bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Cellular and Molecular Probing of Intact
Transparent Human Organs
Authors
Shan Zhao, Mihail Ivilinov Todorov, Ruiyao Cai, Hanno Steinke, Elisabeth
Kemter, Eckhard Wolf, Jan Lipfert, Ingo Bechmann and Ali Ertürk

Graphical Abstract

Supplementary Movies of SHANEL are available at
http://discotechnologies.org/SHANEL/

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Cellular and Molecular Probing of Intact
Transparent Human Organs
Shan Zhao1,2, Mihail Ivilinov Todorov1,3, Ruiyao Cai1,3, Hanno Steinke5, Elisabeth Kemter6,7,8,
Eckhard Wolf6,7,8, Jan Lipfert9, Ingo Bechmann5 and Ali Ertürk1,4
1

Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, Klinikum der Universität München, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich,
Germany
2
Munich Medical Research School (MMRS), Munich, Germany
3
Graduate School of Neuroscience (GSN), Munich, Germany
4
Munich Cluster for System Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany
5
Institute of Anatomy, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany
6
Institute of Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany
7
Center for Innovative Medical Models (CiMM), Oberschleißheim, Germany
8
German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Neuherberg, Germany
9
Department of Physics and Center for Nanoscience, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany
Correspondence: Ali.Ertuerk@med.uni-muenchen.de

20.05.2019
SUMMARY
Optical tissue transparency permits cellular and molecular
investigation of complex tissues in 3D, a fundamental
need in biomedical sciences. Adult human organs are
particularly challenging for this approach, owing to the
accumulation of dense and sturdy molecules in decadesaged human tissues. Here, we introduce SHANEL
method utilizing a new tissue permeabilization approach
to clear and label stiff human organs. We used SHANEL
to generate the first intact transparent adult human brain
and kidney, and perform 3D histology using antibodies
and dyes in centimeters depth. Thereby, we revealed
structural details of sclera, iris and suspensory ligament
in the human eye, and the vessels and glomeruli in the
human kidney. We also applied SHANEL on transgenic
pig organs to map complex structures of EGFP expressing
beta cells in >10 cm size pancreas. Overall, SHANEL is a
robust and unbiased technology to chart the cellular and
molecular architecture of intact large mammalian organs.

INTRODUCTION
Structural and functional mapping of human organs,
especially the human brain, has been one of the flagship
projects of biomedical science in the last years. Towards
this goal, the US, the EU and many other countries
initiated their own “human brain mapping” projects [1]. Yet,
the progress has been limited especially in deciphering
the anatomical complexity of human brain, mainly due
to lack of scalable technologies to image the content of
large human organs at the cellular level. While magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) can provide longitudinal
imaging for human organs including brain and kidney, it
lacks cellular resolution [2-4]. Therefore, tissue histology
has been the major approach to study the molecular and
cellular complexity of the human brain. Although routine
standard histology is limited to tiny pieces of the human

brain (typically a tissue section is ~1/10,000,000 of the
whole brain volume), there still have been efforts to
perform it for whole human brain mapping [5, 6]. However,
slicing and imaging thousands of thin sections from a
whole human brain alone may require years of labor, and
subsequent reconstruction of the whole brain in 3D could
be very complicated or impossible due to the numerous
tissue distortions introduced by mechanical sectioning.
Thus, a scalable and routine technology to enable cellular
and molecular interrogation of centimeters sized human
organs could substantially reduce sectioning artifacts and
also overcome complications in registering large scale
imaging data in 3D. Such an approach would eliminate
the extremely tedious and laborious work with thousands
of thin sections that is needed to map human organs.

In the last decade, emerging optical tissue clearing
methods have enabled fast 3D histology on transparent
specimens avoiding major pitfalls of standard histology,
especially tissue sectioning [7, 8]. Furthermore, new deep
tissue labeling methods were developed in combination
with clearing methods to better phenotype whole rodent
organs and human embryos [9-15]. Progress in optical
tissue clearing firstly allowed clearing of increasingly
larger rodent samples (up to whole adult rodent bodies)
[16-19], then adaptation of light-sheet microscopy
systems to manage imaging of whole transparent rodent
bodies [14, 18, 20]. However, clearing of human organs
so far has been notoriously challenging, in particular for
adult human brain tissue. Recent efforts with chemical
screening of thousands of compounds [21] and application
of electrical field forces [22] could achieve clearing of only
small pieces of human organs. For example, it took 10
months to clear a 8 mm-thick human brain specimen [23]
and 3.5 months to clear a 5 mm-thick human striatum
sample [24]. Furthermore, deep-tissue antibody labeling
methods developed on rodent tissues also encounter

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

hurdles to label adult human tissue thicker than 1 mm [25].
We reasoned that highly myelinated content, lipidome
complexity [26], and age-related accumulation of opaque
and dense molecules such as lipofuscin and non-soluble
collagen [27, 28] impede penetration of chemicals deep
into human organs, thereby blocking both clearing and
labeling of centimeters sized specimens.

Here, we introduce SHANEL (Small-micelle-mediated
Human orgAN Efficient clearing and Labeling), a new
method that is driven by detergent permeabilization

chemistry allowing penetration of labeling and clearing
agents into centimeters-thick mammalian organs (Fig.
1). Our approach enables histology of human samples
ranging from 1.5 cm thickness to whole adult human
organs. We also show that the technology works on other
large mammalian organs such as pig brain and pancreas,
which can readily be labeled transgenically. Thus, the
SHANEL histology pipeline presented here will pave the
way for cellular and molecular mapping of whole adult
human organs, including the human brain.
RESULTS

°

Fig. 1– Deep tissue permeabilization by detergent CHAPS forming small micelle
(A) 3D molecular structural features of SDS and Triton X-100 exhibiting typical head-to-tail amphiphilicity, whereas,
CHAPS exhibiting peculiar facial amphiphilicity. (B) Schematic diagram showing the formation of smaller micelle by
facial CHAPS compared to standard detergents for tissue clearing and histology (SDS and Triton X-100). CHAPS could
more efficiently and deeply permeabilize the tissue owing to its smaller micelle size. (C) Radii of gyration determined for
CHAPS and SDS and literature values (full references are in TableS1) for Rg (the size of micelle is characterized by the
squared radius of gyration of the micellar core, Rg2). Values for CHAPS and SDS represent mean and standard error
from at least three independent repeats. (D,E) Detectable fragments of SDS and Triton X-100 are evident after washing while no residual of CHAPS is left inside of the tissue. Facial CHAPS disrupts the lipid bilayer by binding onto the
surface rather than by embedding into the membrane as head-to-tail detergents, therefore CHAPS could be completely
washed out.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Development of new detergent permeabilization
chemistry
We hypothesized that both labeling and clearing of large
and sturdy human organs require a new permeabilization
chemistry allowing deep tissue penetration of molecules.
Ionic SDS (Sodium dodecyl sulfate) and nonionic Triton
X-100 (4-(1,1,3,3-Tetramethylbutyl)phenyl-polyethylene
glycol) are commonly used detergents for tissue clearing,
and they are characterized as containing typical ‘headto-tail’ amphipathic regions. Their structural features lead
to the formation of relatively large micelles suggesting
that they can get stuck at the tissue surfaces, and
therefore exhibit limited tissue permeabilization capacity
(Fig. 1A-C; Supporting Fig. 1; Supporting Table
1). We anticipated that detergents forming smaller
micelles would be better candidates for deep tissue
permeabilization as they could penetrate more rapidly
and deeply into the tissue. We identified the zwitterionic
detergent 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1propanesulfonate (CHAPS), bearing a rigid steroidal
structure with a hydrophobic convex side, a hydrophilic
concave side (bearing three hydroxyl groups) and a
sulfobetaine-type polar group. CHAPS possesses atypical
‘facial’ amphiphilicity [29]. With this peculiar structure of
hydrophobic and hydrophilic faces, it has higher critical
micelle concentration (CMC), smaller aggregation
number, and forms much smaller micelles compared to
SDS and Triton X, which could enable its rapid penetration
deep into large and sturdy human organs such as the
brain with densely packed extracellular matrix molecules
(Fig. 1A-C; Supporting Fig. 1; Supporting Table 1).
Furthermore, once the micelles travel into the tissue and
interact with the bilayer of lipid, the facial hydrophobic side
of CHAPS reclines on the bilayer surface with a larger
area rather than being embedded into the lipid as headto-tail detergents. These different interaction behaviors of
the detergents suggest that detectable fragments of SDS
and Triton X-100 exist after washing while no residual of
CHAPS would be left inside of the tissue [30-32] (Fig.
1D,E). Thus, CHAPS could function as an efficient tissue
permeabilization reagent by traveling throughout sturdy
tissue and disrupting the dense ultrastructure, without
leaving behind residual detergent fragments after wash
out.

Human organs carry residual blood clots due to several
hours to days of delay until organ harvest after death.
Heme in the blood causes strong autofluorescence
at visible wavelengths (400-700 nm) and reduces the
intensity of travelling light within the tissue, thereby
impeding the full transparency of cleared organs [17].
PFA-fixed blood was washed by detergent solutions,
resulting in colorless supernatant and red pellet, indicating
detergent alone was unable to remove the heme (Fig.
2A). To overcome this issue, we firstly screened CHAPS
compatible chemicals to elute the heme. In particular,
we focused on effective, colorless and cheap chemicals
for scalability to large human organs (Fig. 2B-E). Our
screen showed that N-methyldiethanolamine (NMDEA)
was an efficient candidate when combined with CHAPS,

resulting in a completely colorless pellet from PFAfixed blood (chemical 7 in Supporting Tables 2-3). In
addition, NMDEA was the cheapest among the screened
chemicals, reducing the cost when used in large amounts
for intact human organs (Supporting Table 3). Compared
to Triton X-100 and SDS that were used in prior clearing
methods as detergents, CHAPS was faster and more
successful in decolorization of mouse kidney, liver, heart,
spleen and brain, suggesting a better performance for
large human organs (Fig. 2F). Moreover, protein loss
assay indicated the superior retention of endogenous
biomolecules with CHAPS, assuring a more reliable
molecular investigation of intact organs (Fig. 2G). Thus,
we anticipated that CHAPS, by forming small micelles,
could completely diffuse through intact large mammalian
organs and ameliorate tissue meshes, leaving behind
a fully permeabilized biological tissue for cellular and
molecular phenotyping.

Development of SHANEL Tissue Clearing
Next, we tested the accessibility of CHAPS permeabilized
large mammalian organs using tissue clearing reagents.
We chose to work with organic solvent-based clearing
methods because they are fast and robust in addition
to inducing tissue shrinkage [18], which helps to image
larger pieces of intact cleared mammalian organs with
the limited sample holding capacity of standard lightsheet microscopy. First, we cleared the intact brain of a
2-year-old adult pig, which was fixed with PFA by passive
immersion after dissection, using standard organic
solvent clearing reagents [33, 34]. We found that a
combination of ethanol for dehydration, dichloromethane
(DCM) for delipidation, and benzyl alcohol + benzyl
benzoate (BABB) for refractive index (RI) matching was
highly effective in rendering the centimeters-thick pig
brain transparent after CHAPS/NMDEA permeabilization
and decolorization (all together represents the SHANEL
clearing) (Fig. 3A-C). SHANEL clearing provided in
rapid transparency of ~12.0 x 7.3 x 5.0 cm size pig brain
including heavily myelinated white matter, thalamus and
brainstem within 1.5 months (Fig. 3C). The dimensions
of the pig brain after clearing became 7.5 x 5.0 x 3.3 cm,
with a shrinkage ratio of 67% in volume.

Recent developments in gene editing with CRISPR/
Cas9 technology have enabled easy generation of large
transgenic reporter mammals, expressing fluorescent
proteins in the tissues of interest [35, 36]. Therefore, we
applied SHANEL clearing to INS-EGFP transgenic pig
pancreas exhibiting porcine insulin gene (INS) promotor
driven beta cell specific enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP) expression in the islets of Langerhans
[37] (Fig. 3D-F). To enhance the signal of EGFP in
centimeters sized tissue, we used anti-GFP nanobodies
conjugated with bright Atto dyes [14]. We demonstrated
that the 3D distribution of pancreatic beta cells as single
cells or groups of cells within the islets of Langerhans
could be readily assessed by our new approach enabling
quantification of islet volume and demonstration of

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Fig. 2– Screen for CHAPS compatible blood decolorization chemicals and protein loss assay for different detergents
(A) Detergents including CHAPS, Triton X-100 and SDS cannot decolorize PFA-fixed blood, showing colorless supernatant and red pellet solution. (B-C) Screening of 11 chemicals without or with CHAPS admixtures for blood decolorization
(see Table S2). Good candidates show green supernatant and colorless pellet. CHAPS is compatible with most tested
chemicals to improve the decolorization efficiency. (C) Schematic of hypothesized mechanism how chemicals interact
with iron of heme for an efficient decolorization. (D) Optimization of CHAPS concentration combined with 25% w/v
N-Methyldiethanolamine (chemical 7) for blood decolorization. (E) All detergents could decolorize with N-Methyldiethanolamine. (F) Mouse organs were incubated with mixtures of 25% w/v N-Methyldiethanolamine and following detergents: CHAPS (10% w/v), Triton X-100 (10% w/v) or SDS (200 mM). CHAPS mixture shows superior permeabilization
to remove the heme from blood-retaining mouse organs (red rectangle). (G) Protein loss assay indicating the superior
retention of endogenous proteins after CHAPS treatment compared to other detergents (P values were calculated using
one-way ANOVA test).

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Fig. 3– SHANEL clearing of brain and pig pancreas from adult pig
(A) PFA-fixed adult pig brain with retained blood. (B) Permeabilized and decolorized pig brain by CHAPS/NMDEA. (C)
Fully transparent adult pig brain after SHANEL clearing. (D) PFA-fixed, dissected (INS-EGFP transgenic pig) pancreas
with retained blood. (E) After CHAPS/NMDEA treatment, the pancreas was completely decolorized. (F) Transparent pig
pancreas after SHANEL clearing. (G) 3D distribution of β-cell islets imaged by light-sheet microscopy after nanobody
boosting of EGFP. (H) High magnification view of the region marked in G. (I) High magnification view of the region
marked in H showing β-cell islets of single cells (yellow arrows) or multiple of cells (white arrows). We observed that the
majority of larger islet shapes were circular or oval. See also Supporting Fig. 2 and Supporting Movie 1.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

islet size heterogeneity (Fig. 3G-I; Supporting Fig. 2;
Supporting Movie 1).

Generation of intact transparent human brain by
SHANEL clearing
Labeling and clearing of the intact human brain would be
a tremendous step forward to map it in the near future.
As the human brain vascular system is an established
network reaching all parts of the brain, we used it to
deliver the chemical cocktails deep into the brain tissue
(Fig. 4A). We used the two main pairs of large arteries,
the right and left internal carotids (CR, CL) and the right
and left vertebral arteries (VR, VL) to circulate solutions.
First, we used PBS/heparin solution to wash out the liquid
blood, followed by 4% PFA/PBS solution to fix the brain.
Subsequently we isolated the whole human brain with
these major vessels and connected eyes (with a volume
of ~1344 cm3 and dimensions of ~15.0 x 10.4 x 14.4
cm) from the skull. Then we set up a pressure-driven
pumping system to circulate cell nucleus labeling dye
(TO-PRO-3) and all clearing reagents through the four
arteries to accelerate the process (Fig. 4B). By doing so,
we rendered the whole adult human brain transparent for
the first time. To demonstrate the full transparency, we
illuminated the whole brain with a condensed fluorescent
light, which travelled end-to-end in the intact seethrough human brain (Fig. 4C). This is a 2-3 orders of
magnitude increase in the volume of human brain tissue
that could be rendered transparent compared to prior
methods [38]. The whole process takes ~3 months and
costs approximately 3000 € for one adult human brain
(Supporting Table 4). The final volume of shrunken
brain was 56% of the initial volume. As there are no lightsheet microscopy systems yet available to image such
large organs, we used a modified commercial light-sheet
microscopy (Lavision Ultramicroscopy) to acquire mosaic
images of the intact cleared human eye with a diameter
of ~3 cm. We imaged TO-PRO-3 and autofluorescence
signals of the intact cleared eye and reconstructed the
details of its anatomical structures including sclera, iris
and suspensory ligament in 3D (Fig. 4D-E; Supporting
Movie 2). Thus, our approach provides the basis for 3D
histological assessment of the whole human brain in the
near future.

SHANEL histology of centimeters sized human
organs
Because in vivo genetic labeling and fluorescent dye
tracing are not applicable to study post-mortem human
tissue, cellular and molecular interrogation of human
organs requires post-mortem staining using dyes and
antibodies. However, state-of-the-art antibody labeling
techniques of decades-aged human samples are limited
to ≤50 µm in standard histology, and to a maximum of ~1
mm thickness in prior clearing methods, mainly due to the
weak permeabilization of the tissue and slow diffusion of
the antibodies, which are large molecules (~150 kDa) [11,
24, 25]. In addition, age-related accumulation of highly
autofluorescent molecules increases the background

tremendously in thicker tissues [39]. To overcome these
limitations and achieve staining of human brain tissues as
large as the current imaging systems can accommodate
(1.0-1.5 cm of thick tissue) [18], we set out to develop
a deep-tissue antibody labeling method for thick human
tissues. Towards this goal, we perfused an intact human
brain from a 92-years old female using CHAPS/NMDEA
to permeabilize and decolorize. This treatment softened
the sturdy human brain and allowed its easy sectioning
into 12 coronal slices (each 1.5 cm thick) using a brain
slicer (Supporting Fig. 3). The permeabilized human
brain slice was further slackened by delipidation using
DCM/MeOH (methanol). Next, we identified acetic acid
and guanidine HCl as powerful reagents to loosen the
extracellular matrix (ECM) for the diffusion of large
molecules such as antibodies (Supporting Fig. 4).
We firstly labeled and cleared an intact 16.5 x 16.5 x
1.5 cm human brain slice using Methoxy-X04 and TOPRO-3, which were affordable dyes in large quantities,
to label Abeta plaques and cell nuclei in such large
tissue, respectively. After clearing, we scanned a 7.5
x 5 x 0.4 cm region of brain slice in ~2 days using an
upright confocal microscopy that is design to scan large
slices of tissue. We detected Abeta plaque accumulation
in several brain regions including cingulate gyrus (CG),
precuneus (PCun), superior temporal gyrus (STG) and
middle temporal gyrus (MTG) (Supporting Fig. 5A-D;
Supporting Movie 3). Next, we used epifluorescence
microscopy to quickly screen the 1.5 cm thick half human
brain slice and again readily located the regions with
Methoxy-X04-labeled Abeta accumulation for subsequent
confocal microscopy imaging (Supporting Fig. 5E-H).

Antibody labeling of tissues has been widely used to
interrogate the specific cellular architecture and underlying
molecular mechanism of biological processes. Therefore,
we next applied SHANEL to assess the possibility of
antibody-based histology of centimeters sized human
tissues. Towards this goal, we first used ionized
calcium binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba1) antibody to
immunolabel microglia (Fig. 5A-H). Iba1+ microglia were
identifiable throughout the 2.0 x 1.8 x 1.5 cm size human
brain slice (Supporting Movie 4). We also observed
morphological differences: microglia cells in gray matter
were mostly larger and more ramified compared to white
matter (Fig. 5E-H). Next, we used tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH) antibody to immunolabel neuronal structures
along with PI labeling of the cell nuclei (Fig. 5I-L). We
could clearly see specifically labeled axonal extensions
throughout the 1.8 x 1.8 x 1.5 cm human brain slice (Fig.
5J-L; Supporting Movie 5). These results demonstrate
that SHANEL histology can successfully permeabilize
entire 1.5 cm thick sturdy human brain slices for deep
tissue antibody labeling. This represents a 1-2 orders
of magnitude enhancement in the thickness of adult
human tissue that could be processed for histology with
prior methods [38]. Studying vasculature has been a
valuable method to explore diverse developmental and
pathological phenomena in biological tissues. Again,

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Fig. 4– SHANEL clearing of adult intact human brain
(A) Active perfusion pipeline is used to accelerate whole human brain SHANEL clearing. (B) A sample of permeabilized
and decolorized whole human brain by CHAPS/NMDEA via active pumping setup (black arrows). (C) Transparent whole
human brain, a volume of ~1344 cm3 and the dimensions of ~15.0 x 10.4 x 14.4 cm. Light of epifluorescent microscope
travels end-to-end demonstrating the full transparency of intact human brain. (D) Brightfield view of an eye, dissected
from the intact transparent human brain. (E) 3D reconstruction of the eye from light-sheet scans showing the sclera, iris
and suspensory ligament structures. See also Supporting Movie 2.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Fig. 5– SHANEL histology on centimeters thick human tissues imaged by light-sheet microscopy
(A-D) Iba1 microglia (green) and propidium iodide (PI) (magenta) labeling of post-mortem human brain tissue with an
original size of 2.0 x 1.8 x 1.5 cm (1.3 x 1.2 x 1.0 cm after shinkage). Individual microglia throughout the gray matter (E,
F) and white matter (G, H) are evident. (I) Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) (red) and propidium iodide (PI) (cyan) labeling of
post-mortem human brain tissue with an original size of 1.8 x 1.8 x 1.5 cm (1.2 x 1.2 x 0.91 cm after shinkage). (J-L)
TH+ axonal extensions in gray (white arrowheads in J1-J2) and white matter (white arrowheads in K1-L2) throughout
the entire depth of tissue are evident. Note that cyan channel is not shown in J1-L2 to emphasize the TH labeling. See
also Supporting Movies 4 and 5.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

histological assessment of vasculature in human tissue
has been limited by the penetration of specific dyes
and antibodies. Here, we used Lectin dye to effectively
label a human brain sample with a size of 3.0 x 1.9 x
1.5 cm (Supporting Fig. 6). In addition to specific
vascular structures (e.g. Supporting Fig. 6C), we could
identify vasculature related tissue abnormalities, seen
as swollen structures in our deep tissue Lectin labeling
(e.g. Supporting Fig. 6D). Thus, SHANEL histology
allows the labeling of specific molecules, cells and
vasculature in centimeters sized human brain samples
presenting a viable tool to scale up the investigation of
brain pathologies.

Next, we tested our SHANEL technology on entire human
kidneys using affordable small dyes. There is a huge
shortage of donor organs for hundreds of thousands
of people in need of kidney transplantation [40]. The
waiting time for donation may be several years, and cost
of transplantation might reach about half a million dollars
[40]. Understanding the 3D structure of the human kidney
would be of value for tissue engineering efforts aiming
to generate artificial kidneys [41], which require detailed
cellular and molecular knowledge on intact human kidney
tissues. Kidneys are the major organ for blood filtration
through glomeruli, whose density and size are critical for
healthy organ function. Towards understanding the 3D
cellular structure of the human kidney we used SHANEL
histology with active perfusion of TRITC-dextran and
TO-PRO-3 dyes through the renal artery to label the
vessels and dense cellular structure of the glomeruli
in the entire kidney with a size of 11.5 x 8.2 x 3.0 cm.
After labeling, we also actively pumped the clearing
reagents through the kidney to overcome the age and
size related challenges. We achieved full transparency,
revealing the primary renal artery, secondary branches
of segmental arteries and interlobar arteries (Fig. 6A-C).
Using light sheet microscopy, we could visualize the 3D
distribution of vessels and glomeruli in the kidney cortex
over large volumes (1.2 x 1.2 x 0.45 cm), and trace
individual afferent arteriole and its glomeruli (Fig. 6D-F;
Supporting Movie 6). Through cortex profile counting,
we found that the width of the cortex zone was around
2742 ± 665 µm (mean ± s.d.), the diameter of glomerular
caliper was 221± 37 µm, and afferent arteriole diameter
was 71 ± 28 µm (Fig. 6G). Thus, our technology provides
accurate and precise mapping of glomeruli and arteries
of kidney in 3D at a reasonable time and cost.

DISCUSSION
Histological studies of human tissues suffer from a lack
of scalable methods to label and image large human
specimens. Here we present the SHANEL method, which
is derived from a new tissue chemistry achieving thorough
permeabilization of fixed post-mortem human tissues. It
allows full penetration of labeling molecules and clearing
chemicals into centimeters sized decades-aged human
tissues such as post-mortem human brain and kidney
specimens. Our method can also readily be applied to

many organs in parallel as it does not require lengthy
handwork other than setting up the perfusion system and
exchange of the solutions. Thus, this scalable method
could vastly accelerate the 3D structural and molecular
mapping of cells in intact human organs including the
human brain.

Early efforts of adult human organ clearing started
a century ago with slow progress in transparency
and labeling options [42]. A particular difficulty has
been the age dependent accumulation of intracellular
and extracellular molecules such as lipofuscin and
neuromelanin pigments. Lipofuscin is a mixture of
highly oxidized cross-linked macromolecules including
proteins, lipids, and sugars from different cellular
metabolic processes [27]. Age-related accumulation of
lipofuscin in the human body, in particular in the brain,
correlates with senescence and sturdiness of human
tissues [27]. Similarly, insolubility of the collagen also
increases in the human body with the ageing, leading to
hardening, browning and autofluorescence of the tissues
[28]. Due to age-related accumulation of such insoluble
macromolecules in human tissues over several decades,
histological examination relying on the penetration of large
molecules such as antibodies deep into tissues has been
very challenging. Recently developed tissue clearing
methods have proven to be a promising way to achieve
histological assessment of intact specimen. While diverse
clearing methods have been quite successful in rodents
(with the age of a few months), they have not been as
effective on decades-aged human tissues. We solved this
problem by developing a new method to permeabilize the
sturdy human tissues, which is the prerequisite step for
any tissue labeling and clearing method.

Here, we hypothesize that the micellar structures of
detergents would be critical to penetrate the dense
meshes of sturdy human tissues. Towards this goal, we
identified CHAPS, a zwitter-ionic detergent having rigid
steroidal structure with hydrophobic and hydrophilic
faces. The ‘facial’ amphiphilicity of CHAPS is responsible
for the aggregation behavior and surface configuration of
molecules at interface. Firstly, CHAPS aggregates into
much smaller micelles compared to standard ‘head-totail’ detergents such as SDS and Triton X-100, facilitating
its rapid penetration deep into dense human tissues. In
aggregation formation, the hydrophobic faces (β-plane of
steroid) are considered to contact with each other, while
the hydrophilic ones (three hydroxyl groups) remain
exposing to the aqueous environment. Secondly, in terms
of interfacial interaction, the facial amphiphiles bind to
the bilayer in a unique mode that allows coverage of a
larger hydrophobic area instead of being embedded into
the bilayer. By this way, less facial amphiphile CHAPS is
needed and no residual CHAPS left behind in the tissue
after the treatment. Moreover, as a mild zwitterionic
detergent, CHAPS exhibits better preservation of tissue
endogenous biomolecules compared to SDS and Triton
X-100 for cellular and molecular interrogation. Starting
from this new permeabilization chemistry, we further

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Fig. 6– Cellular investigation of human kidney
(A-C) A PFA-fixed adult human kidney (A) was rendered totally transparent after SHANEL clearing, revealing visible
arteries (B,C). (D) 3D reconstruction of vessels and glomeruli of the kidney cortex region marked in (C) imaged by lightsheet microscopy. TRITC-dextran labels the vessels (magenta), while TO-PRO-3 labels glomeruli more prominently
(green). High magnification light-sheet microscopy (E) and confocal microscopy (F) images show the structural details
of afferent arteriole (magenta) and glomeruli (green). (G) Human kidney anatomy and cortex profiles from the 3D reconstruction. See also Supporting Movie 6.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

developed our technology by loosening ECM using acetic
acid and guanidine HCl [43, 44].

The resulting SHANEL histology method enabled diffusion
of molecules as large as conventional IgG antibodies for
straightforward 3D histology of centimeters sized human
organs. Thus, our approach can also tremendously help
scaling up the efforts on Human Protein Atlas (HPA) by
reducing the time to label and annotate across large
human tissues [45, 46]. Yet, our method does not fully
eliminate the tissue autofluorescence, in particular those
coming from the lipofuscin in the brain tissue. However,
this autofluorescence can be used to extract more
information on senescence of cells throughout different
tissue layers in addition to imaging of specific dye/
antibody signals in other channels.

The SHANEL technology is also applicable to other
large mammal organs. As pig is a much better model
system for the human islets research compared to
rodents, study of transgenic INS-EGFP pig pancreas in
combination with SHANEL clearing can also accelerate
research in metabolic disorders. We demonstrate that
the 3D distribution of pancreatic beta cells as single
cell or groups of cells within the islet of Langerhans can
be readily imaged and quantified by our new approach
demonstrating the islet size heterogeneity. Regional
differences of islet size and distribution (head vs. tail)
in human pancreas are well known, and alterations
in beta cell mass occur in diverse metabolic disorders
[47]. For instance in disease conditions like type 2
diabetes, regional changes of islet distribution leading to
preferentially large islets in the head region occur [48].
Another interesting application would be to assess the
quantity and distribution of porcine islets after intraportal
xenotransplantation into the liver of non-human primate
models [48, 49].
Currently, we lack fluorescent microscopy systems that
can image biological specimen as large as the intact
human brain. While we rendered the entire human brain
transparent, we could not use current laser-scanning
light-sheet microscopes to construct a complete 3D
image of the whole brain. The development of such
imaging systems with extended stages and imaging
capacities would tremendously accelerate studies on
phenotyping of the cellular and molecular architecture
of the whole human brain. Leading towards this
possiblity, Voigt et al., recently proposed the mesoSPIM
(mesoscale selective plane illumination microscopy),
an open-hardware microscopy platform for imaging
cleared tissues several centimeters in size [50]. Here,
we sliced the intact adult human brain into twelve 1.5
cm-thick sections using standard slicer equipment. Still,
such thick slices are much easier to handle compared
to micrometer or even millimeter thick sections, because
there is no need to embed or collect them on glass slides.
Moreover, SHANEL histology allowed a thorough labeling
of these 1.5 cm-thick brain slices. Because we use

organic solvents for tissue clearing, we also reduced the
thickness of the cleared samples by about one third. This
allows the usage of high numerical aperture objectives
such as 4x Olympus objective (NA: 0.28 and working
distance (WD): 10 mm) and 20x Zeiss Clarity objective
(NA: 1, WD: 5.6 mm) on defined regions of interest to
reconstruct the entire 1.2 - 2 cm thick human tissue by
scanning from both sides. Another advantage of our
approach is that, after SHANEL histology, the specimens
become hard, enabling easy handling of complete organs
and slices. Finally, owing to the complete dehydration and
incubation in organic solvents, the tissues are preserved
by SHANEL histology, allowing long-term storage for the
future studies by the same investigators or in other labs.
This approach will reduce the need of repetitive sample
collection to perform similar experiments with the same
type of post-mortem human tissues.

In conclusion, this work presents a new technology to
permeabilize centimeters sized aged-human tissues for
molecular and cellular phenotyping. This method allows
deep tissue labeling and clearing of human specimens
as large as the intact human kidney and brain. Thus,
SHANEL histology can be a key technology to map intact
human organs in the near future, which would accelerate
our understanding of the physiological and pathological
conditions governing human life.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Small-angle X-ray scattering measurements
We used small-angle X-ray scattering to determine the
size, shape, and aggregation number of CHAPS and
SDS micelles. Experimental data were collected at
beam line 12ID at the Advanced Photon Source (APS)
using procedures as previously described [51-53]. In
brief, measurements were carried out with a custommade sample cell and holder [54], at a temperature of
25 ºC and an X-ray energy of 12 keV, with a sample-todetector distance of 1.8 m. We defined the magnitude of
momentum transfer as q = 4π / λ ∙ sin (θ), where 2θ is the
total scattering angle and λ = 1 Å the X-ray wavelength.
The useable q-range in our measurements was 0.02 Å-1
< q < 0.275 Å-1. Scattering angles were calibrated using
a silver behenate standard sample and data read out,
normalization, and circular averaging were performed
using custom routines at beam line 12ID, APS. SDS and
CHAPS were measured in PBS buffer for 10 exposures
of 0.1 s. Matching buffer profiles were subtracted for
background correction. Subsequent exposures were
compared to verify the absence of radiation damage.
Horse heart cytochrome c at 8 mg/ml was used as a
molecular mass standard.

Small-angle X-ray scattering data analysis
Radii of gyration Rg and forward scattering intensities I(0)
were determined from Guinier analysis [55-57] of the low
q region of scattering profiles, i.e. from a fit of the logarithm
of the scattering intensity vs. q2 for small q (Supporting

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Fig. 1A,B). The fitted radii of gyration are in excellent
agreement with previously reported values, as far as
available (Fig. 1C). In addition, the full scattering profiles
were fitted with one- and two-component ellipsoid models
[51] (Supporting Fig. 1C). We found that the CHAPS
data were well described by a prolate one-component
ellipsoid model with long axis of ≈30 Å and short axis ≈12
Å. In contrast, the SDS data require a two-component
ellipsoid model for a convincing fit, similar to other ‘headto-tail’ detergents [51], and were well described by a
oblate two-component ellipsoid model with an inner core
(representing the region occupied by the hydrophobic
tail groups) with small axis ≈15 Å and long axis ≈25 Å
(in good agreement with results from neutron scattering
[58]), surrounded by a shell (representing the head
groups) of thickness ≈3.5 Å.

Aggregation numbers for CHAPS and SDS micelles
were determined using two independent approaches
[51]. One approach was to use the fitted geometric
models to compute the volumes of the micelle (in the
case of CHAPS) or of the hydrophobic core (in the case
of SDS) and to compute the aggregation number by
dividing the total volume by the volume of the monomer
(for CHAPS, see Table S1) or the hydrophobic core
volume by the volume of the alkyl tail (determined from
the Tanford formula [59], 350.2 Å3 for SDS). We note that
the approach of using the micelle volume to determine
the aggregation number uses the entire scattering profile
in the model fit, but is independent of the scale of the
scattering intensity, since only the shape of the scattering
pattern is fit. An alternative and independent approach to
determining the aggregation number is to determine the
forward scattering intensity I(0) from Guinier analysis and
to compute the aggregation number from the equation
[51]:
N = I(0) / Imon(0) = I(0) / [ K ∙ (C - CMC) ∙ (ρdet− ρsol)2 ∙
Vmon2 ]
Here K is a proportionality constant that was determined
from measurements of horse heart cytochrome c as a
scattering standard, C is the detergent concentration,
CMC the critical micelle concentration, ρdet the electron
density of the detergent, ρsol = 0.34 e/Å3 the electron
density of the solvent, and Vmon the detergent monomer
volume. Values for CMC, ρdet and Vmon are given in
Table S1. The approach of using I(0) to determine the
aggregation number only uses the very low q information
in the scattering pattern and is independent of any model
assumptions about the size or shape of the micelles.
Aggregation numbers determined by the independent
approaches are in good agreement.

Mouse samples
CD-1 IGS (Charles River, stain code: 022) mice
were used for blood collection, organs screening and
protein loss assay. The animals were housed under a
12/12 hours light/dark cycle. The animal experiments
were conducted according to institutional guidelines:
Klinikum der Universität München / Ludwig Maximilian

University of Munich and after approval of the Ethical
Review Board of the Government of Upper Bavaria
(Regierung von Oberbayern, Munich, Germany) and
in accordance with the European directive 2010/63/EU
for animal research. All data are reported according to
the ARRIVE criteria. Animals were randomly selected.
Mice were deeply anesthetized using a combination
of medetomidine, midazolam and fentanyl (MMF; 5
mg, 0.5 mg and 0.05 mg per kg body mass for mice;
intraperitoneal). As soon as the animals did not show
any pedal reflex, blood was extracted intracardially from
the left ventricle. Then the blood was mixed with 2 times
volume of 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in 0.01 M PBS
(pH 7.4; Morphisto, 11762.01000) and incubated for 24 h
at 4 °C. Animals for protein loss assay were intracardially
perfused with heparinized 0.01 M PBS (10 U ml−1 of
heparin, Ratiopharm; ~110 mmHg pressure using a Leica
Perfusion One system) for 5–10 min at room temperature
until the blood was washed out, followed by 4% PFA for
10–20 min. The brains were dissected and post-fixed in
4% PFA for 1 d at 4 °C and later washed with 0.01 M PBS
for 10 min 3 times at room temperature.

Pig samples
Pig intact brain was brought from local slaughterhouse
and immersion fixed for 10 days with 4% PFA at 4°C.
Housing, breeding and animal experiments of INS-EGFP
transgenic pigs were done at the Institute of Molecular
Animal Breeding and Biotechnology at LMU Munich
according the approval of the Ethical Review Board
of the Government of Upper Bavaria (Regierung von
Oberbayern, Munich, Germany) and in accordance with
the European directive 2010/63/EU for animal research.
All data are reported according to the ARRIVE criteria.
INS-EGFP transgenic pigs have a beta-cell specific EGFP
reporter gene expression driven by the porcine insulin
(INS) promoter [37]. Pancreas of an exsanguinated 5.5
month old INS-EGFP transgenic male pig of a German
landrace background was dissected, its pancreatic ducts
was cannulated and 20 ml of ice-cold 4% PFA was slowly
injected.

Human samples
Intact human brains were taken from different human
body donors with no known neuropathological diseases.
All donors gave their informed and written consent to
explore their cadavers for research and educational
purposes, when still alive and well. The signed consents
are kept at the Anatomy Institute, University of Leipzig,
Germany. Institutional approval was obtained in
accordance to the Saxonian Death and Funeral Act of
1994. The signed body donor consents are available on
request.

The brains of a 92 years old female and a 48 years old
male of the body donation program of the Institute of
Anatomy, University of Leipzig were fixed in situ by whole
head perfusion via carotid and vertebral arteries under a

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

pressure of below 1 bar. The head was firstly perfused
with 5 L heparinized 0.01 M PBS (10 U ml−1 of heparin,
Ratiopharm), followed by 3 L 4% PFA in 0.01 M PBS for
2-3 h. The veins were finally closed to maintain the PFA
to the brain. Then the brains were recovered by calvarian
dissection and preserved at least 1-2 weeks for postfixation submersed in the 4% PFA solution. The kidneys
of a 93 years old female were dissected from the body.
The blood was flushed by 200 ml of heparinized PBS
in a PBS bath for 1 h and perfused with 400 ml of PFA
immersed in PFA solution. The kidneys were preserved
at least 1-2 weeks for post-fixation submersed in the 4 %
PFA solution at 4 °C.

Screening of affordable and scalable chemicals for
blood decolorization
PFA-fixed mouse blood was thoroughly vortexed with
only 25% w/v screened chemicals (Sigma, Table S2) or
only detergents (10% w/v CHAPS, 10% w/v Triton X-100
or 200mM SDS, Sigma), or the mixture of detergents and
25% w/v chemicals, and then immediately centrifuged at
15000 rpm for 5 min at room temperature. Supernatant
was transferred into the multi-well plate and pellet was
dissolved in diH2O and also transferred into paired
well. Bright-field images were immediately captured.
In accordance with our hypothesis that electron-rich
nitrogen donor and polarizable hydrogen of chemicals
tend to bind with iron of heme as double-action
multidentate ligands, then eluting the heme from the
blood, all of the tested chemicals could partly decolorize
the red heme. These effects were improved with the
addition of detergents. Considering the practical prices
and availability of reagents to process large samples
such as the human brain, we optimized the concentration
of CHAPS with N-Methyldiethanolamine (chemical 7) for
later experiments [17].

Permeabilization and decolorization of mouse organs
with remaining blood
Mouse organs were dissected and post-fixated with 4%
PFA/PBS as soon as the animals did not show any pedal
reflex. The blood-retaining organs were washed with
PBS for 3h x 3 times and put into a multi-well plate and
bright-field images were captured. Then the organs were
incubated with mixtures (10% w/v CHAPS and 25% w/v
N-Methyldiethanolamine, 10% w/v Triton X-100 and 25%
w/v N-Methyldiethanolamine, 200 mM SDS and 25% w/v
N-Methyldiethanolamine) at 37 °C on a shaking rocker
(IKA, 2D digital). The solutions were refreshed when the
color changed to green until colorless. Then the grouped
samples were washed with PBS 3 times for 3h at room
temperature and imaged again under bright-field.

Protein loss assay
PFA-fixed adult mouse (3-4 month) brains were cut into
1-mm-thick sections using a vibratome (Leica, VT1200S)
[11, 22]. All sections were weighted and randomly grouped
then placed in 5 ml solutions as follow: distilled water,

2.5% w/v CHAPS, 5% w/v CHAPS, 10% w/v CHAPS,
200nM SDS or 10% w/v Triton X-100. The samples were
incubated for 2 weeks at 37 °C on a shaking rocker. The
respective solutions and quantity of protein lost from
tissue by diffusing into solutions was measured using
Bio-Rad DC protein assay kit (bio-rad, 5000116). Total
protein in mouse brain was estimated at 10% (wt). For
each group, the standard solution was prepared in the
same buffer as the sample.

Passive SHANEL clearing of pig brain
PFA-fixed pig brain samples were washed with PBS at
room temperature, incubated with 10% w/v CHAPS and
25% w/v N-Methyldiethanolamine solution at 37 °C on a
shaking rocker. The incubation time of whole brain was
10 days with solution refreshed once at day 5. After PBS
washing at room temperature, the samples were shaken
with a series of Ethanol/DiH2O solutions (50%, 70%,
100%, 100% v/v) at room temperature, following further
DCM (Roth, KK47.1) incubation, immersed into BABB
solution until complete transparency. The incubation time
depended on the sample size, for whole brain, 4 days for
each step.

Active SHANEL clearing of pig pancreas
Pancreas from a 5.5-month old INS-EGFP transgenic
pig was dissected without the tail part, a G 20 venous
catheter was inserted into the pancreatic duct and sewed
on. 4% PFA was injected to fix the tissue, followed by
post-fixation for 3 days at 4 °C. Then the sample was set
up in the active pumping system consisting of a peristaltic
pump (ISMATEC, REGLO Digital MS-4/8 ISM 834),
chemical-resistant PTFE tubing (VWR, 228-0735) and a
glass chamber. After PBS washing, 200 ml solution of
5% w/v CHAPS and 12.5% w/v N-Methyldiethanolamine
was circulated through the pancreas for 8 days in total,
refreshing the solution with fresh one every 2 days.
After 2 times of PBS washing for 3 h, the sample was
pretreated with 200 ml of permeabilization solution
containing 1.5% goat serum, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.5
mM of methyl-β -cyclodextrin, 0.2% trans-1-acetyl-4hydroxy-l-proline and 0.05% sodium azide in PBS for half
a day at room temperature. Subsequently, the perfusion
proceeded further, through connection of a 0.20 μm
syringe filter (Sartorius, 16532) to the intak-ending of the
tube to prevent accumulation of dye aggregates into the
sample. At the same time, an infrared lamp (Beuer, IL21)
was used to heat up the solution to 26–28 °C. With this
setting, the pancreas was perfused for 13 d with 250 ml
of the same permeabilization solution containing 30 μl of
Atto647N-conjugated anti-GFP nanobooster (Chromotek,
gba647n-100). After that, the pancreas was washed out
by perfusing with washing solution (1.5% goat serum,
0.5% Triton X-100, 0.05% of sodium azide in PBS) for 6
h 3 times at room temperature and PBS for 3 h at room
temperature. The clearing was started with series of 250
ml of EtOH/DiH2O solution (50%, 70%, 100%, 100% v/v)
pumping for 6 h at each step. Then the pancreas was
passively incubated with DCM for 1 day, proceeded by

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

BABB solution until complete transparency in one month.

Active SHANEL clearing of intact human brain
The four main arteries of PFA-fixed intact human brain
were connected to a peristaltic pump (ISMATEC, REGLO
Digital MS-4/8 ISM 834) through a chemical-resistant
PTFE tubing (VWR, 228-0735) in a glass chamber. 5 L of
10% w/v CHAPS and 25% w/v N-Methyldiethanolamine
solution was pumped continuously into arteries keeping
the pressure at 180-230 mmHg (50-60 rpm). One
channel from the pump, made by a single reference
tube, was set for circulation of the solution through the
artery into the brain vasculature system: one ending of
the tube was connected to the tip which inserted into
the artery tubing, and the other ending was immersed in
the solution chamber where the brain was placed. The
perfusion tip pumped appropriate solution into the artery,
and the other ending collected the solution inside of the
brain to recirculate the solution, pumping it back into the
brain. At the same time, the solution was also stirred
using a blender (IKA, RCT B S000) and heated to 3739 °C. With this setting, the human brain was perfused
for one month with once refresh at day 15. Then the
solution was changed to PBS for washing 2 days. Using
the same setting without heating, the human brain was
labeled with TO-PRO-3 in 2 L PBS (1:2000 dilutions) for
1 month at room temperature. After labeling the clearing
was performed by perfusing with 5L of the following
series of EtOH/DiH2O solutions: 50%, 70%, 100%, 100%
v/v for one week for each step, followed by perfusion of
5 L of DCM for another week to delipidate, in the end
the sample was perfused with 5 L of BABB solution until
complete transparency. When the brain was getting
transparent, the BABB was refreshed and the brain was
stored in this solution at room temperature without further
circulation or stirring.

1.5 cm-thick human brain slice preparation
PFA-fixed intact human brain was actively pumped with 5
L 10% w/v CHAPS and 25% w/v N- Methyldiethanolamine
solution for one month with once refresh at day 15. Then
the solution was changed to PBS for actively washing
for 2 days. The intact human brain was cooled in PBS at
4°C overnight, then directly cut into 1.5 cm-thick slices in
coronal plane using a Rotation Cutting Slicer (Rotation
Schneidemaschine, Biodur, Heidelberg, Germany). The
total 12 slices were serially labeled and stored in 70%
EtOH at 4°C.

Passive histology of 1.5 cm-thick intact human brain
slice
1.5 cm-thick intact human brain slice (Number 7, see
Fig. S3) was randomly chosen and passively incubated
with 400 ml TO-PRO-3 (T3605, Thermo Fisher, 1:2000
dilution) in PBS at room temperature for 1 week. Then the
solution was changed to 400 ml with 100 μM of Methoxy
X-04 (4920, Tocris) in 40% EtOH (pH=10 adjusting by
NaOH solution) for another week. After labeling, the slice

was washed with PBS for 1 day. The clearing started
with dehydration using a series of 1 L of EtOH/DiH2O
solutions (50%, 70%, 100%, 100% v/v) and followed
by delipidation using 1 L DCM, all steps lasted 1 day.
1 L BABB solution was replaced and incubated at room
temperature until completely transparency.

Passive SHANEL antibody histology study of 1.5 cmthick human brain samples
1.5 cm-thick intact human brain slices (Number 4 and
6, see Fig. S3) were randomly chosen and dehydrated
with series of 1 L EtOH/DiH2O (50%, 70%, 100%, 100%
v/v), then delipidated with 2 L DCM/MeOH (2:1 v/v), then
rehydrated with series of 1 L EtOH/DiH2O (100%, 70%,
50%, 0% v/v) at room temperature. After incubating with
1 L 0.5 M acetic acid in DiH2O, the solution was changed
to mixture of 4 M guanidine HCl, 0.05 M sodium acetate
and 2% Triton X-100, pH=6.0, at room temperature to
loosen the extracellular matrix. The incubation time for
each solution was 1 day. Next, the slice was shortly
incubated with 10% w/v CHAPS and 25% w/v NMethyldiethanolamine solution for 4 h and washed with
PBS for 1 day. The intact slice was stored in blocking
buffer (0.2% Triton X-100/10% DMSO/10% goat serum/
PBS/ 0.05% of sodium azide) at 4 °C. Interested pieces
were cut and incubated with the same blocking buffer at
37 °C for 1 day. Then the samples were incubated with
rabbit antibody anti-Iba1 (1:1000, 019-19741, Wako),
rabbit antibody anti-TH (1:250, ab112, abcam) in antibody
incubation buffer (3% goat serum/3% DMSO/0.2%Tween20/10mg∙L-1Heparin/PBS) for 1 week at 37 °C. After
the primary antibody incubation, samples were washed
with washing buffer (0.2%Tween-20/10mg∙L-1Heparin/
PBS) for 1 day with 3 times refresh and incubated with
dye-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:500, A-21245,
Thermo Fisher) in antibody incubation buffer for 1 week
at 37 °C. Also, samples were incubated with DyLight
649-lectin (1:500, DL-1178, Vector) in antibody incubation
buffer for 1 week at 37 °C. After washing with PBS,
propidium iodide (1:100, P3566, Thermo Fisher) or TOPRO-3 dye was added in PBS for cell nuclei staining for
3 days. After labeling, the samples were dehydrated by
solutions of EtOH/DiH2O (50%, 70%, 100%, 100% v/v)
and delipidated by DCM solution for 4 h each solution.
BABB solution was replaced and incubated at room
temperature until completely transparent.

Active SHANEL histology study of intact human
kidney
The PFA-fixed intact kidneys were pumped through
primary artery with 36 ml of mixture of 25 mg/ml
tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyabate-dextran, 2 mM
p-maleimidophenyl isocyanate (PMPI) and 5 mM DLdithiothreitol (DTT). Then the kidneys were sealed into
plastic bag and incubated in 37 °C overnight. After the
vessel labeling, we set up the perfusion system with
peristaltic pump and PTFE tubing at room temperature
as human brain. The first step consisted of the washing
with 2 L PBS washing for one day twice. The second

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

step was decolorization and permeabilization with 2 L
10% w/v CHAPS and 25% w/v N-Methyldiethanolamine
solution for one week. The third step was dehydration
with series of 2 L EtOH/DiH2O (50%, 70%, 100% v/v) 4
days each solution. The fourth step was delipidation with
4 L DCM/MeOH (2:1 v/v) sealed for 4 days. The fifth step
was rehydration with series of 2 L EtOH/DiH2O (100%,
70%, 50%, 0% v/v) 4 days each solution. The sixth step
was loosening ECM with 0.5 M acetic acid for 4 days and
mixture of 4 M guanidine HCl, 0.05 M sodium acetate
and 2% Triton X-100, pH=6.0, for 4 days. The seventh
step was again PBS washing one day twice. Next, 1 L of
TO-PRO-3 dye (1:2000 diluted) was continually pumped
for 2 weeks, then washed with PBS one day twice. The
clearing was started with series of 2 L of EtOH/DiH2O
solutions (50%, 70%, 100%, 100% v/v) pumping for 2
days of each step, followed by 2 L of DCM delipidation
for 3 days, then proceeded to 2 L BABB solution until
complete transparent.

Light-sheet microscopy imaging
Single plane illuminated (light-sheet) image stacks were
acquired using Ultramicroscopy (LaVision BioTec),
featuring an axial resolution of 4 μm with following filter
sets: ex 470/40 nm, em 535/50 nm; ex 545/25 nm, em
605/70 nm; ex 580/25 nm, em 625/30 nm; ex 640/40
nm, em 690/50 nm; ex 785 nm, em 845/55 nm. Samples
were imaged with 1x objective (LaVsion 0.1 NA [WD= 17
mm] or 4x objective (Olympus XLFLUOR 0.28 NA [WD
= 10 mm]), and 12x objective (LaVsion 0.53 NA [WD=
10 mm]). Tile scans with 20% or 30% overlap along the
longitudinal x-axis and y-axis were obtained using a
z-step of 3 µm, 5 µm or 8 µm. Exposure time was 90120 ms, laser power was adjusted depending on the
intensity of the fluorescent signal (in order to never reach
the saturation) and the light-sheet width was kept at 80%
of maximum.

Laser-scanning confocal microscopy imaging
After imaging with light-sheet microscopy, areas of
interest from the cleared specimens, such as human
brain and human kidney, were dissected and imaged with
an inverted laser-scanning confocal microscopy (Zeiss,
LSM 880) using Zen 2 software (v.10.0.4.910; Carl Zeiss
AG). Before imaging, samples were mounted by placing
them onto the glass surface of a 35 mm glass-bottom
petri dishes (MatTek, P35G-0-14-C) and adding a few
drops of BABB to make sure that the imaging region
was immersed in BABB [14]. The imaging was done
using a 40x oil-immersion objective lens (Zeiss, ECPlanNeoFluar × 40/1.30 oil DIC M27, 1.3 NA, WD = 0.21
mm). 7.5 x 5 x 1 cm brain section was cut from number 7
labeled and cleared intact human brain slice, and imaged
with upright confocal microscopy (MAVIG, RSG4) using
Caliber I.D. RS-G4 research software. The working
dimensions of stage is 46 x 40 x 66 cm. The images
were acquired with UPLFLN 10x objective (OLYMPUS
0.3NA [WD=10mm]). Tile scans were obtained along the
longitudinal y-axis. Laser power was adjusted depending

on the intensity of the fluorescent signal (in order to never
reach the saturation).
Epifluorescence stereomicroscopy imaging
Cleared 1.5 cm-thick whole human slice was fixed in a
glass chamber and was imaged with a Zeiss AxioZoom
EMS3/SyCoP3 fluorescence stereomicroscopy using a
1x long working distance air objective lens (Plan Z 1x,
0.25 NA, WD= 56 mm). The magnification was set as 32x
and imaging areas were selected manually to cover half
of slice. The images were taken with 405 nm filters and
files were exported as tiff images.

Image processing
Processing, data analysis, 3D rendering and video
generation for the imaging data were done on an HP
workstation Z840, with 8 core Xeon processor, 196
GB RAM, and Nvidia Quadro k5000 graphics card
and HP workstation Z840 dual Xeon 256 GB DDR4
RAM, nVidia Quadro M5000 8GB graphic card. We
used Imaris, Arivis, photoshop and Fiji (ImageJ2)
for 3D and 2D image visualization. Tile scans were
stitched by Fiji’s stitching plugin49. Stitched images
were saved in TIFF format and optionally compressed
in LZW format to enable fast processing. We removed
tiles with acquisition errors using Fiji’s TrakEM2 plugin
and Imglib2library. We acquired light-sheet microscopy
stacks using ImSpector (v.5.295, LaVision BioTec) as 16bit grayscale TIFF images for each channel separately.
In each pair of neighboring stacks, alignment was done
by manually selecting 3 to 4 anatomic landmarks from
the overlapping regions, and then the stitching was
done sequentially with the Scope Fusion module of the
Vision4D (v.2.12.6 × 64, Arivis) software. Landmarks
were mainly chosen from the cellular structures on the
basis of visual inspection of the anatomical features.
After completing the 3D reconstructions, the data
visualization was done with Imaris (v.9.3.0, Bitplane) in
both volumetric and maximum-intensity projection color
mapping. Epifluorescence stereomicroscopy images
were saved as series TIFF images. The images were
stitched manually in photoshop by overlapping regions
from landmarks.

3D volume and iso-surface rendering of pig pancreas
islets
Insulin positive β-cell volumes were quantified by 3D isosurfacing using the Imaris software (v.9.3.0, Bitplane,
Switzerland). Islet volumes were segmented using the
‘absolute threshold’ thresholding option and the intensity
threshold was set manually for most of pancreas with
the filter of ‘number of voxels Img=1’. Statistical data
parameters (Overall, Area, Center of Homogeneous
Mass, Ellipsoid Axis A, Ellipsoid AxisB, Ellipsoid Axis C,
Ellipsoid Axis Length A, Ellipsoid Axis Length B, Ellipsoid
Axis Length C, Ellipticity (oblate), Ellipticity (prolate),
Number of Voxels, Position, Sphericity and Volume) were

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

exported from Imaris to Microsoft Excel (Microsoft, USA)
spread sheets (*.xls). Statistical analysis was performed
using GraphPad Prism8.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.Z. performed the protocol development, organs
processing, labeling, clearing, imaging and data analysis.
M.I.T. contributed to optimize the protocol, organs
processing, imaging and data analysis. H.S. perfused
and dissected the human brain and human kidney.
E.K. and E.W. generated the INS-EGFP transgenic pig
line. E.K. perfused and dissected pig pancreas. J.L.
performed the SAXS experiment and data analysis. S.Z.
and A.E. wrote the manuscript. All authors commented
on the manuscript. A.E. initiated and led all aspects of
the project.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank O. Thorn-Seshold for the critical comments
on the manuscript, and David Eliezer and Sebastian
Doniach for support in the initial stages of this project.
This work was supported by the Vascular Dementia
Research Foundation, Synergy Excellence Cluster
Munich (SyNergy), ERA-Net Neuron (01EW1501A to
A.E.), Fritz Thyssen Stiftung (A.E., Ref. 10.17.1.019MN),
DFG (A.E., Ref. ER 810/2-1 and TRR127 to E.W. and
E.K.), NIH (A.E.), and Helmholtz ICEMED Alliance (A.E.).

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
A.E. filed a patent on SHANEL technologies described
in this study.

8.
Richardson, D.S. and J.W. Lichtman, Clarifying Tissue
Clearing. Cell, 2015. 162(2): p. 246-257.
9.
Belle, M., et al., Tridimensional Visualization and
Analysis of Early Human Development. Cell, 2017. 169(1): p.
161-173 e12.
10.
Renier, N., et al., iDISCO: a simple, rapid method to
immunolabel large tissue samples for volume imaging. Cell,
2014. 159(4): p. 896-910.
11.
Murray, E., et al., Simple, Scalable Proteomic Imaging
for High-Dimensional Profiling of Intact Systems. Cell, 2015.
163(6): p. 1500-14.
12.
Renier, N., et al., Mapping of Brain Activity by
Automated Volume Analysis of Immediate Early Genes. Cell,
2016. 165(7): p. 1789-1802.
13.
Deverman, B.E., et al., Cre-dependent selection yields
AAV variants for widespread gene transfer to the adult brain.
Nat Biotechnol, 2016. 34(2): p. 204-9.
14.
Cai, R., et al., Panoptic imaging of transparent mice
reveals whole-body neuronal projections and skull-meninges
connections. Nat Neurosci, 2018.
15.
Belle, M., et al., A simple method for 3D analysis of
immunolabeled axonal tracts in a transparent nervous system.
Cell Rep, 2014. 9(4): p. 1191-201.
16.
Yang, B., et al., Single-cell phenotyping within
transparent intact tissue through whole-body clearing. Cell,
2014. 158(4): p. 945-958.
17.
Tainaka, K., et al., Whole-body imaging with singlecell resolution by tissue decolorization. Cell, 2014. 159(4): p.
911-24.
18.
Pan, C., et al., Shrinkage-mediated imaging of entire
organs and organisms using uDISCO. Nat Methods, 2016.
13(10): p. 859-67.
19.
Jing, D., et al., Tissue clearing of both hard and soft
tissue organs with the PEGASOS method. Cell Res, 2018.
28(8): p. 803-818.

REFERENCES

20.
Kubota, S.I., et al., Whole-Body Profiling of Cancer
Metastasis with Single-Cell Resolution. Cell Rep, 2017. 20(1):
p. 236-250.

1.
Reardon, S., Worldwide brain-mapping project sparks
excitement - and concern. Nature, 2016. 537(7622): p. 597.

21.
Tainaka, K., et al., Chemical Landscape for Tissue
Clearing Based on Hydrophilic Reagents. Cell Rep, 2018.
24(8): p. 2196-2210 e9.

2.
Despotovic, I., B. Goossens, and W. Philips, MRI
segmentation of the human brain: challenges, methods, and
applications. Comput Math Methods Med, 2015. 2015: p.
450341.

22.
Chung, K., et al., Structural and molecular interrogation
of intact biological systems. Nature, 2013. 497(7449): p. 332-7.

3.
Heusch, P., et al., Functional evaluation of transplanted
kidneys using arterial spin labeling MRI. J Magn Reson Imaging,
2014. 40(1): p. 84-9.

23.
Morawski, M., et al., Developing 3D microscopy with
CLARITY on human brain tissue: Towards a tool for informing
and validating MRI-based histology. Neuroimage, 2018. 182: p.
417-428.

4.
Sijens, P.E., et al., MRI-determined fat content of
human liver, pancreas and kidney. World J Gastroenterol, 2010.
16(16): p. 1993-8.

24.
Lai, H.M., et al., Next generation histology methods for
three-dimensional imaging of fresh and archival human brain
tissues. Nat Commun, 2018. 9(1): p. 1066.

5.
Amunts, K., et al., BigBrain: an ultrahigh-resolution 3D
human brain model. Science, 2013. 340(6139): p. 1472-5.

25.
Park, Y.-G., et al., Protection of tissue physicochemical
properties
using
polyfunctional
crosslinkers.
Nature
Biotechnology, 2018. 37: p. 73.

6.
Ding, S.L., et al., Comprehensive cellular-resolution
atlas of the adult human brain. J Comp Neurol, 2016. 524(16):
p. 3127-481.
7.
Garvalov, B. and A. Erturk, Seeing whole-tumour
heterogeneity. Nature Biomedical Engineering, 2017. 1: p.
772–774

26.
Bozek, K., et al., Organization and evolution of
brain lipidome revealed by large-scale analysis of human,
chimpanzee, macaque, and mouse tissues. Neuron, 2015.
85(4): p. 695-702.
27.

Moreno-Garcia, A., et al., An Overview of the Role of

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Lipofuscin in Age-Related Neurodegeneration. Front Neurosci,
2018. 12: p. 464.

46.
Vogt et al., Raising the game in image classification.
Nat Methods, 2018. 15(10): p. 759.

28.
Monnier, V.M., R.R. Kohn, and A. Cerami, Accelerated
age-related browning of human collagen in diabetes mellitus.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1984. 81(2): p. 583-7.

47.
Chen, C., et al., Human beta cell mass and function
in diabetes: Recent advances in knowledge and technologies
to understand disease pathogenesis. Mol Metab, 2017. 6(9): p.
943-957.

29.
Lee, S.C., et al., Steroid-based facial amphiphiles for
stabilization and crystallization of membrane proteins. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2013. 110(13): p. E1203-11.
30.
White, L.J., et al., The impact of detergents on the
tissue decellularization process: A ToF-SIMS study. Acta
Biomater, 2017. 50: p. 207-219.
31.
Zhang, Q., H. Tao, and W.X. Hong, New amphiphiles
for membrane protein structural biology. Methods, 2011. 55(4):
p. 318-23.
32.
Rodi, P.M., et al., Comparative study of the interaction
of CHAPS and Triton X-100 with the erythrocyte membrane.
Biochim Biophys Acta, 2014. 1838(3): p. 859-66.
33.
Erturk, A., et al., Three-dimensional imaging of
solvent-cleared organs using 3DISCO. Nat Protoc, 2012. 7(11):
p. 1983-95.
34.
Dodt, H.U., et al., Ultramicroscopy: three-dimensional
visualization of neuronal networks in the whole mouse brain.
Nat Methods, 2007. 4(4): p. 331-6.
35.
Hsu, P.D., E.S. Lander, and F. Zhang, Development
and applications of CRISPR-Cas9 for genome engineering.
Cell, 2014. 157(6): p. 1262-78.
36.
Kurome, M., et al., Direct introduction of gene
constructs into the pronucleus-like structure of cloned embryos:
a new strategy for the generation of genetically modified pigs.
Transgenic Res, 2017. 26(2): p. 309-318.
37.
Kemter, E., et al., INS-eGFP transgenic pigs: a
novel reporter system for studying maturation, growth and
vascularisation of neonatal islet-like cell clusters. Diabetologia,
2017. 60(6): p. 1152-1156.
38.
Hildebrand, S., et al., Scalable cytoarchitectonic
characterization of large intact human neocortex samples.
bioRxiv, 2018: p. 274985.
39.
Davis, A.S., et al., Characterizing and Diminishing
Autofluorescence in Formalin-fixed Paraffin-embedded Human
Respiratory Tissue. J Histochem Cytochem, 2014. 62(6): p.
405-423.
40.
Chung, R., et al., Economic evaluations in kidney
transplantation: frequency, characteristics, and quality-a
systematic review. Transplantation, 2014. 97(10): p. 1027-33.

48.
Wang, X., et al., Regional differences in islet
distribution in the human pancreas--preferential beta-cell loss
in the head region in patients with type 2 diabetes. PLoS One,
2013. 8(6): p. e67454.
49.
Kemter, E. and E. Wolf, Recent progress in
porcine islet isolation, culture and engraftment strategies for
xenotransplantation. Curr Opin Organ Transplant, 2018. 23(6):
p. 633-641.
50.

Voigt, F.F., et al., 2019.

51.
Lipfert, J., et al., Size and shape of detergent micelles
determined by small-angle X-ray scattering. J Phys Chem B,
2007. 111(43): p. 12427-38.
52.
Oliver, R.C., et al., Tuning micelle dimensions and
properties with binary surfactant mixtures. Langmuir, 2014.
30(44): p. 13353-61.
53.
Oliver, R.C., et al., Dependence of micelle size and
shape on detergent alkyl chain length and head group. PLoS
One, 2013. 8(5): p. e62488.
54.
Lipfert, J., et al., Sample holder for small-angle
x-ray scattering static and flow cell measurements. Review of
Scientific Instruments, 2006. 77(4): p. 046108.
55.
Guinier, A., La diffraction des rayons X aux
très petits angles : application à l’étude de phénomènes
ultramicroscopiques. Ann. Phys., 1939. 11(12): p. 161-237.
56.
Svergun, D.I. and M.H.J. Koch, Small-angle scattering
studies of biological macromolecules in solution. Reports on
Progress in Physics, 2003. 66(10): p. 1735-1782.
57.
Lipfert, J. and S. Doniach, Small-angle X-ray scattering
from RNA, proteins, and protein complexes. Annu Rev Biophys
Biomol Struct, 2007. 36: p. 307-27.
58.
Hammouda, B., Temperature Effect on the
Nanostructure of SDS Micelles in Water. J Res Natl Inst Stand
Technol, 2013. 118: p. 151-67.
59.
Clarke, S., The hydrophobic effect: Formation of
micelles and biological membranes, 2nd edition (Tanford,
Charles). Journal of Chemical Education, 1981. 58(8): p. A246.

41.
Murphy, S.V. and A. Atala, 3D bioprinting of tissues
and organs. Nat Biotechnol, 2014. 32(8): p. 773-85.
42.
Steinke, H. and W. Wolff, A modified Spalteholz
technique with preservation of the histology. Ann Anat, 2001.
183(1): p. 91-5.
43.
Rajan, N., et al., Preparation of ready-to-use, storable
and reconstituted type I collagen from rat tail tendon for tissue
engineering applications. Nat Protoc, 2006. 1(6): p. 2753-8.
44.
Yanagishita, M., K.A. Podyma-Inoue, and M.
Yokoyama, Extraction and separation of proteoglycans.
Glycoconj J, 2009. 26(8): p. 953-9.
45.
Sullivan, D.P., et al., Deep learning is combined with
massive-scale citizen science to improve large-scale image
classification. Nat Biotechnol, 2018. 36(9): p. 820-828.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

MOVIE LEGENDS
Supporting Movie 1
Beta cells distribution in pig pancreas by SHANEL
histology
SHANEL histology revealed individual or groups of beta
cells within islets of INS-EGFP transgenic pig pancreas
that is several centimeters in size. 3D reconstruction of
nanobody boosted EGFP transgenic pancreas imaged
by light-sheet microscopy. After SHANEL, all labelled
beta cells became evident in the islets throughout the
pancreas. In the second part of the movie, segmented
EGFP+ islets shown.

TRITC-dextran labeled vessels and TO-PRO-3 labeled
glomeruli structures, imaged by light-sheet microscopy.
Individual glomerulus was tracked by afferent arteriole.
Structural profiles of cortex were characterized by the
width, glomerular capillary diameter and afferent arteriole
diameter.

Supporting Movie 2
3D imaging of intact human eye using SHANEL
technology
3D reconstruction of intact human eye imaged by
light-sheet microscopy. SHANEL technology revealed
structural details of sclera, iris and suspensory ligament
in intact human eye.

Supporting Movie 3
Abeta plaques accumulation in 92 years large human
brain slice by SHANEL histology
Upright confocal microscopy imaging of 0.4 cm thickness
of a human brain slice with the cellular resolution (before
clearing size: 10 x 7 x 1.5 cm; after clearing size 7.5 x 5
x 1.1 cm). The large scan shows the Abeta plaques are
heavily accumulated in specific cortex regions including
middle temporal gyrus (MTG) and cingulate gyrus (CG).

Supporting Movie 4
SHANEL histology on centimeters sized human brain
tissues for microglia labeling
3D reconstruction of Iba1 antibody labeled microglia cells
were evident throughout the centimeters size human
brain tissue imaged by light-sheet microscopy.

Supporting Movie 5
SHANEL histology on centimeters sized human brain
tissues for neural process labeling
3D reconstruction of Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) antibody
labeled neuronal processes were evident throughout
centimeters size human brain tissue imaged by lightsheet microscopy. Individual axonal extension across the
gray matter and white matter were visible.

Supporting Movie 6
Cellular and molecular investigation of human kidney
using SHANEL histology
3D reconstruction of human kidney cortex showing

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supporting Fig. 1– Analysis of detergent micelle shape and size by small-angle X-ray scattering
(A) Small-angle X-ray scattering profiles of CHAPS (red) and SDS (blue) micelles in PBS buffer. Fits of ellipsoid to the
data are shown in black models (see Methods for details). (B) Guinier analysis of the scattering profiles from panel (A).
The black lines indicate linear fits to ln(I) vs. q2; the steeper slope for SDS corresponds to a larger radius of gyration Rg.
The fitting ranges were chosen such that the largest q-values are included in the fit, qmax, satify the condition qmax ∙ Rg <
1.2. The inset shows the residual of the fit, confirming good linearity of the data in the Guinier region. (C) Schematics of
the geometrical models fit the CHAPS and SDS scattering data, shown to relative scale.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supporting Fig. 2– Segmentation and quantification of pancreas islets in transgenic pig after SHANEL histology
INS-EGFP transgenic pig pancreas expresses EGFP under the porcine insulin gene (INS) promotor labeling beta cells
in the islets of Langerhans. We used anti-GFP nanobodies (ref. vDISCO) to enhance and stabilize the signal of EGFP.
(A, B) Demonstration of the 3D distribution of pancreatic beta cells based on their volume in the islets of Langerhans.
The heterogeneity of islet sizes is evident. (C) Quantification of the total number of detected islets and categorization
based on their volume.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supporting Fig. 3– Slicing of intact adult human brain for SHANEL clearing
(A) 12 slices of 1.5 cm thickness from an intact adult human brain after CHAPS/NMDEA treatment. (B) Photo of an
example slice (#7) before SHANEL clearing. (C) Photo of the example slice (#7) after SHANEL clearing showing the full
transparency of the 1.5 cm thick human brain slice. The colored rectangles are shown in higher magnification on the
right hand side showing the heavily myelinated white matter and cerebellum.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supporting Fig. 4– SHANEL histology pipeline
(A) SHANEL histology is further characterized by loosening of the extracellular matrix (ECM) using acetic acid & guanidine HCl, which enables antibody-sized molecules to fully penetrate into centimeter-thick sturdy adult human tissues.
(B) Step by step SHANEL histology pipeline (with durations) for deep tissue antibody labeling.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supporting Fig. 5– Imaging centimeters sized human brain slice with an upright confocal or with an epifluorescence microscope
(A) We imaged large parts of the example slice (#7) using an upright confocal microscope (left side, red region) or an
epifluorescence microscope (right side, purple region). (B-D) 3D reconstruction of upright confocal images of the left
side of the brain in (A) showing the TO-PRO-3 labeled cell nuclei (red) and Methoxy-X04 labeled Abeta plaques (cyan).
Zoom-in images indicating plaque accumulation regions including cingulate gyrus (CG), precuneus (PCun), superior
temporal gyrus (STG) and middle temporal gyrus (MTG) (arrowheads in C and D). (E-G) Stitched epifluorescent data of
right side of the brain slice in (A) showing Aβ plaques accumulating in the parahippocampal gyrus (PHG, green arrows)
and fusiform gyrus (FuG, yellow arrows). (H) Tiled 3D confocal images showing Aβ plaques (magenta) and surrounding
cell nuclei (red) from the cortex. See also Supporting Movie 3.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supporting Fig. 6– Example of human brain stained with Lectin by SHANEL histology
(A-D) Lectin labeling of post-mortem human brain tissue with a size of 3.0 x 1.9 x 1.5 cm. Lectin labeling throughout
the entire depth of the centimeters sized human brain tissue is evident. For example, alteration of regional density of
vasculature (compare C1 to C2) and tissue abnormalities observed by swollen structures (arrowheads in D1 and D2)
are evident.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supporting Table 1– Physical/chemical/geometrical properties of detergent micelles
Detergent
CMCa (mM)

CHAPS
8 Ref. [1]

SDS
1-8 Ref.[1,2]

Triton X-100
0.3 Ref.[3]

Aggregation number

10 Ref. [1]
11-12 [from I(0)]b
15-17 [from model]b

80-90 [from I(0)]b
90-100 [from model]b

80 Ref.[4]
142 Ref.[5]
75-165c

Monomer mass (Da)

615

288

628 Ref.[5]

Micelle molecular
massd (kDa)

≈7

≈ 26

≈ 63

16.0 ± 1.0 Ref.[6]
15.5 ± 1.0

29.7 ± 1.0 Å

≈ 33 Å Ref.[4]
29.5 ± 0.2 Å
Ref.[7]

Monomer volumee Vmon
(Å3)

830.3

414.2

Electron densityf ρdet
(e/Å3)

0.405

0.377

Prolate ellipsoid;
Long axis: 30-32 Å
Short axis: 10-11 Å

Oblate two-component
ellipsoid;
Long axis core: 23-25 Å
Short axis core: 15-16 Å
Outer shell: 2-4 Å

Radius of gyration (Å)

Micelle shape
a

Critical micelle concentration. The CMC for ionic detergents such as SDS depends on ionic strength of the
solution[1]. For 150 mM monovalent salt, corresponding to the ionic strength of PBS buffer and the approximate
physiological ionic strength the CMC for SDS is 1.5 mM.
b
Aggregation numbers determined from SAXS analysis. Two independent estimates were obtained by i) analyzing
the forward scattering intensity I(0) and ii) fitting the shape of the scattering patterns with a geometrical model
(see Methods).
c
Anatrace catalogue (2014)
d
Computed from the monomer mass and the estimated aggregation number.
e
Monomer volumes were computed were calculated from the monomer mass and the published specific
densities[2].
f
Electron densities were computed from the atomic composition and the monomer volume

1.
Corrin, M.L. and W.D. Harkins, The effect of salts on the critical concentration for the
formation of micelles in colloidal electrolytes. J Am Chem Soc, 1947. 69(3): p. 683-8.
2.
le Maire, M., P. Champeil, and J.V. Moller, Interaction of membrane proteins and lipids with
solubilizing detergents. Biochim Biophys Acta, 2000. 1508(1-2): p. 86-111.
3.
Mandal, A.B., B.U. Nair, and D. Ramaswamy, Determination of the critical micelle
concentration of surfactants and the partition coefficient of an electrochemical probe by using cyclic
voltammetry. Langmuir, 1988. 4(3): p. 736-739.
4.
Stubičar, N., et al., Size, Shape and Internal Structure of Triton X-100 Micelles Determined by
Light and Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering Techniques, in Surfactants in Solution, K.L. Mittal, Editor.
1989, Springer US: Boston, MA. p. 181-195.
5.
Stubičar, N. and J. Petres, Micelle Formation by Tritons in Aqueous Solutions. Croatica
Chemica Acta, 1981. 54(3): p. 255-266.
6.
Lipfert, J., et al., Size and shape of detergent micelles determined by small-angle X-ray
scattering. Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2007. 111(43): p. 12427-38.
7.
Paradies, H.H., Shape and size of a nonionic surfactant micelle. Triton X-100 in aqueous
solution. The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 1980. 84(6): p. 599-607.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supporting Table 2– Screening chemicals for blood decolorization
No.

CAS No.

Name

1

7529-22-8

4-Methylmorpholine N-oxide

2

622-40-2

4-(2-Hydroxyethyl)morpholine

3

3040-44-6

1-(2-Hydroxyethyl)piperidine

Structure
O
N

Catalog No.

CH3

224286-100G

OH

H28203-100G

O

N

O

116068-100G

N
HO

4

102-71-6

HO

Triethanolamine

OH

N

90279-100ML

OH

5

96-80-0

2-(Diisopropylamino)ethanol

6

5966-51-8

7

105-59-9

1,3-Bis(dimethylamino)-2propanol
N-Methyldiethanolamine

N

CH3

CH3

8

139-87-7

CH3
H3 C

10
11

102-79-4
2160-93-2
102-60-3

CH3

N

N

B42985-10G

CH3

CH3
N

HO

471828-18L

OH
CH3

N-Ethyldiethanolamine
N-Butyldiethanolamine

CH3

OH

N

HO

9

471488-100ML

OH
H3 C

112062-5G
OH

471240-2L

OH
H3C

N

OH

t-Bu

N-tert-Butyldiethanolamine

N

HO

455709-250G

OH

OH

Quadrol

OH
H3 C

122262-1L

CH3
N

CH3

N

H3 C

OH
OH

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/643908; this version posted May 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supporting Table 3– Prices and scalability of screened chemicals
Aminoalcohols
1
2
3
4
5
6
7a
8
9
10
Package/kg or L
0.1
0.25 0.5 2.5
0.5
0.01
18 0.005
2
0.25
1670 133 630 72
125 16300 30 4740
46
290
/kg or L
Color of solution
+
+
+
+
+
+

11
1
71
-

-: colorless; +: color
a: red highlights the chemicals used in SHANEL

Supporting Table 4– Costs of chemicals for clearing whole adult human brain
Chemicals
Amount, g or L
Cost , Kg-1 or L-1

CHAPS
N-Methyldiethanolamine
EtOH
DCM
BABB
Total

149
30
38
25
20

1000
10
16
5
10

1490
300
608
125
200
∑ 2723

