bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Epithelial invagination by vertical telescoping
Jingjing Li1, Andrew D. Economou1†, Jeremy B.A. Green1*.

1

Centre for Craniofacial and Regenerative Biology, King’s College London, United Kingdom.

*Correspondence to: jeremy.green@kcl.ac.uk.
†Current address: Developmental Signalling Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London,
United Kingdom.

Abstract:
Epithelial bending is a fundamental process that shapes organs during development. All currently
known mechanisms involve cells locally changing shape from columnar to wedge-shaped. Often
this shape change occurs by cytoskeletal contraction at cell apices (“apical constriction”) but
mechanisms such as basal nuclear positioning (“basal wedging”) or extrinsic compression are
also known. Here we demonstrate a completely different mechanism which occurs without cell
wedging. In mammalian salivary glands and teeth, we show that initial invagination occurs
through coordinated vertical cell movement. Specifically, we show that cells towards the
periphery of the placode move vertically upwards while their more central neighbours move
downwards to create the invagination. We further show that this occurs by active cell-on-cell
migration: outer cells migrate with an apical leading edge protrusion, depressing the central cells
to “telescope” the epithelium downwards into the underlaying mesenchyme. Cells remain basally
attached to the underlying lamina while their apical protrusions are dynamic and planar polarised
centripetally. These protrusions depend on the actin cytoskeleton, and inhibition of the branching
molecule Arp2/3 inhibits them and the invagination. FGF and Hedgehog morphogen signals are
also required, with FGF providing a directional cue. These findings show that epithelial bending
can be achieved by novel morphogenetic mechanism of coordinated cell rearrangement quite
distinct from previously recognised invagination processes.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Main Text:
Ectodermal organs, including hair follicles, teeth, mammary glands, and smaller glands such as
mucous, salivary, sweat, lacrimal and sebaceous, are all regulated by a common set of genes, all
form from a placode (epithelial thickening) and are all affected simultaneously by congenital
ectodermal dysplasias

1, 2

. We previously showed that in mammalian tooth germs, mammary

glands and hair follicles, the epithelium invaginates when it stratifies and cells in the suprabasal
layers (suprabasal cells) migrate centripetally and pull radially inwards on a ring of underlying
basal layer cells, both bending the epithelium and narrowing the “neck” of the bud (Fig. 1a-c). In
this mechanism, canopy contraction, basal layer cells become wedge-shaped due to the extrinsic
contraction of the overlying canopy 3. Canopy contraction, however, only explains invagination
in a solid organ primordium as is seen in so-called “bud” or “peg” stages of teeth, hair follicles
and mammary glands. By contrast, salivary glands (SGs), as well as the other glandular
ectodermal organs, initially invaginate with a hollow space and no canopy above the
invagination (Fig. 1d-f). Close inspection of early tooth invagination shows that before
contractile canopy formation, it too initially invaginates as a hollow shape (Fig. 1a). The absence
of a canopy rules out canopy contraction, but raises the question: how does this hollow
invagination occur? We tested for apical constriction in SG placodes by staining for its
hallmarks, namely apical enrichment of F-actin and diphosphomyosin light chain-2 (ref. 4) . We
found that neither F-actin nor diphosphomyosin was detectably enriched in invaginating salivary
germs compared to nearby flat oral epithelium (Fig. 1g-j), nor did we see circumferential actin
cables which are seen in some other invaginating systems 5, 6 (data not shown). Upon cell shape
analysis, using mosaic labelling of individual cells in the epithelium, we unexpectedly found no
significantly apically narrowed, wedge-shaped cells in any region of the invaginating SG
placode, with no significant deviation from columnar shape (Fig.1k-n). This immediately ruled
out not only apical constriction but also some other alternative epithelial bending mechanisms,
including basal relaxation and basal wedging

7-13

. Consistent with this, nuclear height was

uniformly in the middle of the apicobasal axis throughout the invaginating placode (Fig.1o).
Geometrically, the only way of packing a field of approximately cylindrical cells on an
invaginated surface is by a staggered arrangement illustrated in Fig.2a. For this to be an active
mechanism of invagination, the cells must undergo vertical shear, similar to the sliding between
the steps of an escalator or sections of a “telescopic” arm. We therefore designated this cell
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

rearrangement as “vertical telescoping”. In transverse sections of early SG we indeed observed
numbers of vertically aligned cells arranged on the inclined, invaginating basal lamina (Fig.2c).
To test whether vertical telescoping occurs throughout the invaginating SG in an unbiased way,
we computationally segmented 3D confocal image stacks to determine the outlines of all the
epithelial cells in 3D and fitted ellipsoids to every cell

14

. Vertical telescoping definitively

predicts that cells will lean or tilt outwards from the centre of the placode relative to the normal
to the lamina (as shown schematically in Fig. 2a). We therefore mapped the angle of the
ellipsoids’ principal axes to the plane of the immediately underlying basal lamina (Fig.2b).
Measuring angles was preferred over attempting to measure vertical position differences due to
the variability of cell heights. In early SG, we indeed observed a consistent outward lean
between the cells and the lamina (Fig. 2e-g) as arrows pointing outwards radially from the
placodal centre), unambiguously indicative of vertical telescoping across an entire placode.
Judged by the length of the arrows, the extent of telescoping appeared correlated to the degree of
invagination, i.e. the steeper the slope is, the more cells leaned outward from the placodal centre
and quantification proved this to be the case (Extended Data Fig. 1, Table 1). Thus, vertical
telescoping occurs throughout the SG.
We then considered other ectodermal organs. Although different in later stages of development,
the initial tooth primordium resembles early SG placode morphologically: both form an
invaginated monolayer (before pseudostratification and then outright stratification by vertical
cell divisions in the molar 3, 15). To test for vertical telescoping in the tooth, we examined molar
primordia at their early initiation stages, when stratification has barely begun. Transverse
sections revealed vertical cells on the inclined slope of the lamina (Fig. 2d). Mapping the cell-tolamina angles in 3D, we saw that cells in the basal layer showed the tell-tale outward lean
indicative of vertical telescoping, although with a central region having less-tilted cells,
consistent with the flatter shape of the tooth invagination at its centre (Fig. 2h-j). Thus, vertical
telescoping occurs in tooth primordia in the early stages of invagination before formation of a
substantial contractile canopy. This shows a unity of morphogenetic mechanism between
different placodal organs.
To understand the mechanism of vertical telescoping, we first determined whether it requires the
underlying mesenchyme. If mesenchyme contributes to invagination, its removal should result in
less invagination. Enzymatic removal of the mesenchyme resulted in a more, rather than less,
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

invaginated placode (Extended Data Fig. 2). This result clearly shows that, rather than driving
SG invagination, mesenchyme limits it at this stage and that there is most likely an epithelially
autonomous mechanism for vertical telescoping.
If vertical telescoping is epithelially driven, then it implies active cell movement consisting of
vertical cell migration of cells relative to their neighbours – in effect a "mesenchymoid"
behaviour. By analogy with migration of cells on substrates, one might expect that the cells
move with a leading-edge protrusion

16

. For the vertical movement implicit in vertical

telescoping, a leading edge could be either apical or basal (Fig. 3a, b), although some sort of
novel snake-like undulating lateral movement is also theoretically possible (Fig. 3c) 7. Live
imaging of mosaically labelled specimens revealed no apparent basal protrusions or lateral
undulations, but did reveal rather highly conspicuous apical protrusions (Movie S1-S3). These
protrusions were dynamic and somewhat less obvious, although still visible, in fixed material
and in individual movie frames (Fig. 3d-e). Although some apical protrusions could be seen in
inter-placodal flat epithelium (Extended Data Fig. 3a), those in the invaginating SG were much
more abundant, much larger, and less static (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 3b, Movie S4 versus
S1). Importantly, the protrusions in the SG cells were all directed towards its centre (i.e.
centripetally) compared to the random orientation of non-placodal cell protrusions (Fig. 3g-j) (p
< 0.001 inside placode and p > 0.05 outside placode, Rayleigh test). Thus, the protrusions are
consistent with the model depicted in Fig. 3a: an apical centripetal leading edge somehow
vertically raises a cell relative to its more central neighbour while depressing the latter to drive
vertical telescoping.
To determine the function of the apical protrusions and signals that induce and orient them, we
applied small molecule inhibitors to cultured SG placode explants. We titrated the concentrations
of the actin polymerization inhibitor cytochalasin D and the Arp2/3 actin-branching inhibitor
CK666 to the lowest concentrations that had a phenotypic effect. At these levels of cytochalasin
D, the actin cytoskeleton is affected (Extended Data Fig. 4a) but cells remain remarkably intact
(Extended Data Fig. 4c) and explants survive without shedding dead cells after 6 hours of
incubation. CK666 has an even milder effect, with the actin distribution and cell shapes
appearing broadly normal (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c). Both treatments caused a reduction in the
number of apical protrusions (Fig. 4c) and inhibited invagination (Fig 4a,b). Given the selectivity

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of Arp2/3 for branched actin structures and their association with leading-edge cell protrusions,
we conclude that the apical protrusions are likely to be important for the epithelial invagination.
We previously showed

15

that both the Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and Fibroblast Growth Factor

(FGF) pathways drive early tooth morphogenesis. We therefore tested the effect of a Hedgehog
signalling inhibitor (cyclopamine) and an inhibitor of FGF receptor (SU5402) in SG explants. At
minimum concentrations known to inhibit expression of pathways targets (data not shown)
cyclopamine reduced invagination and SU5402 essentially abolished it (Fig. 4d,e). Analysis of
apical protrusions in mosaically labelled live tissue showed that both cyclopamine and SU
reduced the number of protrusions (Fig. 4e-f). FGF pathway inhibition, unlike cyclopamine, also
disorientated the protrusions from centripetal to random (Fig. 4g,h), potentially accounting for
the complete loss of invagination and suggesting that FGF plays a polarizing or chemotactic role
in organizing cell behaviour in vertical telescoping.
Together our findings reveal cell-on-cell migration as a previously unrecognized mechanism for
epithelial monolayer invagination. All previously described and theoretical mechanisms going
back at least to the 1930s and up to the present day, have involved cell wedging, while vertical
telescoping does not. Thus vertical telescoping introduces a new principle of epithelial bending
by cell rearrangement. It requires coordinated vertical migration behaviour of an ensemble of
cells and could be considered a form of collective cell migration. Why has this mechanism not
been described before? Possibly it does not occur in Drosophila, currently the premier system for
epithelial morphogenesis. Possibly, it does not occur in early vertebrate development, although a
re-examination of some instances of neural invagination may reveal it. We have shown vertical
telescoping to occur in salivary gland and tooth, which are representative of the whole class of
ectodermal organs. These are diverse, numerous, widespread and largely conserved across
mammals and to some extent birds. Thus vertical telescoping is unlikely to be an obscure rarity.
The comparing the salivary gland with the tooth illustrates how vertical telescoping is related to
canopy contraction 3. In both, cells migrate upwards and centripetally. In the tooth, but not the
salivary gland, vertical cell division simply liberates apical (suprabasal) daughters, allowing
them to migrate even more centripetally. They remain mechanically linked to their basal sisters,
thus creating a contractile canopy coupled to the basal layer. The simple sum of the migratory
and oriented cell division behaviours achieves the difference between these two types of
ectodermal organ (Extended Data Fig. 5). The mechanics of vertical telescoping, as distinct from
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the kinematic that we describe, and the adhesive and cytoskeletal structures that are involved,
remain to be established: mechanical modelling and experimental measurement of forces in this
system is a current focus of further investigation.
Understanding mechanisms of physical morphogenesis is a necessary basis for improving the
fidelity of organoids to their natural counterparts and for precision regeneration in vivo. Vertical
telescoping is one such mechanism, a new type of fold in the art of epithelial origami, and a
mechanistic module that can be combined with others to generate phenotypic diversity.

References and Notes:
1.

Pispa, J. & Thesleff, I. Mechanisms of ectodermal organogenesis. Dev Biol 262, 195-205
(2003).

2.

Thesleff, I., Vaahtokari, A. & Partanen, A.M. Regulation of organogenesis. Common
molecular mechanisms regulating the development of teeth and other organs. Int J Dev
Biol 39, 35-50 (1995).

3.

Panousopoulou, E. & Green, J.B. Invagination of Ectodermal Placodes Is Driven by Cell
Intercalation-Mediated Contraction of the Suprabasal Tissue Canopy. PLoS Biol 14,
e1002405 (2016).

4.

Watanabe, T., Hosoya, H. & Yonemura, S. Regulation of myosin II dynamics by
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of its light chain in epithelial cells. Mol Biol Cell
18, 605-616 (2007).

5.

Roper, K. Anisotropy of Crumbs and aPKC drives myosin cable assembly during tube
formation. Dev Cell 23, 939-953 (2012).

6.

Nishimura, M., Inoue, Y. & Hayashi, S. A wave of EGFR signalling determines cell
alignment and intercalation in the Drosophila tracheal placode. Development 134, 42734282 (2007).

7.

Pearl, E.J., Li, J. & Green, J.B. Cellular systems for epithelial invagination. Philos Trans
R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 372 (2017).

8.

Monier, B. et al. Apico-basal forces exerted by apoptotic cells drive epithelium folding.
Nature 518, 245-248 (2015).

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

9.

Sai, X. & Ladher, R.K. Early steps in inner ear development: induction and
morphogenesis of the otic placode. Front Pharmacol 6, 19 (2015).

10.

Sai, X. & Ladher, R.K. FGF signalling regulates cytoskeletal remodelling during
epithelial morphogenesis. Curr Biol 18, 976-981 (2008).

11.

Smith, J.L. & Schoenwolf, G.C. Cell cycle and neuroepithelial cell shape during bending
of the chick neural plate. Anat Rec 218, 196-206 (1987).

12.

Smith, J.L., Schoenwolf, G.C. & Quan, J. Quantitative analyses of neuroepithelial cell
shapes during bending of the mouse neural plate. J Comp Neurol 342, 144-151 (1994).

13.

Schoenwolf, G.C. & Franks, M.V. Quantitative analyses of changes in cell shapes during
bending of the avian neural plate. Dev Biol 105, 257-272 (1984).

14.

Ollion, J., Cochennec, J., Loll, F., Escude, C. & Boudier, T. TANGO: a generic tool for
high-throughput 3D image analysis for studying nuclear organization. Bioinformatics 29,
1840-1841 (2013).

15.

Li, J., Chatzeli, L., Panousopoulou, E., Tucker, A.S. & Green, J.B. Epithelial
stratification and placode invagination are separable functions in early morphogenesis of
the molar tooth. Development 143, 670-681 (2016).

16.

Pollard, T.D. & Borisy, G.G. Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of
actin filaments. Cell 112, 453-465 (2003).

17.

Hama, H. et al. Scale: a chemical approach for fluorescence imaging and reconstruction
of transparent mouse brain. Nat Neurosci 14, 1481-1488 (2011).

18.

Economou, A.D., Brock, L.J., Cobourne, M.T. & Green, J.B. Whole population cell
analysis of a landmark-rich mammalian epithelium reveals multiple elongation
mechanisms. Development 140, 4740-4750 (2013).

Acknowledgments: We thank Eleni Panousopoulou and Ana Rolo for helpful discussions. The
project was supported by BBSRC grant BB/P007325/1 to J.B.A.G.
Author contributions: J.L performed experiments and data analysis; J.L and A.E developed
computer pipelines and codes for image analysis; J.B.A.G. designed and supervised the project.
All wrote the manuscript together.
Competing interests: Authors declare no competing interests.
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Materials and code requests & Correspondence should be addressed to J.B.A.G.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 1. Invagination of early salivary placode is not driven by cell wedging. a-f: Phalloidin staining of indicated
stages of molar tooth (a-c) and submandibular salivary gland (d-f). False-coloring indicates intercalating suprabasal
cells (green) and shoulder/basal cells that transmit the contractile force to the basal lamina (yellow). g-j: Phalloidin
(magenta), DAPI (blue) staining of the SG placode (g), tongue epithelium (h), and phosho-Thr18/Ser19 Myosin 2
immunofluorescence (green) of the SG (i), and tongue epithelium (j). k-l: Mosaically labelled mT/mG tissue stained
by DAPI (blue) for cell shape and nuclear height analysis in SG. En face (k) and frontal (l) views. m: Ratios of
planar cross-sectional areas of cells at indicated heights in different regions of the SG invagination revealing no
wedging (3 litters, 11 placodes in total; p > 0.05 (one -way ANOVA)). n: Schematic showing regions across a
salivary placode mediolaterally used in M and O. Fe: flat epithelium. Lsh: lingual shoulder region. Lsl: lingual
slope. B: bottom. Bsl: buccal slope. Bsh: buccal shoulder. o: Nuclear position (height above lamina) as fraction of
total cell height in indicated regions (3 litters, 4 placodes in total; p > 0.05 (one-way ANOVA)). Scale bars in all
panels: 50 μm. Bar graphs are means +/- SDs.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 2. Vertical telescoping in early SG and molar invagination. a. Schematic showing vertical sliding
between cells to generate invagination. b. Schematic illustrating the method of measuring and displaying
cell tilt. Green vector: major axis of a basal cell. Red vector: normal vector of the local lamina. Purple
vector: the displacement between the green and red vectors. Blue line: basal lamina of the placode. c-d.
Immunofluorescence of transverse sections of SG and molar placode. Green: β-catenin. Red: Laminin-α1.
Dashed lines: major axes of cells. Curved lines: the angle between the local lamina and the major axes of
cells. e and h: Immunofluorescence of SG placode (e) and molar placode (h), top (xy plane) view and
orthogonal (yz and zx plane) views. Green: β-catenin. Red: Laminin α1. Blue: DAPI. f and i: Heat map of
the depth of the SG (f) and molar placode (i). g and j: Vector map of the displacement angle between cell
and lamina vectors of the SG placode in e and the molar placode in h, indicating VT. Arrows are coloured
by their direction to the left (blue) and right (red) to facilitate visualization. Note that due to the
asymmetry of the SG placode, arrows on the left side (buccal side) of the placode are longer than those on
the right (lingual), corresponding to the steepness of the slope. Maps are representative of 3 independent
litters, for placode type and of 6 and 3 different placodes for SG and molars respectively. Scale bars: 50
μm
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 3. Centripetal apical protrusions are associated with VT. a-c: Schematics of possible cell
behaviour in VT: apical protrusion (a), basal protrusion (b), and lateral undulation (c). d,e,g,h: Stills from
movies of mosaically labelled epithelia. d: Top view of apical protrusions in SG placode from Movie S3
(placode centre is to the right). e: Side view of apical protrusions from Movie S2 (placode centre is to the
right). Successive frames show protrusions are dynamic. f: Quantifications of the abundance and length of
the protrusions. g-h: Top view of an area of flat epithelium (g) and SG placode (h) to show the orientation
of apical protrusions (grayscale cell contours at the apical end extending beyond magenta-coloured cell
contour at mid-height, yellow arrowheads show direction). Hash marks (#) indicate non-protrusive cells.
“+” indicates centre of microscope field (g) or of placode (h). To avoid cell shape ambiguity, only
isolatedly labelled basal cells were analysed. i-j: Quantification of orientation of protrusions (0° indicates
protrusion towards field/placode centre. P values are calculated using the Rayleigh test for circular data
(test for non-uniform disribution) and two-tailed unpaired t test for abundance and length data. Sample
sizes: 3 independent litters, 6 SG placodes, 40 protrusive cells in total, 6 flat regions, 28 cells in total. Bar
graphs are means +/- SDs. Scale bars: 20 μm.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 4. Protrusions and invagination are similarly sensitive to inhibitors. a, d: Transverse sections of
SG placode explant culture with DMSO, Cytochalasin D, CK666, SU5402, ethanol, or cyclopamine as
indicated (green: phalloidin; blue: DAPI) showing inhibition of invagination. Scale bars: 50 μm. b, c, e,
f: Quantification of placode depth (b, e) and protrusion abundance (c, f) in inhibitor-treated placodes
versus vehicle-treated controls (means +/- SDs from 3 independent litters for each treatment, 3 or 4
placodes per experiment per treatment). c, f: Quantification of by inhibitors compared to controls g.Topview live images of SG placodes in mT/mG explants treated with vehicle, cyclopamine or SU5402.
Dashed line circles: placode region. Asterisks inside cells: the cell bodies of protrusive cells. Arrowheads:
direction of the protrusion. “+”: the centre of the placode. Note that protrusions are centripetal in control
and cyclopamine treated tissues, but not in SU5402-treated tissue. Only isolatedly-labelled cells were
analysed. Scale bars: 20 μm. h Orientation of protrusions in the three treatments (0° indicates centripetal)
(data from 3 independent litters, 6 placodes in each condition). P values in b, d, and f are two tailed t-test,
in g are Rayleigh test.
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Materials and Methods
Mouse strain and staging of embryos
All animal experiments were conducted under license from the United Kingdom Home Office and approval of the
institutional Ethical Review Board. Live imaging of mosaically labelled cells, cell shape analyses in fixed materials,
were performed using mT/mG mice [Gt(ROSA)26Sortm4(ACTB-tdTomato,- EGFP)Luo/J (Jackson Laboratories
strain 007576)] crossed with a tamoxifen-inducible Cre male B6.Cg-Tg(CAG-cre/Esr1)5Amc/J (Jackson
Laboratories strain 004682) 3. To induce mosaic expression of membrane GFP, 2 mg/animal Tamoxifen (Sigma) in
corn oil was injected I.P. 24 hrs. prior to the experiment into pregnant mT/mG females, together with 1 mg
progesterone (Sigma) to reduce fetal resorption. Automated cell orientation analysis, immunofluorescent staining,
and inhibitor treatment were performed with CD-1 mice. Embryos were staged by nominal age (noon of the day of
vaginal plug detection taken as E0.5).
Whole-mount immunostaining and imaging
Specimens were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 3 hrs. at room temperature (RT). Fixed whole-mount tissues
were washed 3 times with PBS-Triton (0.1%) and blocked with 20% goat serum (Sigma G6767) for 1 hr. at RT.
Antibody and chemical staining were performed in blocking solution at the following dilutions: anti-β-catenin 1:500
(Sigma C2206), anti-laminin 1:500 (Sigma L9393), anti-phosphorylated myosin 2 light chain (Cell Signaling 3674),
Alexa 488/568 anti-mouse/rabbit/rat 1:500 (Life Technologies), fluorescent phalloidin (Life Technologies) 1:200,
DAPI (Life Technologies) 1:10000. Validations of antibodies can be found on manufacturers’ websites. Incubations
for both primary and secondary antibodies were at 4oC overnight. For specimens >80 μm thick, post-fixation (4%
PFA, RT, 1 hr.) was performed after immunostaining, and stained tissues were cleared using Scale A2 and Scale B4
solutions 17 for confocal imaging.
3D image stacks were captured on a Leica SP5 confocal microscope with an HCX PL APO CS 40X oil (N.A. 1.25)
or an HCX PL APO 63x / 1.3 GLYC CORR CS (21° C) objective. For 3D cell shape and orientation analyses,
placodes were imaged en face at optimal z resolution.
Cell shape and nuclear height analyses
For cell shape analysis, GFP positive embryos were dissected and submandibular glands were imaged en face at
optimal z resolution under the 63X objective. Isolated GFP-positive cells contacting the basal lamina were identified
by digitally reslicing the 3D stack frontally and viewing in frontal section. To measure cell shapes, along the
apicobasal axis, the apical and basal limits of a cell were decided by scrolling up and down the original image stack
to find where in z the GFP cell boundary started and ended. These two positions were marked and slice numbers of a
quarter, half, three quarters and 9/10 cell height from the base were calculated. Areas of the cell inside the boundary
at each of these heights were drawn manually using the freehand tool in Fiji to return the area enclosed. “Base” area
for Fig. 1Q was taken as that of the quarter-height slice (necessary because the actual base is often oblique) and the
“apical” area was that of the 9/10-height slice (for similar reasons). For nuclear height analysis, whole mount
mandibles were stained with DAPI to show the nucleus. Submandibular glands were imaged en face as 3D stacks at
optimal z resolution under a 63X confocal objective. The centre of the nucleus and the height of each cell were
decided by viewing the cell on a transverse digital section that shows the largest section area of the cell. The line
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

tool in Fiji was used to manually measure the height of the nucleus and the cell. ANOVA test was performed to
decide whether there is any significant difference between groups.
Automated quantification of cell orientation
Whole-mount mandibles were stained for β-catenin (for cell boundary), α-laminin (for basal lamina), and DAPI (for
nucleus), and a 3D stack of the placode was imaged en face at optimal z resolution on a Leica SP5 40x or 63x
objective. Fiji macro and MATLAB were used to segment epithelial cells in 3D and compute cell orientations,
respectively (scripts available upon request). Essential steps in the pipeline are as follows: an entire image was
divided in x-y as a grid (each square 20 x 20 pixels), keeping the z depth. The 3D coordinates of the local lamina
were registered as the peak of the laminin staining intensity in z and the x-y coordinates of the small square. The
mesenchyme was blacked out from the image below the lamina. Cells were segmented in 3D using our selfdeveloped iterative thresholding Fiji macro and the 3D suite Fiji plugin

14

based on the cell boundary staining, and

the segmented objects were filtered for DAPI staining to confirm them as real cells. Ellipsoids were fitted to each
segmented cell volume using the Fiji ellipsoid-fitting macro

14

and information of cell centroids and axes of the

ellipsoids were extracted. These cell data together with the lamina grid positions were imported into MATLAB. The
plane of the local lamina of a cell was determined as that defined by the xyz coordinates of the lamina at the centre
points of the three 20x20 pixel regions closest to the centroid of the cell. Orientation of a cell was computed in
MATLAB as the angle between the major axis (as a vector) of the cell and the normal vector to the local lamina
plane. Displacements of these two vectors were plotted as a vector map to show the “leaning” of columnar cells on a
bending lamina. A map of the depth of the basal lamina was plotted as a heat map in R

18

. For scatter plots in

Extended data Fig. 2, cells were defined as basal if their basal-most points were < 3 µm above the basal lamina
plane. Code for the above procedures is available on request from the authors.
Explant Culture and treatments
Explant culture of salivary placodes was performed as described in 15. Concentrations of drugs used in culture were:
20 μM cyclopamine (Sigma, diluted from 10 mM stock in ethanol), 5 μg/ml SU5402 (Sigma, diluted from 10 mg/ml
stock in DMSO) 0.05 μg/ml cytochalasin D (Sigma, diluted from 10 mM stock in DMSO), and 250 μM CK666
(Sigma, diluted from 80 mg/ml stock in DMSO). Ethanol or DMSO were used as vehicle, respectively. Culture
medium is phenol red-free Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium: Nutrient Mixture F-12 (DMEM/F12) + 15% FCS +
0.1g/L Ascorbic Acid + Pen/Strep.
Sample sizes of each experiment are detailed in each figure legend.
Live imaging
GFP-positive mT/mG embryos were selected for live imaging. Submandibular gland explants were dissected at
E11.25 in DMEM/F12, immobilized apical-side-down in a glass bottom dish by overlaying with a piece of
transparent membrane from a porous cell culture insert (Corning 353090, 0.4μm) anchored to the glass at its edges
with small blobs of Vaseline, and imaged on an inverted Leica SP5 with a 63X objective with optimal z resolution.
The culture was supplied with humidified 5% CO2 in air in a 37oC incubation chamber throughout the imaging.
To assess the effect of drugs on cell protrusions in live tissue, mandibular explants were dissected and cultured with
drugs in concentrations listed above, in a glass bottom dish and shallow medium so that the surface of the tissue was
in contact with air (for tissue health). Explants were cultured at least 3 hrs. before setting up for imaging.
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/515981; this version posted September 11, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

16

