bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Brain morphology predicts long-term placebo response in multiple sclerosis patients
Mariya V. Cherkasova1*, Jessie Fanglu Fu3, Michael Jarrett5, Poljanka Johnson1, Shawna Abel1,
Roger Tam2,6, Alexander Rauscher4, Vesna Sossi3, Shannon Kolind1, David Li1,2, A. Dessa
Sadovnick1,7, Lindsay Machan2, J. Marc Girard8, Francois Emond9, Reza Vosoughi10, Anthony
Traboulsee1, A. Jon Stoessl1*
1

Department of Medicine (Division of Neurology) and Djavad Mowafaghian Centre for Brain
Health, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
2
Department of Radiology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada
3
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada
4
Depatment of Pediatrics (Division of Neurology), University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada
5
Population Data BC, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
6
School of Biomedical Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada
7
Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada
8
Centre Hospitalier de l’Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada
9
CHU de Québec-Université Laval, Hôpital de l’Enfant-Jésus, Québec, Canada
10
Department of Internal Medicine (Neurology), University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada
*Correspondence:
A. Jon Stoessl, CM, MD, FRCPC, FCAHS Professor & Head, Neurology;
Director, Djavad Mowafaghian Centre for Brain Health;
Canada Research Chair in Parkinson’s;
Pacific Parkinson’s Research Centre & Parkinson’s Foundation Centre of Excellence;
University of British Columbia;
T: 604-822-7967
jstoessl@mail.ubc.ca
Mariya V. Cherkasova
University of British Columbia
2215 Westbrook Mall,
Vancouver, BC V6T 2B5
phone: 604-822-3428

cherkaso@mail.ubc.ca
Conflict of Interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Keywords: placebo effect, liberation procedure, multiple sclerosis, cortical thickness, graph
theory, structural connectivity
Manuscript word count (including figure legends, tables and references): 10,740
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ABSTRACT
Significant insights have been gained into the neural mechanisms of acute placebo responses.
However, little is known about the mechanisms of long-term placebo responses, such as those
seen in clinical trials, or the interactions between these mechanisms and brain disease. We
examined morphological brain correlates of placebo responses in a randomized clinical trial of
the “liberation procedure”, a controversial endovascular treatment for multiple sclerosis (MS).
Patients were randomized to receive either balloon or sham extracranial venoplasty and followed
for 48 weeks. The trial did not support therapeutic efficacy of venoplasty, but a subset of both
venoplasty and sham patients reported a transient improvement in health-related quality of life,
indicating a placebo response. Graph theoretical analysis of cortical thickness (CT) covariance
showed that placebo non-responders had a more homogenous regional CT pattern with denser
clustering and a more small-world-like architecture. In placebo non-responders, lesion load
inversely predicted CT in primary somatosensory and motor areas, association areas, precuneus
and insula, primarily in the right hemisphere. In placebo responders, lesion load was unrelated to
CT, but lesion activity was higher. Lesions associated with cortical atrophy in MS may result in a
cortical configuration that cannot support a sustained placebo response.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION
A placebo response is a therapeutic response to an inert intervention believed to be
potent. Placebo responses are commonly observed in randomized controlled trials (RCTs),
sometimes for as long as two years (1). The neurobiological mechanisms underlying placebo
responses have been primarily studied in the context of acute interventions usually performed in
laboratory settings. The findings have pointed to the neural circuits involved in reward
expectancy and emotion regulation, as well as the ‘effector pathways’ specific to the type of
response, such as the pain matrix in the case of placebo analgesia (2)(3)(4)(5). The neural
mechanisms of long-term placebo responses, such as those observed in clinical trials, have been
less studied. Several studies have observed patterns of fMRI-derived functional and structural
connectivity predicting subsequent placebo responses in clinical trials of chronic pain, as well as
modulation of functional connectivity patterns associated with the experienced placebo
analgesia. However, the specific patterns have differed between studies (6)(7)(8)(9) (10). Others
have observed modulation of metabolic brain networks involving limbic regions in response to
antidepressant placebo in depressed males (11) and in response to a sham surgery in a trial of
gene therapy in Parkinson’s disease (12)(13).
In RCTs examining treatments of neuropsychiatric or neurodegenerative disorders, neural
mechanisms producing placebo responses may interact with the neuropathological processes of
the disease. For example, Alzheimer’s patients show a reduced capacity for placebo analgesia in
an experimental context; this impaired capacity to mount a placebo response is associated with
and may result from a reduced capacity for neural coding of expectancy associated with
disrupted connectivity of the prefrontal cortex with the rest of the brain (14). Such effects of
brain disease on the capacity of the patient to benefit from placebo and thereby, to some degree,
from real therapies, have important implications for interpreting the results of clinical trials.
However, little is known about the interactions between placebo responses and brain disease.
To address this question, we examined structural neural predictors of placebo responses
of multiple sclerosis (MS) participants undergoing an RCT of a controversial extracranial
venoplasty procedure dubbed the “liberation therapy”. The treatment was based on the
hypothesis that chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency (CCSVI), or deficient venous
drainage caused by extracranial venous stenoses, is a major contributor to the pathogenesis of
MS. Despite initially promising effects of the procedure on symptoms and disease course
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

reported in uncontrolled, unblinded studies (15)(16)(17)(18)(19)(20), CCSVI has been found to
not be specifically related to MS (21), and the procedure has now been demonstrated to be
ineffective in two separate double blind sham-controlled RCTs, one of these conducted by the
pioneers of the procedure (22), and the other by our group (23). In the latter, while venoplasty
was not superior to sham venoplasty on any outcome measure, a subset of both venoplasty and
sham treated patients experienced a significant transient improvement in self-reported healthrelated quality of life (MSQOL-54) over the trial’s 48 week follow-up, peaking at 12 weeks
following treatment and subsequently subsiding. This suggested a placebo response in both
groups, with substantial individual variation (Figure 1A). We examined MRI-based structural
neural predictors of this placebo response by comparing placebo responders versus nonresponders in terms of brain volume, white matter lesions and cortical thickness at the onset of
the trial (Figure 1).
In addition to examining global and localized measures of brain morphology, which do
not take into account the global structure and connectivity of the brain, we performed a graph
theoretical analysis of regional cortical thickness in placebo responders vs. non-responders.
Graph theory is a modality invariant framework used to study brain connectivity by representing
the brain as a complex network of “nodes” (brain regions) connected via links or “edges”. In
structural brain networks, the edges represent actual anatomical connections, i.e. white matter
fibers, whereas in functional networks, they represent temporal covariation in neural activity.
Graph theoretical analysis of regional cortical thickness has been previously used as a measure of
structural connectivity in both healthy controls and MS patients (24)(25), as well as in other
neurological disorders (26). However, rather than representing anatomical links, the edges
represent inter-regional covariation in cortical thickness (CT), considered a proxy of functional
connectivity: CT in a given region tends to covary with CT in functionally connected regions,
and these covariance patterns partly recapitulate functional networks (26). Graph theory
describes networks using measures of global and local connectivity. Studies using the graph
theoretical approach to studying CT covariance patterns in MS have suggested increased network
segregation in MS patients with an enhancement of local network properties early in the disease,
progressing to a shift in both local and global network properties with advancing disease.
Relative to controls, early remitting-relapsing (RRMS) patients (< 5 years) displayed stronger
modular decomposition and increased local network properties with an increasing strengthening
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of these properties over time (27)(28). A parallel strengthening of local properties was seen in
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) based white matter networks in a similar group of early RRMS
patients (29). White matter lesion load in RRMS patients was proportional to decreases in both
local and global network efficiency (25); similar decreases in global and local efficiency
covarying with disease severity and lesion burden were also observed in DTI-based white matter
networks (30). Finally, a study in advanced MS patients pointed to a more regular pattern of
cortical thickness organization with altered local and global properties, which was correlated
with MEG-based functional connectivity (24). However, it has remained unclear whether these
changes in cortical architecture are related to placebo or active treatment responses in MS.

RESULTS
Placebo responders and non-responders were identified based on the area under the curve
(AUC) measure of change in the physical health composite of the MSQOL-54 adjusted for
baseline MSQOL-54 scores, as higher baseline scores predicted less change in on this measure (b
= -0.91, SE = 0.32, t = -2.88, 95% CI = -1.53 - -0.28, p = 0.005). This was done for only those
patients whose T1-weighted MRIs were of sufficient quality to be included in the volumetric and
cortical thickness analyses: 88 out of the total 104 participants in the trial (for the remaining
scans, signal intensity at the lateral extremes was too low for successful surface extraction). The
patients whose AUC z-scores were > 0 were designated as placebo responders; those with scores
≤ 0 were designated as non-responders. This was done for both venoplasty and sham participants
under the assumption that with respect to benefit, both treatments are effectively sham. Analyses
of only those participants who received the sham intervention (responders: n=25, nonresponders: n=21) yielded qualitatively similar trends (see Supplementary Table S4, Figure S1,
S2). The responder and non-responder groups did not differ on any demographic or clinical
characteristics, although there were non-significant trends for the non-responders to have higher
Extended Disability Status Scale (EDSS) scores and more difficulty with ambulation at baseline
(Table 1). The proportion of placebo responders vs. non-responders did not differ as a function
of site: this was a multisite study, with participants from 4 different sites across Canada (see
methods). As expected, the two groups had markedly different treatment responses in terms of
self-reported health-related quality of life (Figure 1A).

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Placebo Responders Have Higher Lesion Activity
Relative to the non-responders, placebo responders had significantly larger normalized
brain volumes at baseline, prior to the intervention, without adjustment for covariates
(responders: 0.77 ± 0.03; non-responders: 0.75 ±0.03; b=0.01, CI: 0.00 – 0.03, p=0.05).
However, this was no longer true after age, gender, age x gender interaction, disease duration
and site were included in the model (b=0, CI: -0.01 – 0.02, p=0.39). Percent brain volume change
over the 48 weeks of trial also did not differ between the groups (p=0.34), though there was
progressive atrophy in both groups (b = -0.31, SE = 0.09, t = -3.45, p = 0.0009). No significant
differences between the groups in regional grey or white matter volume were revealed by voxelbased morphometry, and there were no differences in regional CT, adjusting for total brain
volume, age, gender, the age x gender interaction, disease duration, site and lesion load. There
was, however, a significant dimensional association between the magnitude of placebo response
and cortical thickness of a left precuneus region (x = -3.16, y = -70.12, z = 37.10; Figure 2 A),
controlling for the same covariates, as well as health-related quality of life at baseline.
There were no significant differences in lesion load, computed as the total volume
occupied by lesions on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) scans, either at baseline or at
24-week and 48-week follow-up points (ps ≥ 0.78), and there was no significant increase in
lesion load over the 48 weeks (p = 0.11). There were also no significant differences between
placebo responders and non-responders in terms of FLAIR lesion locations at baseline, based on
a voxel-wise t-statistic comparing the two groups’ lesion probability maps, thresholded using
non-parametric permutation inference (31) (Figure 2B; see Supplement for a 3D movie showing
the probability of each voxel being lesional as a function of group). Although the majority of
participants across both groups did not have gadolinium enhanced lesions on their T1 gadolinium
scans, there were significant differences in lesion activity between the groups (Table 2). Placebo
responders were more likely to display gadolinium enhanced lesions at baseline (b = 1.26, SE =
0.46, z = 2.73, p = 0.006) and to have newly enhancing lesions (that were not enhanced on the
previous scan) at 24 weeks (b = 1.26, SE = 0.42, z = 3.01, p = 0.003) and at 48 weeks (b = 1.77,
SE = 0.51, z = 3.43, p = 0.0006). A similar pattern was evident for new lesions on FLAIR scans
both at 24 (b = 1.11, SE = 0.33, z = 3.34, p = 0.0008) and at 48 weeks (b = 1.57, SE = 0.40, z =
3.97, p = 0.00007) and for new active lesions that were not present on previous gadolinium T1
scans, both at 24 (b = 1.24, SE = 0.27, z = 4.52, p=0.000006) and at 48 weeks (b = 1.54, SD =
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0.36, z=4.25, p = 0.00002). The incidence of enlarging lesions was also higher in the placebo
responders at 24 weeks (b = 2.61, SE = 0.75, z = 3.49, p = 0.0005), though not at 48 (p = 0.14)
weeks.

Placebo Responders Have a More Homogenous and Small-World-Like CT Covariance Pattern
To examine the cortical organization in the two groups we conducted a graph theoretical
analysis on CT of 78 cortical areas derived using automated anatomical labeling (AAL). We
used the following common measures of network segregation and integration (32). 1) A
network’s clustering coefficient, which describes a fraction of a node’s neighbors that are also
neighbours of each other, is a measure of clustered connectivity around individual nodes. In the
context of CT networks, it reflects uniformity of CT with respect to individual nodes. 2)
Modularity, a measure of how clearly a network may be subdivided into segregated nonoverlapping communities of highly correlated groups of regions. 3) Characteristic path length is
a measure of network integration representing the number of edges typically required to connect
pairs of nodes in the network. In the context of CT networks, path length does not represent the
number of anatomical links required to connect two nodes, but rather the number of required
indirect correlations surpassing the sparsity threshold (see below). 4) Global efficiency is a
related measure computed as the average inverse shortest path length in the network. 5) Smallworldness, computed as the ratio of clustering coefficient and characteristic path length,
describes a topology featuring numerous short-range connections with an admixture of few longrange connections, which balances specialized and distributed processing while minimizing
wiring costs. Like other anatomical networks, cortical thickness covariance networks have been
reported to have small world topologies (26).
Mean regional CT values for each participant, adjusted for total brain volume, age,
gender, age by gender interaction, disease duration, site and lesion load were used to construct
pairwise correlation matrices for the placebo responder group and the non-responder group
(Figure 1F, 5A). In addition, scans from gender and age-matched healthy participants (13 males,
30 females, age: 52.98 ± 8.93) were used to construct a control correlation matrix. Six of these
scans were obtained at the University of British Columbia site, and the rest were taken from
Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS-3). This was done to provide a benchmark for
comparison of placebo responders and non-responders and help determine which CT covariance
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

pattern was more normative. Graph theory metrics were computed and compared between the
groups using a range of linearly spaced sparsity thresholds from 10% to 50%. Error estimates
from leave-one-out cross validations were used to examine the robustness of graph theory
metrics and visualize group differences in the estimated metrics, and statistical significance of
pairwise group differences in these metrics was evaluated against the null distributions of group
differences on the metrics based on 1000 random permutations of participants in the sample.
Group differences in the metrics presented below were consistent over the range of sparsity
thresholds. As input matrices are not stable at low sparsity, which results in high error estimates,
we chose a relatively high sparsity threshold of 43% yielding stable input matrices for presenting
the results of random permutation tests. P-values for the entire range of sparsity thresholds are
given in the Supplement.
Cortical thickness of placebo non-responders was more regionally homogeneous (range r:
.1 to .95, median r: .66) relative to that of the placebo responders (range rs: -.15 to .95, median r: .49)

and controls (range rs: -.22 to .92, median r: .41, Figure 3A, B). Hence, the CT network of the nonresponders had a more homogenous degree distribution relative to both responders and controls.
While placebo responders did not differ significantly from controls on any of the computed
graph theory metrics (ps ≥ 0.29), placebo non-responders differed significantly from both
responders and controls on several metrics. Relative to placebo responders and controls, nonresponders had a more segregated network topology with higher mean and normalized clustering
coefficients (non-responders vs. responders: ps = 0.02; non-responders vs. controls: ps = 0.01).
Non-responders also had marginally shorter normalized and non-normalized characteristic
pathlengths relative to the responders (ps = 0.06) and significantly shorter pathlengths relative to
the controls (ps < 0.04). A related metric of global efficiency was also increased in the nonresponders relative to the responders (p = 0.05) and the controls (p = 0.03). Overall, this resulted
in stronger small-world attributes for the non-responders relative to the responders and controls
(ps = 0.01). Given that all groups had CT networks with a small world topology, a higher small
world index in placebo non-responders indicated a shift towards a more regular and less random
topology relative to the responders and controls.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lesion Load Inversely Predicts CT Only in Placebo Non-Responders
One interpretation of more regular CT graphs in neurological populations has been that
they arise from coordinated tissue loss leading to more correlated CT patterns. As white matter
lesions in MS may result in coordinated tissue loss in anatomically connected regions and have
been associated with impaired network efficiency (25), we examined the associations between
white matter lesion load and cortical thickness in the placebo responders and non-responders.
Although lesion load and location did not differ significantly between the two groups, there was
a significant difference between the groups in the association between cortical thickness and
lesion load, controlling for total brain volume, age, disease duration and site. While there was no
relationship between lesion load and cortical thickness in the placebo responders, in the nonresponders, greater lesion load was associated with cortical thinning in 9 clusters identified using
random field theory to correct for cluster significance (Figure 4, Table 3). The clusters covered a
substantial portion of the right hemisphere including portions of the primary motor and sensory
cortices as well as frontal, somatosensory, visual and auditory association areas. The major
clusters included: the primary motor cortex, comprising both the paracentral lobule and the
precentral gyrus and extending into the premotor cortex (middle frontal gyrus, Brodmann area
(BA 6) and the insula; primary somatosensory cortex (postcentral gyrus, BA 3) extending to the
superior parietal lobule and the precuneus; superior occipital gyrus (BA 19) extending to middle
temporal gyrus (BA 39); middle temporal gyrus (BA 21) extending to inferior temporal gyrus
(BA 20). There were also smaller primary motor and superior occipital clusters in the left
hemisphere. Thus, lesions may have played a differential role in the loss cortical tissue resultant
cortical organization in the two groups.

DISCUSSION
Our findings revealed significant structural brain differences between the MS patients
who experienced a placebo response to an ineffective invasive intervention and those who did
not. These findings advance our understanding of both the neurobiology of placebo responses
and of how the propensity to experience them is impacted by the neuropathological changes in
MS.
While placebo responders and non-responders did not differ significantly in terms of
clinical characteristics, lesion load or lesion location, brain volume or regional cortical thickness,
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

there were significant differences between the groups in terms of their CT covariance patterns.
Relative to the placebo responders, the non-responders had more uniform CT across different
brain regions. In graph theoretical terms, the non-responders had a more segregated and clustered
topology. Coupled with marginally shorter characteristic pathlengths (also reflected in an
increased global efficiency), this resulted in stronger small world attributes, which indicated a
shift towards a more regular and less random topology in the placebo non-responders relative to
the responders and the controls. While a more regular network may be associated with smaller
wiring costs, which could be imposed by axonal loss in MS, this type of network may be less
capable of distributed processing and functional integration. Differences in network topology
between the non-responders and controls, in the absence of differences between the responders
and controls, suggest that the more segregated and regular topology of the non-responders is
anomalous. Previous studies have suggested that CT covariance networks in MS are
characterized by increased segregation with an enhancement of local properties, as well as a shift
towards more regular networks in advanced disease (27)(28)(25)(24). Although CT networks do
not reflect true structural connectivity, convergent findings have emerged from studies of DTIbased structural networks in MS patients (29) (30) and MEG-based functional connectivity (24).
Together, the evidence points to a shift towards more segregated and regular networks in MS,
and our findings suggest that the MS patients who experience these shifts may also lose their
capacity to experience placebo effects. It follows that placebo responses may require a cortical
organization whose topology favours distributed processing and functional integration.
One interpretation of our findings is that in the placebo non-responders, the disease
process may have resulted in a more synchronized cortical tissue loss across different brain
regions leading to increasingly correlated cortical thickness values. This pattern of
neurodegeneration might have resulted in the loss of capacity to mount a placebo response. This
interpretation is supported by our post-hoc analysis relating lesion load to regional cortical
thickness. In the placebo responders, there was no association between lesion load and cortical
thickness, whereas in the placebo non-responders, lesion load significantly predicted cortical
thinning in a substantial portion of the right hemisphere, including the primary sensory and
motor areas and frontal, somatosensory, visual and auditory association areas. Association areas,
as well as the precuneus and the insula have been identified as hubs by graph theoretical studies
of structural connectivity (33). Synchronous loss of neurons in these regions and of projections
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

between them could impair the associative processes that may play an important role in placebo
response, such as the ability to integrate one’s appraisals of one’s somatic functioning in
different modalities with expectancy of therapeutic benefit. The precuneus and the insula, which
are key structures involved in self-referential thinking and interoceptive awareness, may play a
central role in generating such expectancy-biased appraisals and have also been identified as
likely functional connectivity hubs (33), but see (34). Notably, placebo responders and nonresponders did not differ in the degree of cortical thinning in these regions, although left
precuneus thickness predicted placebo response dimensionally. Rather, they differed in the
association between lesion load and CT, potentially pointing to the role of these regions’
connectivity in addition to their integrity. Insults to these structural hubs and their connections
are likely to result in changes in network organization with major implications for functional
integration of neural activity (35)(36)(37).
Our data do not permit us to determine definitively the cause of the differential
associations between cortical thickness and lesion load in placebo responders versus nonresponders. However, it is likely that lesion characteristics play a role. Cortical grey matter loss
in MS may arise from a combination of primary pathological processes and secondary effects of
white matter damage. With regard to the latter, chronic inactive lesions are more likely to be
associated with axonal degeneration (38). Although both placebo responders and non-responders
had relatively advanced disease (10-20 years, median EDSS of 4.0), at which point most lesions
are inactive (39), and gadolinium enhancing lesions were observed in only 22 out of the 88
patients over the 48 weeks of the trial, placebo responders had a significantly higher incidence of
these active lesions. They were also more likely to have lesions that became enlarged at 24 or at
48 weeks relative to baseline (in the same subset of participants who displayed enhancing
lesions), which may indicate either expanding inflammatory activity or “smoldering” or slowly
expanding lesions (39), which have some inflammatory activity but can only be definitively
distinguished from inactive lesions using MRI with gradient echo sequences to detect a rim with
iron-laden activated microglia and macrophages surrounding an inactive centre (40)(41). Based
on this, and given equivalent lesion load in the two groups, it is plausible that placebo nonresponders may have had a higher proportion of inactive lesions. These may be more likely to be
chronic lesions with axonal loss, which could in turn drive synchronized loss cortical tissue,
although our data do not speak to that. In addition, the absence of evidence of active
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

inflammation in non-enhanced lesions may have caused their volume to be reduced compared to
that of active lesions, resulting in a smaller lesion load. A supplementary analysis showed that
our finding of unique associations between lesion load and cortical thickness in the placebo nonresponders remained after removing all participants with enhancing lesions at baseline
(Supplementary figure S3). Nonetheless, lesion activity could have partially contributed to our
findings.
Associations of cortical thinning with lesion load and other measures of white matter
integrity in MS have been previously reported and were in some cases modulated by lesion
location and disease characteristics (42)(43)(44)(45)(46). For example, the volume of
periventricular and not of other white matter lesions were found to predict cortical thickness in
RRMS (45), consistent with the role of CSF-mediated immune pathology in cortical atrophy. We
explored the possibility that the differential associations between lesion load and CT could be
driven by lesion location but did not find significant differences in lesion location between
placebo responders and non-responders. The relationship between white matter pathology and
CT has also been found to depend on disease subtype: white matter pathology predicted cortical
thinning more in RRMS than in SPMS, which was interpreted to suggest that cortical grey matter
atrophy occurs largely independent of white matter pathology in SPMS (42)(43). Roughly half of
our cohort were RRMS patients, with SPMS and PPMS patients making up the rest. Thus,
restricting the analysis to a single patient subtype would severely limit our power and could lead
to unjustified conclusions. However, as can be seen in Supplementary Figure S4, the association
does not appear to be driven by the patients with a specific MS subtype.
In sum, given the associations we observed between lesion load and cortical thinning in
areas of high spatial overlap with network hubs, it is plausible that lesions driving synchronized
cortical tissue loss in these regions resulted in the CT network reorganization we observed,
although the mechanisms whereby this occurred remain unclear.
It remains unclear whether network topology characteristics associated with the absence
of placebo response revealed by our study would generalize to other patient groups or other types
of placebo response. This could be tested in future studies investigating structural or functional
neural correlates of placebo responses; graph theoretical analysis can could also be applied to
existing published datasets. Thus far, graph theoretical network analysis has seldom been used to
study neural correlates of placebo responses. We are aware of only one study using graph theory
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

metrics of DTI-based structural networks to predict placebo response in migraine patients (10).
In that study, increased global and local efficiency at baseline inversely predicted placebo
analgesic response to sham acupuncture, which is consistent with our findings.
Our study had several limitations. First, to maximize sample size, participants receiving
sham and active venoplasty interventions were combined under the reasonable assumption that
both interventions were effectively sham, considering that venoplasty has been demonstrated to
be ineffective in two separate studies. Indeed, our placebo non-responder group included nonsignificantly more sham than active venoplasty participants (Table 1). Moreover, our
supplementary analysis focusing only on those participants who received the sham intervention
yielded qualitatively similar trends (Supplementary Table S4, Figures S1 and S2). We report the
findings from the full sample, as they are likely more reliable. Second, we also had to exclude
some patients from our analysis due to poor MRI quality. Third, our findings are limited by our
definition of placebo response. Placebo responders and non-responders were identified based on
subjective self-report regarding physical health-related quality of life over the course of the trial.
As such, our findings may not generalize to placebo responses manifesting as more objective
measures of clinical improvement, which we did not observe in the trial (23). However, even
subjective placebo responses can be quite compelling for the patients: in the case of venoplasty,
they may have contributed to fueling the efforts of patient advocacy groups to legitimize the
procedure in the face of skepticism from the scientific community (47). In addition, in the
context of a clinical trial with a 48-week follow-up, placebo response is necessarily confounded
with the natural course of the disease and could in part reflect changes in health-related quality of
life due to relapses, remissions and regression to the mean. Although such contributions are
possible, we consider them unlikely to be substantial for the following reasons. 1) While we did
see evidence of regression to the mean, with participants with poorer health-related quality of life
at baseline more likely to show an improvement over the course of the trial, we adjusted our
measure of placebo response for baseline scores. 2) While we did observe a higher incidence of
active lesions in the placebo responders (though only in a minority of patients), the incidence of
newly enhancing lesions did not change over the course of the trial, indicating that lesion activity
did not transiently diminish in the placebo responders (Figure S5). Therefore, it is unlikely that
the transient increase in health-related quality of life in the responder group was driven by
remissions. This is further supported by the absence of such transient improvement on more
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

objective clinician-rated measures, such as the EDSS. Finally, as mentioned earlier, our graph
theoretical analysis was based on cortical thickness covariance patterns, which do not represent
true structural connectivity. Rather, they are thought of as an indirect reflection of functional
connectivity between brain regions. Resting state fMRI data could have provided valuable direct
information regarding functional connectivity differences between placebo responders and nonresponders. Unfortunately, no resting state sequences were collected as part of this trial.
In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that the absence of placebo response in MS is
associated with 1) a more regular and segregated topology of the cortical thickness covariance
network, 2) cortical tissue loss in regions spatially overlapping hubs that is associated with and
may be secondary to white matter pathology, and 3) lower lesion activity. Grey matter atrophy
and dysfunction of cortical networks are important predictors for both physical disability and
cognitive dysfunction in MS (48)(49)(50)(51)(52)(53)(54). Although previous research has
pointed to relationships between cortical thickness covariance patterns and disease
characteristics, these studies have not examined the relationships between CT network
characteristics and treatment response. Our data are the first to show that brain network
characteristics favoring integration are associated with placebo response in MS patients.
Considering that placebo response is a constituent of active therapeutic response, these network
characteristics may by extension predict response to active therapies. Our findings also
underscore the importance of brain networks in the generation of the placebo response and
highlight graph theory network analysis as a tool that can elucidate the neural substrates of
placebo responses when applied to neuroimaging data.

METHODS
Detailed description of the trial’s methods is given in (23).
Participants
Participants with relapsing remitting (RRMS), secondary (SPMS) and primary
progressive (PPMS) MS were recruited between May 29, 2013 and Aug 19, 2015 from four
Canadian academic centers: 1) University of British Columbia Hospital, Vancouver; 2) Health
Sciences Centre, Winnipeg; 3) CHUM, Hôpital Notre-Dame, Montreal; 4) CHU de QuébecUniversité Laval, Hôpital de l’Enfant-Jésus, Québec. Inclusion criteria were: age 18-65 years,
diagnosis of definite MS by the 2010 McDonald criteria (55), an Expanded Disability Status
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Score (EDSS) (56) between 0 (i.e. minimal disability) and 6.5 (i.e. using bilateral aids to walk),
neurologically stable disease within the 30 days prior to screening, and fulfillment of at least two
ultrasound criteria for CCSVI defined by the Canadian Institute for Health Research Imaging
Expert Panel with confirmation of >50% narrowing affecting at least one of 3 extracranial veins
(either internal jugular and/or azygos) on catheter venography. Participants on standard diseasemodifying therapies were permitted to continue on the medication, and changes were allowed for
on study relapses after randomization. Exclusion criteria included treatment with vasodilators,
parasympathomimetics, sympathicolytics, calcium channel blockers, previous venoplasty and/or
stenting, previous jugular or subclavian central line or major neck surgery or radiation, previous
contrast allergy, inability to undergo MRI, inadequate medical records confirming diagnosis and
disease course, and inability to complete all study visits. The total of 104 participants meeting
the above criteria were randomized and entered into the trial, but only 88 of them had T1weighted MRIs of sufficient quality for volumetric and cortical thickness analyses.
Study approval
The clinical research ethics boards at the four participating centers approved the study
protocol, and participants gave written informed consent.

Procedure
Eligible participants were randomized 1:1 to either sham or active balloon venoplasty of
all narrowed veins under study. Stratified randomization (RRMS versus progressive MS course)
at each site was completed by a permuted-block size of six. Venography was performed under
conscious sedation and the duration of time within the angiography suite was uniform for both
venoplasty and sham treated participants. A 5-French diagnostic catheter was introduced through
the common femoral vein to selectively catheterize the right and left internal jugular veins as
well as the azygos vein. The venoplasty participants were treated with an angioplasty balloon
2mm greater than the nominal vein diameter which was inflated for 60 seconds. The participants
randomized to sham had a catheter that was advanced across the stenosis and left for 60 seconds.
After randomization and intervention, participants were followed for 48 weeks, with
Adverse Event assessments, standardized Patient-Reported Outcome scales including MSQOL54 (72 hours and weeks 2, 12, 24, 36 and 48), Multiple Sclerosis Functional Composite score

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(MSFC) (57), EDSS (weeks 2, 12, 24 and 48), MRI and ultrasound (weeks 24 and 48)
assessments.

MRI data acquisition
The MS patient MRIs were carried out on the following scanners: Site 1: Philips Intera 3T; Site
2: Siemens Verio 3T; Site 3: Philips Achieva 3T; Site 4: Philips Achieva 3T. The scanning
protocol was standardized across the four sites. All scans were acquired in sagittal orientation,
and the parameters for each site were as follows. Sites 1 and 3: resolution = 320 x 320 x 200 and
voxel size = 0.8 mm for all scans; 3D T1 time repetition (TR) = 6.2 ms and time echo (TE) = 3.0
ms; 3D T2 TR = 2500 ms and TE = 363 ms; 3D FLAIR TR = 8000 ms, TE = 337 ms and
inversion time (TI) = 2400 ms. Site 2: 3D T1 resolution =320 x 320 x 176, voxel size = 0.78 x
0.78 x 0.78 mm, TE =3.4 ms, TR=1900 ms, TI = 900; 3D T2 resolution = 512 x 512 x 160, voxel
size = 0.488 x 0.488 x 1 mm, TE = 409 ms, TR = 3200 ms; FLAIR: resolution = 320 x 320 x
160, voxel size = 0.83 x 0.83 x 0.83 mm, TE = 337 ms, TR = 8000 ms, TI = 2400. Site 4: 3D T1
resolution = 320 x 320 x 112, slice size = 0.8 x 0.8 x 1.6 mm, TE = 3.2 ms, TR = 6.5 ms; 3D T2
resolution = 320 x 320 x 112, slice size = 0.8 x 0.8 x 1.6 mm, TE = 255, TR = 2500; FLAIR
resolution = 336 x 336 x 112, slice size = 0.76 x 0.76 x 1.6 mm, TE = 330 ms, TR = 4800 ms, TI
= 1650. For the control group, six 3D T1 scans were acquired on the Philips 3T Achieva scanner
at Site 1 in sagittal orientation using the following parameters: resolution = 256 x 250 x 165,
voxel size = 1.0 x 1.0 x 1.0, TR = 8.1 ms, TE = 3.5 ms, SENSE factor 1.8. The rest of the control
3D T1 scans were obtained from the Open Access Series of Imaging Studies repository (OASIS3, www.oasis-brains.org, RRID:SCR_007385). These scans were acquired on Siemens TIM Trio
3T MRI scanner using the following parameters: orientation = transverse, resolution = 256 x 256
x 176, slice size = 1 mm, TR = 2400 ms, TE = 3.16 ms.

Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Placebo response
Change in MSQOL-54 Physical Health Composite was used as the measure of placebo
response, as this measure showed a transient significant improvement in the trial (23). Scores at
baseline and the subsequent 6 assessment points were used to compute the area under the curve
scores for each participant using the Matlab function trapz. These values were then adjusted for
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the baseline score using linear regression, and standardized residuals were then used to subdivide
participants into placebo responders (those with scores > 0) and placebo non-responders (those
with scores ≤ 0).

Lesion analysis
For lesion segmentation, a trained radiologist blinded to treatment assignment placed one or
more seeds points on each lesion. The FLAIR images were thresholded to produce binary masks
containing only hyperintense regions representing candidate lesions. These regions were
subsequently processed using the manual seed points and connected component analysis to
remove false positives, leaving only true lesions (58). Lesion load was calculated as the sum of
volumes of all T2-FLAIR lesion masks (mm3) for a given patient. Lesion activity analysis was
carried out by the same radiologist; gadolinium enhanced lesions indicating blood brain barrier
disruption were identified on T1 scans, newly enhancing lesions were counted as the lesions that
were enhanced on the current scan but were not enhancing in previous scans during the trial; new
and newly enlarging lesions on the T2-FLAIR scans were counted as lesions that were
respectively absent (new) or stable and smaller in volume (newly enlarging) in previous
assessment points in the trial; unique newly active lesions were newly enhancing lesions and
non-enhancing new or newly enlarging lesions on a current scan without double counting. Lesion
load and its change over the trial’s duration was compared between placebo responders and nonresponders with a linear mixed-effects model using the lme4 R package (RRID:SCR_015654)
(59), lmer function, including age, gender, age by gender interaction, disease duration and site as
covariates. Group differences in lesion counts at each assessment point during the trial were
analyzed with poisson regressions using the lme4 glm function and using the same covariates.
The analysis of lesion location was performed using the Functional MRI of the Brain’s
Software Library (FSL, http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl, RRID:SCR_002823). Only the lesions
identified on the T2-FLAIR scans were considered for this analysis, as there were too few
participants with gadolinium enhanced lesions on the baseline scans (4 non-responders; 6
responders). First, all T2 scans were first affinely registered to the MNI-152 template using
FSL’s Linear Image Registration Tool (FLIRT). The resulting transformation parameters were
then applied to the lesion mask files to move them into the MNI-152 space. The correspondence
of lesion masks to the locations of hyperintense lesions on the T2-FLAIR scans in the MNI-152
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

space was verified by visual inspection. To create and compare the lesion probability maps for
the placebo responders and non-responders, the registered lesion masks from all the patients in
each group were merged into a single 4D file. Each 4D file was then averaged across the patient
dimension at each voxel using the fslmaths utility, yielding a lesion probability map per each
group representing the probability of each voxel being lesional (see Supplement for lesion
probability map movie). For the lesion location comparison, the two 4D files were analyzed
using the Randomise algorithm (31), which uses non-parametric permutation inference to
threshold a voxel-wise statistical map produced, in this case, by voxel-wise unpaired t-tests
performed on the two groups.

MRI processing for brain morphometric and cortical thickness analyses
Normalized brain volumes were computed on the 3D T1w MRIs using a segmentationbased approach that computed the parenchymal volume, normalized by intracranial volume (60).
Percentage brain volume change was computed using an automated in-house registration-based
method, which estimates volumetric change from parenchymal edge displacement between
scans. This method was designed to be particularly robust to scanner-induced variations in voxel
size and intensity across time (61).
Prior to further volumetric analyses, white matter lesions were filled with intensities
similar to those of neighboring white matter voxels using the Lesion Filling function in FSL (62).
This reduces intensity contrast within lesion areas and can improve registration and segmentation
of MS brains and resulting morphometric measurements (63). Native T1 weighted MRIs were
processed through CIVET automated pipeline (version 2.1, in-house software developed in the
lab of Alan C. Evans, Montreal Neurological Institute) (64) housed on CBRAIN
(RRID:SCR_005513), a web-based platform for analyzing neuroimaging data developed by the
McGill Centre for Integrative Neuroscience (MCIN) (65). The pipeline included the following
steps. 1) The native MRIs were registered to standard space using a 9-parameter nonlinear
transformation (66). For the controls, the MNI-152 template was used, whereas for the MS
patients, a high-resolution Alzheimer’s disease template was used, provided by CIVET: because
of paraventricular brain atrophy, the AD template produced superior registration. Simultaneous
non-uniformity correction was performed using N3 algorithms (67). 3) The registered corrected
images were classified into white matter, gray matter, CSF, and background, using an artificial
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

neural network classifier (64). 4) Binary volumes consisting of gray matter voxels and white
matter voxels were then extracted from classified images, smoothed using an 8-mm FWHM
smoothing kernel and used in the subsequent voxel-based morphometry analyses (see below). 5)
Cortical surfaces were extracted from the classified images using the Constrained Laplacian
Anatomic Segmentation Using Proximities (CLASP) surface extraction procedure (68)(69). This
process generates a triangulated mesh at the interface of gray matter and white matter and
expands the mesh outwards toward the pial surface. 6) Cortical thickness was measured in native
space as the distance between corresponding vertices on the inner and outer surfaces of the mesh
across 40,962 vertices in each hemisphere (70). The cortical thickness maps were then blurred
using a 20 mm surface based blurring kernel to improve sensitivity (71). Quality control was
performed using a combination of the CIVET QC tool and visual inspection of the outputs.

Voxel-based morphometry
Voxel-based morphometry was conducted on the 8-mm smoothed gray and white matter
volumes using the PET and VBM module of Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM 12,
RRID:SCR_007037). The grey and white matter volumes were compared using voxel-wise two
sample t-tests with total brain volume, age, gender, interaction of age and gender, disease
duration and site. Continuous associations between volumes and the degree of placebo response,
represented by the AUC change in MSQOL-54 scores adjusted for baseline scores, were also
explored using multiple regression models with the same covariates. The resulting statistical
maps were thresholded using family-wise error corrected threshold of p = 0.05.

Cortical thickness analysis
Native-space CT at 40,962 vertices was analyzed statistically using SurfStat
(RRID:SCR_007081) (http://www.math.mcgill.ca/keith/surfstat/), a Matlab toolbox for the
statistical analysis of surface and data with linear mixed effects models and random field theory
to correct for multiple comparisons in determining vertex and cluster significance (72). The
analyses were performed using Matlab17a. We first considered models predicting CT as a
function of group membership (placebo responder vs. non-responder), adjusting for total brain
volume, age, gender, the interaction of age x gender, disease duration, site and lesion load at
baseline:
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CT = β1 + β2 Volume + β3 Age + β4Gender + β5Age*Gender + β6Disease_Duration + β7 Site
+ β8Lesion_Load + β9 Group
In light of the differential associations of lesion load with cortical thickness in placebo nonresponders and responders, which may be viewed as violating the assumption of homogeneity of
regression slopes (73), the analysis was performed using models with and without lesion load as
a covariate, as well as those substituting baseline EDSS as a measure of disease burden. As this
did not qualitatively change the results, we report the findings from the models with lesion load
as a covariate. We additionally considered whether placebo response as a continuous variable
was associated with CT. We analyzed this with a model predicting vertex-wise CT from the
AUC measure of change in MSQOL-54, adjusting for total brain volume, age, disease duration,
site and baseline MSQOL-54 scores:
CT = β1 + β2 Volume + β3 Age + β4 Gender + β5 Age*Gender + β6Disease_Duration + β7
Site + β8Lesion_Load + β9 Baseline + β10 Response
As these analyses yielded no significant vertices or clusters, the results are not shown.
To analyze Associations between cortical thickness and lesion load in placebo responders
versus non-responders, we first used a model testing the significance of the interaction between
lesion load and group in predicting vertex-wise CT, adjusting for total brain volume, age, disease
duration and site.
CT = β1 + β2 Volume + β3 Age + β4 Gender + β5 Age*Gender + β6 Disease_Duration +
β7Site + β8 Responder*Lesion_Load
Once the significance of this interaction was established, we analyzed the associations between
CT and lesion load separately in each group.
CT = β1 + β2 Volume + β3 Age + β4 Gender + β5 Age*Gender + β6 Disease_Duration +
β7Site + β8 Lesion_Load
Once we established that CT was significantly predicted by lesion load only in the placebo nonresponders, we used a mask of the clusters where this association was evident to extract the mean
cortical thickness values across all vertices in these clusters for every participant. We then used a
scatter plot (Figure 3B) to visualize the associations between lesion load and mean CT of these
regions in each group.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Graph theoretical cortical thickness analysis
Cortical surfaces were parcellated into 78 regions based on AAL (74), and mean CT
values for each participant were extracted for each of the 78 regions.
A linear regression analysis was then performed to adjust these CT values for total brain volume,
age, gender, interaction of age and gender, disease duration, site, total brain volume and lesion
load. Again, given differential associations of lesion load with cortical thickness in placebo nonresponders and responders, the graph theoretical analyses were performed on the data both with
and without lesion load covaried out, as well as data adjusting for baseline EDSS in place of
lesion load as a measure of disease burden. As this did not qualitatively change the results, we
report the results adjusted for lesion load. In addition, given the significant group difference in
normalized brain volume in placebo responders vs. non-responders, we also performed the
analysis with and without adjustment for total brain volume. As these analyses yielded similar
results, we report the analysis controlling for both brain volume and lesion load. For controls, CT
values were adjusted for total brain volume, age, gender, and interaction of age and gender. The
resulting residuals were then substituted for the raw cortical thickness values to construct an
inter-regional correlation matrices for placebo responders, non-responders and controls: Rij (i, j
=1, 2 ... n, where n is the number of regions). These correlation matrices were then used to
construct binarized structural networks and compute graph metrics at 30 linearly spaced sparsity
thresholds ranging from 0.1 to 0.5. This thresholding approach normalizes each group-level
graph to have the same number of edges. The following graph metrics were computed using the
Brain Connectivity Toolbox (RRID:SCR_004841) (32) in Matlab2017a. Using the formulas
given in (32), we computed the following graph metrics. 1) Clustering coefficient was computed
as a fraction of a node’s neighbors that are also neighbours of each other:
𝐶=

1
1
2𝑡𝑖
∑ 𝐶𝑖 = ∑
𝑛
𝑛
𝑘𝑖 (𝑘𝑖 − 1)
𝑖∈𝑛

𝑖∈𝑛

, where n is the total number of nodes, Ci is the clustering coefficient of node i and ki is the
degree of node i; Ci = 0 for ki <2 (75). Normalized clustering coefficient was computed as the
ratio of the mean clustering coefficient C and normalization factor Crnad computed as the mean
clustering coefficient of 10 random networks with the same number of nodes and edges as the
tested input network. 2) Modularity was computed as:
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2

𝑄 = ∑ [𝑒𝑢𝑢 − ( ∑ 𝑒𝑢𝑣 ) ]
𝑢∈𝑀

𝑣∈𝑀

, where the network is fully subdivided into a set of non-overlapping modules M; euv is the
proportion of all the edges that connect the nodes in module v (76). 3) Characteristic path length
was computed as:
𝐿=

∑𝑗∈𝑁.𝑗≠𝑖 𝑑𝑖𝑗 −1
1
1
∑ 𝐿𝑖 = ∑
𝑛
𝑛
𝑛−1
𝑖∈𝑁

𝑖∈𝑁

, where Li is the average distance between node i and all other nodes and dij is the distance from
node i to node j (75). Normalized path length was computed as the ratio of characteristic path
length L and a normalization factor Lrnad based on 10 random networks, as described above. 4)
Global efficiency of the network was computed as:
𝐸=

∑𝑗∈𝑁.𝑗≠𝑖 𝑑𝑖𝑗 −1
1
1
∑ 𝐸𝑖 = ∑
𝑛
𝑛
𝑛−1
𝑖∈𝑁

𝑖∈𝑁

, where Ei is the efficiency of node i (77). 5) Small-worldness was computed as the ratio of
normalized clustering coefficient and normalized characteristic path length:
𝑆=

𝐶 ⁄𝐶𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑
𝐿⁄𝐿𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑

, where C and Crand are clustering coefficients for the tested and random networks, respectively,
and L and Lrand are the characteristic path lengths for these networks (78). Leave-one-out crossvalidation was performed to estimate the stability of the graph metrics, and error estimates from
these cross validations were used to visualize group differences (Figure 3). Statistical
significance associated with these differences was evaluated against null distributions of group
differences on the metrics based on 1000 random permutations of participants in the input
matrix.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MVC: conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, visualization, writing – original draft,
writing – review and editing
JFF: formal analysis, software, visualization, writing – review and editing
MJ: data curation
PJ: data curation, investigation
SA: data curation, investigation
RT: investigation, formal analysis, resources, writing – review and editing
AR: investigation, formal analysis, resources, writing – review and editing
VS: formal analysis, writing – review and editing
SK: conceptualization, investigation, writing – review and editing
DL: investigation, writing – review and editing
ADS: funding acquisition, investigation
LM: investigation
MG: investigation
FE: investigation
RV: investigation
AT: conceptualization, funding acquisition, investigation, methodology, supervision, resources,
writing – review and editing
AJS: conceptualization, methodology, supervision, resources, writing – review and editing
ACKNOWLEGMENTS
This work was primarily supported by cooperative agreements from the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR), MS Society of Canada, Michael Smith Foundation for Health
Research, Research Manitoba, and Ministère de la Santé et des Services Sociaux du Québec.
Healthy control data were provided in part by OASIS-3: Principal Investigators: T. Benzinger, D.
Marcus, J. Morris; NIH P50AG00561, P30NS09857781, P01AG026276, P01AG003991,
R01AG043434, UL1TR000448, R01EB009352. We thank Andrew Riddehough, and Kevin
Atkins and Kevin Lam at the UBC MS/MRI group for computing support and data handling.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

REFERENCES
1. Olanow WC et al. Gene delivery of neurturin to putamen and substantia nigra in Parkinson
disease: A double-blind, randomized, controlled trial. Ann. Neurol. 2015;78(2):248–257.
2. Scott DJ et al. Individual Differences in Reward Responding Explain Placebo-Induced
Expectations and Effects. Neuron 2007;55(2):325–336.
3. Lidstone SC et al. Effects of Expectation on Placebo-Induced Dopamine Release in Parkinson
Disease. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 2010;67(8):857.
4. Atlas LY, Wager TD. A meta-analysis of brain emchansims of placebo analgesia: consistent
findings and unanswered questions. In: Benedetti F ed. Placebo, Handbook of Experimental
Psychology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 2014:39–64
5. Price DD, Finniss DG, Benedetti F. A comprehensive review of the placebo effect: recent
advances and current thought. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2008;59(1):565–590.
6. Wanigasekera V et al. Disambiguating pharmacological mechanisms from placebo in
neuropathic pain using functional neuroimaging. Br. J. Anaesth. 2018;120(2):299–307.
7. Tétreault P et al. Brain connectivity predicts placebo response across chronic pain clinical
trials. PLoS Biol. 2016;14(10):1–22.
8. Hashmi JA et al. Brain networks predicting placebo analgesia in a clinical trial for chronic
back pain. Pain 2012;153(12):2393–2402.
9. Vachon-Presseau E et al. Brain and psychological determinants of placebo pill response in
chronic pain patients. Nat. Commun. 2018;9(1):3397:.
10. Liu J et al. Integration of white matter network is associated with interindividual differences
in psychologically mediated placebo response in migraine patients. Hum. Brain Mapp.
2017;38(10):5250–5259.
11. Mayberg HS et al. The functional neuroanatomy of the placebo effect. Am. J. Psychiatry
2002;159(5):728–737.
12. Ko JH et al. Network modulation following sham surgery in Parkinson’s disease. J. Clin.
Invest. 2014;124(8):3656–3666.
13. Niethammer M, Eidelberg D. Metabolic brain networks in translational neurology: Concepts
and applications. Ann. Neurol. 2012;72(5):635–647.
14. Benedetti F et al. Loss of expectation-related mechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease makes
analgesic therapies less effective. Pain 2006;121(1–2):133–144.
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

15. Dake MD, Dantzker N, Bennett WL, Cooke JP. Endovascular correction of cerebrovenous
anomalies in multiple sclerosis : A retrospective review of an uncontrolled case series. Vasc.
Med. 2012;17(3):131–137.
16. Hubbard D et al. Clinical improvement after extracranial venoplasty in multiple sclerosis. J.
Vasc. Interv. Radiol. 2012;23(10):1302–1308.
17. Zamboni P et al. A prospective open-label study of endovascular treatment of chronic
cerebrospinal venous insufficiency. J. Vasc. Surg. 2009;50(6):1348–1358.
18. Radak D et al. Percutaneous angioplasty of internal jugular and azygous veins in patients
with chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency and multiple sclerosis : early and mid-term
results. Plebology 2014;29(6):367–375.
19. Salvi F, Buccellato E, Galeotti R. Venous angioplasty in multiple sclerosis : neurological
outcome at two years in a cohort of relapsing-remitting patients. Funct. Neurol. 2012;2007:55–
60.
20. Zagaglia S, Balestrini S, Perticaroli E. Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty for chronic
cerebrospinal venous insufficiency in multiple sclerosis : dichotomy between subjective and
objective outcome scores. Neurol. Sci. 2013;34:2205–2210.
21. Traboulsee AL et al. Prevalence of extracranial venous narrowing on catheter venography in
people with multiple sclerosis , their siblings , and unrelated healthy controls : a blinded , casecontrol study. Lancet 2013;6736(13):1–8.
22. Zamboni P et al. Efficacy and safety of extracranial vein angioplasty in multiple sclerosis.
JAMA Neurol 2018; 75(1):35-43.
23. Traboulsee AL et al. Safety and efficacy of venoplasty in MS. Neurology 2018;91:e1660e1668.
24. Tewarie P et al. Disruption of structural and functional networks in long-standing multiple
sclerosis. Hum. Brain Mapp. 2014;35(12):5946–5961.
25. He Y et al. Impaired small-world efficiency in structural cortical networks in multiple
sclerosis associated with white matter lesion load. Brain 2009;132(12):3366–3379.
26. Alexander-Bloch A, Giedd JN, Bullmore E. Imaging structural co-variance between human
brain regions. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2013;14:322–336.
27. Fleischer V et al. Longitudinal cortical network reorganization in early relapsing–remitting
multiple sclerosis. Ther. Adv. Neurol. Disord. 2019;12:1–15.
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

28. Muthuraman M et al. Structural brain network characteristics can differentiate CIS from
early RRMS. Front. Neurosci. 2016;10:1–12.
29. Fleischer V et al. Increased structural white and grey matter network connectivity
compensates for functional decline in early multiple sclerosis. Mult. Scler. 2017;23(3):432–441.
30. Shu N et al. Diffusion tensor tractography reveals disrupted topological efficiency in white
matter structural networks in multiple sclerosis. Cereb. Cortex 2011;21(11):2565–2577.
31. Winkler AM, Ridgway GR, Webster MA, Smith SM, Nichols TE. NeuroImage Permutation
inference for the general linear model. Neuroimage 2014;92:381–397.
32. Rubinov M, Sporns O. Complex network measures of brain connectivity: Uses and
interpretations. Neuroimage 2010;52(3):1059–1069.
33. van den Heuvel MP, Sporns O. Network hubs in the human brain. Trends Cogn. Sci.
2013;17(12):683–696.
34. Warren DE et al. Network measures predict neuropsychological outcome after brain injury.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2014;111(39):14247–14252.
35. Gratton C, Nomura E, Pérez F, D’Esposito M. Focal brain lesions cause widespread
disruption of the modular organization of the brain. Hum. Brain Mapp. 2012;24(6):1275–1285.
36. Crossley NA et al. The hubs of the human connectome are generally implicated in the
anatomy of brain disorders. Brain 2014;137(8):2382–2395.
37. Pandit AS et al. Traumatic brain injury impairs small-world topology. Neurology
2013;80(20):1826–1833.
38. Mahad DH, Trapp BD, Lassmann H. Pathological mechanisms in progressive multiple
sclerosis. Lancet Neurol. 2015;14(2):183–193.
39. Frischer JM et al. Clinical and pathological insights into the dynamic nature of the white
matter multiple sclerosis plaque. Ann. Neurol. 2015;78(5):710–721.
40. Kaunzner UW et al. Quantitative susceptibility mapping identifies inflammation in a subset
of chronic multiple sclerosis lesions. Brain 2019;142(1):133–145.
41. Dal-Bianco A et al. Slow expansion of multiple sclerosis iron rim lesions: pathology and 7 T
magnetic resonance imaging. Acta Neuropathol 2017;3:25–42.
42. Steenwijk MD et al. Cortical atrophy patterns in multiple sclerosis are non-random and
clinically relevant. Brain 2016;139(1):115–126.
43. Steenwijk MD et al. Unraveling the relationship between regional gray matter atrophy and
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

pathology in connected white matter tracts in long-standing multiple sclerosis. Hum. Brain
Mapp. 2015;36(5):1796–1807.
44. Bergsland N et al. Corticospinal tract integrity is related to primary motor cortex thinning in
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. Mult. Scler. 2015;21(14):1771–1780.
45. Jehna M et al. Periventricular lesions correlate with cortical thinning in multiple sclerosis.
Ann. Neurol. 2015;78(4):530–539.
46. Charil A et al. Focal cortical atrophy in multiple sclerosis: Relation to lesion load and
disability. Neuroimage 2007;34(2):509–517.
47. Paylor B, Longstaff H, Rossi F, Illes J. Collision or convergence?: Beliefs and politics in
neuroscience discovery, ethics, and intervention. Trends Neurosci. 2014;37(8):409–412.
48. Calabrese M et al. Widespread cortical thinning characterizes patients with MS with mild
cognitive impairment. Neurology 2010;74(4):321–328.
49. Geurts JJG, Barkhof F. Grey matter pathology in multiple sclerosis. Lancet Neurol.
2008;7:841–851.
50. Calabrese M et al. Cortical atrophy is relevant in multiple sclerosis at clinical onset. J.
Neurol. 2007;254(9):1212–1220.
51. Fisniku LK et al. Gray matter atrophy is related to long-term disability in multiple sclerosis.
Ann. Neurol. 2008;64(3):247–254.
52. Chen JT et al. Relating neocortical pathology to disability progression in multiple sclerosis
using MRI. Neuroimage. 2004;23(3):1168–1175.
53. Amato MP et al. Association of Neocortical Volume Changes With Cognitive Deterioration
in Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis. Arch. Neurol. 2007;64(8):1157–1161.
54. Sailer M et al. Focal thinning of the cerebral cortex in multiple sclerosis. Brain
2003;126(8):1734–1744.
55. Polman CH et al. Diagnostic Criteria for Multiple Sclerosis : 2010 Revisions to the
McDonald Criteria. Ann. Neurol. 2011;69:292–302.
56. Kurtzke JF. Rating neurologic impairment in multiple sclerosis : An expanded disability
status scale ( EDSS ). Neurology 1983;33:1444–1453.
57. Cutter GR et al. Development of a multiple sclerosis functional composite as a clinical trial
outcome measure. Brain 1999;122:871–882.
58. McAusland J, Tam RC, Wong E, Riddehough A, Li DKB. Optimizing the Use of Radiologist
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Seed Points for Improved Multiple Sclerosis Lesion Segmentation. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging
2010;57(11):2689–2698.
59. Bates D, Mächler M, Bolker B, Walker S. Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models using lme4.
J. Stat. Softw. 2015;67(1):1–48.
60. Wicks E et al. Automatic computation of normalized brain volume on 3D T1-weighted MRI
scans without registration to standard space. In: Proceedings of the International Society for
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine (ISMRM) Scientific Meeting. 2015.
61. Smith SM et al. Accurate, robust, and automated longitudinal and cross-sectional brain
change analysis. Neuroimage. 2002; 17(1):479-489.
62. Battaglini M, Jenkinson M, De Stefano N. Evaluating and reducing the impact of white
matter lesions on brain volume measurements. Hum. Brain Mapp. 2012;33(9):2062–2071.
63. Valverde S, Oliver A, Lladó X. A white matter lesion-filling approach to improve brain
tissue volume measurements. Neuroimage Clin. 2014;6:86–92.
64. Zijdenbos AP, Forghani R, Evans AC. Automatic “ Pipeline ” Analysis of 3-D MRI Data for
Clinical Trials : Application to Multiple Sclerosis. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2002;21:1280–
1291.
65. Sherif T et al. CBRAIN : a web-based , distributed computing platform for collaborative
neuroimaging research. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 2014;8:1–13.
66. Collins L, Neelin P, Peters TM, Evans AC. Automatic 3D intersubject registration of MR
volumetric data in standardized talairach space. J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr. 1994;18:192–205.
67. Sled JG, Zijdenbos AP, Evans AC. A Nonparametric method for automatic correction of
intensity nonuniformity in MRI Data. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 1998;17(1):87–97.
68. Kim JS et al. Automated 3-D extraction and evaluation of the inner and outer cortical
surfaces using a Laplacian map and partial volume effect classification. Neuroimage
2005;27:210–221.
69. Macdonald D, Kabani N, Avis D, Evans AC. Automated 3-D extraction of inner and outer
surfaces of cerebral cortex from MRI. Neuroimage 2000;356:340–356.
70. Lerch JP, Evans AC. Cortical thickness analysis examined through power analysis and a
population simulation. Neuroimage 2005;24:163–173.
71. Chung MK et al. Deformation-based surface morphometry applied to gray matter
deformation. Neuroimage 2003;18:198–213.
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

72. Worsley KJ, Andermann M, Koulis T, Macdonald D, Evans AC. Detecting changes in
conisotropic images. Hum. Brain Mapp. 1999;101:98–101.
73. Miller GA, Chapman JP. Misunderstanding analysis of covariance. J. Abnorm. Psychol.
2001;110:40–48.
74. Tzourio-Mazoyer N et al. Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a
macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain. Neuroimage
2002;15:273–289.
75. Watts DJ, Strogatz SH. Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature
1998;393:440–442.
76. Newman MEJ. Modularity and community structure in networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
2006;103(23):8577–8582.
77. Latora V, Marchiori M. Efficient behavior of small-world networks. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2008;87:198701.
78. Humphries MD, Gurney K. Network ‘ small-world-ness ’: a quantitative method for
determining canonical network equivalence. PLoS One 2008;3(4):e0002051.

29

Figure 1: Method overview

A: Placebo response classification
64.00
62.00
60.00
58.00
56.00
54.00
52.00
50.00

MSQOL -54 PH Composite +/- SE

MSQOL-54 PH COMPOSITE +/- SE

Health-related quality of life

B: T2 FLAIR MRIs

Placebo response
80.00
75.00

70.00
65.00
60.00
55.00

Lesion
Lesion masks probability
maps

50.00

45.00
40.00

non-responder

C: T1 MRIs, CIVET

responder

F: Graph Theory

D: SufStat

E: SPM VBM

GM

WM

Figure 2. Brain structure of placebo responders and non-responders

A.

B.

(A) Regional cortical thickness predicts a stronger placebo response. (B) Lesion probability maps in
placebo responders (red) and non-responders (blue): no significant differences in lesion location between
groups.

Figure 3. Structural covariance patterns of cortical thickness in placebo
responders and non-responders: graph theoretical analysis
B.

A.

C.

Backbone structure

D.
p=0.06
p=0.02

p=0.05

p=0.01

(A) Correlation matrices of cortical thickness values across 78 cortical areas delineated using Automated Anatomical
Labeling (AAL) in placebo non-responders (blue), placebo responders (red), and a group of healthy age- and gendermatched controls (black). (B) A histogram depicting distributions of correlation coefficients in placebo responders and nonresponders. (C) Backbone structure for these matrices at the sparsity threshold of 0.43. (D) Graph theoretical
characteristics of these matrices across the range of sparsity thresholds from 0.1 to 0.5. Error ribbons represent standard
deviation for parameter estimates from leave-one-out cross-validation. Box plots represent group comparisons at the
sparsity threshold of 0.43 based on leave-one-out cross-validations; histograms represent the p-values based on
permutation tests at the sparsity threshold of 0.43.

Figure 4. Associations between cortical thickness and T2 FLAIR lesion
load as a function of placebo response
A.

B.

(A) Cortical areas whose thickness was significantly associated with lesion load in the placebo nonresponders. (B) Mean cortical thickness of the regions shown in in relation to lesion load in the placebo
responders (red) and non-responders (blue).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1. Demographic and clinical characteristics of placebo responders and non-responders.

Venoplasty, n
Sham, n
Males, n
Females, n
Age, mean (SD)
Disease duration, mean (SD)
MS type (n)
RRMS
PPMS
SPMS
Baseline EDSS, median (range)
Baseline MSFC, mean (SD)
25 foot walk, mean (SD)
9 hole peg test, mean (SD)
PASAT, mean (SD)

Non-responder
(n = 45)
24
21
18
27
55.0 (7.4)
18.8 (9.6)

Responder
(n = 34)
18
25
13
30
53.0 (8.5)
16.7 (8.1)

p

25
6
14
4.0 (0-6.5)
7.2 (6.2)
15.80 (12.15)
108.50 (49.73)
37.53 (14.70)

30
3
10
4.0 (0-6.5)
8.9 (4.9)
11.87 (7.24)
94.41 (36.04)
38.63 (14.97)

0.19
0.24
0.26
0.29

0.35
0.09†
0.17
0.07†
0.13
0.73

RRMS = remitting relapsing MS; PPMS = primary progressive MS; SPMS = secondary progressive MS;
EDSS = Expanded Disability Status Scale; MSFC = Multiple Sclerosis Function Composite; PASAT = Paced
Auditory Serial Addition Test. For MSFC, raw scores rather than z-scores are given.

Table 2. Brain morphometric characteristics
Measure (SD)
Normalized brain parenchymal
fraction (baseline)
% Change in brain volume
from baseline
24 weeks
48 weeks
WM lesion load (mm3)
Baseline
24 weeks
48 weeks
New T2 lesions (# of patients
with lesion count)
0
1
2
3
5
6
7
8

Non-responder (n = 45)

Responder (n = 43)

p

0.75 (0.03)

0.77 (0.03)

0.39

-0.40 (0.50)
-0.70 (0.60)

-0.43 (0.38)
-0.61 (0.61)

0.78
0.65

12031.63 (12002.73)
12681.97 (12185.17)
12792.65 (11875.89)

12269.53 (14538.12)
12581.44 (14527.14)
12907.21 (14698.09)

0.78
0.92
0.87

W24

W48

W24

W48

36
4
3
0
1
0
0
0

36
5
0
2
0
0
0
0

35
3
1
0
0
1
0
2

33
4
3
1
0
0
1
0

< 0.001**

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

9
11
Unique newly active lesions (#
of patients with lesion count)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
11
15
22
Newly enhancing lesions (# of
patients with lesion count)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Newly enlarging T2 lesions (#
of patients with lesion count)
0
1
2
7
13

0
0

0
0

1
0

0
1

BL

W24

W48

BL

W24

W48

40
1
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

33
6
4
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0

36
5
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

33
3
2
2
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0

34
2
2
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
1

33
3
3
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
0

BL

W24

W48

BL

W24

W48

40
1
3
0
0
0
0
0

36
6
2
0
0
0
0
0

38
4
1
0
0
0
0
0

33
3
2
2
1
0
0
1

36
4
0
1
0
0
1
0

34
5
0
2
0
2
0
0

W24

W48

W24

W48

42
2
0
0
0

42
0
1
0
0

38
2
1
1
1

38
4
1
0
0

< 0.0005***

< 0.01*

W24: 0.0005***
W48: 0.14

BL = baseline; W24 = 24 weeks assessment point; W48 = 48 weeks assessment point; WM = white
mater. P-values represent comparisons between placebo responders and non-responders for
corresponding assessment points. The models include age, gender, age x gender interaction, disease
duration and site as terms.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825638; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 3: Regions where cortical thickness was predicted by lesion load in placebo non-responders.
Cluster

# vertices

Right superior and medial
frontoparietal
p < 0.00005

4080

Right precentral gyrus /
insula
p < 0.00005
Left parahippocampal gyrus
p < 0.00005
Right inferior temporal gyrus
p = 0.0002
Right parahippocampal gyrus
p = 0.0005
Left lingual gyrus
p = 0.01
Right lingual gyrus
p = 0.02
Left precentral gyrus
p = 0.03
Left superior parietal lobule
p = 0.03

3026

Peak
Medial frontal gyrus (R)
Superior parietal lobule (R)
Precuneus (R)
Middle occipital gyrus (R)
Postcentral gyrus (R)
Paracentral lobule (R)

x
4.30
28.69
13.35
44.45
11.82
13.69

y
-24.62
-57.71
-66.54
-77.33
-59.08
-41.22

z
57.64
52.84
32.83
22.46
69.79
58.15

t
5.22
5.03
4.96
4.83
4.75
4.56

p
0.008
0.013
0.015
0.021
0.027
0.043

Precentral gyrus (R)

52.78
39.91

-6.92
-0.08

10.30
16.26

5.32
5.21

0.006
0.008

Insula (R)

383

Parahippocampal gyrus (L)

-12.13

-9.54

-12.02

5.41

0.005

1220

Inferior temporal gyrus (R)

59.56

-7.57

-28.66

4.51

0.05

335

Parahippocampal gyrus (R)

15.12

-12.79

-11.08

4.82

0.02

246

-

-16.26

-93.19

-12.51

3.14

-

311

-

10.08

-72.09

-4.17

4.03

-

385

-

-14.29

-19.43

70.91

4.12

-

329

-

-31.33

-70.83

47.50

3.64

-

Significance thresholds for vertices and clusters of contiguous vertices and are determined using
Random Field Theory; corrected p-values are given. Due to some of the clusters being extensive, the
coordinates (in MNI space) are given for either peak vertices for clusters featuring such peaks (labeled in
hot colors on Figure 3). For smaller clusters without peaks, average cluster coordinates are provided.

32

