bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Gallay et al. | September, 2019 |

Spatio-temporal control of DNA replication by
the pneumococcal cell cycle regulator CcrZ
Clement Gallay1,2,#, Stefano Sanselicio1,#, Mary E. Anderson3, Young Min Soh1, Xue Liu¹, Gro A. Stamsås⁴,
Simone Pelliciari⁵, Renske van Raaphorst¹, Morten Kjos⁴, Heath Murray⁵, Stephan Gruber¹, Alan D. Grossman³,
Jan-Willem Veening1,2,*
Department of Fundamental Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Biophore Building, CH-1015
Lausanne, Switzerland
2
Molecular Genetics Group, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Institute, Centre for Synthetic Biology, University of
Groningen, Nijenborgh 7, 9747 AG Groningen, the Netherlands
3
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
4
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Ås, Norway
5
Centre for Bacterial Cell Biology, Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne NE2 4AX, UK
1

#
*

These authors contributed equally
Correspondence to Jan-Willem Veening: Jan-Willem.Veening@unil.ch, tel: +41 (0)21 6925625, Twitter handle: @JWVeening

Summary
Most bacteria replicate and segregate their DNA concomitantly while growing, before cell division takes place.
How bacteria synchronize these different cell cycle events to ensure faithful chromosome inheritance is poorly understood.
Here, we identified a conserved and essential protein in pneumococci and related Firmicutes named CcrZ (for Cell Cycle
Regulator protein interacting with FtsZ) that couples cell division with DNA replication by controlling the activity of the
master initiator of DNA replication, DnaA. The absence of CcrZ causes mis-timed and reduced initiation of DNA replication,
which subsequently results in aberrant cell division. We show that CcrZ from Streptococcus pneumoniae directly interacts
with the cytoskeleton protein FtsZ to place it in the middle of the newborn cell where the DnaA-bound origin is positioned.
Together, this work uncovers a new mechanism for the control of the bacterial cell cycle in which CcrZ controls DnaA
activity to ensure that the chromosome is replicated at the right time during the cell cycle.
Keywords: Cell division, FtsZ, DNA replication, DnaA, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis

Introduction

Most organisms have mechanisms ensuring that their genome is
replicated and segregated prior to cell division. In many bacterial
species, DNA replication and cell division occur concomitantly1–3.
Different models emerged from the mid-1900’s to explain how
bacterial cells handle DNA replication together with cell division
in Escherichia coli or Bacillus subtilis4–7. The current cellsize control model suggests that cells initiate DNA replication
independently from their original size, and grow to a constant
size independently from their size at birth (adder model)8–12. How
cells sense changes in cell size and convert it to trigger replication
initiation is not known, but these models imply the existence of
regulatory controls3,13–15. However, no such cell cycle regulator
has been reported yet for bacteria. Specific regulatory models
have been proposed for E. coli16–18, but these are not applicable
to most other organisms, and especially Gram-positive bacteria,

that do not contain the proteins proposed to be the regulators.
Furthermore, most of the mechanisms known to regulate the
initiation of replication and the activity of the replication initiator
DnaA in E. coli do not exist in other bacteria19–23. This pinpoints
a divergence between regulatory systems within bacteria. In line
with this notion, changes in DNA replication initiation were shown
to alter cell size in E. coli and B. subtilis but the converse was
not true for B. subtilis24,25. Taken together, current data indicates
that bacteria evolved different mechanisms to coordinate their cell
cycle events.
Although E. coli and B. subtilis use different systems
for regulating their cell cycle, the way they localize their division
site is conserved, as both organisms use a variant of the Min
system to prevent polymerization of the tubulin-like protein
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
| Gallay et al. | September, 2019

FtsZ away from mid-cell26,27. Both species also have a nucleoid
occlusion system (Noc) inhibiting Z-ring formation over the
chromosome to prevent “cutting” of the chromosome during
cell division28. Together, the Min and Noc systems ensure that
cell division and septation occur when both sister chromatids
have been fully replicated and segregated. These systems are
however not conserved within all bacteria as the Gram-positive
opportunistic human pathogen S. pneumoniae lacks homologs of
the Min and Noc systems29. In contrast to E. coli and B. subtilis,
the pneumococcal Z-ring forms readily over the nucleoid29,30.
Recently, a pneumococcal specific protein called RocS was
identified that might fulfil a similar function as the Noc system by
connecting chromosome segregation with capsule production31.
Another S. pneumoniae specific protein, called MapZ was
shown to guide Z-ring formation, analogous to the Min system
in other bacteria32,33. During cell growth, nascent MapZ rings are
pushed apart by septal peptidoglycan synthesis, allowing for FtsZ
polymers to continuously assemble at the newly formed septum34.
Importantly, the position of the origin of replication (oriC) was
shown to be crucial for division site selection in S. pneumoniae
and the origins mark the positions of future division sites35.
In S. pneumoniae, cell division and DNA replication are thus
intimately connected. Critically however, it remains unknown
how the cell senses when a new round of replication should be
initiated.

We hypothesized that an unknown factor could be
responsible for coordination of cell division and DNA replication
in the pneumococcus. Using high throughput gene silencing with
CRISPRi of all essential genes of S. pneumoniae36, we examined
proteins leading to DNA content defects upon depletion. Here,
we describe the identification of CcrZ, a conserved protein
that activates DnaA to trigger initiation of DNA replication.
Pneumococcal CcrZ localizes at the division site in a FtsZdependent manner and its inactivation leads to division defects.
Together, our findings show that CcrZ acts as a novel spatiotemporal link between cell division and DNA replication in
S. pneumoniae.

Results
CcrZ is a conserved bacterial cell cycle protein
We previously generated a knock-down library using CRISPRi
(clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
interference) targeting 348 conditionally essential genes of the
serotype 2 strain S. pneumoniae D39V that were identified by

Tn-Seq (transposon-insertion sequencing)36. Here, we investigated
the function of spv_0476, encoding a protein of unknown
function that is conserved in most Firmicutes (>30% identity)
(Supplementary Fig. 1a). Silencing of spv_0476 by CRISPRi led
to a drastic reduction of the growth rate as well as appearance
of anucleate cells as visualized by DAPI staining (Fig. 1a-b).
We renamed SPV_0476 to CcrZ (for Cell Cycle Regulator protein
interacting with FtsZ) for reasons explained below. ccrZ is in
an operon with trmB, which encodes a tRNA methyltransferase
and this operon structure is conserved across Firmicutes
(Supplementary Fig. 1a). To exclude the possibility that the
observed phenotypes of ccrZ silencing were caused by polar
effects on trmB expression, we constructed a deletion of trmB.
This deletion did not lead to any growth defect (Supplementary
Fig. 1b left panel). While Tn-seq indicated that ccrZ is essential36,
we were able to generate a DccrZ deletion mutant, although cells
grew very slow. We therefore constructed a depletion of CcrZ by
ectopically expressing CcrZ under control of either an IPTG- or a
ZnCl2- inducible promoter (Plac and PZn respectively) and deleted
ccrZ from its native location (ccrZ-/+ and PZn-ccrZ-/+ respectively).
Depletion of CcrZ led to a significant growth delay at 37°C and
30°C, confirming the CRISPRi observations (Supplementary
Fig. 1b). Immunoblotting using a specific antibody raised against
purified CcrZ confirmed CcrZ depletion (Supplementary Fig. 1c).
In line with the CRISPRi observations, DNA staining of cells
depleted for CcrZ showed that 20% of cells lacked a nucleoid
(Fig. 1c, 442 cells counted). To test whether the ccrZ-deletion
phenotype was conserved in other Gram-positive bacteria, we
silenced ccrZ (SAOUHSC_01866, here ccrZSa) in Staphylococcus
aureus SH1000 using CRISPRi and deleted the Bacillus subtilis
168 ccrZ homolog (ytmP, here ccrZBs). Upon CcrZSa silencing in
S. aureus, we observed a high proportion of anucleate cells, as
well as a delay in growth. In contrast, no obvious phenotypical
changes were observed for B. subtilis (Supplementary Fig. 1d).
Interestingly, the S. pneumoniae ccrZ deletion could not be
complemented by expression of ccrZ from either B. subtilis or
S. aureus as only very small colonies were present on agar plate.
In contrast, depletion of S. aureus CcrZ was rescued by expression
of CcrZ from B. subtilis (Supplementary Fig. 1d).
In addition to an increase of the number of anucleate cells,
CcrZ depletion in S. pneumoniae also led to slight morphological
defects and modest changes in cell size when analyzed by phase
contrast microscopy (Fig. 1d). Polysaccharide capsule production
has previously been linked to the pneumococcal cell cycle37, but
capsule production was not impacted as the amount of capsule
was similar between a CcrZ mutant and wild type (Supplementary
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Gallay et al. | September, 2019 |

Figure 1. Depletion of CcrZ leads to anucleate cells and division defects
a, growth curve of cells with ccrZ targeted by CRISPRi (ccrZsgRNA + IPTG) indicates a clear growth defect when ccrZ is silenced. b, ccrZ silencing leads
to appearance of anucleate cells, as visualized by DAPI staining. c, ccrZ depletion by ectopic expression via the IPTG-inducible Plac promoter also leads
to cells lacking a nucleoid, as observed by DAPI staining. d, distribution of cell area of ccrZ-depleted cells, ccrZ depletion leads to a slight decrease
in cell length and cell area (P value = 2.2 x 10-16, Wilcoxon rank sum test). e, when a deletion of ccrZ is complemented (left panel), FtsZ-mTurquoise2
shows a clear mid-cell localization, while it appears as a blurry signal in several cells upon ccrZ depletion (right panel). f, transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) indicates that cells depleted for ccrZ form multiple, often incomplete, septa. g, distribution of number of septa per cell length as
determined by TEM for 22 wild type cells, 28 CcrZ-depleted cells and 17 ccrZ-complemented cells (P value = 1 x 10-6 for wild type vs CcrZ-depleted
cells and P value = 0.0013 for ccrZ-complemented vs CcrZ-depleted cells, Wilcoxon rank sum test with Bonferroni adjustment).

Fig. 1e). To visualize division sites in live cells, we constructed
a translational fusion of mTurquoise2 to the tubulin-like protein
FtsZ (as the only copy of FtsZ, expressed from its native genetic
location), which assembles into distinct rings at new division
sites where it recruits the machinery required to form septa38.
As shown in Figure 1e, Z-rings were clearly mis-localized upon
CcrZ depletion, with the presence of several aberrant Z-rings
in a fraction of the cells (Fig. 1e). To obtain more insights into
the morphological defects caused by CcrZ depletion and verify

that the increased number of septa are not due to the fluorescent
protein fused to FtsZ, we employed transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) in untagged cells. While not evident by
phase contrast microscopy, when ccrZ was depleted we observed
frequent aberrant septum formation using TEM, in line with the
FtsZ localization data, and many cells harbored two (18 %) to
four (4 %) septa while typically only one septum is observed in
wild type cells (Fig. 1f-g).
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
| Gallay et al. | September, 2019

S. pneumoniae CcrZ is part of the divisome

As CcrZ seems to be involved in both chromosome biology and
cell division, we examined its subcellular localization. Strikingly,
immunofluorescence on fixed cells using a CcrZ-specific antibody
demonstrated a clear mid-cell localization (Supplementary
Fig. 2a). To assess the localization of CcrZ in live cells, we
created several functional fusions of a green fluorescent protein
to the N-terminus of CcrZ (gfp-ccrZ) or a red fluorescent protein
to the C-terminus (ccrZ-mKate2) and inserted either construct
at the native ccrZ locus (Supplementary Fig. 1c). Visualization
of fluorescently tagged CcrZ by epifluorescence microscopy in
live bacteria showed that CcrZ localizes at mid-cell (Fig. 2a).
This localization was also conserved in both the TIGR4 and

unencapsulated R6 strains (Supplementary Fig. 2b). Interestingly,
CcrZSa and CcrZBs did not localize as clear rings at mid-cell in

S. aureus and B. subtilis (Supplementary Fig. 2b), indicating
that the activity and/or localization of CcrZ in these organisms
is regulated differently. In order to get higher spatial resolution
of S. pneumoniae CcrZ, 240 images (16 stacks) on live cells
were acquired using 3D-structured illumination microscopy
(3D-SIM) and reconstructed to generate a super resolution
image and a 3D fluorescence image of GFP-CcrZ. As shown in
Fig. 2b and Supplementary Video 1, CcrZ forms a patchy ring
at mid-cell. Furthermore, time-lapse microscopy showed that
CcrZ disassembles from the old septum to assemble at the newly
formed division site (Supplementary Video 2).

Figure 2. CcrZ co-localizes with FtsZ at new division sites
a, CcrZ localizes at mid-cell in live wild type S. pneumoniae cells as observed by epifluorescence microscopy of GFP-CcrZ and CcrZ-mKate2.
b, 3D-SIM of GFP-CcrZ and reconstructed volume projection (right) indicate that CcrZ forms a patchy ring at mid-cell. c, GFP-CcrZ and FtsZ-mCherry
co-localize in wild type cells. d, localization signal of GFP-CcrZ and FtsZ-mCherry in 699 cells of a double labelled gfp-ccrZ ftsZ-mCherry strain,
ordered by cell length and represented by a heatmap. e, GFP-CcrZ and FtsZ-mCherry co-localize during the entire cell cycle, as visualized when signal
localization over cell length is grouped in three quantiles. f, 3D-SIM co-localization of GFP-CcrZ and FtsZ-mCherry shows a clear co-localizing ring
with identical patchy pattern.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Gallay et al. | September, 2019 |

To test whether the mid-cell localization of
S. pneumoniae CcrZ coincides with FtsZ, we constructed a CcrZ /
FtsZ double-labelled strain (gfp-ccrZ ftsZ-mCherry). As shown in
Fig. 2c, CcrZ co-localized with FtsZ and analysis of still images
from exponentially growing cells corroborated this observation
(Fig. 2c-e, Supplementary Video 3). 3D-SIM also indicated an
overlap of GFP-CcrZ and FtsZ-mCherry as well as a similar
circular co-localizing pattern at mid-cell (Fig. 2f, Supplementary
Fig. 2c and Supplementary Video 4).

Prediction of CcrZ’s topology using TMHMM39 did not indicate the
presence of a transmembrane domain; CcrZ’s septal localization
might then rely on another partner. To identify possible partners, we
purified GFP-CcrZ expressed from S. pneumoniae and untagged
cytosolic sfGFP as a control using anti-GFP nanobodies (GFPTrap) without cross-linking, and directly analyzed the purified
fraction by liquid chromatography‐tandem mass spectrometry

(LC‐MS/MS). Interestingly, we found an enrichment (> 5-fold
change) for several proteins from the divisome (FtsZ, PBP2X,
EzrA and FtsH) (Supplementary Table 1). To determine which
of the candidates might interact directly with CcrZ, we used
the NanoBit complementation reporter assay40,41, which uses an
enhanced luciferase separated into two different fragments (large
bit (LgBit) and small bit (SmBit), respectively). Fusion of two
different interacting proteins to each fragment can restore the
activity of the luciferase and, in presence of a furimazine-based
substrate, produce light. Accordingly, we fused the C-terminal
extremity of CcrZ to LgBit (ccrZ-LgBit) and putative partners to
SmBit and integrated the different constructs at their respective
loci under native control. We also fused SmBit to other proteins
known to localize at the septum (Cps2E, FtsA, FtsW and ZapA),
or to the highly abundant histone-like protein HlpA localizing at
the nucleoid and used a strain expressing both HlpA-LgBit and

Figure 3. CcrZ directly interacts with FtsZ
a, split-luciferase assay using several combinations with CcrZ-LgBit reveals that CcrZ and FtsZ are in very close proximity, as indicated by a high
luminescence signal. FtsA, EzrA and ZapA, all three interacting directly with FtsZ, also gave a slight signal. hlpA-LgBit hlpA-SmBit (HlpA-HlpA),
here diluted 100 times, is used as positive control. Each dot represents the average of 15 measurements of a technical replicate, with the size of the
dot representing the SEM. b, FtsZ-CcrZ interaction confirmation by bacterial two-hybrid. T25 is the empty vector pST25 and T25-FtsZ corresponds
to vector pST25-FtsZ used in combination with pUT18-CcrZ (CcrZ-T18) and pUT18-FtsZ (FtsZ-T18). c, affinity purification of FtsZ-GFP from
S. pneumoniae cells (2nd lane) also pulls down untagged CcrZ (4th lane). Purification of GFP alone (first lane) did not pull CcrZ down (3rd lane). d, FtsZ
from S. pneumoniae expressed in E. coli co-purifies with CcrZSp-GFP by affinity purification. WC: whole cell extract, S: supernatant, HE: heat eluted
products, C: CcrZ, F: FtsZ. e, epifluorescence time-lapse microscopy of CcrZ-mKate2 at 37°C in presence (left panel) or absence (right panel) of FtsZ.
When FtsZ amounts are reduced, cells increase their size and CcrZ is de-localized from mid-cell.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
| Gallay et al. | September, 2019

HlpA-SmBit as a positive control of interaction. After addition
of the substrate, we could detect a strong and reproducible signal
when FtsZ was fused to SmBit and CcrZ to LgBit, as well as a
weaker signal for FtsA, EzrA and ZapA, and no detectable signal
for any of the other proteins (Fig. 3a). This result indicates that
FtsZ and CcrZ in S. pneumoniae are in very close proximity in
space. Interestingly, using a strain expressing both CcrZ-LgBit
and CcrZ-SmBit, a weak signal was observed indicating that CcrZ
might also self-interact (Fig. 3a).

To confirm the observed interaction with FtsZ, we used a
bacterial two-hybrid assay in E. coli42. Again, we observed a
robust interaction between CcrZ and FtsZ, while T25-FtsZ did
not interact with the empty vector alone, strongly suggesting that
CcrZ directly binds to FtsZ (Fig. 3b). Co-immunoprecipitation
of FtsZ-GFP from S. pneumoniae cells confirmed the in vivo
interaction with CcrZ (Fig. 3c). Affinity purification of CcrZSpGFP when over-expressing FtsZSp in E. coli also confirmed this
interaction as we were able to co-purify FtsZ in large amounts
(Fig. 3d). To test whether the localization of CcrZ depends on
FtsZ, we constructed a strain expressing CcrZ-mKate2 as well
as a second copy of FtsZ under the control of an IPTG-inducible
promoter and deleted the native ftsZ gene (ftsZ-/+). As expected,
FtsZ depletion led to aberrant cell morphology and, consistent
with a FtsZ-CcrZ interaction, CcrZ-mKate2 was rapidly mislocalized and the signal was spread throughout the cytoplasm
(Fig. 3e, Supplementary Video 5). In total, we conclude that CcrZ
localizes to new division sites via a direct interaction with FtsZ.

CcrZ controls DNA replication
As shown in Fig. 1c, when cells are depleted for CcrZ, a
large proportion of cells become anucleate. To investigate the
consequences of lack of CcrZ on chromosome segregation in live
cells, we introduced a translational fluorescent fusion of HlpA43
and deleted ccrZ. Localization of HlpA-mKate2 in this slow
growing DccrZ mutant showed similar results to DAPI stained
cells depleted for CcrZ and we observed that 19 % of cells lacked
a nucleoid signal (Supplementary Fig. 3, 4855 cells counted).
Time-lapse imaging indicated that cells with defective DNA
content had either no DNA at all or chromosomes “guillotined”
during septum closure suggesting reduced nucleoid occlusion
control in DccrZ (Fig. 4a, Supplementary Video 6). We also
co-localized FtsZ-CFP with HlpA-mKate2 while depleting CcrZ
for a short period of time (2h). Interestingly, we observed many
cells with a chromosome localized at only one half of the cell,

at one side of the Z-ring (Fig. 4b). The absence of DNA in the other
half of the cell could be explained by defective DNA segregation,
by impaired replication or by DNA degradation.
When attempting to make clean ccrZ deletions, in
addition to small colonies typical of slow growing mutants, there
were also spontaneous large, wild type-sized colonies. Growth
analysis of cells from three of these large colonies (ccrZsupp1-3)
showed that cells behaved like wild type and DAPI staining
revealed a restoration of wild type DNA content (Fig. 4c-d). To
verify whether these wild type-like phenotypes were caused by
suppressor mutations, the genomes of these fast-growing strains
were sequenced. All three strains still contained the ccrZ deletion
and, in addition, contained a single nucleotide polymorphism
elsewhere in the genome (Fig. 4e). Two missense mutations
were found in dnaA (DnaA-Q247H and DnaA-S292G) and one
nonsense mutation in yabA (YabA-E93*). Since DnaA promotes
initiation of DNA replication and YabA hampers it by preventing
interaction of DnaA with DnaN44, we wondered whether the
frequency of DNA replication initiation was changed in a ccrZ
mutant.

To test this hypothesis, we quantified the copy number
ratio between chromosomal origin and terminus regions (oriC/ter
ratios) using real-time quantitative PCR. In a wild type situation,
during exponential growth, the oriC/ter ratio varies between
1.4 – 1.8, as most cells have started a round of DNA replication
(note that in contrast to E. coli and B. subtilis, multifork replication
does not occur in S. pneumoniae)45. Remarkably, depletion of CcrZ
resulted in a significantly decreased DNA replication initiation
rate with an oriC/ter ratio of 1.1 vs 1.8 for complemented cells
(P value < 0.05) (Fig. 4f). Interestingly, the same observation
was made for both B. subtilis and S. aureus, where deletion or
depletion of CcrZ caused a clear reduction in oriC/ter ratios
(Fig. 4g). As the identified ccrZ-bypass mutations were found
in DNA replication initiation regulators, we tested whether they
would restore the oriC/ter ratio in a fresh ccrZ deletion background
in S. pneumoniae. Indeed, the oriC/ter ratios for ΔccrZ dnaAS292G, ΔccrZ dnaA-Q247H and for yabA-E93* (ccrZsupp3) were
like wild type (Fig. 4h-i).
The point mutation found in yabA causes premature
translation termination at the C-terminus of YabA. When yabA
alone was replaced by an antibiotic resistance cassette, we observed
an increase of replication initiation as well as a reduced growth
rate; but when ccrZ was co-deleted, wild type like growth and a
wild type oriC/ter ratio was restored (Fig. 4i-j). DnaA suppressor
mutations were located in the AAA+ ATPase domain of DnaA and
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Gallay et al. | September, 2019 |

Figure 4. CcrZ-depleted cells under-replicate
a, time-lapse microscopy of HlpA-mKate2 at 30°C in a ΔccrZ mutant shows several cells with defective DNA content. Orange arrows indicate a cell
with no nucleoid after cell division; white arrows indicate a cell with “guillotined” DNA. b, co-localization of FtsZ-CFP and HlpA-mKate2 when
depleting ccrZ indicates that several cells have a nucleoid located only on one side of the Z-ring. c, three isolated ccrZ mutants (ccrZsupp1-3) restore wild
type growth to ΔccrZ. d, DAPI staining of the three selected ccrZ suppressors mutants shows a restoration of DNA content. e, schematic representation
of the localization of suppressor mutations in the domain III of DnaA and in the DnaA/DnaN binding motif (ANB) of YabA. TM: tetramerization
domain. f, oriC/ter ratios as determined by RT qPCR for D39V wild type and CcrZ-depleted cells. Average values are indicated under the boxes. CcrZ
depletion leads to a clear reduction in oriC/ter ratio. g, oriC/ter ratios for S. aureus upon ccrZSa depletion (left) and for B. subtilis with ccrZBs deletion
(right). h, oriC/ter ratios of strains with dnaA mutations re-inserted into a ΔccrZ background show that these mutations restore replication initiation
rates. i, yabA deletion leads to an increase in oriC/ter ratios, while suppressor mutation ccrZsupp3 (ΔccrZ, yabA-E93*) as well as co-deletion of yabA
together with ccrZ (ΔyabA ΔccrZ) restored a wild type ratio. j, while yabA deletion alters the growth rate, a ΔyabA ΔccrZ double mutant grows like wild
type. dnaA Q247H and dnaA S292G mutation also restore a wild type rate in a ΔccrZ mutant. k, dnaA mutation in a wildtype background increases the
oriC/ter ratios. See Methods for statistical tests.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
| Gallay et al. | September, 2019

it was previously reported that specific mutations in this domain
could increase the initiation rate in B. subtilis46. To determine

if those mutations alone were able to induce over-initiation, we
inserted each dnaA mutation into a wild type background strain.
Marker frequency analysis detected an increase in the oriC/ter
ratio for both dnaA alleles (Fig. 4k). We conclude that mutations
that increase the rate of initiation of DNA replication can rescue
the ∆ccrZ phenotype.

CcrZ is a conserved regulator of DnaA
The results so far suggest that the division defects observed
in the absence of CcrZ are due to perturbed Z-ring formation
caused by under-replication of the chromosome. To examine
whether disruption of DNA replication in general could lead
to division defects similar to those of a ccrZ mutant, we took
advantage of a thermosensitive dnaA mutant (dnaATS) in which
DNA replication initiation is drastically reduced when cells are
grown at the non-permissive temperature (40°C)31. As expected,
when shifted to the non-permissive temperature, many cells were
anucleate (Supplementary Fig. 4a). Strikingly, localization of
FtsZ-mTurquoise2 in the dnaATS strain at 40°C phenocopied the
∆ccrZ mutant, and FtsZ was frequently mis-localized (Fig. 5a).
Furthermore, examination by TEM at 40°C showed many cells
with aberrant septa like CcrZ-depleted cells (Fig. 5b). As DnaA
inactivation leads to strikingly similar phenotypes, these data
are consistent with the idea that CcrZ exerts a control on DNA
replication initiation.
To test whether CcrZ controls DNA replication via
regulating DnaA activity, we made use of the fact that a B. subtilis
∆ccrZBs mutant also under-initiates (Fig. 4g) and a strain was
constructed in which DNA replication was driven in a RepNdependent manner (from a plasmid origin of replication oriN)
rather than from DnaA-dependent initiation (from oriC). This
showed no significant ori-ter ratio differences when ccrZ was
deleted (Fig. 5c), suggesting that CcrZ is an activator of DnaAdependent initiation of replication in B. subtilis. We therefore
tested whether CcrZ interacts directly with DnaA to trigger
DNA replication and employed bacterial two-hybrid assays
and the Split-luc system using pneumococcal CcrZ and DnaA
(Fig. 3a and Supplementary Fig. 4b). However, none of these
assays revealed a direct protein-protein interaction. It is still
possible that CcrZ interacts directly with DnaA, but that we
cannot detect it with these assays. Alternatively, another factor
might be required for CcrZ’s function or CcrZ indirectly affects

the activity of DnaA in replication initiation.

CcrZ’s conserved residues are essential for its function
S. pneumoniae CcrZ is 264 amino acids long and is predicted to
have a single APH (aminoglycoside phosphotransferase enzyme
family) domain. Sequence alignment using Psi-BLAST showed
homology with phosphotransferase enzyme family proteins, while
pairwise comparisons of profile-hidden Markov models (HMMs)
using HHpred47 identified homologies with ethanolamine- and
choline kinases. Despite various attempts, we have not been able
to establish any biochemical activity or nucleotide binding for
recombinant purified CcrZ and were unable to produce protein
crystals, probably because of its rapid precipitation in solution.
Nevertheless, as CcrZ is highly conserved in Firmicutes, we
aligned CcrZ protein sequence with 1000 protein sequences
from UniRef50 and identified three residues conserved in more
than 95% of the proteins (D159, N164 and D177) and two other
residues (H157 and D189) in more than 80% (Supplementary
Fig. 4c). To determine the position of these residues, the
S. pneumoniae CcrZ protein sequence was mapped onto the
crystal structure of the best hit from the HMM alignment, the
choline kinase LicA, in complex with adenosine monophosphate
(AMP) (pdb 4R78). Interestingly, these five conserved residues
appear to be in spatial proximity to AMP and thus to a putative
nucleotide-binding pocket (Fig. 5d). Mutational analysis of
these residues showed that at least H157, N164 and D177 are
essential for CcrZ’s function in S. pneumoniae (Fig. 5e), while
mutating CcrZ-D159 or CcrZ-D189 did not lead to any growth
defect. All three mutants were properly produced (Supplementary
Fig. 1c) and CcrZ-H157A and CcrZ-D177A could still localize at
the septum (Fig. 5f). Therefore, these three residues are crucial
for the function of CcrZ. CcrZ-N164 and CcrZ-D177 residues
correspond to LicA-N181 and LicA-D194, respectively, and both
residues were shown to interact with the α-phosphate moiety of
AMP48. It is therefore very likely that CcrZ-N164 and CcrZ-D177
also contribute to binding of a as of yet unknown nucleotide.

A model for CcrZ-controlled DNA replication in
S. pneumoniae
We showed above that CcrZ is fundamental for DnaA-dependent
DNA replication initiation in B. subtilis and that S. pneumoniae
CcrZ localizes at mid-cell for most of the cell cycle. In
S. pneumoniae, once DNA replication initiates at mid-cell, the
origins localize at both future division sites, while the replication
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Gallay et al. | September, 2019 |

Figure 5. CcrZ activates DnaA-dependent replication initiation
a, localization of FtsZ-mTurquoise2 in a thermo-sensitive DnaA strain (dnaATS) at permissive (30°C) and non-permissive (40°C) temperatures shows
that dnaA inactivation leads to a similar phenotype as ccrZ inactivation. b, TEM of dnaATS at non-permissive temperature (40°C) indicates the presence
of multiple septa, similarly to a ΔccrZ mutant. c, when replication is driven in a RepN-dependent manner in B. subtilis (oriN), no decrease in ori/ter ratio
can be observed in absence of ccrZBs (oriN, ΔccrZBs). d, LicA choline kinase structure complexed with AMP and MES (2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic
acid). The 5 residues indicated in yellow are conserved between CcrZ and LicA (and highly conserved within Firmicutes). e, mutation of three of these
five conserved residues in the putative ATP binding pocket leads to growth defects. f, localization of GFP-CcrZ H157A and GFP-D177A is not impaired.

machinery stays near the Z-ring until completion of replication
and closure of the septum35. We therefore hypothesized that CcrZ
is brought to mid-cell by FtsZ to promote initiation of DNA
replication. To map the hierarchy of events that take place during
the pneumococcal cell cycle, we constructed a triple-labeled
strain (strain ccrZ-mKate2 dnaN-sfTQOX parBp-mYFP) in which
CcrZ is fused to a red fluorescent protein, DNA replication is
visualized by a DnaN fusion to a cyan fluorescent protein, and
the origin of replication is marked with a yellow fluorescent
reporter (see Methods). Imaging of this strain by short time-lapse
fluorescence microscopy (< 1 min) revealed that once CcrZ is
assembled at mid-cell, DNA replication initiates and the newly
replicated origins of replication are segregating as cells elongate
(Fig. 6a-d, Supplementary Video 7). The replication machinery

remains near the old division site together with CcrZ, only to move
to the new cell division sites once DNA replication is complete.
This data supports a model in which FtsZ brings CcrZ to oriC
to stimulate DnaA to fire a new round of replication ensuring
that DNA replication only commences after the origins are well
segregated and positioned at the new mid-cell position. Indeed,
DnaA co-localizes with CcrZ in new-born cells (Supplementary
Fig. 5). In the absence of CcrZ, initiation of DNA replication
is mis-timed and occurs too late relative to cellular growth and
Z-ring formation, frequently leading to futile division events and
anucleate cells (Fig. 6e).

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
| Gallay et al. | September, 2019

Figure 6. Spatio-temporal localization of CcrZ via FtsZ ensures proper timing of DNA replication in S. pneumoniae
a, microscopy of the origin of replication (yellow), replication fork (cyan) and CcrZ (red) in live S. pneumoniae wild type background cells. b, DnaN,
oriC and CcrZ localizations grouped by cell area (µm2) in five equally sized groups. Analyzed from snapshots of exponentially growing cells. c, singlecell kymographs of DnaN, CcrZ and oriC localizations in a 2:30 minute interval time-lapse movie. d, tracked DnaN, oriC and CcrZ over time in a single
cell. Top: overlay of fluorescence, cell outline and phase-contrast of the cell displayed in panel c and bottom: fluorescence localization on the length axis
of the same single cell over time. e, model for spatio-temporal control of replication by CcrZ. In S. pneumoniae, CcrZ is brought to the middle of the
cell where the DnaA-bound origin of replication is already positioned. CcrZ then stimulates DnaA to trigger DNA replication by an as of yet unknown
activity, possibly involving a phosphor-transfer event. While the precise regulation and localization of CcrZ seems diverse between different organisms,
CcrZ’s activity to stimulate DNA replication is conserved, at least in S. pneumoniae, S. aureus and B. subtilis.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Gallay et al. | September, 2019 |

Discussion

Notions of cell cycle events synchronization in bacteria emerged
in the mid-1900s and a tremendous amount of work has since
been done aiming at explaining how DNA replication, cell growth
and cell division are intertwined. Two robust models emerged
(adder and sizer) based on observations that cell size and DNA
replication events were connected. However, these models were
established mainly for rod-shaped bacteria that are capable of
multi-fork replication. S. pneumoniae differs from these model
organisms as it has an ovoid-like shape, lacks the canonical Min
and Noc systems and does not perform multi-fork replication.
The principal contribution of this work is the identification and
initial functional characterization of a new mechanism for cell
cycle regulation in S. pneumoniae via the CcrZ protein. We show
that CcrZ’s septal localization occurs via a direct interaction with
FtsZ. Our data is consistent with a model in which, once positioned
at mid-cell where the DnaA-bound origin of replication is located,
CcrZ stimulates DnaA, by an as of yet unknown mechanism, to
initiate DNA replication (Fig. 6). Importantly, CcrZ’s function of
controlling DnaA seems conserved in S. aureus and B. subtilis,
and likely in many other Gram-positive bacteria (Supplementary
Fig. 1a).
Besides the production of anucleate cells and cells
with cleaved chromosomes, ccrZ mutants contain multiple
aberrant division septa (Fig. 6e). Notably, this is phenocopied
by a temperature sensitive DnaA allele. This indicates that
chromosome replication itself, and correct localization of the
chromosome has an important role in nucleoid occlusion: when
initiation is too late and the new daughter chromosomes are not
fully segregated, division can take place over the DNA resulting
in dissected chromosomes. In this respect, it is interesting to note
that the S. aureus Noc system also controls DNA replication,
as Δnoc cells over-initiate DNA replication49. In support of our
findings, a lethal Δnoc ΔcomEB double mutant could be rescued
by a suppressor mutation in ccrZSa49, further indicating that CcrZSa
is also involved in the control of DNA replication in S. aureus.
This work uncovers a novel mechanism in which a
single protein links cell division with DNA replication control.
In this model, Z-ring formation is used as a timer for the initiation
of DNA replication. When cell division terminates, leading to
the formation of another Z-ring at the new division site, CcrZ is
brought along and can activate a new round of DNA replication.
This simple system ensures that DNA replication only commences
a single time per cell cycle in newborn cells. It will be interesting
to see how CcrZ controls the cell cycle in other bacteria, what the

involved biochemical activities are and whether CcrZ will prove
as a new target for innovative antibiotics.

Methods
Bacterial strains and culture conditions.
All strains, plasmids and primers used are listed in Supplementary
Table 2 and Supplementary Table 3.
All pneumococcal strains in this study are derivate of
S. pneumoniae D39V50, unless specified otherwise, and are listed
in Supplementary Table 2. Strains were grown in liquid semidefined C+Y medium51 at 37˚C from a starting optical density
(OD600nm) of 0.01 until the appropriate OD. Induction of the
zinc-inducible promoter (PZn) was carried out by supplementing
the medium with 0.1 mM ZnCl2 and 0.01 mM MnCl2 (SigmaAldrich) and the IPTG-inducible promoter (Plac) was activated
with 1 mM IPTG (β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside, Sigma-Aldrich).
For all related experiments, depletion strains where first grown
without inducer until OD600nm = 0.3 and then diluted 100 times in
fresh medium and grown until the desired OD. Transformation
of S. pneumoniae was performed as described before51 with
cells taken at exponential growth phase (OD600nm = 0.1). When
necessary, the medium was supplemented with the following
antibiotics: chloramphenicol (0.45 µg.mL-1), erythromycin
(0.2 µg.mL-1), kanamycin (250 µg.mL-1), spectinomycin (200
µg.mL-1) and tetracycline (0.5 µg.mL-1). S. aureus strains are listed
in Supplementary Table 2. Cells were grown in brain heart infusion
(BHI) medium (Oxoid) with shaking at 37°C. When appropriate,
5 µg.mL-1 erythromycin and / or 10 µg.mL-1 chloramphenicol
was added to the growth medium. All S. aureus plasmids were
initially made in E. coli strain IM08B52. E. coli IM08B was grown
in LB medium at 37°C with shaking; 100 µg.mL-1 ampicillin was
added when appropriate. Plasmids were then transformed into
S. aureus by electroporation, as described previously53. B. subtilis
strains are listed in Supplementary Table 2. Cells were grown
with shaking at 37°C in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium or S7 defined
minimal medium with MOPS (3-(N-morpholino) propanesulfonic
acid) buffer at a concentration of 50 mM rather than 100 mM
supplemented with 1 % glucose, 0.1 % glutamate, trace metals,
40 μg.mL-1 phenylalanine, and 40 μg.mL-1 tryptophan54. Standard
concentrations of antibiotics were used when appropriate.
B. subtilis strains were derived from 1A700 or JH642 (pheA1
trpC2)55.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
| Gallay et al. | September, 2019

Strains construction

Construction of strains is described in the Supplementary
Methods.
Microtiter plate-based growth assay
For S. pneumoniae growth assays, cells were first grown in C+Y
medium pH = 7.4 until mid-exponential growth phase (OD595nm
= 0.3) with no inducer at 37°C, after which they were diluted
100 times in fresh C+Y medium supplemented with IPTG or ZnCl2
when appropriate. Cellular growth was then monitored every
10 min at either 37°C or 30°C in a microtiter plate reader (TECAN
Infinite F200 Pro). Each growth assay was performed in triplicate.
The lowest OD595nm of each growth curve was normalized to 0.004
(detection limit of the reader and initial OD595nm of the inoculum)
and the average of the triplicate values were plotted, with the SEM
(Standard Error of the Mean) represented by an area around the
curve. For assessment of S. aureus growth, CRISPRi knockdown
strains were grown overnight in BHI medium. Cultures were
then diluted 100-fold and grown until OD600nm = 0.4. The cultures
were then re-diluted 200-fold in medium with or without inducer
500 µM IPTG. Growth analysis was performed on a Synergy H1
Hybrid (BioTek) microtiter plate reader at 37°C with measurement
of OD600nm every 10 min. Average of the triplicate values were
plotted, with the SEM (Standard Error of the Mean) represented
by an area around the curve.
Phase contrast and fluorescence microscopy
S. pneumoniae cells were grown in C+Y medium pH = 7.4 at
37°C to an OD595nm = 0.1 without any inducer and diluted 100
times in fresh C+Y medium supplemented when appropriate
with IPTG (for activation of dCas9, complementation of CcrZ
and FtsZ, or expression of fluorescent fusions) or ZnCl2 (for
CcrZ complementation or expression of fluorescent fusions).
At OD595nm = 0.1, 1 mL of culture was harvested by centrifugation
1 min at 9,000 x g. For DAPI staining, 1 µg.mL-1 DAPI (SigmaAldrich) was added to the cells and incubated for 5 min at
room temperature prior to centrifugation. For imaging of bulk
exponentially growing cultures, cells were washed twice with
1 mL ice-cold PBS and re-suspended into 50 µL ice-cold PBS; for
time-lapse microscopy, cells were washed and re-suspended into
1 mL of fresh pre-warmed C+Y medium. 1 µL of cells were then
spotted onto PBS- or C+Y-polyacrylamide (10 %) pads. For timelapse microscopy, pads were incubated twice for 30 min in fresh
C+Y medium at 37˚C prior to spotting. Pads were then placed
inside a gene frame (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and sealed with
a cover glass as described before56. Microscopy acquisition was

performed either using a Leica DMi8 microscope with a sCMOS
DFC9000 (Leica) camera and a SOLA light engine (Lumencor),
or using a DV Elite microscope (GE Healthcare) with a sCMOS
(PCO-edge) camera and a DV Trulight solid state illumination
module (GE Healthcare), and a 100x/1.40 oil-immersion
objective. Phase contrast images were acquired using transmission
light (100 ms exposure). Still fluorescence images were usually
acquired with 700 ms exposure, and time-lapses with 200300 ms exposure. Leica DMi8 filters set used are as followed:
DAPI (Leica 11533333, Ex: 395/25 nm, BS: LP 425 nm, Em:
BP 460/50 nm), CFP (Ex: 430/24 nm Chroma ET430/24x, BS:
LP 455 Leica 11536022, Em: 470/24 nm Chroma ET470/24m),
GFP (Ex: 470/40 nm Chroma ET470/40x, BS: LP 498 Leica
11536022, Em: 520/40 nm Chroma ET520/40m), YFP
(Ex: 500/20 nm Chroma ET500/20x, BS: LP 520 Leica 11536022,
Em: 535/30 nm Chroma ET535/30m) and mCherry (Chroma
49017, Ex: 560/40 nm, BS: LP 590 nm, Em: LP 590 nm).
DeltaVision microscope used a DV Quad-mCherry filter set: GFP
(Ex: 475/28 nm, BS: 525/80 nm, Em: 523/36 nm) and mCherry
(Ex: 575/25 nm, BS: 605/50, Em: 632/60 nm). Images were
processed using either LAS X (Leica) or SoftWoRx (GE Healthcare).
For S. aureus microscopy, cells were induced as described above,
grown until OD600nm = 0.2 and analyzed on a Zeiss AxioObserver
with an ORCA‐Flash4.0 V2 Digital CMOS camera (Hamamatsu
Photonics) through a 100x PC objective. HPX 120 Illuminator
(Zeiss) was used as a light source for fluorescence microscopy.
Images were processed using ZEN (Zeiss). Signals was
deconvolved, when appropriate, using Huygens (SVI) software.
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)
Strains were grown in C+Y medium at either 37°C, or at 30°C for
dnaATS, until an OD595nm = 0.3, with or without addition of ZnCl2
(for ccrZ complementation or depletion, respectively) and diluted
100 times into 10 mL of fresh C+Y medium. Cells were then
grown either at 37°C or at 40°C, for dnaA depletion in the dnaATS
strain, until OD595nm = 0.15. 5 mL of each sample was then fixed
with 2.5 % glutaraldehyde solution (EMS) in phosphate buffer
(PB 0.1 M pH = 7.4) (Sigma Aldrich) for 1h at room temperature,
followed by 16 h incubation at 4°C. Cells were then post-fixed
by a fresh mixture of osmium tetroxide 1 % (EMS) with 1.5 %
potassium ferrocyanide (Sigma Aldrich) in PB buffer for 2 h at
room temperature. Samples were then washed three times with
distilled water and spun down in low melting agarose 2 % (Sigma
Aldrich) and solidified in ice. Solid samples were then cut in
1 mm3 cubes and dehydrated in acetone solution (Sigma Aldrich)
at graded concentrations (30 % for 40 min; 50 % for 40 min;
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Gallay et al. | September, 2019 |

70 % for 40 min and 100 % for 3 x 1 h). This step was followed
by infiltration in Epon (Sigma Aldrich) at graded concentrations
(Epon 1/3 acetone for 2 h; Epon 3/1 acetone for 2 h, Epon 1/1 for
4 h and Epon 1/1 for 12 h) and finally polymerized for 48 h at 60°C.
Ultra-thin sections of 50 nm were then cut on a Leica Ultracut
(Leica Mikrosysteme GmbH) and placed on a copper slot grid
2 x 1 mm (EMS) coated with a polystyrene film (Sigma Aldrich).
Sections were subsequently post-stained with 4 % uranyl acetate
(Sigma Aldrich) for 10 min, rinsed several times with water, then
with Reynolds lead citrate (Sigma Aldrich) for 10 min and rinsed
several times with distilled water. Micrographs were taken using a
transmission electron microscope Philips CM100 (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) equipped with a TVIPS TemCam-F416 digital camera
(TVIPS) and using an acceleration voltage of 80 kV. Number of
septa and cell length were manually measured on TEM images
of cells in the correct focal plane: 22 wild type cells, 28 CcrZdepleted cells and 17 CcrZ-complemented cells.
3D Structured Illumination Microscopy (3D-SIM)
Samples for 3D-SIM were prepared as described previously
by spotting 1 µL onto PBS-10 % acrylamide pads. Acquisition
was performed on a DeltaVision OMX SR microscope
(GE Healthcare) equipped with a 60x/1.42 NA objective (Olympus)
and 488 nm and 568 nm excitation lasers. 16 Z-sections of
0.125 μm each were acquired in Structure Illumination mode with
20 ms exposure and 20 % laser power. The 240 images obtained
were reconstructed with a Wiener constant of 0.01, and the volume
reconstructed using SoftWoRx.
Image analysis and cells segmentation
All microscopy images were processed using Fiji (fiji.sc).
Cell segmentation based on phase contrast images was performed
either on Oufti57 or Morphometrics58 and fluorescent signals
where analyzed using Oufti (for CcrZ and FtsZ), MicrobeJ59 (for
CcrZ) or iSBatch60 (for DnaN and oriC). Fluorescence heat-maps
were generated using BactMAP61.
Small-scale expression and GFP resin pull-down of FtsZ and
CcrZ-GFP

For affinity purification of CcrZSp-GFP while expressing FtsZSp,
ccrZSp was amplified from D39V genomic DNA with primers
213/214 and the resulting fragment was assembled using Golden
Gate allelic replacement strategy (BsaI) with plasmid pET-Gate2
ccdB (pSG436), pSG366, pSG367 and pSG2562, resulting in
plasmid pSG2950. ftsZ was amplified by PCR 215/216 on D39V
genomic DNA and cloned into plasmid pJet1.2, resulting in

plasmid pSG4227. The later was then assembled with pSG1694
using Golden Gate assembly, leading to plasmid pSG4268. BL21
DE3 Gold competent cells were co-transformed with plasmids
containing one of each S. pneumoniae FtsZ and CcrZ-GFP.
Expression was ZYM-5052 autoinduction media62. Cells were
sonicated in buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM
potassium acetate, 5 % glycerol, and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol
(lysis buffer). Supernatant was then mixed with GFP resin which
was produced by crosslinking nanobody63 to NHS-Activated
Sepharose 4 Fast Flow beads (GE Healthcare) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. After 1 hour of batch binding, resin
was washed 10 column volume (CV) with lysis buffer. Beads
were then re-suspended in 50 µL of lysis buffer mixed with SDSPAGE loading dye containing 5 % w/v β-mercaptoethanol and
heat treated at 95 ⁰C for 15 minutes. Supernatant was collected
and labelled heat elution (HE) samples. Whole cell lysate (WC),
supernatant after sonication (S), and HE were loaded on 15 %
SDS-PAGE gels and visualized by Coomassie staining.
Large-scale purification of CcrZ-CPD for antibody production
In order to express a fusion of S. pneumoniae CcrZ with a C-terminal
cysteine protease domain (CPD), ccrZ was amplified by PCR from
D39V genomic DNA with primers 213/214 and assembled using
Golden Gate allelic replacement strategy (BsaI) with plasmid
pET-Gate2 ccdB (pSG436), pSG366, pSG367 and pSG2559.
The resulting pSG2949 plasmid was then transformed into
BL21 DE3 Gold cells using ZYM-5052 auto-induction media62.
Cells were sonicated in buffer containing 300 mM NaCl, 50 mM
Tris pH 7.5, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, and protease inhibitor
cocktail (PIC). Supernatant was loaded onto a gravity flow
column containing HisPurTM Cobalt Resin (Thermo Scientific).
Column was washed 5 CV with buffer containing 100 mM NaCl,
20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol. Because CcrZ
had affinity to the resin even without the CPD, instead of on
column tag cleavage, elution was collected with buffer containing
150 mM Imidazole, 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5 mM
β-mercaptoethanol, and tag cleavage was performed for 1 hour
at 4 ⁰C by adding 1 mM inositol hexakisphosphate. The sample
was further purified using a HitrapQ column and Superdex 200
16/600 pg column (GE). The final storage buffer contained
100 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT. For antibody
production, sample was loaded onto a 15 % SDS PAGE gel.
Edge wells were cut out and stained with Coomassie to determine
position of CcrZ on the gel. Gel portions containing CcrZ was
sent for antibody production by Eurogentec.
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
| Gallay et al. | September, 2019

Western blot analysis

Cells were grown in C+Y medium until OD595nm = 0.2 and
harvested by centrifugation at 8000 x g for 2 min at room
temperature from 1 mL of culture. Cells were re-suspended
into 150 µL of Nuclei lysis buffer (Promega) containing 0.05 %
SDS, 0.025% deoxycholate and 1 % Protease Inhibitor Cocktail
(Sigma Aldrich), and incubated at 37°C for 20 min and at 80°C
for 5 min in order to lyse them. One volume of 4X SDS sample
buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH = 6.8, 2 % SDS, 10 % glycerol,
1 % β-mercaptoethanol, 12.5 mM EDTA and 0.02 % Bromophenol
blue) was then added to three volumes of cell lysate sample and
heated at 95°C for 10 min. Protein samples were separated by
SDS–PAGE (4-20%) and blotted onto polyvinylidene fluoride
membranes (Merck Millipore). Membranes were blocked for
1 h with Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 0.1 % Tween 20
(Sigma Aldrich) and 5 % dry milk and further incubated for 1 h
with primary antibodies diluted in TBS, 0.1 % Tween 20, 5 % dry
milk. Polyclonal CcrZ-antiserum concentration used was 1:5000
and commercial monoclonal GFP-IgG (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
were used at 1:5000. Membranes were washed four times for
5 min in TBS, 0.1 % Tween 20 and incubated for 1 h with the
secondary IgG (HRP-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit antibodies,
Promega) diluted 1:20,000 in TBS, 0.1 % Tween 20 and 5 %
dry milk. Membranes were then washed four times for 5 min in
TBS, 0.1 % Tween 20 and revealed with Immobilon Western HRP
substrate (Merck Millipore).

30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted
1:1 with TEAB buffer and digested by adding 0.1 µg of modified
Trypsin (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37°C, followed by
a second digestion for 2 h with the same amount of enzyme. The
supernatant was collected, diluted 2 times with 0.1 % formic acid
and desalted on strong cation exchange micro-tips (StageTips,
Thermo Fisher scientific) as described64. Peptides were eluted
with 1.0 M ammonium acetate (100 µL). Dried samples were
resuspended in 25 µL 0.1 % formic acid, 2 % acetonitrile prior
being subjected to nano LC-MS/MS.
LC-MS/MS analysis

ccrZ-GFP purification with anti-GFP nanobodies

Tryptic peptide mixtures (5 µL) were injected on a Dionex
RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA)
interfaced via a nanospray source to a high resolution QExactive
Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were
separated on an Easy Spray C18 PepMap nanocolumn (25 or
50 cm x 75 µm ID, 2 µm, 100 Å, Dionex) using a 35 min gradient
from 4 to 76 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid for peptide
separation (total time: 65 min). Full MS survey scans were
performed at 70,000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition
controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher), the 10 most
intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS
survey scan were selected for higher energy collision-induced
dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE = 27 %)
and analysis in the orbitrap at 17,500 resolution. The window for
precursor isolation was of 1.6 m/z units around the precursor and
selected fragments were excluded for 60 sec from further analysis.

gfp-ccrZ and P3-gfp (negative control) strains were grown in
C+Y medium at 37°C until OD595nm = 0.2 and cells were harvested
by centrifugation 15 min at 3000 x g at 4°C. Cells were then
incubated in sucrose buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH = 7.5, 2 mM
MgCl2, 1 M sucrose, 1 % Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma
Aldrich), 200 μg.mL-1 RNase A and 10 μg.mL-1 DNase (Sigma
Aldrich)) for 30 min at 30°C, then incubated in hypotonic buffer
(0.1 M Tris-HCl pH = 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1 % Triton, 1 % Protease
Inhibitor Cocktail, 200 μg.mL-1 RNase A and 10 μg.mL-1 DNase)
for 15 min at room temperature and cell debris were eliminated
by centrifugation 30 min at 15,000 x g at 4°C. Cell lysate was
then incubated with equilibrated GFP-Trap resin (Chromotek)
at 4°C for 2 h. After several washes with wash buffer (10 mM
Tris-HCl pH = 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 % Protease
Inhibitor Cocktail), beads were resuspended in 20 µL 8 M Urea,
50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH = 8.0 and
reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 37°C. Cysteines were
alkylated by adding 20 mM iodoacetamide and incubated for

MS data were analyzed using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix
Science, London, UK) set up to search the UniProt (www.uniprot.
org) protein sequence database restricted to S. pneumoniae D39
/ NCTC 7466 taxonomy (339 SWISSPROT sequences + 1586
TrEMBL sequences). Trypsin (cleavage at K,R) was used as the
enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Mascot was
searched with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment
ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da (QExactive Plus). Iodoacetamide
derivative of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed
modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein, oxidation of
methionine and phosphorylation of Ser, Thr, Tyr and His were
specified as variable modifications. Scaffold software (version
4.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate
MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications, and to perform
dataset alignment. Peptide identifications were accepted if they
could be established at greater than 90.0 % probability as specified
by the Peptide Prophet algorithm65 with Scaffold delta-mass
correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Gallay et al. | September, 2019 |

established at greater than 95.0 % probability and contained at
least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by
the Protein Prophet algorithm66. Proteins that contained similar
peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis
alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins
sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.
Split luciferase assay

S. pneumoniae cells were grown in C+Y medium at 37°C until
OD595nm = 0.2 and washed once with fresh C+Y medium. 1 %
NanoGlo Live Cell substrate (Promega) was then added and
luminescence was measured 20 times at 37°C every 30 sec in
plate reader (TECAN Infinite F200 Pro). Measurements were
performed in triplicate and the average values were plotted, with
the SEM (Standard Error of the Mean) represented by the dot size.
Bacterial two-hybrid
The bacterial two-hybrid assay was based on the method from
Karimova et al.42 with the following modifications. dnaA, ccrZ and
ftsZ genes from S. pneumoniae D39V were cloned both into the
low copy-number vector pUT18 and into the high copy-number
vector pST2567 using the enzymes BamHI and KpnI. Escherichia
coli strain HM1784 (BTH101 Δrnh::kan) was transformed using
each combination of plasmids. Chemically competent cells were
incubated on ice for 60 min, heat shocking at 42℃ for 90 sec and
then inoculated at 37℃ in 3 mL of LB media supplemented with
ampicillin (100 µg/mL) and spectinomycin (50 µg/mL) with mild
agitation for 16 hours. The A600 nm was adjusted to 0.5, cultures
were diluted 1:1000 and a 5 µL aliquot was spotted on a nutrient
agar plate containing antibiotics (as above) containing 0.006 %
X-gal. Plates were incubated at 30℃ for 48 hours and the images
were captured using a digital camera.
Co-immunoprecipitation of CcrZ and FtsZ-GFP with anti-GFP
nanobodies
S. pneumoniae cells were grown in C+Y medium at 37°C
until OD595nm = 0.2 and harvested by centrifugation 15 min at
3,000 x g at 4°C. Cells were lysed using GFP-Trap_A Lysis buffer
(Chromotek), 0.25 % Deoxycolate, 1 % Protease Inhibitor Cocktail
incubated at room temperature for 10 min followed by incubation
at 4°C for 20 min. Cell lysate was incubated with equilibrated
GFP-Trap resin (Chromotek) at 4°C for 2 h. The resin was then
washed 3 times in GFP-Trap_A Wash buffer (Chromotek) and
GFP-proteins were eluted using SDS sample buffer at 95°C for
10 min and analyzed by immunoblotting.

Genome resequencing of ccrZ suppressors by NGS

Strains ccrZsupp1, ccrZsupp2 and ccrZsupp3 were grown in C+Y
medium at 37°C until OD595nm = 0.3 and cells were harvested by
centrifugation 1 min at 10,000 x g. Pellet was then re-suspended
into Nuclei lysis buffer (Promega) containing 0.05 % SDS, 0.025%
deoxycholate and 200 µg.mL-1 RNase A at 37°C for 20 min, in
order to lyse the cells and Protein Precipitation Solution (Promega)
was added. DNA was then precipitated using isopropanol. The
extracted genomes were then analyzed by Illumina sequencing
by GATC Biotech (Eurofins Genomics). Mutations were mapped
onto D39V genome using breseq pipeline68. Genomes sequences
are available at SRA (pending accession number).
oriC/ter ratios determination by RT-qPCR
Determination of S. pneumoniae oriC/ter ratios was performed
as followed. Cells were pre-grown until OD600nm = 0.4 in C+Y
medium at 37°C, with or without inducer (ZnCl2 or IPTG) for
complementation and depletion conditions, respectively. Cells
were then diluted 100 times in fresh C+Y medium supplemented
when appropriate with inducer and harvested for genomic DNA
isolation when they reached OD600nm = 0.1 (exponential phase).
For normalization (oriC/ter ratio of 1), dnaA thermosensitive
strain was grown for 2h at non-permissive temperature (40°C)
in C+Y medium and harvested for chromosomal DNA isolation.
As a negative (overinitiating) control, wild type S. pneumoniae
was incubated 2h with 0.15 μg.mL-1 HPUra (DNA replication
inhibitor) at 37°C prior to harvesting. Primers pairs OT1/OT2
and OT3/OT4 were used to amplify the oriC and ter regions
respectively. Amplification by Real-Time qPCR was performed
using SYBR Select Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) on a
StepOne Plus Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems), in
triplicate. For S. aureus oriC/ter ratio determination, overnight
cultures were diluted 100-fold and grown until OD600nm = 0,4.
These cultures were then re-diluted 200-fold in medium with
500 µM IPTG and grown until OD600nm = 0.2. As reference samples
with assumed oriC/ter ratio of 1, wild type S. aureus SH1000 cells at
OD600nm = 0.15 were supplemented with 50 µg.mL-1 rifampicin
(inhibiting replication initiation) and incubated for 2 hours
for replication run-out. Cells were then harvested and lysed
enzymatically by addition of 0.2 mg.mL-1 lysostaphin and
10 mg.mL-1 lysozyme, and genomic DNA was isolated using the
Wizard Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Promega). qPCR reactions
of 10 µL were set up with 5 µL PowerUpTM SYBRTM Green
Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), 500 nM of each primer OT5/
OT and OT7/OT8 and 20 ng of DNA. In both cases, amplification
efficiencies of the primers and oriC/ter ratios were determined
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
| Gallay et al. | September, 2019

as described previously

. Data were plotted as whiskers plot
were whiskers represent the 10th and 90th percentile of data from
Monte Carlo simulations, * P value < 0.05, significantly up. For
B. subtilis oriC/ter ratios determination, cultures were grown to
mid-exponential phase in LB medium and diluted back to OD600nm
= 0.05 and grown to mid-exponential phase (OD600nm = 0.2 - 0.4)
at 37°C. Cells were harvested in ice-cold methanol (1:1 ratio) and
pelleted. Genomic DNA was isolated using Qiagen DNeasy kit
with 40 μg.mL-1 lysozyme. The copy number of the origin (oriC)
and terminus (ter) were quantified by qPCR to generate the oriC/
ter ratio. qPCR was done using SSoAdvanced SYBR master mix
and CFX96 Touch Real-Time PCR system (Bio-Rad). Primers
used to quantify the origin region were OT9/OT10. Primers used
to quantify the terminus region were OT11/OT12. Origin-toterminus ratios were determined by dividing the number of copies
(as indicated by the Cp values measured through qPCRs) of the
origin by the number of copies quantified at the terminus. Ratios
were normalized to the origin-to-terminus ratio of a temperature
sensitive mutant, dnaB134 (KPL69), that was grown to have
synchronized replication initiation, resulting in 1:1 ratio of the
oriC/ter. Data were plotted as whiskers plot. *P value < 0.05
(t-test), significantly up.
45

Quantifications and statistical analysis
Data analysis was performed using R and Prism (Graphpad).
When comparing wild type phenotypes with ccrZ depletion/
complementation, a Wilcoxon rank sum test with Bonferroni
adjustment was used as we did not assume a normal distribution,
since some mutant cells can behave like wild type because of the
variable time of depletion or possible leakiness of Plac or PZn.
Data shown are represented as mean of at least three replicates
± SEM if data came from one experiment with replicated
measurement, and ± SD if data came from separate experiments.

Acknowledgements
We appreciate the assistance from the Electron Microscopy
Facility (EMF) and the Protein Analysis Facility (PAF) at the
University of Lausanne (UNIL) and thank them for their support.
We thank Wiep Klaas Smits (LUMC) for the Split-luc sequences
and Tanneke den Blaauwen (UVA) for the mTQox sequence
prior to publication, Arnau Domenech (UNIL) for construction
of strain hlpA-LgBit hlpA-SmBit and Zhian Salehian (NMBU)
for help with cloning. Work in the Kjos lab is supported by a
FRIMEDBIO grant (project number 250976) and a JPIAMR grant
(project number 296906) from the Research Council of Norway.

Work in the Murray lab was supported by a Wellcome Trust
Senior Research Fellowship (204985/Z/16/Z) and a grant from
the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
(BB/P018432/1). Work in the Grossman lab was supported, in
part, by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the
National Institutes of Health under award number R37 GM041934
and R35 GM122538. Work in the Veening lab is supported
by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) (project
grant 31003A_172861), a JPIAMR grant (40AR40_185533)
from SNSF, a Novartis Foundation grant (#17B064) and ERC
consolidator grant 771534-PneumoCaTChER.

Authors Contributions
C.G. and J.W.V. wrote the paper with input from all authors.
C.G., S.S., M.E.A., Y.M.S., X.L., G.A.S., S.P., R.R. and M.K.
performed the experiments. C.G., S.S., M.E.A., M.K., H.M., S.G.,
A.D.G. and J.W.V designed, analyzed and interpreted the data.

References
1. Harashima, H., Dissmeyer, N. & Schnittger, A. Cell cycle
control across the eukaryotic kingdom. Trends Cell Biol. 23,
345–356 (2013).
2. Boye, E. & Nordström, K. Coupling the cell cycle to cell
growth. EMBO Rep. 4, 757–60 (2003).
3. Reyes-Lamothe, R. & Sherratt, D. J. The bacterial cell cycle,
chromosome inheritance and cell growth. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
1 (2019). doi:10.1038/s41579-019-0212-7
4. Kjeldgaard, N. O., MaalOe, O. & Schaechter, M. The Transition
Between Different Physiological States During Balanced
Growth of Salmonella typhimurium. J. Gen. Microbiol. 19,
607–616 (1958).
5. Schaechter, M., MaalOe, O. & Kjeldgaard, N. O. Dependency
on Medium and Temperature of Cell Size and Chemical
Composition during Balanced Growth of Salmonella
typhimurium. J. Gen. Microbiol. 19, 592–606 (1958).
6. Donachie, W. D. Relationship between cell size and time of
initiation of DNA replication. Nature 219, 1077–9 (1968).
7. Cooper, S. & Helmstetter, C. E. Chromosome replication and
the division cycle of Escherichia coli Br. J. Mol. Biol. 31, 519–
540 (1968).
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Gallay et al. | September, 2019 |

8. Campos, M. et al. A Constant Size Extension Drives Bacterial
Cell Size Homeostasis. Cell 159, 1433–1446 (2014).
9. Taheri-Araghi, S. et al. Cell-size control and homeostasis in
bacteria. Curr. Biol. 25, 385–391 (2015).
10. Wold, S., Skarstad, K., Steen, H. B., Stokke, T. & Boye, E. The
initiation mass for DNA replication in Escherichia coli K-12 is
dependent on growth rate. EMBO J. 13, 2097–102 (1994).
11. Si, F. et al. Mechanistic Origin of Cell-Size Control and
Homeostasis in Bacteria. Curr. Biol. 29, 1760-1770.e7 (2019).
12. Wallden, M., Fange, D., Lundius, E. G., Baltekin, Ö. & Elf,
J. The Synchronization of Replication and Division Cycles in
Individual E. coli Cells. Cell 166, 729–739 (2016).
13. Kleckner, N. E., Chatzi, K., White, M. A., Fisher, J. K. &
Stouf, M. Coordination of Growth, Chromosome Replication/
Segregation, and Cell Division in E. coli. Front. Microbiol. 9,
1469 (2018).
14. Kleckner, N. et al. The bacterial nucleoid: nature, dynamics
and sister segregation. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 22, 127–37
(2014).
15. Hajduk, I. V., Rodrigues, C. D. A. & Harry, E. J. Connecting
the dots of the bacterial cell cycle: Coordinating chromosome
replication and segregation with cell division. Semin. Cell Dev.
Biol. 53, 2–9 (2016).
16. Espéli, O. et al. A MatP-divisome interaction coordinates
chromosome segregation with cell division in E. coli. EMBO
J. 31, 3198–211 (2012).
17. Zheng, H. et al. Interrogating the Escherichia coli cell cycle
by cell dimension perturbations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
113, 15000–15005 (2016).
18. Huls, P. G., Vischer, N. O. E. & Woldringh, C. L. Different
Amounts of DNA in Newborn Cells of Escherichia coli
Preclude a Role for the Chromosome in Size Control According
to the “Adder” Model. Front. Microbiol. 9, 664 (2018).
19. Katayama, T. Initiation of DNA Replication at the
Chromosomal Origin of E. coli, oriC. in 79–98 (Springer,
Singapore, 2017). doi:10.1007/978-981-10-6955-0_4
20. Katayama, T., Kasho, K. & Kawakami, H. The DnaA Cycle in
Escherichia coli: Activation, Function and Inactivation of the
Initiator Protein. Front. Microbiol. 8, 2496 (2017).

21. Løbner-Olesen, A., Skarstad, K., Hansen, F. G., von
Meyenburg, K. & Boye, E. The DnaA protein determines the
initiation mass of Escherichia coli K-12. Cell 57, 881–889
(1989).
22. Pierucci, O., Rickert, M. & Helmstetter, C. E. DnaA protein
overproduction abolishes cell cycle specificity of DNA
replication from oriC in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 171,
3760–6 (1989).
23. Flåtten, I., Fossum-Raunehaug, S., Taipale, R., Martinsen, S.
& Skarstad, K. The DnaA Protein Is Not the Limiting Factor
for Initiation of Replication in Escherichia coli. PLOS Genet.
11, e1005276 (2015).
24. Hill, N. S., Kadoya, R., Chattoraj, D. K. & Levin, P. A. Cell
Size and the Initiation of DNA Replication in Bacteria. PLoS
Genet. 8, e1002549 (2012).
25. Murray, H. & Koh, A. Multiple Regulatory Systems Coordinate
DNA Replication with Cell Growth in Bacillus subtilis. PLoS
Genet. 10, e1004731 (2014).
26. Bisicchia, P., Arumugam, S., Schwille, P. & Sherratt, D.
MinC, MinD, and MinE drive counter-oscillation of early-celldivision proteins prior to Escherichia coli septum formation.
MBio 4, e00856-13 (2013).
27. Marston, A. L., Thomaides, H. B., Edwards, D. H., Sharpe,
M. E. & Errington, J. Polar localization of the MinD protein
of Bacillus subtilis and its role in selection of the mid-cell
division site. Genes Dev. 12, 3419–30 (1998).
28. Wu, L. J. & Errington, J. Nucleoid occlusion and bacterial cell
division. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 10, 8–12 (2012).
29. Pinho, M. G., Kjos, M. & Veening, J.-W. How to get (a)
round: mechanisms controlling growth and division of coccoid
bacteria. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 11, 601–614 (2013).

30. Land, A. D. et al. Requirement of essential Pbp2x and GpsB
for septal ring closure in Streptococcus pneumoniae D39. Mol.
Microbiol. 90, 939–955 (2013).
31. Mercy, C. et al. RocS drives chromosome segregation and
nucleoid protection in Streptococcus pneumoniae. Nat.
Microbiol. 1 (2019). doi:10.1038/s41564-019-0472-z
32. Fleurie, A. et al. MapZ marks the division sites and positions
FtsZ rings in Streptococcus pneumoniae. Nature 516, 259–262
(2014).
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
| Gallay et al. | September, 2019

33. Holečková, N. et al. LocZ is a new cell division protein
involved in proper septum placement in Streptococcus
pneumoniae. MBio 6, e01700-14 (2014).

34. Perez, A. J. et al. Movement dynamics of divisome proteins
and PBP2x:FtsW in cells of Streptococcus pneumoniae. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 116, 3211–3220 (2019).
35. van Raaphorst, R., Kjos, M. & Veening, J.-W. Chromosome
segregation drives division site selection inStreptococcus
pneumoniae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114, E5959–E5968
(2017).
36. Liu, X. et al. High-throughput CRISPRi phenotyping identifies
new essential genes inStreptococcus pneumoniae. Mol. Syst.
Biol. 13, 931 (2017).
37. Nourikyan, J. et al. Autophosphorylation of the Bacterial
Tyrosine-Kinase CpsD Connects Capsule Synthesis with the
Cell Cycle in Streptococcus pneumoniae. PLOS Genet. 11,
e1005518 (2015).
38. Du, S. & Lutkenhaus, J. Assembly and activation of the
Escherichia coli divisome. Mol. Microbiol. 105, 177–187
(2017).
39. Krogh, A., Larsson, B., von Heijne, G. & Sonnhammer, E.
L. . Predicting transmembrane protein topology with a hidden
markov model: application to complete genomes. J. Mol. Biol.
305, 567–580 (2001).
40. Oliveira Paiva, A. M. et al. The Bacterial Chromatin Protein
HupA Can Remodel DNA and Associates with the Nucleoid in
Clostridium difficile. J. Mol. Biol. 431, 653–672 (2019).
41. Bodle, C. R., Hayes, M. P., O’Brien, J. B. & Roman, D. L.
Development of a bimolecular luminescence complementation
assay for RGS: G protein interactions in cells. Anal. Biochem.
522, 10–17 (2017).
42. Karimova, G., Pidoux, J., Ullmann, A. & Ladant, D. A bacterial
two-hybrid system based on a reconstituted signal transduction
pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 5752–6 (1998).
43. Kjos, M. et al. Bright fluorescent Streptococcus pneumoniae
for live-cell imaging of host-pathogen interactions. J. Bacteriol.
197, 807–18 (2015).
44. Felicori, L. et al. Tetramerization and interdomain flexibility of
the replication initiation controller YabA enables simultaneous
binding to multiple partners. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, 449–463
(2016).

45. Slager, J., Kjos, M., Attaiech, L. & Veening, J.-W. AntibioticInduced Replication Stress Triggers Bacterial Competence by
Increasing Gene Dosage near the Origin. Cell 157, 395–406
(2014).
46. Scholefield, G., Errington, J. & Murray, H. Soj/ParA stalls
DNA replication by inhibiting helix formation of the initiator
protein DnaA. EMBO J. 31, 1542–55 (2012).
47. Soding, J., Biegert, A. & Lupas, A. N. The HHpred interactive
server for protein homology detection and structure prediction.
Nucleic Acids Res. 33, W244–W248 (2005).
48. Wang, L., Jiang, Y.-L., Zhang, J.-R., Zhou, C.-Z. & Chen,
Y. Structural and Enzymatic Characterization of the Choline
Kinase LicA from Streptococcus pneumoniae. PLoS One 10,
e0120467 (2015).
49. Pang, T., Wang, X., Lim, H. C., Bernhardt, T. G. & Rudner,
D. Z. The nucleoid occlusion factor Noc controls DNA
replication initiation in Staphylococcus aureus. PLoS Genet.
13, e1006908 (2017).
50. Slager, J., Aprianto, R. & Veening, J.-W. Deep genome
annotation of the opportunistic human pathogen Streptococcus
pneumoniae D39. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, 9971–9989 (2018).
51. Domenech, A., Slager, J. & Veening, J.-W. Antibiotic-Induced
Cell Chaining Triggers Pneumococcal Competence by
Reshaping Quorum Sensing to Autocrine-Like Signaling. Cell
Rep. 25, 2390-2400.e3 (2018).
52. Monk, I. R., Tree, J. J., Howden, B. P., Stinear, T. P. & Foster,
T. J. Complete Bypass of Restriction Systems for Major
Staphylococcus aureus Lineages. MBio 6, e00308-15 (2015).
53. Löfblom, J., Kronqvist, N., Uhlén, M., Ståhl, S. & Wernérus,
H. Optimization of electroporation-mediated transformation:
Staphylococcus carnosus as model organism. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 102, 736–747 (2007).
54. Jaacks, K. J., Healy, J., Losick, R. & Grossman, A. D.
Identification and characterization of genes controlled by the
sporulation-regulatory gene spo0H in Bacillus subtilis. J.
Bacteriol. 171, 4121–4129 (1989).
55. Perego, M., Spiegelman, G. B. & Hoch, J. A. Structure of the
gene for the transition state regulator, abrB: regulator synthesis
is controlled by the spo0A sporulation gene in Bacillus subtilis.
Mol. Microbiol. 2, 689–699 (1988).
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/775536; this version posted September 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Gallay et al. | September, 2019 |

56. de Jong, I. G., Beilharz, K., Kuipers, O. P. & Veening, J.W. Live Cell Imaging of Bacillus subtilis and Streptococcus
pneumoniae using Automated Time-lapse Microscopy. J. Vis.
Exp. (2011). doi:10.3791/3145
57. Paintdakhi, A. et al. Oufti: an integrated software package
for high-accuracy, high-throughput quantitative microscopy
analysis. Mol. Microbiol. 99, 767–777 (2016).

67. Ouellette, S. P. et al. Analysis of MreB interactors in Chlamydia
reveals a RodZ homolog but fails to detect an interaction with
MraY. Front. Microbiol. 5, 279 (2014).
68. Deatherage, D. E. & Barrick, J. E. Identification of mutations in
laboratory-evolved microbes from next-generation sequencing
data using breseq. Methods Mol. Biol. 1151, 165–88 (2014).

58. Ursell, T. et al. Rapid, precise quantification of bacterial
cellular dimensions across a genomic-scale knockout library.
BMC Biol. 15, 17 (2017).
59. Ducret, A., Quardokus, E. M. & Brun, Y. V. MicrobeJ, a tool
for high throughput bacterial cell detection and quantitative
analysis. Nat. Microbiol. 1, 16077 (2016).
60. Caldas, V. E. A., Punter, C. M., Ghodke, H., Robinson, A.
& van Oijen, A. M. iSBatch: a batch-processing platform
for data analysis and exploration of live-cell single-molecule
microscopy images and other hierarchical datasets. Mol.
Biosyst. 11, 2699–2708 (2015).
61. Raaphorst, R. van, Kjos, M. & Veening, J.-W. BactMAP: an
R package for integrating, analyzing and visualizing bacterial
microscopy data. bioRxiv 728782 (2019). doi:10.1101/728782
62. Studier, F. W. Protein production by auto-induction in high
density shaking cultures. Protein Expr. Purif. 41, 207–34
(2005).
63. Kubala, M. H., Kovtun, O., Alexandrov, K. & Collins, B.
M. Structural and thermodynamic analysis of the GFP:GFPnanobody complex. Protein Sci. 19, 2389–401 (2010).
64. Kulak, N. A., Pichler, G., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N. & Mann, M.
Minimal, encapsulated proteomic-sample processing applied
to copy-number estimation in eukaryotic cells. Nat. Methods
11, 319–324 (2014).
65. Andrew Keller, *,†, Alexey I. Nesvizhskii, *,†, Eugene
Kolker, and & Aebersold, R. Empirical Statistical Model To
Estimate the Accuracy of Peptide Identifications Made by MS/
MS and Database Search. (2002). doi:10.1021/AC025747H
66. Alexey I. Nesvizhskii, *,†, Andrew Keller, *,†, Eugene
Kolker, ‡ and & Aebersold, R. A Statistical Model for
Identifying Proteins by Tandem Mass Spectrometry. (2003).
doi:10.1021/AC0341261

19

