bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

scribble abrogation induces tumor growth through JNK-Wnt pathways depending on
cellular-microenvironment in Drosophila wing imaginal tissue
Amarish Kumar Yadav1, Roshan Fatima2 and Saripella Srikrishna1*
1. Cancer and Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Science, Banaras
Hindu University, Varanasi -221005, India.
2. National Centre for Biological Sciences, Bangalore -560065, India.

Abstract
scribble (scrib) is a cell-polarity determinant in Drosophila and human. Cell polarity plays a
crucial role in the maintenance of tissue homeostasis and its disruption leads to neoplastic
cancer progression. However, the underlying mechanisms by which loss of cell-polarity
regulators drives cancer progression are poorly known. In this study, we have explored the
tumor progression mechanisms upon scrib knockdown in Drosophila wing imaginal disc
using UASRNAi-GAL4 approach. We have found that scrib knockdown in wing disc leads to
tumor growth with disrupted actin cytoskeleton, loss of cell-polarity and elevated JNK
signalling, resulting in absolute early pupal lethality. Further, scrib abrogated cells in a large
area of the disc are capable of invading the surrounding wild type cells and inducing
apoptosis along with compensatory proliferation through JNK-Wnt pathways. Moreover,
JNK pathway upstream candidate hep (JNKK) knockdown in scrib abrogated cells rescues
the cell polarity defects, actin cytoskeleton disruption and tumor growth, while constitutive
hep activation further aggravates the tumor phenotype. Interestingly, generation of undead
cells by apoptosis inhibition in these hep knockdown cells by p35 expression further leads to
tumor development. Hence, we conclude that scrib knockdown in a large area of wing disc
might have a ‘group-protection’ and ‘undead-cells’ microenvironment that modulates the
action of JNK signalling resulting in tumor formation. Furthermore, JNK dependent
activation of Wnt/Ca2+ signalling also supports the tumor growth and actin cytoskeleton
disruption. Thus, our results importantly highlight the role of JNK signalling in tumor
progression upon scrib loss of function depending on cellular-microenvironment.

Keywords
scribble, Cancer, JNK and Wnt signalling, Microenvironment, Drosophila

⁎ Correspondence: skrishna@bhu.ac.in (S. Srikrishna)
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1. Introduction
Major forms of human cancer are epithelial in origin including cervical cancer, breast cancer,
prostate and colorectal cancer etc (Pearson et al., 2011; Royer et al., 2011). Proper epithelial
cell-polarity is crucial for tissue homeostasis and normal development. Loss of apical-basal
cell polarity is one of the hallmarks of the cancerous cell (Ellenbroek et al., 2012; Grifoni et
al., 2013). Epithelial cell polarity regulators have been categorised into three major classes
known as- Crumbs complex [Crumbs-Pals1 (stardust)-Patj-Lin7] & Par-complex [Par3
(bazooka)-Par6-aPKC] both of which are apically localized and Scrib-Complex (LglScribble-Dlg), a basolateral determinant and localized towards the basement membrane
(Humbert et al., 2006; Royer and Lu, 2011). Among these classes Scrib complex members
like Scribble, Lgl & Dlg are well studied in Drosophila and reported as neoplastic tumor
suppressors (Bilder, 2004).
The scrib mutation in Drosophila was first isolated by Bilder and Perrimon (2000) in a screen
for maternal effect mutations that affect the epithelial morphogenesis. It was named so
because of the indented appearance of the embryonic cuticle of the mutants, unlike the
smooth surface of wild type. They also cloned the gene and generated antibodies against the
protein and showed that it is associated with cell membranes and localizes to the septate
junctions. A series of EMS alleles of scribble with varying degree of severity have been
described (Bilder and Perrimon 2000; Zeitlet et al 2004). While some of them act as null
alleles with extended larval life and die as giant larvae, some others act as hypomorphs and
die as early to late pupae. Moreover, alleles in certain trans-heterozygous combinations
produce escapee flies as well. Apical proteins like armadillo, Sas (Stranded at second),
Neurexin, Crumbs, etc. are mis-localized in scrib mutants causing disruption of epidermal
architecture with groups of cells that are rounded or irregular in shape, a shift from the
columnar, mono-layered profile of wild type cells.
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Zeitler et al (2004) examined the wing discs of scrib mutant larvae using Phalloidin staining
that labels the filamentous actin. Wing discs consist of a monolayer of apically elongated
epithelial cells with the filamentous actin enriched at the apical end in wild type. However, in
scrib mutants, actin shows uniform cortical distribution in multi layered groups of cells. The
mutant wing discs are larger in comparison to wild type and the phenotype is correlated to the
severity of the mutation. Wing discs of null alleles have a higher area, volume and number of
cells than those of weaker alleles. Mutations in two other genes, discs-large (dlg) and lethal
giant larvae (lgl) also result in loss of apico-basal polarity and over proliferative phenotypes,
due to which these genes, along with scribble, are known as neoplastic tumor suppressor
genes (Brumby and Richardson 2003; Pagliarini and Xu 2003). Moreover, scrib is one of the
major targets of human papilloma viruses (HPV) and associated with many forms of humancancer development (Barmchi et al., 2016; Kranjec et al., 2016).
Previous studies in Drosophila have shown that small clones of scrib mutant do not grow
vigorously and are ultimately removed by surrounding wild type cells through cellcompetition (Chen et al., 2011), whereas the scrib loss-of-function in relatively bigger area
resists the removal by wild type cells (Verghese et al., 2012). Further, Chen et al 2011
reported that removal of the scrib mutant clones was due to elevated JNK signalling (Chen et
al., 2011). However, it has been also shown that active JNK cooperates over proliferation of
scrib mutant clones with Ras gain-of-function (Brumby et al., 2003; Enomoto et al., 2015).
Hence, the cellular microenvironment modulates the action of JNK signalling either to
promote or suppress the tumor growth. Likewise, scrib knockdown in large area shows
resistance to its apoptotic removal by surrounding wild type cells suggesting the role of
cellular-microenvironment in JNK signalling regulation. But, how large area of scrib
knockdown cells evade cell-competition mediated removal is still not clear and largely
unexplored.
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A recent study reported that highly populated Rab5 mutant cells are able to evade cellcompetition through a mechanism of ‘group-protection’ against surrounding wild type cells
(Saavedra et al., 2014). These group-protected Rab5 mutant cells exhibit active JNK
signalling and Wg (wingless or Wnt) pathway, supporting overgrowth of wing discs
(Saavedra et al., 2014). Wg pathway activation is well reported in many forms of human
cancers (Zhan et al., 2017). Wg signaling acts as both canonical (Wg/β-Catenin) and noncanonical (Wg/Ca2+) manner to regulate cell proliferation and development (De et al., 2011).
Also, it has been reported that in Drosophila wing imaginal disc JNK signalling induces Wg
and Yki (Yorkie) expression during compensatory proliferation against tissue damage/X-ray
irradiation/genetically induced apoptosis (Sun et al., 2011). while, p35 mediated apoptosis
inhibition in the X-ray or genetically induced apoptotic-cells, make them ‘undead cell’ which
secretes wg/dpp morphogen causing overgrowth of the tissue (Ryoo et al., 2004; Perez-garijo
et al., 2009). Wg is an effector mediator of cell competition and up-regulated Wg expression
in the cells protect their apoptotic removal. Interestingly, Cell-competition induced dying
cells also secret the cell growth promoting morphogen like Wg/dpp and contribute to
compensatory proliferation (Levayer et al., 2013).
Loss of cell polarity regulator, Scrib, has been reported from common epithelial human
cancers like breast, cervical, colorectal, skin etc (Feng et al., 2016; Kranjec et al., 2016). But,
how loss of Scrib promotes tumor growth is largely unexplored. We undertook the present
study with an aim to explore the underlying mechanisms of epithelial cancer progression
upon scrib loss of function. We report that scrib knockdown in the wing disc leads to tumor
development with disrupted actin cytoskeleton, loss of cell-polarity and elevated JNK
signalling resulting in absolute early pupal lethality.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2. Results
2.1. scrib knockdown in wing imaginal discs leads to tumorous growth eventually
resulting in early pupal lethality
With an aim to study the mechanism of cancer progression upon scrib loss of function, we
knocked down the scrib in the wing imaginal disc using UASRNAi-GAL4 approach. The
expression pattern of Wing-GAL4 was analysed by crossing it to UAS-GFP and UAS-LacZ
responder lines, which showed the GAL4 expression in almost the entire disc, including the
wing pouch, notum and hinge regions, with an exception of the margins of the disc, as shown
in Fig. S1. Thus it was clear that using this approach, it is possible to induce or silence a gene
in almost the entire disc. We then went ahead and knocked down scrib in the wing discs by
crossing UAS-scribRNAi responder line to Wing-GAL4 driver line. We found that scrib
knockdown by this approach (UAS-ScribRNAi/Wing-GAL4) is sufficient to promote massive
tumour growth with distorted wing-discs morphology causing absolute pupal lethality (Fig.1
A-F). Wing disc area was measured using LSM-image browser software with overlaydrawing mode and measures. Tumorous disc was about 1.3 times larger in area relative to
wild type disc (Fig.1 C). Moreover, we observed that scrib knockdown driven tumor bearing
third instar larvae were relatively larger in size compared wild type larvae. Though they
initiate pupation like wild type, the pupae fail to develop further and show 100% lethality at
early stages of development, whereas wild type pupae complete their development normally
(Fig.1 D-F). Further, immunostaining revealed a reduction in the levels of Scrib expression in
the mutant wing discs as compared to wild type (Fig. S2).
2.2. scrib knockdown in wing imaginal discs leads to enhanced JNK signalling
We wanted to investigate the status of JNK signalling in the scrib knockdown induced tumor,
since it is known that cell-polarity regulators modulate JNK signalling in cancerous tissue
(Igaki et al., 2006; Leong et al., 2009). We examined active JNK (Phosphorylated-JNK) in
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

wing imaginal discs as previously shown by Wang et al 2012. scrib knockdown induced
tumor shows elevated JNK transcription, up to 1.9 folds, compared to wild type disc as
revealed by immunostaining and qPCR respectively (Fig.2 A-D and I). Further, we were
interested to analyse the presence of proliferating and/or apoptotic cells in this tumor as it is
well known that JNK signalling can act as a tumor promoting as well as a tumor suppressing
factor. Cell death and cell proliferation were analysed by TUNEL and BrdU assays,
respectively in growing tumor against wild type counterpart (Fig.2 E-H). Apoptotic and
proliferating cells were counted manually in LSM-image browser software. TUNEL assay
revealed that scrib abrogated tumor has around 4.6 times higher number of apoptotic cells
relative to normal disc (Fig. 2 J), though these apoptotic cells were higher in number towards
the edge of tumor (Fig.2 F, white arrows). Moreover, BrdU assay showed the presence of
about 1.4 times higher number of actively dividing cells in tumorous disc compared to wild
type (Fig. 2 K). However, the actively dividing cells were present throughout the tumorous
disc (Fig. 2 H). Also, cyclin-E immunostainig further corroborated the presence of actively
dividing cells in growing tumor (Fig. S3). Hence, scrib knockdown in the wing disc leads to
tumorous growth with elevated JNK signalling resulting in absolute pupal lethality.

Figure 1. scrib Knockdown in wing imaginal discs leads to tumorigenesis and absolute pupal
lethality. A-B. DIC images of normal and tumorous wing discs of WT and SbRNAi, respectively.
Green circles depict the distorted morphology of SbRNAi disc as compared to the regular shape of WT
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

disc. C. Histogram showing comparative area of WT and SbRNAi wing imaginal discs. D-E. Normally
developed pupa of WT and a dead pupa of SbRNAi, respectively. F. Histogram showing percent of
dead pupae of SbRNAi (100%, n=129) in comparison to WT (0%).

Figure 2. Confocal projections showing active JNK (p-JNK), TUNEL and BrdU
immunostaining in Wild type (WT) and scrib knockdown (SbRNAi) discs respectively. A-B show
wild type (A) and SbRNAi (B) active JNK (green) status. SbRNAi shows highly active JNK compared to
wild type. Magnified images of the same are shown in C-D. Wild type disc (C) shows normal level of
active JNK, though few cells show high level of active JNK (green spots). While,SbRNAi (D) shows
high level of active JNK throughout disc. TUNEL assay (E-F) reveals apoptotic cells (white arrows
indicating green dots) in wild type & SbRNAi discs respectively and Brdu immunostaining (G-H) shows
presence of actively dividing cells (red dots indicated by white arrows) in wild type and SbRNAi discs
respectively. Histogram (I) shows about 1.9 folds elevated level of JNK mRNA in ScribRNAi compared
to wild type. (J) and (K) represent the presence of higher number of apoptotic cells and dividing cells
in scrib knockdown driven tumor compared to wild type counterpart respectively. (p<0.05).

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2.3. JNK signalling regulates the cell-proliferation and apoptosis in scrib knockdown
tumor of wing imaginal discs
As we noted that scrib knockdown in the wing imaginal disc leads to tumor growth with
elevated JNK signalling along with proliferating as well as apoptotic cells, we were interested
to understand that how JNK signalling regulates the cell proliferation and cell death in this
tumor. Therefore, we genetically modulated the JNK signalling in this tumor by
overexpression and knockdown of JNK upstream candidate Hemipterous (Hep) also known
as Jun Kinase Kinsae (JNKK). UAS-HepAct (constitutively active) line was used to upregulate JNK signalling, while UAS-HepRNAi line was employed to knockdown the JNK
signalling in this tumor. It may be noted that Hep activation causes phosphorylation of Basket
(JNK) to induce JNK signalling in the cells (Ages et al., 1999; Stronach, 2005).In accordance
with our previous observation, we noted that activation of JNK signalling in the background
of scrib knockdown induces both cell proliferation as well as cell death, as analysed by BrdU
and TUNEL assays, respectively. Activation of JNK signalling in scrib knockdown tissues
(Wing-Gal4>UAS-HepAct; UAS-ScribRNAi) induces higher cell proliferation, about 8.3%
relative to scrib knocked down alone (Wing-Gal4>UAS-ScribRNAi) and about 48.5% higher
as compared to wild type (Fig.3 A-C, E-G, I-K and Q, Number of Brdu positive cells were
counted manually using LSM image browser and calculated in percentage to represent
comparisons). We further analysed the cell proliferation in this tumor upon JNK downregulation (Wing-Gal4>UAS-HepRNAi; UAS-ScribRNAi) and observed that JNK down
regulation reduces cell proliferation by about 22.3% relative to scrib knockdown alone and
also restores the wing disc morphology to near wild type (Fig.3 A-C, E-G, M-O and Q). As
far as cell death is concerned, JNK activation in the background of scrib knockdown induces
higher cell death, about 82.7% as revealed by TUNEL assay (Fig.3 D, H, L and R). We
observed that apoptotic cells were present throughout the tumor though more number of
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

apoptotic cells were present towards outer region (Fig. 3L). Likewise, JNK signalling down
regulation shows about 13.7% reduction in apoptotic cells in this tumor compared to scrib
knocked down alone (Fig 3 P and R). Here, we noted that the number of apoptotic cells were
still higher in number compared to wild type disc (Fig. 3 R) and were present more towards
the inner region of the disc (Fig. 3 P). Hence, JNK signalling modulates the cell proliferation
and cell deaths in scrib knockdown driven tumor.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3. Confocal projections representing BrdU and TUNEL assays. A. Wild type wing
imaginal disc showing actively dividing cells (in S-phase) stained with BrdU (red) and DAPI (blue)
representing the nucleus. B-C. Magnified wild type disc representing nucleus (blue) and dividing cells
(red). Note the nuclear localization of BrdU (B). D. Apoptotic cells (green dots) during wing disc
development. Likewise, (E-H), (I-L) and (M-P) show the presence of actively dividing cells and
apoptotic cells in scrib knockdown upon JNK up and down regulated wing discs respectively.
Histograms (Q) and (R) show the number of actively dividing cells and apoptotic cells respectively in
corresponding genotypes.

2.4. Apoptosis inhibition by p35 expression in JNK down-regulated scrib knockdown
disc induces tumorous growth
In previous result, we found that JNK signalling down regulation in scrib knockdown cells
inhibited the tumor growth but more number of apoptotic cells were present in this disc
compared to wild type (Fig.3 D, P). Therefore, we were interested to know what would
happen if apoptosis is inhibited in these cells. We used UAS-p35 line, a caspase inhibitor
(Marchal et al., 2012), in these cells to inhibit the apoptosis. We observed that p35 expression
in these cells restores the tumorigenic potential of these cell and induces tumorous growth
(Fig.4 A-B). Hence, apoptosis inhibition by p35 expression in JNK diminished scrib
abrogated cells further leads to tumor growth.

Figure 4. DIC images representing A. JNK down-regulation in scrib knockdown cells rescued
tumor growth and B. p35 expression in JNK compromised scrib knockdown cells induces tumorous
growth.
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2.5. scrib knockdown in wing discs show tumorigenesis from early age of larval
development and JNK signalling diminution rescues the tumor growth and early pupal
lethality
We have observed that scrib knockdown tumor grows vigorously with highly disrupted wing
disc morphology and elevated level of JNK signalling. So, we were interested to observe how
the tumor progresses and what is the fate of scrib knockdown cells with JNK signalling up
and down regulation, respectively. For this, we marked the cells with scrib knockdown alone
and in genetic combination of Hep (JNKK), with GFP (green fluorescent protein) using UASGFP line and dissected out the wing discs for observation from early to late age of larval
development stages i.e. in a window of 36h to 96h after larvae hatched. We found that wild
type discs (WingGAL4>UAS-GFP) shows GFP expression present to larger area of the disc
from early to late age of development and mostly absent from margins of the disc as shown in
merged fluorescence images with DIC images representing whole disc, respectively (Fig5 AE). While, scrib knockdown discs (Wing-Gal4>UAS-GFP; UAS-ScribRNAi) show the
distorted discs morphology from early age of development and GFP expressing cells are
progressively expanded throughout the discs and at late age of 72-96 hrs these cells covers
the whole area of the discs and reach the outer margin as well (Fig.5 F-J). Likewise, JNK
signalling up regulation (Wing-Gal4>UAS-HepAct/UAS-GFP; UAS-ScribRNAi) in this tumor
further aggravates the disc morphology distortion from early age and GFP expressing cells
invade the outer margins to covers the whole disc (Fig.5 K-O). However, JNK downregulation in scrib knockdown discs (Wing-Gal4>UAS-HepRNAi/UAS-GFP; UAS-ScribRNAi)
show the progressive removal of GFP expressing scrib knockdown cells from the early age of
development to restore the normal wing disc morphology (Fig.5 P-T).
Moreover, we found that JNK down regulation in scrib knockdown wing imaginal discs
protect early pupal deaths significantly (82.2%) and the pupae reach upto pharate adult stage
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Fig. 6 A, D). Also, some of these puape (7%) were able to eclose as adult flies with distorted
(around 40.5%) as well as very normal wings (39.5%) morphology. Distorted wings show the
developmental defects in Anterior Cross Vein (ACV) and Posterior Cross Vein (PCV) (Fig.
6B, C, E). Though, eclosed flies show life span near to wild type flies (Fig. 6F). Hence, scrib
knockdown tumor grows progressively in JNK dependent manner and JNK down regulation
protects the tumor formation and associated anomalies.

Figure 5. Confocal projections representing GFP (green) expression in developing wild type and
tumorous discs at different time frames after larvae hatched. (A-D) wild type shows GFP
expression throughout the disc from early to late stages of development except at the margins. (E)
Magnified wild type wing pouch region represent GFP expression restricted to pouch region (red
arrow) and absent from outer margin (white arrow). Likewise, (F-I) SbRNAi (WingGal4>UAS-GFP;
UAS-ScribRNAi) and (K-N) HepAct/SbRNAi (Wing-Gal4>UAS-GFP/UAS-HepAct;UAS-ScribRNAi ) show
GFP expression throughout and late age discs shows invasion of GFP cells at outer margin also.
Magnified (J, O) show GFP cell at outer region suggestion invading nature of scrib abrogated cell
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

leading to loss of wild type cells, JNK activation further enhances invading capacity of scrib
abrogated cells. While (P-S) HepRNAi/SbRNAi (WingGal4>UAS-GFP/HepRNAi;UAS-ScribRNAi) JNK
signalling down regulation shows loss of GFP expressing scrib abrogated cells and their replacement
by wild type cells. (T) Magnified image shows loss of GFP cells from wing pouch region in
comparison to wild type (E) and scrib knockdown disc (J) (n=10). (Scale bar represents 100µm).

Figure 6. Pupal development, adult wings morphology and percent survival of escaper flies. A.
WT (Wild type) shows the fly development inside pupal case while SbRNAi (WingGal4>UASScribRNAi) and SbRNAi/HepACT (WingGal4>UAS-HepAct;UAS-ScribRNAi lead to early pupal death and
enlargement of pupa size, But SbRNAi/HepRNAi(WingGal4>UAS-HepRNAi;UAS-ScribRNAi) showed
normal pupal development, although they died as pharate adults, however very few were able to
eclose. (B) Wild type (WT) and SbRNAi/HepRNAi escapers flies. (C) Bright field images showing wing
morphology of wild type and escapers flies . Magnified images below show the developmental defects
of Anterior Cross Vein (ACV) and Posterior Cross Vein (PCV) of the escaper flieswith relatively
smaller size of cross veins. The yellowish-black spots in escapee fly wings might be melatonic
depositions. Histograms (D-E) represent percent death of early pupae for respective genotypes

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(n=115) and wing disc morphological defects (n=20) respectively (***p<0.001). (F) Shows life span
of escapee flies compared to wild type and WingGAL4 driver line (n=40).

2.6. JNK signalling down-regulation restores actin cytoskeleton and cell polarity in scrib
abrogated wing imaginal disc
Scrib is one of the cell polarity regulators restricted towards basolateral side of the cell in
complex with Dlg and Lgl. So, we analysed the cell polarity in this tumor and actin
cytoskeleton rearrangement, a property of tumorous tissue (Efremov et al 2015). Actin
cytoskeleton organization was analysed by Phalloidin staining in tumorous disc compared to
wild type disc, while cell polarity was observed by basolateral cell polarity marker, Dlg (disc
large) immunostaining. We found that actin cytoskeleton was highly disrupted in tumorous
disc compared to wild type. Scrib knockdown and JNK activation (WingGAL4>UAS-HepAct;
UAS-ScribRNAi) driven tumor shows highly polymerized and accumulated actin filaments,
while JNK signalling down-regulation (WingGAL4>UAS-HepRNAi; UAS-ScribRNAi) restores
the actin cytoskeleton arrangement comparable to wild type counterpart (Fig.S4 A-H).
Likewise, we found that scrib knockdown driven tumor cells show loss of basolateral cell
polarity as revealed by mislocalized Dlg (appears to be present along the cell-membrane and
in cytoplasm) compared to wild type counterpart. Further, we found that JNK signalling
activation in this tumor shows Dlg mislocalization though it is similar to scrib knockdown
tumor, while JNK signalling down regulation restores the cell polarity with restricted
distribution of Dlg to basolateral side (Fig. S4, I-T). Hence, restoration of actin
rearrangement and cell polarity further corroborate the replacement of scrib knockdown cells
by wild type cells upon JNK down-regulation as shown in Fig.5S.

2.7. scrib knockdown driven tumor shows altered levels of Wingless, β-catenin and
intracellular Ca2+ in parallel to JNK signalling
Since scrib knockdown tumor grows with simultaneous presence of apoptotic as well as
proliferating cells in JNK dependent manner, we were interested to analyse the Wingless
(Wg) pathway in this tumor, as Wg pathway has been shown to be involved in apoptosis
induced compensatory proliferation (Ryoo et al 2004). Here, we observed the Wg (also called
Wnt) and its downstream effector β-catenin (Armadillo) levels by immunostainings in this
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

tumor in respect to JNK signalling up and down regulation, respectively. Scrib abrogated
tumor (Wing-Gal4>UAS-ScribRNAi) shows elevated Wingless (Wg) signalling compared to
wild type counterpart as revealed by immuno-staining. Also, wild type wing imaginal disc
shows a characteristic expression pattern of Wg along the wing-pouch and notum regions,
however, it’s hard to identify the wing pouch and notum area for growing tumor (Fig.7 A, B,
E, F). Further, JNK signalling up regulation induces the Wg expression, while JNK down
regulation reduces the Wg expression in this tumor relatively (Fig. 7 C, D, G, H). Further, βcatenin (Armadillo) level was found to be increased in scrib knockdown tumor compared to
wild type and it also alters with respect to JNK signalling up and down-regulation as revealed
by immunostaining. (Fig S5).
Moreover, we analysed the intracellular level of Ca2+, another ‘Wnt’ transducer besides βcatenin. Also, Ca2+ is known to facilitate the β-catenin entry into nucleus to induce
transcription (Thrasivoulou et al, 2013). We observed the Ca2+ level in this tumor using UASGCamp3.0 responder line, which encodes a calcium indicator that fluoresces green in
presence of intracellular Ca2+. scrib knockdown driven tumor (WingGAl4>UAS-GCamp3.0;
UAS-ScribRNAi) shows elevated level of Ca2+ relative to control disc (WingGAl4>UASGCamp3.0). Further, JNK signalling up-regulation (WingGAl4>UAS-GCamp3.0/UASHepAct; UAS-ScribRNAi) enhances the intracellular Ca2+ while, JNK signalling downregulation (WingGAl4>UAS-GCamp3.0/UAS-HepRNAi; UAS-ScribRNAi) reduces the Ca2+
level relative to scrib knockdown tumor alone (Fig. 7 I-L). Hence, scrib knockdown tumor
shows altered level of Wg/β-catenin/Ca2+ in parallel to JNK signalling.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 7. Confocal images of wing imaginal discs representing Wg (wingless) immunostaining
and Ca2+ detection using GCamp3.0 detector. (A, E) Wild type wing imaginal discs representing
wingless (green) pattern (arrows) while (B, F) scrib knockdown wing disc tumor shows higher level
of Wg expression and (C, G) constitutive Hep (JNKK) activation further enhances Wg expression,
But (D, H) decreasing Hep expression reduces Wg expression in scrib knockdown tumor. Lower
panel (I-L) represent cytosolic Ca2+ (green) status in wild type wing disc and tumor tissue. (I) WT
shows low cytosolic Ca2+ (arrow) in comparison to (J) loss of scrib driven tumor while (K) Hep
activation further enhances cytosolic Ca2+ level and (L) reducing hep activity reduces Ca2+ level
relatively. (n=10).

3. Discussion:

Drosophila larval imaginal discs (e.g. wing imaginal disc) are epithelial monolayer
structures, which have been extensively used by researchers to study various aspects of
development and disease-biology, including cancer (Froldi et al., 2008). Most of the human
cancers are epithelial in origin and are characterised by loss of cell polarity (McCaffrey et al,
2011). Scrib is a well-studied cell polarity regulator and its loss-of-function is associated with
various forms of human-epithelial cancer (Kapil et al., 2017). In our study, we have knocked
down scrib gene in large area of wing imaginal disc to induce tumor growth, using UAS16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

GAL4 system. We confirmed the expression of Wing-GAL4 (used in this study) to large area
of the disc by GFP and LacZ expression analysis (Fig S1). Scrib immunostaining revealed the
reduced level of Scrib compared to wild type wing disc (Fig. S2). We reported that scrib
knockdown (UAS-ScribRNAi/WingGAL4) in large area of wing disc resulted in tumorous
growth causing absolute early pupal lethality (Fig. 1 A-F). Also, previous studies with various
alleles of scrib mutants had shown similar findings with varying degrees of developmental
disparity leading to embryonic lethality, wing disc tumor growth and pupal lethality (Bilder et
al, 2000 and Zeitler et al. 2004). Scrib knockdown driven tumor of wing imaginal disc might
have a systemic effect causing developmental defects associated with the early pupal lethality
(Clarevega et al 2015). We have analysed the role of JNK signalling in scrib knockdown
driven tumor, since previous studies reported the activation of JNK signalling upon loss of
cell polarity regulators but the precise role of JNK signalling in these tumors is unknown and
remained to be explored. First, we analysed the transcript levels of JNK by qPCR and the
status of phosho-JNK (p-JNK) by immunostaining in scrib knockdown tissues. We found that
scrib knockdown leads to transcriptional up-regulation of JNK as well as induction of JNK
signalling (Fig 2I). In Drosophila, active JNK signalling upon loss of cell-polarity regulator
Scrib has been shown to cooperate the oncogenic signals to cause over proliferation in eye
imaginal disc (Brumby et al., 2003). However, JNK mediated apoptosis has also been
reported in the removal of small scrib mutant clones in eye imaginal tissue (Chen et al.,
2011), suggesting the context dependent role of JNK signalling. In the current study, we
report that active JNK signalling induces tumorous growth upon scrib knockdown in large
area of wing imaginal disc.
To explore the role of JNK signalling in tumor progression, we examined the cell
proliferation and cell death status in scrib knockdown driven tumor. BrdU and TUNEL
assays revealed the presence of proliferating as well as apoptotic cells in the scrib knockdown
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

induced tumor. However, the apoptotic cells were majorly present towards edge of the
tumorous disc (Fig. 2 F) and proliferating cells were observed throughout the disc (Fig 2 H).
We found that genetically up regulated JNK signalling (through constitutively active hep,
UAS-HepAct) further induces the cell proliferation as well as cell deaths in the growing tumor,
though again the majority of apoptotic cells were present towards the edge (Fig 3. L).
Correspondingly, JNK signalling down regulation by UAS-HepRNAi in scrib knockdown
tumor reduces the number of apoptotic and proliferating cells relative to scrib knockdown
alone, however in this case the apoptotic cells were relatively more towards the wing pouch
and notum regions (Fig. 3 P). These observations clearly suggested the critical role of JNK
signalling in cell death and cell proliferation determination in scrib knockdown induced
tumor. Further, we analysed the fate of GFP marked scrib knockdown cells upon modulation
of JNK signalling. As tumor grows from early to late age, the GFP positive cells
progressively spread throughout the disc suggesting invasive nature of scrib abrogated cells
(Fig5 F-J). Moreover, JNK activation further cooperates with invasive property and leads to a
rapid growth of tumor from early age of development (Fig.5 K-O). Also, it is anticipated that
presence of GFP expressing cells in outer margin regions of the tumorous disc might be due
to competitive removal of wild type cells (Amoyel et al, 2014) as suggested by the presence
of apoptotic cells at outer margin area (Fig. 2F). Interestingly, JNK down-regulation in scrib
knockdown cells (Wing-Gal4>UAS-HepRNAi/UAS-GFP; UAS-ScribRNAi) restore normal wing
discs morphology with progressive removal of GFP expressing scrib knockdown cells from
the disc from an early age of development (Fig.5 P-T). Removal of GFP expressing scrib
knockdown cells from the disc suggested the cell-competition mediated removal of JNK
compromised scrib knockdown cells by wild type cells and restoring normal wing disc
morphology. Also, presence of apoptotic cells towards wing pouch and notum region further
strengthen the removal of scrib knockdown cells by neighbouring wild type cells (Fig. 3P).
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Progressive loss of GFP expressing scrib knockdown cells of wing disc show the cellcompetition at interface of wild type cells. Though, even at late stage presence of GFP
expressing cells in the core of wing pouch suggested that inner cells not facing direct cellcompetition are protected and must be slow growing. Wild type cells in the margins were
capable of removing the JNK compromised scrib abrogated cells to revert the wing disc
morphology leading to normal pupal development to distinct wing, eye and complete fly
development (Fig. 6). Hence, our study indicates that scrib knockdown cells in a large area
were group-protected and modulate the role of JNK signalling in cancer progression.
Parallelly, we suggest that the tumor growth upon p35 inhibited apoptosis in JNK diminished
scrib abrogated cells (Fig. 4) must be due to the ‘undead-cell’ behaviour of inner cells not
facing cell competition. These inner undead-cells might be supporting the survival of scrib
knockdown cells at wild type interface leading to over-proliferation. It has been reported that
undead-cells secret cell-growth promoting morphogenes like wg/dpp etc causing overproliferation (Huh JR et al; 2004). Also, wingless up-regulation along with JNK in groupprotected Rab5 mutants is known to supports such kind of cell-proliferation in wing disc
(Arias et al; 2014). Hence, the elevated level of wingless (Wnt) and armadillo (β-catenin) in
scrib abrogated tumor might be a suggestive cause of cell proliferation even with JNK
activation (Fig 7). Further, altered wingless expression in lgl mutant (Mukherjee and Roy,
1995) has indicated the role of wingless in tumor progression upon loss of cell polarity
regulators. Also, the wingless up-regulation is required in mutant cells to make them ‘supercompetitor’ to protect their removal by neighbouring wild type cells through cell-competition
(Tamori et al, 2011; Amoyel et al, 2014). These super-competitor cells with enhanced wg
expression induce apoptosis in nearby wild type cells, consequently the dying cells also
release morphogenes like wingless supporting compensatory cell-proliferation (Amoyel et al
2014; Claver and Torres, 2016). In scrib abrogated discs, the presence of higher number of
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

actively dividing cells in close vicinity of apoptotic cells at interface of wild type cells
suggested wingless mediated compensatory proliferation (Fig S6).
In addition, the previous report by Zhu et al have proposed the role of JNK signalling in cell
polarity regulator lgl mutant cells to regulate cell-proliferation, cell-polarity and actin
cytoskeleton dynamics (Zhu et al 2010). Likewise, we have found that scrib knockdown cells
with active JNK signalling show the disrupted cell-polarity and actin cytoskeleton
arrangements (Fig S5). The suggestive cause of JNK mediated actin remodelling and cell
polarity disruption might be due to activation of Wnt/β-catenin/Ca2+ signalling pathways
(Tejada-romero et al., 2015; Zhan et al., 2017). Moreover, the JNK mediated transcriptional
regulation of Wnt has been reported in eye disc to modulate cell deaths (Zhang et al., 2015;
Tare et al., 2016). Further, we have analysed that JNK activation induces Wnt (Wingless)
expression in scrib abrogated cells along with increased intracellular Ca2+ level in cytoplasm
(Fig 7. I-L). Wnt expression is known to elevate cytoplasmic Ca2+ to facilitate β-catenin entry
to the nucleus and also induces non-canonical Wnt/Ca2+signalling which regulates the cellpolarity and actin dynamics (Thrasivoulou et al., 2013; Zhan et al., 2017). Hence, our data
suggested that in scrib abrogated wing imaginal disc JNK mediated Wnt non-canonical
signalling must be influencing cell-polarity and actin cytoskeleton arrangement.
In conclusion, our findings highlight the fact that scrib knockdown induced JNK signalling
disrupts actin dynamics and induces cell proliferation through activation of Wnt pathway.
More importantly, the cellular microenvironment like ‘group protection’ and ‘undead cells’
behaviour modulates the action of JNK signalling to augment carcinogenesis (Fig8) in large
area scrib abrogated cells.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 8. Schematic diagram representing cell-competition and ‘undead cell’ mediated tumor
growth upon scrib abrogation in large area of wing imaginal disc. (A) Shows active JNK pathway
in scrib knockdown cells acts non-autonomously to remove surrounding wild type cells through cellcompetition and active JNK induces cell proliferation by inducing wg signalling, (B) shows
competitive removal of JNK down regulated scrib knockdown cells by wild type cells to restore the
tissue morphology while (C) represents apoptosis inhibition by overexpression of p35 in JNK
compromised scrib knockdown cells interestingly restores the proliferation potential of the scrib
abrogated cells. In set of lower projected cells (D) represent a proposed mechanism protecting scrib
and JNK knockdown cells from cell-competition mediated removal by neighbouring wild type cells
and leading to over proliferation as ‘undead’ core cells supporting the survival of marginal cells
through wg signaling making them super-competitor.

4. Material and methods
4.1. Fly stocks and culture conditions
Wild type (Oregon-R), UAS-scribRNAi(#35748),UAS-GFP (#1521), UAS-LacZ, UASHepACT(#9306), UAS-HepRNAi (#2190-R2), (UAS-GCamp3.0); DM/TM3sb, Sp/Cyo;
dCO2/TM6B and Wing-GAL4 (#32120) stocks used in study, were procured from
Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center, USA. Drosophila flies were cultured on standard

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cornmeal agar media and stocks were maintained in BOD with alternative light-dark cycle at
24±1˚C.
4.2. X-Gal staining
Third instar larvae were dissected in 1X PBS to isolate wing imaginal discs in cavity slides
followed by washing with 50mM phosphate buffer (pH 8) then fixed in 2.5% gluteraldehyde
for 10 min each at room temperature. Fixative was removed and tissues were washed with
wash buffer (50mM PB) three times each, then X-gal solution was added and kept in dark at
37°C for 30 min followed by washing with wash buffer to remove staining solution.
Imaginal discs were transferred onto fresh slides and mounted in 50% glycerol, cover slips
sealed with DPX to observe under compound microscope.
4.3. Immunohistochemistry
Third instar larvae were dissected in 1X PBS to separate wing imaginal discs and then fixed
in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 minutes at room temperature followed by washing
with PBST (1X PBS and 0.1% Triton X-100), 3 times for 10 min each. Then wing imaginal
discs were incubated in the blocking buffer containing 3% bovine serum albumin in PBS
0.3% Tween-20 for 1hr at room temperature. Tissues were incubated with primary antibody
in blocking solution for overnight followed by washing with PBST, 3 times for 15 min each.
Then the tissues were incubated with secondary antibody in 1XPBS for 3 hr at room
temperature followed by washing with PBST, 3 times for 10 min each. These tissues were
further incubated with Phalloidin (1:50) for 45 min at room temperature followed by washing
with PBST for 3 times 5 min each and then incubated with DAPI (1µg/mL in 1X PBS) for 10
min, washed in 1X PBS 3 times for 5 min each and subsequently mounted on glass slides in
DABCO. Images were obtained on confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM-510 Meta). Primary
antibodies used were: goat anti-scrib (Santa Cruz) at 1:50, mouse anti-Wnt (DSHB) at 1:30,
mouse anti-Dlg (DSHB) at 1:30, mouse anti-BrdU (DSHB) at 1:20, rabbit anti-pJNK
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Promega) at 1:100, and Secondary antibodies were anti-goat-IgG-TRITC (1:200), antimouse-IgG-FITC (1:200) and anti-mouse-IgG-TRITC (1:200) were used for respective
experiments.
4.4. BrdU staining
Third instar larvae were dissected in 1XPBS and wing imaginal discs were isolated,
incubated in BrdU solution (0.01mg/ml in 1XPBS) for 1hr at RT followed by 3 times
washing with 0.1% PBST for 5min each then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min
and followed by 3 times washing with PBST for 5 min each, then treated with 2N HCl for 20
min and washed 3 times with PBST for 5min each followed by blocking in blocking solution
for 1hr at room temperature then incubated with anti-BrdU primary antibody (mouse-antiBrdU, 1:100) for overnight and washing with PBST for 3 times 5 min each and then
incubated with secondary antibody for 3 hr and washing with PBST for 3 times 5 min each
and then mounted wing discs in DABCO solution to observe under confocal microscope.
4.5. TUNEL assay
Third instar larvae were dissected to isolate wing imaginal discs in 1XPBS followed by
fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15min and washed for 3 times with 1X PBS followed
by permeabilization with 0.1% Triton-X in 1XPBS for 5min and washed three times with 1X
PBS 5 min each followed by incubation with TUNEL Assay reaction mixture at 37°C for 2 hr
as per manufacturer’s instruction followed by washing with 1XPBS for two times 5 min each
and then discs were mounted in DABCO to observe under confocal microscope.
4.6. Real time PCR
Total RNA was isolated from 60 wing imaginal discs each from 3rd instar larvae of respective
genotypes using TRI reagent (TAKARA) as per manufacturer’s protocol. High quality RNA
from both the samples (as estimated by absorbance ratio A260/280) was reverse transcribed
for cDNA synthesis through reverse transcriptase PCR. cDNA of the respective sample was
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

used as template DNA for quantification of jnk normalised against gapdh using specific
primer

sets

of:

jnk:

FP-CACCAACACTACACCGTCGA;

RP-

AAGCGGCGCATACTATTCCT, gapdh: FP- TAAATTCGACTCGACTCACGGT; RPCTCCACCACATACTCGGCTC by SYBR green JUMPSTART TAQ Ready mix
(Thermofisher Scientific) using real time thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems 7500 real time
PCR). All samples were run in triplicate and expression levels were determined by
calculating (ΔCT values) threshold cycle analysis.
4.7. Microscopy and image processing
Samples were analysed by confocal microscopy using LSM-510 Meta microscope. Optical
sections were captured using ZEN Black 2009/LSM image browser software followed by
processing in Adobe Photoshop(R) 7.0 to assemble the images.
Conflict of interest
None
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a research grant (P07/598) awarded to S.S by the Science and
Engineering Research Board, India and authors are highly grateful to SERB for financial
support (SERB_2015-19). The authors would like to greatly acknowledge Cytogenetics
Laboratory, Dept. of Zoology for providing Confocal microscope facility, also ISLS-BHU
and UPE-BHU for Nanodrop, Real time PCR and other routine facilities. One of the authors
(AKY) is grateful to ICMR and DST-PURSE for providing financial support in the form of
Senior Research Fellowship.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Amoyel, M. and Bach, E. A. (2014). Cell competition : how to eliminate your neighbours.
988–1000.
Barmchi, M. P., Gilbert, M., Thomas, M., Banks, L., Zhang, B. and Auld, V. J. (2016). A
Drosophila Model of HPV E6-Induced Malignancy Reveals Essential Roles for Magi
and the Insulin Receptor. 1–28.
Bilder D, Perrimon N. (2000). Localization of apical epithelial determinants by the
basolateral PDZ protein Scribble. Nature, 403, 676-680.
Bilder, D. (2004). Epithelial polarity and proliferation control : links from the Drosophila
neoplastic tumor suppressors. 1909–1925.
Brumby, A. M. and Richardson, H. E. (2003). scribble mutants cooperate with oncogenic
Ras or Notch to cause neoplastic overgrowth in Drosophila. 22, 5769–5779.
Chen, C., Schroeder, M. C., Kango-singh, M., Tao, C. and Halder, G. (2011). Tumor
suppression by cell competition through regulation of the Hippo pathway.
Clarevega AF and Bilder D (2015). Malignant Drosophila tumors interrupt insulin signaling
to induce cachexia-like wasting. Dev Cell. 33, 47–55.
Claver, C. and Torres, M. (2016). Cell Competition : Mechanisms and Physiological Roles.
De A (2011). Wnt/Ca2+ signaling pathway: a brief overview. Acta Biochimica et
Biophysica Sinica, 43, 745–756.
Efremov YM, Dokrunova AA and Sokolova OS et al. (2015). Distinct impact of targeted
actin cytoskeleton reorganization on mechanical properties of normal and malignant
cells. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1853 (2015) 3117–3125.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ellenbroek, S. I. J., Iden, S. and Collard, J. G. (2012). Seminars in Cancer Biology Cell
polarity proteins and cancer. Semin. Cancer Biol.22, 208–215.
Enomoto, M., Vaughen, J. and Igaki, T. (2015). Non-autonomous overgrowth by
oncogenic niche cells : Cellular cooperation and competition in tumorigenesis. 106,.
Feng Y, Zhang Z, and Zhou Y. (2016). Effects of Scribble on mammary tumorigenesis and
metastasis in breast cancer. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 9(9), 9325-9330.
Froldi F, Ziosi M and Grifini D et al (2008). Drosophila Lethal Giant Larvae Neoplastic
Mutant as a Genetic Tool for Cancer Modeling. Current Genomics, 9, 147-154.
Grifoni, D., Froldi, F. and Pession, A. (2013). Connecting epithelial polarity , proliferation
and cancer in Drosophila : the many faces of lgl loss of function. 687, 677–687.
Huh, JR., Guo, M. and Bruce. A.H (2004). Compensatory Proliferation Induced by Cell
Death in the Drosophila Wing Disc Requires Activity of the Apical Cell Death Caspase
Dronc in a Nonapoptotic Role. 14, 1262–1266.
Humbert, P. O., Dow, L. E. and Russell, S. M. (2006). The Scribble and Par complexes in
polarity and migration: friends or foes? Trends Cell Biol.16, 622–630.
Igaki T, Pagliarini R.A and Xu T, et al. (2006). Loss of Cell Polarity Drives Tumor Growth
and Invasion through JNK Activation in Drosophila. Current Biology.16, 1139–1146.
Kranjec, C., Tomai, V., Massimi, P., Nicolaides, L., Doorbar, J. and Banks, L. (2016).
The high-risk HPV E6 target scribble ( hScrib ) is required for HPV E6 expression in
cervical tumour-derived cell lines. 2, 70–77.
Leong GR, Goulding KR and Brumby AM et al (2009). scribble mutants promote aPKC
and JNK-dependent epithelial neoplasia independently of Crumbs. BMC Biology, 7, 118.
Levayer, R. and Moreno, E. (2013). Mechanisms of cell competition : Themes and
variations. 200, 689–698.
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Mukherjee, A. and Roy, J. K. (1995). l ( 2 ) gl , alter the expression of wingless in
Drosophila. 20, 333–339.
Pagliarini RA and Xu T (2003). A Genetic Screen in Drosophila for Metastatic Behavior.
Science, 302, 1227-1231.
Pearson HB, Perez-Mancera PA, Dow LE, et al. (2011). Scrib expression is deregulated in
human prostate cancer, and its deficiency in mice promotes prostate neoplasia. J Clin
Invest. 121(11), 4257-4267.
Perez-garijo, A., Shlevkov, E. and Morata, G. (2009). The role of Dpp and Wg in
compensatory proliferation and in the formation of hyperplastic overgrowths caused by
apoptotic cells in the Drosophila wing disc. 1177, 1169–1177.
Rallis, A., Moore, C. and Ng, J. (2010). Signal strength and signal duration define two
distinct aspects of JNK-regulated axon stability. Dev. Biol. 339, 65–77.
Royer, C. and Lu, X. (2011). Epithelial cell polarity : a major gatekeeper against cancer ?
95, 1470–1477.
Ryoo, H. D., Gorenc, T. and Steller, H. (2004). Apoptotic Cells Can Induce Compensatory
Cell Proliferation through the JNK and the Wingless Signaling Pathways. 7, 491–501.
Saavedra, V. and Morata, G. (2013). Cell competition may function either as tumoursuppressing or as tumour-stimulating factor in Drosophila. 33, 4377–4384.
Solinas, G. and Becattini, B. (2017). JNK at the crossroad of obesity , insulin resistance ,
and cell stress response. Mol. Metab.6, 174–184.
Sun, G. and Irvine, K. D. (2011). Regulation of Hippo signaling by Jun kinase signaling
during compensatory cell proliferation and regeneration , and in neoplastic tumors. 350,
139–151.
Tamori, Y. and Deng, W. (2011). Cell competition and its implications for development and
cancer. J. Genet. Genomics38, 483–495.
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Tare, M., Sarkar, A., Bedi, S., Kango-singh, M. and Singh, A. (2016). Cullin-4 regulates
Wingless and JNK signaling-mediated cell death in the Drosophila eye. 7, e2566–13.
Tejada-romero, B., Carter, J., Mihaylova, Y., Neumann, B. and Aboobaker, A. A.
(2015). Stem cells and regeneration jnk signalling is necessary for a Wnt- and stem celldependent regeneration programme. 2413–2424.
Thrasivoulou C, Millar Michael and Ahmed A (2013). Activation of Intracellular Calcium
by Multiple Wnt Ligands and Translocation of -Catenin into the Nucleus. The Journal of
Biological Chemistry, 288, 35651–35659.
Thrasivoulou, C., Millar, M. and Ahmed, A. (2013). Activation of Intracellular Calcium by
Multiple Wnt Ligands and Translocation of ␤ -Catenin into the Nucleus. 288, 35651–
35659.
Uhlirova, M., Jasper, H. and Bohmann, D. (2005). Non-cell-autonomous induction of
tissue overgrowth by JNK ͞ Ras cooperation in a Drosophila tumor model. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 102(37): 13123–13128
Verghese, S., Waghmare, I., Kwon, H., Hanes, K. and Kango-singh, M. (2012). Scribble
Acts in the Drosophila Fat-Hippo Pathway to Regulate Warts Activity. 7, 1–10.
Wang, M., Zhao, J., Zhang, L., Wei, F., Lian, Y., Wu, Y., Gong, Z., Zhang, S., Zhou, J.,
Cao, K., et al. (2017). Role of tumor microenvironment in tumorigenesis. J. Cancer 8,
761–773.
Zeitler J, Hsu CP, Bilder D, et al. (2004). Domains controlling cell polarity and
proliferation in the Drosophila tumor suppressor Scribble. The Journal of Cell Biology,
6, 1137-1146.
Zhan, T., Rindtorff, N. and Boutros, M. (2017). Wnt signaling in cancer. Nat. Publ. Gr.36,
1461–1473.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Zhang, S., Chen, C., Wu, C., Yang, Y., Li, W. and Xue, L. (2015). The canonical Wg
signaling modulates Bsk-mediated cell death in Drosophila. Cell Death Dis.6, e1713.
Zhu, M., Xin, T., Li, M. et al (2010). Activation of JNK signaling links lgl mutations to
disruption of the cell polarity and epithelial organization in Drosophila imaginal discs.
20, 242–245.

Supplementary Information

Figure S1. Wing-GAL4 expression pattern analysed by GFP and LacZ staining in wing
imaginal discs. A. GFP expresses in the wing pouch (red circle) and notum (black circle)
regions of disc, though absent at the margins (yellow arrows). B. LacZ staining shows similar
expression pattern.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S2. Expression level of Scrib as observed by immunostaining. A , Wild type (WT)
shows high level of Scrib (red) compared to B, Scrib knockdown (ScribRNAi) tumorous wing
imaginal discs.

Figure S3. Cyclin-E, a cell proliferation marker, is over expressed in ScribRNAi. Cyclin-E
(green) and nuclear staining (blue) in wild type (A-D) and ScribRNAi (E-F) wing imaginal
discs. B, F. Magnified images, cyclin-E expression is higher in ScribRNAi tumor tissue as
compared to wild type. C and G, nuclear staining with DAPI for wild type and ScribRNAi
respectively. D and H, merged images for DAPI and Cyclin-E in wild type and ScribRNAi
respectively. Note that Cyclin-E shows nuclear localization.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S4. Confocal images of wing imaginal discs representing actin cytoskeleton
arrangement and cell polarity. (A) WT wing imaginal disc showing regular actin (red)
arrangement and wing pouch (WP) while (B) scrib knockdown causes tumorous growth and
distorted actin cytoskeleton arrangement, (C) Constitutive Hep (JNKK) active expression
along with scrib knockdown also shows the actin disruption and aggregation while (D) loss of
Hep (JNKK) activity by HepRNAi in scrib knockdown tumor restores actin cytoskeleton
arrangement and regular wing structure with wing pouch (WP) formation. (E-H) magnified
images represents (E) Wild type wing pouch region with elongated cells (*) and folds (**)
while (F-G) shows circular cells and distorted actin arrangement in scrib knockdown and
along with active Hep activity respectively while (H) down regulation of Hep activity shows
rescue with well-arranged actin cytoskeleton near to wild type. (I-T) represents dlg (green), a
baso-lateral cell polarity marker, staining (I, M, Q) Wild type represents regular cell polarity
in XY, XZ and YZ plane respectively while (J, N, R) loss of scrib driven tumor shows loss of
31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cell polarity with miss localized Dlg protein. Likewise, (K, O, S) constitutive Hep activated
scrib knockdown cells also shows the loss of cell polarity, however (L, P, I) reducing Hep
activity restores loss of cell polarity in scrib knockdown tumor.

Figure S5. Confocal images of wing imaginal discs representing β-catenin/Armadillo by
immunostaining. (A) wild type disc shows armadillo staining (green). (B) phalloidin
staining represents actin arrangement in wild type disc (C) merged image of A&B suggests
membranous localization of armadillo. While, (D-F) represent armadillo and phalloidin
staining in scrib knockdown tumor and suggests cytoplasmic presence of armadillo beside
membrane. Also, (G-I) constitutive JNK activation (ScribRNAi,HepACT) enhances cytoplasmic
localization of armadillo. While, (J-L) down regulation of JNK signaling (ScribRNA;HepRNAi)
restores membranous localization of armadillo.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/721407; this version posted August 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure. S6. Confocal projection representing BrdU and TUNEL assay in scrib abrogated
tumor. (A) & (B) represent BrdU (red) and TUNEL (green) positive cells respectively. (C)
Shows merged image for BrdU and TUNEL activity. Lower panel magnified images (D-F)
show that actively dividing cells are in close proximity to apoptotic cells (blue arrow). It
suggests the apoptosis induced cell proliferation in scrib abrogated tumor.

33

