bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Glymphatic Optimal Mass Transport with Lagrangian Workflow Reveals Advective and
Diffusion Driven Solute Transport

Sunil Koundal1o, Rena Elkin2o, Saad Nadeem3, Yuechuan Xue1, Stefan Constantinou1, Simon
Sanggaard1, Xiaodan Liu1, Brittany Monte1, Feng Xu4, William Van Nostrand4, Maiken
Nedergaard5, Hedok Lee1, Joanna Wardlaw6, Helene Benveniste1+ and Allen Tannenbaum2*+
*

Corresponding Author
These authors contributed equally to this work
+
Co-Senior Authors
o

(1) Department of Anesthesiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
(2) Departments of Computer Science/Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY, USA
(3) Department of Medical Physics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, NY, NY, USA
(4) George & Anne Ryan Institute for Neuroscience, Department of Biomedical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Rhode Island, RI, USA
(5) Center for Translational Neuromedicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
NY, USA
(6) Brain Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences, Dementia Research
Institute at the University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom

Acknowledgements: NIH R01AG048769, RF1 AG053991, R01AG057705 and Leducq
Foundation (16/CVD/05)
Author contributions:
AT and HB conceived the study; AT and RE developed the rOMT algorithm and Lagrangian
framework analysis; RE performed all rOMT processing; SN provided key suggestions for
processing the Lagrangian analysis; HB performed all rOMT post-processing and designed figures
with contributions from RE; HB performed kinetic analysis; SK, SS and XL performed all
glymphatics experiments. SK executed all morphometric analysis including brain atlas
segmentation; HL designed all pulse-sequences and other hardware for the MRI experiments and
computational pipeline for the volumetric analysis. SS, FX, WVN performed the
immunohistochemistry. SC performed qPCR analysis. YX performed the quantitative AQP4
analysis. HB, RE and AT wrote the manuscript. JW advised on the SHRSP animal model and
cerebral small vessel disease. MN advised on the glymphatic system. All authors posed scientific
questions, read and revised the manuscript. All authors edited and reviewed the paper.
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
The presence of advection in neuropil is contested and solute transport is claimed to occur by
diffusion only. To address this controversy, we implemented a regularized version of the optimal
mass transport (rOMT) problem, wherein the advection/diffusion equation is the only a priori
assumption required. rOMT analysis with a Lagrangian perspective of glymphatic system (GS)
transport revealed that solute speed was faster in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) compared to grey and
white matter. rOMT analysis also demonstrated 2-fold differences in regional particle speed
within the brain parenchyma. Collectively, these results imply that advective transport dominates
in CSF while diffusion and advection both contribute to transport in parenchyma. In rats with
chronic hypertension, solute transport in perivascular spaces (PVS) and PVS-to-tissue transfer was
slower compared to normotension. Thus, the analytical framework of rOMT provides novel
insights in local variation and dynamics of GS transport that may have implications for
neurodegenerative diseases.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
The glymphatic system (GS) is described as a perivascular transit passageway for cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) for exchange with interstitial fluid (ISF), thereby facilitating waste drainage from the
brain1, 2. Investigations of GS function have escalated given its important role in Ab1 and tau3
drainage from brain and the inferred implication for neurodegeneration including Alzheimer’s
disease2, 4-7. The glymphatic system (GS) hypothesis states that advective driven CSF influx from
the perivascular spaces (PVS) into brain parenchyma clears solutes1, 8. Advective streams in
parenchyma would speed up solute transport9-11. This concept is contested with the argument that
advection does not occur in the neuropil and that solute transport occurs by diffusion only12-18. No
single study has unequivocally determined which mode of solute transport is prevailing inside the
brain proper. This gap in knowledge has significantly impeded exploration of the GS and has raised
questions regarding its importance for brain health, disease, and its potential as a therapeutic target
against neurodegeneration.
The GS is comprised of PVS, which connect with the ISF space surrounding all cells in
parenchyma1. Specifically, the PVS connect with ISF via the aquaporin 4 (AQP4) water channels
on astrocytic end-feet and through the small gaps between the overlapping astrocytic end-foot
processes1. Solute transport in the PVS along pial arteries has been shown to be an advectivedriven (bulk flow) process1, 19-21. Recently, various computational analyses and simulations have
been performed to better understand the driving mechanisms of transport across PVS boundaries
and through ISF space22-24. Conservation principles are typically used to derive these simulations,
a popular one being the porous media model25-27. Ray et al.26 proposed adding an advection term
of this form to the (diffusive) porous media model and their simulations indicated the presence of
advective transport in the ISF. Simulations are very effective for distinguishing between advection
and diffusion, but when applied in vivo, inferable insight becomes limited. The key reason for this
problem, lies in the fact that modeling in live brain requires accurate delineation of anatomical
boundaries and knowledge of various kinematic parameters many of which are unknown.
To the best of our knowledge, no current method can provide local dynamic analysis or inform on
GS transport modes across compartments in the live brain. Therefore, we now introduce novel
computational methods to improve the interpretation of GS transport studies. Specifically, we
address two overarching and unresolved questions: (1) Can we obtain voxel-level information on
solute transport across all tissue compartments circumventing the problem of varying GS transport
kinetics and without the need of specifying all of the material properties for simulations? (2) Can
we infer on the existence of the two types of transport (diffusion and advection) in the different
GS compartments? To address these questions, we propose implementing techniques from the
theory of optimal mass transport (OMT)28-30. The OMT problem is centuries old and has impacted
many topics of research in the physical sciences, economics, computer science and image
processing28, 31-33. Given initial and final mass distributions, OMT admits a powerful dynamic
computational fluid formulation that gives an optimal interpolation path of minimal energy among
all possible interpolations that preserve mass34. In this way, OMT can be formulated as a
variational problem based on the principle of least action. A particularly attractive feature of OMT
is that one obtains unique solutions to the model, not by imposing smoothness, but rather by
seeking flows that minimize the expended transport energy. In the classical formulation of OMT,
the continuity equation only involves advection. Considering that diffusion is assumed to be
always occurring in the brain, we have added a diffusion term in the work presented here. We refer
to our modified OMT formulation with the advection/diffusion equation as the regularized OMT
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

problem (rOMT). We utilized an associated Lagrangian formulation of rOMT for the construction
of ‘pathlines’ to effectively extract and visualize GS transport flows over a predetermined set of
time frames in one comprehensive figure. Time-varying particle (a.k.a. solute) attributes associated
with the pathlines, such as ‘speed’ were also computed. As GS dysfunction is reported in
neurodegeneration particularly where vascular dysfunction may be involved7, 35, 36, we applied our
novel rOMT framework to characterize modes of solute transport in an animal model of cerebral
small vessel disease.
In normal brains, rOMT analysis revealed that both advection and diffusion terms were required
for pathlines and trajectory speed in the modeled images to resemble GS transport patterns in live
brain. Moreover, particle speed varied strikingly across tissue compartments with faster solute
passage in CSF when compared to parenchyma. Within the brain parenchyma, 2-fold regional
differences in solute speed were also documented. Collectively, these novel results in live rat brain
demonstrate that advective transport is dominating in the non-cellular CSF spaces and that slower
diffusion contributes to GS transport as the solute is transferred from the PVS into ISF.
Interestingly, in chronic hypertension, PVS-CSF flow and solute transport across the PVS into
parenchyma were impaired. We believe that our new rOMT Lagrangian framework analysis will
prove informative for characterizing local variation in GS transport in neurogenerative states that
would otherwise remain controversial.
Results
Kinetic analysis of GS transport in normal and hypertensive rats
We first characterized GS transport in normotensive Wistar Kyoto (WKY) and spontaneous
hypertensive stroke prone (SHRSP) rats using kinetic modeling8, 37, 38. To measure GS transport,
we used a dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance image (DCE-MRI) technique by
infusion of 559 Da sized gadoteric acid (Gd-DOTA, 20 µL of 1:37 Gd-DOTA diluted with sterile
water at a rate of 1.5 µL/min) into the CSF via the cisterna magna39. DCE-MRIs covering the entire
brain were acquired every 5-min for 2.5 hrs on a 9.4T MRI at a voxel resolution 0.30x0.30x0.30
mm3. In normal rats, the tracer was observed in the subarachnoid CSF space along the large basilar
artery, circle of Willis and olfactory artery within 10-15 min and later emerged along branches of
the posterior cerebral arteries which penetrate into the hippocampus and thalamus (Figs. 1a, b).
Voxel-based morphometric segmentation of each brain into CSF, grey matter (GM) and white
matter (WM) tissue masks derived from anatomical proton-weighted MRIs of the two rat strains
(see methods) were used to calculate influx and efflux rate constants as well as tracer distribution
volumes across brain compartments. A known feature of the spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR)
strain used in previous GS studies37, 40 is innate hydrocephalus41, 42, which can affect CSF fluid
dynamics long-term43. However, no major morphometric differences were observed between
WKY and SHRSP rats, and hydrocephalus was not present in SHRSP rats (Supplementary Fig.
1).
Globally, brain tissue uptake of Gd-DOTA was strikingly different between the two strains (Fig.
1b) with reduced uptake in both GM and WM compartments of SHRSP when compared to WKY
rats (Figs. 1c, d). Peak signal magnitude in GM and WM was significantly reduced in SHRSP
when compared to WKY rats (Fig. 1c, d). Kinetic one-compartment modelling with the input given
as the MRI measure of time-varying Gd-DOTA-induced signal levels in CSF, GM and WM
compartments (Figs. 1c, d, inserts) were used to calculate the influx coefficient K1 and efflux
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

rate constant k2 as well as the distribution volume of the tracer V(t)37. The GM K1 influx rate was
~20% lower in SHRSP rats compared to WKY rats (0.007 ± 0.001 versus 0.009 ± 0.001, p< 0.002,
Mann-Whitney) with no significant differences observed in WM (Fig. 1e). However, model fit
results were more variable in WM when compared to GM. No differences in efflux k2 rates were
observed across tissue compartments and strains over the 160 min experimental time window (Fig.
1f). Gd-DOTA tracer uptake, as measured by the distribution volume V(t), was 23% and 10%
lower in GM and WM, respectively, in SHRSP when compared to WKY rats (Fig. 1g). Kinetic 1compartment modeling applied to data extracted from pre-selected brain regions of interest failed
(as evaluated by ‘goodness-of-fit’ parameters) and regional GS transport differences across strains
could not be explored using this approach.

Figure 1: Kinetic modeling of GS transport in normotensive and hypertensive rats. (a) Glymphatic transport was visualized and
measured in live rats through administration of Gd-DOTA into CSF via the cisterna magna using dynamic contrast enhanced
magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI). 3D DCE-MRIs were acquired every 5 min to track Gd-DOTA transport (measured as
% signal changes from baseline) into CSF, white matter (WM) and grey matter (GM) compartments over 2.5 hrs. (b) Volumerendered color-coded maps of Gd-DOTA induced signal change over 110 min in a WKY rat (top) and SHRSP rat (bottom). It is
clear that Gd-DOTA uptake is reduced in the SHRSP rat when compared to WKY. (c) Mean signal changes (normalized to signal
in CSF compartment) captured in the GM compartment of WKY (blue circles) and SHRSP (gray circles) rats over the 160 min
experimental time window. Insert: grey matter mask is shown in blue overlaid on the anatomical MRI. Peak magnitude in GM at
~70 min of circulation was significantly decreased in SHRSP when compared to WKY (p=0.022). (d) Mean signal changes
(normalized to signal in CSF compartment) in WM of WKY (blue circles) and SHRSP (gray circles) over the 160 min experimental
time window. The insert shows the WM mask in red overlaid on the anatomical template. Peak magnitude in WM at ~60 min of
circulation was significantly decreased in SHRSP when compared to WKY (p=0.022). (e) Mean K1 influx rate calculated from 1compartment kinetic modeling is significantly reduced in GM but not WM of SHRSP compared to WKY rats. (f) Mean efflux rates
were similar across GM and WM compartments and no differences were observed across strains. (g) Distribution volumes of GdDOTA were significantly higher in GM and WM of WKY when compared to SHRSP rats. Data are mean ± SD. Mann-Whitney test,
*significant at level alpha=0.05.

rOMT framework for tracking advection and diffusion modes of GS transport
The rOMT formulation with the inclusion of both advection and diffusion terms in the constraint
(continuity) equation is described in detail in the Methods section. Here we highlight that the
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lagrangian formulation was used to construct so-called ‘pathlines’ for visualizing GS transport
flows in one comprehensive figure, derived from the rOMT returned velocity field and interpolated
images (see methods and Supplementary Fig. 2). As such, a Lagrangian pathline traces the
trajectory of a specific particle over a pre-defined time interval. A particle may refer to a parcel of
mass or an individual substance. For our purposes, we use particle interchangeably with solute.
Observations of particle attributes, such as ‘speed,’ are made from the vantage point of the
particular particle as it traverses its trajectory. In this way, ‘pathlines’ and ‘speed-lines’ encapsulate
the moving particle dynamics in the GS network in a single entity. Additional information, such
as flow volume (size of the pathline network), reflecting the total flux of particles, is extracted
from the pathlines and used in the following for analyzing GS transport across tissue compartments
and brain regions. For ease of narration, we refer to the extraction and visualization of the
Lagrangian representation of Glymphatic Dynamics as our GLaD framework (Supplementary
Fig. 2). rOMT+GLaD analysis was performed on DCE-MRI images taken over the 120 min
interval starting at the time of peak signal (Supplementary Fig. 2a). This time interval afforded
the best representation of GS transport because the signal-to-noise ratio is maximized (peak) and
redistribution of Gd-DOTA tracer into whole brain parenchyma is maximized.
Here we also note that the rOMT algorithm captures the Fick’s law aspect of the flow model,
namely that the diffusion mode of particle transport is controlled by the gradient of the
concentration. This was accomplished using a custom built ‘diffusion’ phantom incorporating the
microdialysis technique44 (Supplementary Fig. 3 and Movie 1). The rOMT model was applied to
the DCE-MRI data acquired in the diffusion phantom. Knowing that the solute transport in the
phantom was solely diffusive, we examined how our model performed if we forced fictitious
advective transport. This was done by using very low diffusivity values that were intentionally
insufficient to mimic the diffusing intensity patterns observed in the DCE-MRIs. This numerical
intervention thereby forced advection to compensate for the lack of diffusion in the modeling of
interpolated images. Although the advective and diffusive fluxes influence each other (see
Methods), the advective flux is primarily influenced by time-varying changes in voxel intensity
while the diffusive flux is primarily influenced by spatial variations. Attempting to account for
both temporal and spatial changes in intensity with advection alone resulted in an irregular flow
field in the interpolated images. It therefore was not surprising that efforts to extract meaningful
(smooth) pathlines with our aforementioned GLaD framework failed on the phantom data under
these conditions. Next, we ran the rOMT model on the DCE-MRI diffusion phantom data again,
this time with an appropriate diffusivity value (experimentally determined). The resulting flow
field was governed by the diffusive flux, as expected. As shown (Supplementary Movie 1),
diffusive flux vectors point from voxels with higher intensity toward voxels with lower intensity
and there is near-perfect consistency between the acquired DCE-MRI images (Fig. 2a) and the
returned interpolated model images (Fig. 2b). This numerical experiment proved informative for
understanding the advantages of adding the diffusion term to the classical dynamic OMT
formulation and the roles of each transport mode (see methods).
Diffusion and advection constraints are both required for matching an rOMT model
Adding diffusion in the rOMT model was required for consistency between GS transport patterns
observed in the live rat brain (Fig. 2c) and is one of the key features of rOMT transport. In order
to choose an appropriate diffusivity value, we tested multiple values and examined how the flow
fields changed. Specifically, we computed streamlines from the rOMT derived velocity fields at
each time step along with the corresponding speeds. Streamlines are curves that are tangent to
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the velocity field at a fixed time, informing the collective instantaneous behavior of the flow. We
chose this approach over the GLaD-pathline analysis in order to investigate the ‘smoothness’ of
the flow field at individual time steps, which should be directly affected by diffusion. A
representative example of speed (color-coded) from a WKY rat along the streamlines is shown in
Figs. 2d-f illustrating the effect of increasing the strength of the diffusion term ‘σ2’ in the rOMT
algorithm. With either no diffusion (Fig. 2d) or too much diffusion (Fig. 2f), the captured
peripheral behavior is dubiously overactive while information about the flow in the deeper
regions, where parenchymal transport of interest occurs, is altogether unrealized. We determined
that an intermediate amount of diffusion (σ2 =0.002) was required (Fig. 2e) in order to replicate
observed GS transport in both peripheral and central regions (see the Methods section for a more
detailed discussion). This led us to conclude that parenchymal GS transport is governed by both
advection and diffusion. We also note that future work will entail improvements in the diffusion
model incorporating, for example, spatially varying diffusion as new developments in the
detailed understanding of diffusion in tissue becomes available.

a

DCE-MRI

%Signal change
500

c
3 mm

3.5

d

‘Ground truth’
DCE-MRI data

0

Speed
(a.u.)
0.8

Diffusive flux ( )

b

rOMT image

Image
intensity
(a.u.)

e

f
0.0
3 mm

0.0

Figure 2: Diffusion is required for rOMT model data to capture in vivo GS transport patterns. (a) Agar distribution after ~ 2 hrs
of diffusion, as captured with contrast-enhanced MRI, is shown in grayscale. The diffusive direction, proportional to the negative
of the image gradient, is shown by the green arrows. (b) The corresponding rOMT-returned image is shown in grayscale with
diffusive flux vectors characterizing the flow behavior and in alignment with Fick’s law are overlaid in green for comparison to
‘ground truth’ (a). (c) Whole brain % signal from baseline at 100 min after contrast injection is shown for context. Corresponding
color-coded flow speeds along streamlines computed from the rOMT-derived vector field associated with 100 min after contrast
injection for multiple diffusion levels are compared, illustrating how an appropriate diffusion value was selected. (d) With no
diffusion, the flow shows exaggerated peripheral advective behavior and central parenchymal transport is unaccounted for. (e)
Using moderate but sufficient diffusion yields feasible peripheral behavior and accounts for transport in deeper parenchymal
regions. (f) With high diffusion, more activity is accounted for but exaggerated peripheral behavior is also seen.

Solute speed varies across tissue compartments
To derive GS solute transport across tissue compartments at the voxel-level, we applied the
proposed rOMT+GLaD analytical pipeline to segmented whole brain DCE-MRIs acquired in
WKY and SHRSP rats. Examples of pathlines color-coded for speed derived in CSF, WM and GM
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

compartments from a WKY and a SHRSP rat are shown in Figs. 3b, and 3c. Anatomically,
pathlines in GM were more prominent in the cerebellum, hippocampus and hypothalamus of
WKYs (Figs. 3b). In WM of WKY rats, pathlines dominated in the brainstem and midbrain (Figs.
3b). In SHRSP rats, subarachnoid CSF pathlines showed overall more heterogeneously
distribution and were most prominent on the ventral surface (Fig. 3c, top). In WKY rats, total
pathline volume in the CSF compartment (representing the total CSF flux of ‘moving’ solutes over
the 120 min selected time interval) was 20% higher when compared to SHRSP rats (7124 ± 605
voxels vs 5822 ± 636 voxels, p=0.001, Mann-Whitney, Fig. 3d), suggesting that more CSF was
available to enter the GS in WKYs and that CSF solute flow was more restricted in SHRSP rats.
In SHRSP rats, the lower than normal CSF pathline volume was mirrored by reduced pathline
volume in both GM and WM compartments when compared to WKYs (Fig. 3d) signifying overall
decreased GS transport in the hypertensive rat stain. In the corpus callosum, pathline volume was
variable with a trend towards decreased solute transport in the SHRSP compared to WKY rats
(582 ± 236 vs 330 ± 120, p=0.051, Mann Whitney).
We next analyzed the time-varying particle attributes associated with the pathlines, that is, ‘speed’
given by the magnitude of the transport vectors derived by the rOMT+GLaD procedure. Speed
trajectories of the pathlines are displayed as color-coded maps for each tissue compartment (Figs.
3b, c). In WKY rats, fast speed (red color) was evident in the CSF subarachnoid compartment on
the ventral surface of the brain, superficial to the cerebellum and cerebral cortex (Fig. 3b, top).
Slower (blue color) speed trajectories were observed inside the cerebral ventricles (Fig. 3b top).
In WKY and SHRSP rats, mean pathline speed was ~40% faster in CSF when compared to the
GM and WM compartments, but significant differences were documented for WM only (Fig. 3e).
Differences in solute speed between CSF and parenchyma can be explained by 1) more restricted
transport in the smaller, 15-20% ISF space45 when compared to non-cellular CSF spaces given that
the solute ‘Gd-DOTA’ is an extracellular tracer in normal brain; 2) less overall advection as the
solute moves away from larger pulsatile pial vessels; 3) increased diffusion mode of solute
transport in deeper portions of parenchyma. Mean pathline speed in CSF of SHRSP was within a
similar range to those of WKY rats (0.10 ± 0.026 versus 0.09 ± 0.02, p=0.558) and no differences
in mean speed were observed in GM and WM compartments between the two strains. We also
compared directional tracer movement from CSF into the tissue compartment between WKY and
SHRSP rats (Supplementary Fig. 4). Using the rOMT-derived velocity field, we evaluated the
total (advective + diffusive) flux across this surface with attention to the net mass moving from the
CSF compartment into the tissue compartment. This analysis showed that the average net mass
transported into the tissue compartment was significantly higher for WKY when compared to
SHRSP rats (Supplementary Fig. 4).

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

WKY Lagrangian speed maps

a
Cerebrospinal fluid

b

CTX

d

p=0.008*

c

p=0.001*
p=0.001*

CB

Hip
Grey matter

cVtr

WKY-CSF

SHRSP Lagrangian speed maps

SHRSP-CSF

Ventral suface
WKY-GM

CB

e
HT

MB

SHRSP-GM

p=0.002*
ns
p=0.012*

WKY-WM

ns

White matter
ns
ns

SHRSP-WM

BS
3 mm

3 mm

0

0.2
Speed (au)

0.2

0
Speed (au)

Figure 3: rOMT whole brain analysis reveals varying solute speed across tissue compartments. (a) Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),
gray matter (GM) and white matter (WM) masks overlaid on the brain anatomical template to illustrate the spatial distribution of
the brain tissue compartments used for the rOMT analysis. (b) Pathlines – color-coded to denote speed – overlaid on corresponding
anatomical brains are shown from a WKY rat in CSF, WM and GM compartments. Red and blue colored pathlines denote fast and
slow pathline speeds, respectively. In the CSF compartment, pathlines are fast moving at the ventral surface. Pathlines with slower
speed lines can be seen inside the cerebral ventricles (cVtr). Speed pathlines in GM and WM compartments are variable: faster
speed in the periphery and slower speed profiles as they penetrate into deeper parts of parenchyma. CTX=cortex; CB=cerebellum;
Hip=hippocampus; HT=hypothalmus; MB=midbrain; BS=brain stem. (c) Corresponding pathlines in the three tissue
compartments from a SHRSP rat are shown. It is clear that pathlines in CSF are sparser and more heterogeneously distributed in
the SHRSP rat when compared to the WKY rat. For example, there are no pathlines above cortex and very few superficial to the
cerebellum. For SHRSP, there are also less pathlines in the GM and WM, as compared to the WKY rat. (d) Analysis of the total
flux of solutes in the pathline network (number of voxels) revealed decreases in all three compartments in SHRSP when compared
to WKY rats. (e) In both WKY and SHRSP strains, mean pathline speed in CSF was significantly faster than mean pathline speed
in the WM compartment. Data are mean ± SD. Mann-Whitney’s test was used for cross-strain analysis. Friedman's ANOVA was
used for within-strain regional analysis. *significant at level alpha=0.05.

Solute speed varies across brain regions
We next considered regional GS transport using GLaD analysis applied to the dynamic DCE-MRI
data extracted from pre-selected brain regions distributed in the GS network including the
hippocampus, cerebellum, superior colliculus and basal forebrain regions (Fig. 4a). Using the
same visualization scheme as for the whole brain data, Fig. 4 shows pathlines color-coded for
speed captured inside cerebellum, superior colliculus, hippocampus and basal forebrain from a
representative WKY (Figs. 4b) and SHRSP rat (Figs. 4c). In the SHRSP rats, the total volume of
pathlines was significantly reduced in the cerebellum, hippocampus and superior colliculus when
compared to WKY rats (Fig. 4d). Furthermore, GS transport varied across brain regions as
evidenced by the varying distribution of pathlines across the brain in both strains. In the SHRSP
rats, pathlines were sparser some areas (e.g., hippocampus) than others (e.g., basal forebrain)
possibly due to chronic hypertension (Fig. 4d). For both WKY and SHRSP rats, it was also evident
that pathline speed was not uniform across regions (Fig. 4e). Within normal WKY rats, mean
pathline speed in the basal forebrain region was significantly increased when compared to the
hippocampus (0.102 ± 0.025 vs 0.055 ± 0.016, p=0.006, Friedman test) and superior colliculus
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(0.102 ± 0.025 vs 0.053 ± 0.012, p=0.021, Friedman test). Within the SHRSP rats, mean pathline
speed also varied across regions (Fig. 4f). Across strains, the analysis revealed that mean speed in
the superior colliculus was significantly reduced in the SHRSP when compared to WKY rats
(0.053 ± 0.012 vs 0.040 ± 0.005, p=0.022, Mann Whitney).

a

d

Hip

Cb

Sc

p=0.008*

Hip

Sc
Cb

Bf

b

WKY top view

Bf
p=0.035*

p=0.001*

WKY lateral view

ns

p=0.021*
p=0.006*

e
p=0.005*
ns

0

c

Speed (a.u.)

SHRSP top view

0

Speed (a.u.)

0.2

SHRSP lateral view

ns

p=0.039
ns

ns

0.2

Figure 4: Solute speed is not uniform across brain regions. (a) Volume rendered anatomical delineation of brain regions
including the cerebellum (cb), superior colliculus (Sc), hippocampus (Hip) and basal forebrain (Bf) that were used for the analysis.
Top and lateral views of the regions are shown. (b) Color-coded pathlines depicting speed captured over 120 min are shown from
a normal WKY rats inside the regions of interest. In the normal WKY rat, speed trajectories in the cerebellum penetrate the entire
region. Pathlines at the level of the dorsal hippocampus are sparser when compared to the ventral hippocampus. (c) Color-coded
pathlines depicting speed captured over 120 min are shown from a SHRSP rat for the same regions. Note that in this particular
SHRSP rat, pathlines barely reach the superior colliculus and are not observed in the center of the cerebellum. (d) The total
pathline volume for each region was calculated and compared between WKY and SHRSP rats. Except for the Bf, all regions showed
lower pathline volume in SHRSP when compared to WKY rats. (e) Mean pathline speed varied across brain regions in both strains.
The fastest mean speed was observed in the basal forebrain for both strains. Data are mean ± SD. Mann-Whitney’s test was used
for cross-strain analysis. Friedman's ANOVA was used for within-strain regional analysis. *significant at level alpha=0.05.

Solute transfer from PVS-to-tissue is impaired in SHRSP rats
To further explore GS solute transport dynamics between the two strains, we acquired DCE-MRIs
at higher spatial resolution using a smaller 1-cm RF-surface coil positioned above the left
hemisphere of the rat’s head to capture transport in the PVS of pial arteries at the circle of Willis
and along the entire MCA traveling across the left hemisphere (Movie 2). To boost signal-to-noise
in the PVS, we administered 20 µL of 1:5 Gd-DOTA diluted with sterile water at a rate of 1.5
µL/min into the CSF. The higher Gd-DOTA levels in CSF enabled us to track solute transport
along the entire left hemispheric MCA at a voxel resolution of 0.15x0.15x0.15 mm3. We first
extracted time signal curves (TSC) from the PVS along the MCA on the ventral surface (a.k.a.
‘MCA-PVS root’, Fig. 5a) and observed strikingly different signal dynamics between SHRSP and
WKY rats (Fig. 5b). While the MCA-PVS root TSCs from SHRSPs and WKYs were characterized
by similar time-to-peak and peak magnitude, the signal ‘relaxation’ phase was faster in WKYs,
suggesting faster transit of solutes into parenchyma compared to SHRSP rats (Fig. 5b). This
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

interpretation was supported when comparing DCE-MRIs at the base of the brain after ~3 h of
CSF Gd-DOTA circulation (Figs. 5c, d). Significantly higher Gd-DOTA signal was evident along
the root PVS-MCA of SHRSP rats (Fig. 5d) but not along the MCA distal to this point when
compared to WKYs (Figs. 5e) suggestive of physical obstruction (or ‘slow-down’) of MCA-PVS
flow in this area.
The rOMT+GLaD pipeline was applied to extract pathline speed information along the MCA.
Pathline start points were selected from binary masks capturing tissue along the MCA in order to
analyze transport behavior stemming from this specific region (see Methods). The color-coded
speed maps along the MCA are overlaid on the anatomical volume rendered MRIs of the left
hemisphere (Figs. 5e, f). While pathline speed appeared to be homogeneous along the MCA in
WKY rats (Fig. 5e), pathline speed varied along the MCA in SHRSP rats (Fig. 5f). Specifically,
in SHRSP rats, pathline speed was increased by 3-fold along the MCA ‘root’ when compared to
speed along the MCA distal to this area (0.12 ± 0.04 vs 0.04 ± 0.01, p=0.029, Student’s t test).
Corresponding measurements in WKY rats did not reveal a significant differences in speed along
the MCA (p=0.25). We also noted that in WKY pathlines had migrated >4 mm away from the
MCA-PVS into the adjacent tissue (Fig. 5e). In contrast, in SHRSP rats, pathlines were observed
in closer proximity to the PVS-MCA (Fig. 5f).

a

e

b

WKY

d

MCA ‘root’

MCA
MCA ‘root’

4 mm

c

WKY

Speed (au)

0

d

SHRSP

f

0.15

SHRSP

MCA

MCA

MCA ‘root’

MCA ‘root’

MCA
MCA ‘root’

4mm

4 mm
4 mm

%Signal change from baseline
0

300%

Figure 5: Solute transfer from the perivascular space (PVS) along the middle cerebral artery. (a) Contrast enhanced MRIs from
a WKY rat at the level of the circle of Willis near the take off of the middle cerebral artery (MCA). Contrast in the perivascular
space along the circle of Willis and MCA is evidenced as a high intensity signal along the vasculature, which is black. Regions of
interest (ROI) along the MCA (white lines) were used to capture time signal curves (TSC) from the dynamic contrast enhanced
(DCE) MRIs acquired in WKY and SHRSP rats. (b) Mean TSC extracted from WKY (N=4) and SHRSP (N=4) rats along the first
segment of the MCA (‘root’) are displayed. Data are mean ± SD. It is evident that while ‘time-to-peak’ and peak magnitude are
within same range for the two strains, the signal decline (representing redistribution of contrast from PVS to tissue and tissue

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

clearance) is strikingly faster in WKY when compared to SHRSP rats. (c) Volume-rendered, color-coded signal map after ~180
min of circulation of CSF contrast in a WKY rat overlaid onto the corresponding anatomical template. High and low contrast
signal amplitude is given by red and blue colors respectively. Contrast is observed along the entire MCA during its trajectory
across the left hemisphere. (d) Corresponding color-coded signal map from a SHRSP rat showing much higher levels (red color)
of contrast in the PVS along the circle of Willis and along the MCA root. Heterogeneously distributed contrast along the MCA is
more evident in the SHRSP when compared to WKY rat. (e-f) The color-coded speed maps along the MCA are overlaid on the
anatomical volume rendered MRIs of the left hemisphere of a WKY (e) and SHRSP (f). While pathline speed appeared to be
homogeneous along the MCA in WKY rats, pathline speed in SHRSP rats was high in areas localized to the ‘root’ area and lower
distal to this point.

We also performed directional analysis of the advective flux direction along the MCA in normal
WKY rats (Fig. 6). Advective flux vectors were calculated across the boundaries of the binary
mask created along the MCA from the rOMT output. Fig. 6 shows advective flux vectors
(normalized to have unit length) along the MCA overlaid on the anatomical MRI from a WKY
(Figs. 6a, b) and SHRSP (Figs. 6c. d). Figs. 6a-d highlight directions of the advective flux vectors
from the ventral surface of the brain at the level of the circle of Willis from where the MCA take
off (white boxes in Figs. 6a, c). In the WKY rat the advective flux vectors’ direction is following
the path along the MCA in a continuous pattern (Figs. 6 a, b). In the SHRSP rat, the advective flux
vectors are following the direction of the MCA part of the way, but then the flow pattern become
disrupted and advective flux vectors can be seen diverging from the MCA flow direction (Figs.
6c, d). The deflections in advective flux vector directions along the MCA in SHRSP compared to
WKY rats is also clearly appreciated in ‘caudal’ projection views (Figs. 6e, f).

e

a
b

c

WKY

f
d
SHRSP

Figure 6: Advective flux vectors along the MCA show aberrant flow in SHRSP. (a, b) Advective flux vectors across the boundary
along the MCA, determined from the binary mask, were calculated from the rOMT output. The advective flux direction, determined
by normalizing the advective flux vectors to have unit length, are shown overlaid on an anatomical mask of a WKY rat. The ventral
surface at the level of the circle of Willis and MCA origin is highlighted. In the WKY rat, the directions of the advective flux vectors
follow the path along the MCA in a continuous pattern. (c, d) In a corresponding view of a SHRSP rat, the advective flux vectors
are pointing in the same direction along the first segment of the MCA along the ventral surface. However, distal to this point, the
vectors start diverging away from the MCA. (e, f) The deflections in the direction of the advective flux vectors at the transition from
ventral to lateral segments of the MCA in the SHRSP rat compared to the WKY rat is also clearly visible in ‘caudal’ projection
views.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Mechanisms underlying the decreased GS transport chronic hypertension
We next explored major drivers of GS transport to uncover possible mechanisms underlying the
differences observed between SHRSP and WKY rats. Increases19 and decreases1, 20 in vascular
pulsatility have been shown to accelerate and decelerate GS influx, respectively. Only subtle
differential effects of rat strain on the mean heart rate recorded continuously during the
glymphatics MRI experiments were noted (Supplementary Table 1). In fact, mean heart rate was
slightly increased in SHRSP compared to WKY rats, leading us to conclude that changes in heart
rate were unlikely to contribute to GS transport impairment observed in the SHRSP rats. In a series
of randomly selected awake, non-anesthetized rats from age-matched cohorts of WKY and SHRSP
rats, non-invasive blood pressure was measured using the tail-cuff method. Systolic and pulse
pressures were documented to be significantly higher in SHRSP compared to WKY rats
(Supplementary Table 1). General anesthesia will dampen blood pressure when compared to the?
awake state and SHRSP used for the glymphatics experiments may not have been characterized
by higher blood pressure when compared to WKY rats. Therefore, in a separate series of rats with
femoral artery catheterization, we documented that mean arterial blood pressure indeed remained
higher in SHRSP even under anesthesia when compared to WKY rats (Supplementary Table 1).
Based on these data, we concluded that higher than normal pulse pressures in SHRSP rats might
have contributed to the impaired GS transport observed in our study.
State of arousal46 and type of anesthesia47 have also been shown to affect GS transport. We did not
measure electroencephalogram in the experiments, however anesthetic depth was evaluated
indirectly by quantifying anesthetic drugs administered and was found to be similar between
strains (Supplementary Table 1). We therefore concluded that differences in depth of anesthesia
are unlikely to have contributed to the GS transport alterations observed.
Polarized perivascular expression of AQP4 water channels has been associated with rapid transport
of small molecular weight solutes from PVS to brain ISF1, 36, 48. We preformed
immunohistochemistry on a smaller series of WKY (N=4) and SHRSP, (N=4) to examine the
AQP4 expression patterns associated with small vessels and capillaries in select brain regions. In
WKY rats, the distribution of AQP4 immunofluorescence appeared homogeneously distributed in
the occipital cortex (Fig. 7a) and ventral hippocampus (Fig. 7c). In SHRSP rats, increased
immunofluorescence was noted in patchy areas associated with penetrating cortical and
hippocampal vessels (Figs. 7b, d). AQP4 immunofluorescence intensity was measured along
linear ROIs crossing the lumen of small vessels or cerebral capillaries and converted into a
polarization index (Supplementary Fig. 5 and methods). This analysis showed that AQP4
immunofluorescence surrounding the small vessels and capillaries was more polarized in WKY
(higher polarization index) when compared to SHRSP rats (Figs. 7g, h). We also executed qPCR
to measure the mRNA expression levels of GFAP and AQP4 in a separate series of WKY (N=8)
and SHRSP (N=8) rats in the following regions: cerebellum, cortex, hippocampus, striatum and
thalamus. This analysis revealed no statistical differences in AQP4 or GFAP mRNA expression
between WKY and SHRSP rats (Supplementary Fig. 6). Collectively, based on these data, we
conclude that impaired perivascular AQP4 polarization in SHRSP rats (but not increased total
tissue AQP4 expression or astrogliosis) might have contributed to the reduction in PVS-to-brain
solute transfer observed in the SHRSP rats when compared to WKY rats.
Finally, we explored vascular and structural anatomy at the level of the circle of Willis and area of
the MCA root where the contrast in the PVS appeared to be ‘obstructed’. Supplementary Fig. 7
show representative brain sections from WKY rat and SHRSP rat were immunolabeled with an
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

antibody to collagen IV to identify cerebral vessels and micro-vessels (Supplementary Fig. 7c,
insert). In WKY rats smaller networks of micro-vessels were observed in distinct areas at the base
of the brain surrounding penetrating arteries (Supplementary Figs. 7d-f). However, in SHRSP
rats, corresponding microvascular networks were larger in size and the microvasculature denser
(Supplementary Fig 7g-i). We speculate that the microvascular network remodeling might have
affected the PVS transport from the circle of Willis. More investigations are needed to fully
understand mechanisms underlying the ‘obstructed’ PVS flow in SHRSP rats compared to WKY
rats.
b

a

g

e
WKY (vessel ‘6)

d

Polarization index: 2.5

cc

cc
c

d

Or

f

h
SHRSP (vessel ‘3)

SR

H
Polarization index: 2.0

Figure 7: Perivascular AQP4 water channel expression is altered in SHRSP rats. (a) Confocal representative micrographs
show AQP4 immunoreactivity extending from the occipital cortical surface towards the corpus callosum (cc) and shows that
AQP4 was distributed uniformly. (b) Equivalent confocal montage from the ventral hippocampus of a WKY rat. AQP4 is
distributed homogeneously in the Stratum Oriens (Or) and Stratum Radiatum (SR). (c) AQP4 distribution in occipital cortex from
a SHRSP rat showing higher intensity expression along penetrating vessels (white arrows). (d) In SHRSP rats, intensely
expressed AQP4 can be noted in patchy areas surrounding vessels in the SR (arrows) and occasionally in the hilus (H) region.
(e-f) AQP4 intensity was measured along linear ROIs crossing the lumen of small vessels or cerebral capillaries in WKY and
SHRSP rats and converted into a polarization index (Supplementary Fig. 5 and Methods for more information). (g)
Perivascular AQP4 polarization index of small vessels in the ventral hippocampus is significantly reduced in SHRSP when
compared to WKY rats. (h) In the occipital cortex, the perivascular AQP4 polarization index of small vessels was also
significantly reduced in SHRSP when compared to WKY rats. Scale bar=250 µm.

Discussion.
Our rOMT Lagrangian workflow method applied to DCE-MRI images used to measure GS
transport in whole rat brain provides the first evidence of both diffusion and advective solute
transport modes in the brain proper. First, in normal brains, rOMT analysis revealed that both
advection and diffusion terms were required for pathlines and trajectory speed in the modeled
images to resemble GS transport patterns in live brain. Second, particle speed varied strikingly
across tissue compartments with faster solute passage in CSF when compared to GM and WM
compartments. Third, large differences in regional solute speed within the brain parenchyma were
also documented. Specifically, in regions close to the ventral surface near large pulsatile arteries
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(e.g. basal forebrain) solute speed was 2-fold faster when compared to midbrain and
hippocampual regions. Collectively, these novel results demonstrate that advective transport is
dominating in the non-cellular CSF spaces and that slower diffusion transport contributes to GS
transport as the solute is transferred from the PVS into tissue.
The OMT problem was first posed by Gaspard Monge in 178149 and may be formulated as one of
transporting one distribution of mass to another in a manner that minimizes a given cost functional.
Mass is used in a general sense and originally referred to soil, as Monge was interested in the civil
engineering problem of leveling the ground. In our work on the GS, mass is represented by signal
intensity induced by a paramagnetic contrast solute (previously shown to reflect Gd-DOTA
concentrations50) administered into CSF and captured by DCE-MRI. The model is related to the
Navier-Stokes model but instead of considering momentum, one considers the flow of density51,
52
. The advection/diffusion rOMT model is simpler to analyze, but nevertheless provides
physically meaningful information. Interestingly, there are strong connections between rOMT and
the porous media and kinetic models (see the Methods section) previously applied to characterize
GS transport37, 53, 54. However, in contrast to these models, the rOMT problem does not require a
priori identification or delineation of boundaries, time-varying input or tissue function, or
specification of kinematic parameter values. Other than the assumption of the underlying
advection/diffusion equation, no prior assumptions are imposed on the GS flow. Finally, rOMT
may be considered to be an optical flow technique55, but instead of imposing smoothness on the
solutions of the continuity equation, one employs it as a constraint in minimizing a quadratic
energy function.
GS dysfunction is reported in neurodegeneration particularly where vascular dysfunction may be
involved7, 35, 36. We therefore applied the rOMT framework to dissect modes of solute transport
changes in an animal model of cerebral small vessel disease (cSVD). cSVD is the major pathology
in vascular dementia, and GS dysfunction has recently been highlighted as a novel pathogenetic
factor in cSVD5. The hypothesized link between GS dysfunction and cSVD is based on the
observation of abnormally enlarged PVS in clinical cases of cSVD56. We utilized rOMT analysis
to characterize modes of GS solute transport across tissue compartments in normotensive WKY
and SHRSP rodents. The SHRSP rat is a naturally bred animal with a parent control strain, which
mimics human hypertension and cSVD57. Another reason that we used the SHRSP rat is that they
do not present with hydrocephalus – a drawback inherent to other rat strains with chronic
hypertension (e.g. SHR rat41) which may affect CSF flow dynamics7. The rOMT analysis of DCEMRI data from the brain showed that the total flux of moving solutes in all tissue compartments
(including CSF) was reduced in SHRSP when compared to normotensive WKY rats.
Interestingly, mean solute speed in the CSF and tissue compartments was not significantly reduced
in SHRSP when compared to WKY rats. However, a separate analysis of CSF transport in the PVS
along the MCA obtained with DCE-MRI acquired with increased spatial resolution and higher
contrast-to-noise (increased Gd-DOTA concentration in CSF) revealed altered CSF flow patterns
in SHRSP when compared to WKY rats. In WKY rats, solute speed along the MCA was
homogeneous whereas in SHRSP rats solute flow became overtly heterogeneous along the MCA.
The rOMT analysis of the SHRSP MCA data revealed that solute speed was 3-fold higher at the
MCA-PVS ‘root’ area when compared to speed distal to this area suggesting a physical or
physiological obstruction at this site.
We investigated possible mechanisms underlying the reduced CSF solute flux in specific regions
such as the hippocampus and documented impaired perivascular AQP4 expression in SHRSP
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

compared to WKY rats in hippocampus and occipital cortex which might have contributed to the
reduced GS transport patterns. Reduced perivascular expression of AQP4 water channels has been
documented in postmortem studies of human cases of Alzheimer’s disease6 and in aging rodents36.
In summary, the new rOMT Lagrangian framework analysis introduced here established the
presence of diffusion and advective solute transport in brain parenchyma supporting the
glymphatic system hypothesis and its relevance for waste clearance. In addition, altered solute
speed profiles across tissue beds consistent with slower transfer of solutes from PVS to ISF was
revealed in chronic hypertension. Future studies should be conducted to further optimize the
rOMT Lagrangian analysis developed here, and to confirm the observed reductions in solute
transport in human chronic hypertension and cSVD. In addition, future rOMT work will consist
of including a source term in our set-up to include physical parameters (e.g., pressure) as well as
combining OMT with other metrics such as Fisher-Rao in the cost functional to alleviate the
explicit constraint of mass preservation in the model58.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods.
Animals. The local institutional animal care and use committees at Yale University, New Haven,
USA approved all animal work. 8-month old WKY female rats and aged-matched female SHRSP
rats (Charles River, Wilmington, MA, USA) were included in the study. All the animals were
given standard rat chow and water ad libitum.
Blood pressure measurements in SHRSP and WKY rats. Non-invasive blood pressure
measurements were performed in a selection of awake WKY and SHRSP rats using tail cuff
method (CODA monitor, Kent Scientific Corporation, USA). Three measurements were taken x 3
with 5-min interval from each rat and average of systolic and diastolic pressures were used for the
analysis. In a separate series of anesthetized WKY (N=6) and SHRSP rats (N=5) mean arterial
blood pressure was measured using a catheter inserted into the femoral artery. Anesthesia for these
rats were performed with isoflurane and dexmedetomidine as described below.
Anesthesia and cisterna magna catheter: For all glymphatic experiments, rats were anesthetized
with 3% isoflurane delivered into an induction chamber in 100% O2, received dexmedetomidine
(0.01mg/kg i.p.) and glycopyrrolate (0.2 mg/kg i.p.). Surgical anesthesia was maintained with 22.5% isoflurane and the rats were breathing spontaneously throughout the experiments. A small 5mm copper tube (0.32 mm o.d., Nippon Tockushukan, MFG. CO., LTD, Tokyo, Japan) attached
to a PE-10 microcatheter was implanted into the CSF via the cisterna magna and secured in place
using cyanoacrylate glue. Following surgery, the rats were transferred to the MRI instrument.
Anesthesia was maintained throughout the experiment by 0.5-1.0% isoflurane in 1:1 Air:O2
mixture delivered via a nose cone, and a subcutaneous infusion of dexmedetomidine (0.015-0.020
mg/kg/hr)59. During imaging, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, body temperature and heart rate
were continuously monitored using an MRI compatible monitoring system (SA Instruments, Stony
Brook, NY, USA). Body temperature was kept within a range of 36.5oC~37.5oC using a heated
waterbed.
MRI imaging: All MRI acquisitions were performed on a Bruker 9.4T/16 magnet (Bruker
BioSpin, Billerica MA) interfaced to an Avance III console controlled by Paravision 6.0 software.
All rats were imaged in the supine position. For rats used for the whole-brain glymphatic
experiments, a 3-cm planar receive surface radio-frequency (RF) coil (Bruker) was positioned
under the head of the rat with a separate preamplifier used as a receiver. For rats where glymphatic
transport was explored along the middle cerebral artery, a 1-cm planar RF coil (Bruker) was placed
above the left side of the rat’s head. A custom-made volume diameter volume coil (50-mm i.d.)
was used as a transmit RF coil.
Glymphatic transport DCE-MRI: Following an anatomical localizer scan, acquisition of the
DCE-MRI started using VFA-SPGR sequence. For whole brain glymphatics studies: TR=25 msec,
TE=4 msec, 0.30x0.30x0.30 mm FA=15°, number of averages=2, Time/scan=5min). For the MCA
glymphatics studies (left hemisphere): TR=25 msec, TE=4 msec, 0.15x0.15x0.15 mm FA=20°,
number of averages=1, scan time=4min 10s). A reference phantom filled with 0.1 mM Gd-DOTA
was placed in the field of view to allow intensity normalization between each scan as well as
allowing receiver gain adjustment. For measurement of GS transport, DCE-MRI were acquired
before (3 baseline scans), during and after the infusion of gadoteric acid (Gd-DOTA, DOTAREM,
Guerbert LLC, Carol Stream IL) into the CSF via the CM catheter 53. Specifically, for whole brain
studies we infused 20 µL, of 1:37 Gd-DOTA diluted with sterile water at a rate of 1.5 µL/min. For
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the higher resolution MCA scans, we infused 20 µL, of 1:5 Gd-DOTA diluted with sterile water
at a rate of 1.5 µL/min.
Voxel-wise morphometric analyses: To study anatomical volumetric differences between WKY
and SHRSP rats, we implemented deformation-based morphometry as reported previously41. For
this purpose, WKY (N=7, 8-months old) and SHRSP (N=6, 8-months old) were scanned using
3D spoiled gradient echo (SPGR) sequence with the following parameters:
(TR/TE/FA/Ave = 50ms/4ms/7°/4 scanning time= 23min field of view (30x30x15 mm)
reconstructed at isotropic spatial resolution of 0.23x0.23x0.23 mm. Morphometric image
processing steps were similar to the procedure described previously comprising B1 RF
inhomogeneity correction, tissue segmentation, and spatial registration4. Following the DARTEL
registration algorithm, the voxel-wise Jacobian determinant was calculated for each voxel and
subsequently smoothed by a 0.4mm Gaussian smoothing kernel. Voxel-wise statistical analysis
was performed by two sample t-tests in the framework of general linear modeling with the total
intracranial volume (TIV) as a covariate and statistical significance (p-value) reported in colorcoded maps.
Tissue compartment and ROI specific glymphatic flow analyses: To study tissue compartment
specific glymphatic transport, WKY (N=7, 8-months old) and SHRSP (N=7, 8-months old) were
scanned using the 3D VFA-SPGR sequence (TR/TE/FA/Ave = 15ms/4ms/5~30°/2 scanning time=
30 min 0.30x0.30x0.30 mm) as described previously41,4. Proton density weighted (PDW) images
calculated from VFA-SPGR were segmented using a custom made SHRSP-WKY rat brain
template in deriving spatial registration parameters 4. Spatially normalized segmented images were
population averaged and thresholded (0.5) to create a population averaged binary mask for GM,
WM and CSF, and inverse warped to match the individual rat brain. To study ROI specific
glymphatic transport, the publicly available Waxholm Wistar rat brain atlas60 was downloaded,
and ROIs in the atlas were warped onto the individual SHRSP-WKY rat brains in two steps. First
the high resolution T2 weighted Waxholm Wistar rat brain atlas was segmented using the SHRSPWKY template to derive the registration parameters between the atlas and the SHRSP-WKY
template. The registration parameters were then applied onto the ROIs to construct the ROIs in the
template space. ROIs in the template space were then inverse warped, which was derived from the
tissue compartment analyses, to create the ROIs in the individual brain. Nineteen regions were
included in the atlas: anterior commissure, basal forebrain region, brainstem, hippocampus, corpus
callosum, descending corticofugal pathway, fimbria of hippocampus, hypothalamus, superior
colliculus, cerebellum, cortex, olfactory bulb, penial, periaqueductal grey, septal region, striatum,
subiculum, substantia nigra and thalamus. Only four of these (basal forebrain, cerebellum
hippocampus and superior colliculus) were used for GS analysis purposes.
Kinetic analysis of DCE-MRI data from whole brain: Image processing of the series of DCEMRI data of each rat consisted of head motion correction, intensity normalization, smoothing, and
voxel-by-voxel conversion to percentage of baseline signal using SPM1261, 62
(https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/). The processed images were converted into NIfTI format for
further analysis. Brain masks of CSF, GM and WM derived from the morphometric analysis were
used to extract compartmental “time-signal curves” (TSCs) of Gd-DTPA-induced contrast changes
using PMOD software (PMOD, version 3.8). A 1-compartmental kinetic analysis was used to
model the glymphatic movement of Gd-DTPA contrast through brain tissue using the TSCs from
the CSF (main input), GM and WM from each rat. Two rate constants (k1 and k2) and distribution
volume V(t) were calculated from the 1-compartment model using PMOD software (Version 3.8).
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In the next few sections, we provide the necessary details pertaining to our regularized OMT
framework before describing how it was utilized for analyzing the DCE-MRI data.
Regularized OMT (Eulerian framework)
The regularized OMT (rOMT) problem63 considers the minimization of the energy functional
4
1
ℛ[𝜇, 𝑣] = ) ) 𝜇(𝑡, 𝑥)||𝑣(𝑡, 𝑥)||1 𝑑𝑥 𝑑𝑡 (1)
5 𝔛2

overall time-varying densities 𝜇 = 𝜇(𝑡, 𝑥) ≥ 0 and sufficiently smooth velocity fields 𝑣 =
𝑣(𝑡, 𝑥) ∈ ℝ: subject to the advection/diffusion (constraint) equation
𝜕< 𝜇 + ∇ ⋅ (𝜇𝑣) = ∇ ⋅ (𝐷∇𝜇),

(2)

for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝔛, a connected Euclidean subdomain of ℝ: , over the normalized time interval 𝑡 ∈
[0,1] with initial and final conditions
𝜇(0, 𝑥) = 𝜇A:A< (𝑥),

𝜇(1, 𝑥) = 𝜇BA:CD (𝑥), ∀𝑥 ∈ 𝔛. (3)

Here, 𝜇A:A< and 𝜇BA:CD are given observed states of the density at respective times 𝑡 = 0 and 𝑡 =
1, and 𝐷 denotes a symmetric positive definite diffusivity matrix, which may be spatially
dependent or independent. When 𝐷 = 0, the constraint (2) is simply the advection equation and
we recover the classical dynamic-OMT formulation34
From the Calculus of Variations34, 63, the Euler-Lagrange equations associated with the
regularized OMT problem (1)-(3) shows that the optimal velocity, 𝑣HI< , has the form
𝑣HI< = −∇𝜂, (4)
where 𝜂 is the Lagrange multiplier of constraints (2), (3) and satisfies the diffusion HamiltonJacobi equation
1
𝜕< 𝜂 − ||∇𝜂||1 = ∇ ⋅ 𝐷∇𝜂. (5)
2
The diffusion term plays a dual role. First of all, it regularizes the flow. In fact, it makes the
problem equivalent to the so-called Schrödinger bridge problem, and therefore to a certain type of
regularization (related to Fisher information) of the cost function34, 63. This leads to smoother flow
fields. Secondly, it captures a key feature in modelling the underlying dynamics that may best be
understood via compartmental models that will be described in the next section.
Regularized OMT and compartmental models
Compartmental models64 are comparable to spatially averaging the regularized OMT continuity
equation (2). More precisely, one may average the continuity equation by integrating it over a
control volume (i.e., compartment) 𝐶:
)𝜕< 𝜇 𝑑𝐶 + )∇ ⋅ (𝜇𝑣) 𝑑𝐶 = )∇ ⋅ (𝐷∇𝜇) 𝑑𝐶 . (6)
O

O

O

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Considering the advective term, we see that
)∇ ⋅ (𝜇𝑣) 𝑑𝐶 = ) 𝜇𝑣 ⋅ 𝑛R⃗ 𝑑𝐵 = − ) 𝜇∇𝜂 ⋅ 𝑛R⃗ 𝑑𝐵
O

U

(7)

U

by (4) and the divergence theorem, where 𝑛R⃗ is the unit outward normal of 𝐵, the compartment
boundary. In this form, the OMT-advection may be interpreted as an expression of Darcy’s law,
which relates flow velocity to the pressure gradient, as used in the porous media model. We note
that the OMT-velocity does not explicitly account for pressure differences while the porous-mediavelocity does. One can supplement a pressure dependent source term in the continuity equation,
an extension we plan to explore in future work. Considering the unresolved true physical
parameter values, this exemplifies the OMT framework’s utility for capturing, representing and
informing on meaningful dynamic behavior implicitly encoded in the given observed density
distributions, along with interesting insight into how the method works.
Applying the divergence theorem to the diffusive term we find:
)∇ ⋅ (𝐷∇𝜇) 𝑑𝐶 = ) 𝐷∇𝜇 ⋅ 𝑛
R⃗ 𝑑𝐵, (8)
O

U

and thus, we see that diffusion is influenced by the density gradient, in accordance with Fick’s
law. Noting that the total mass in 𝐶 at time 𝑡 is given by
𝜚(𝑡) ≔ )𝜇 𝑑𝐶 , (9)
O

the averaged form of the diffusion-OMT constraint over the given compartment 𝐶 relates the
change in its density over time to the flux across its boundary, and (6) may be written as
𝑑
𝜚(𝑡) = ) (𝐷∇𝜇 − 𝜇𝑣) ⋅ 𝑛
R⃗ . (10)
𝑑𝑡
U
Here, 𝑗\] = −(𝐷∇𝜇 − 𝜇𝑣) is the total flux, comprised of both advective and diffusive
components. We note that the two are not independent of each other, as is seen by (5).
To illustrate the compartmental regularized OMT formulation, we compare tracer movement from
CSF into the tissue compartment between normotensive (WKY) and hypertensive (SHRSP) cases.
As such, we take the tissue compartment to be our control volume 𝐶 and consider the surface
boundary 𝐵 between the CSF and tissue compartment (Supplementary Fig. 4a). For every
boundary point 𝑥 ∈ 𝐵, we can define the unit normal vector 𝑛R⃗(𝑥) that is orthogonal to the surface
at 𝑥 and we orient the surface so that 𝑛R⃗ points from the CSF compartment into the tissue
compartment (Supplementary Fig. 4b). Using the OMT-derived velocity field and smooth
images, we can then look at the total (advective + diffusive) flux 𝑗\] across this surface at each
time step by considering the component of the flux in the normal direction. At a given time, (10)
describes the net mass flowing through the surface. However, we are specifically interested in the
net mass that moves from the CSF compartment into the tissue compartment. We are therefore
interested in the normal component of the flux such that 𝑗\] ⋅ 𝑛
R⃗ > 0. Due to the directional
information provided by the rOMT, this can be readily be determined. Fluctuations in voxel-level
information given by rOMT are clearly lost when averaged, indicative of the well-known challenge
for the kinetic analysis approach for local insight.
Regularized OMT-Lagrangian framework
The Eulerian framework records measurements at fixed locations for multiple points in time,
informing on the collective instantaneous behavior of the flow. We now describe our Lagrangian
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

framework for expressing the trajectories of fixed parcels or particles. In this work we have
assumed that the diffusion is constant, 𝐷 = 𝜎 1 𝐼. While this assumption is somewhat restrictive,
it nevertheless gives physically meaningful results. All the theory goes through in the nonconstant spatially dependent setting. In future work, we plan to examine this extension in more
detail. We note that
∇ ⋅ (𝜇𝑣) − ∇ ⋅ (𝜎 1 ∇𝜇) = ∇ ⋅ (𝜇𝑣) − 𝜎 1 ∇ ⋅ (𝜇∇ log 𝜇)
= ∇ ⋅ [𝜇(𝑣 − 𝜎 1 ∇ log 𝜇)].

(11)
(12)

Defining the augmented velocity
𝑣 Cde ≔ 𝑣 − 𝜎 1 ∇ log 𝜇 ,

(13)

we derive the conservation form of the regularized constraint (2),
𝜕< 𝜇 + ∇ ⋅ (𝜇𝑣 Cde ) = 0.

(14)

The Lagrangian coordinates 𝐿 = 𝐿(𝑡, 𝑥) of the optimal trajectory for the regularized OMT
system are given by
Cde

𝜕< 𝐿 = 𝑣HI< (𝑡, 𝐿(𝑡, 𝑥), 𝐿(0, 𝑥) = 𝑥, (15)
where

Cde

𝑣HI< = 𝑣HI< − 𝜎 1 ∇ log 𝜇HI< , (16)

and 𝑣HI< and 𝜇HI< denote the optimal arguments of the regularized OMT problem (1)-(3).
Numerical regularized OMT model for glymphatic system
In this section, we discuss the considerations taken for applying the regularized OMT model to the
glymphatic system and its numerical implementation. For our purposes, MR signal enhancement
induced by Gd-DOTA is treated as density (the relationship between mass and signal enhancement
has been previously validated39). The images then provide discrete observations 𝜇A:A< and 𝜇BA:CD
of the tracer distribution at some initial time 𝑡 = 0 and a final time 𝑡 = 1, respectively. Space is
discretized as a cell-centered grid of size 𝑚4 × 𝑚1 × 𝑚i with a total number of 𝑀 cells, each with
uniform length 𝑑𝑥, as delineated by the voxels. Time is split into 𝑁 intervals of length 𝑑𝑡 and the
𝑁 + 1 time steps are denoted by the subscript 𝑛 where 𝑛 = 0 corresponds to the time 𝑡 = 0, 𝑛 =
𝑁 corresponds to the time 𝑡 = 1 and 𝑑𝑡 ∗ 𝑁 = 1. Bold font is used to denote linearized variables
and we use 𝛍 = [𝝁o5 , … , 𝝁oq ]o , 𝒗 = [𝒗4o , … , 𝒗oq ]o to represent the temporal concatenation of the
linearized densities and velocities, respectively. Note that 𝑣: is the velocity field that describes the
evolution between 𝜇:s4 and 𝜇: subject to the advection/diffusion equation (2), for 𝑛 = 1, … , 𝑁.
Following the work of65, the numerical method used here was chosen for its nice properties for
differentiating and optimizing the resulting discrete regularized OMT problem, which will become
clear in the discussion to follow.
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We start by discretizing the advection/diffusion equation (2) as
(𝑰u − 𝑑𝑡𝑫)𝝁:w4 = 𝑨(𝒗: )𝝁: ,

𝑛 = 0, … , 𝑁 − 1,

(11)

where 𝑰y is the 𝑠 × 𝑠 identity matrix, 𝑫 is the discrete diffusion operator ∇ ⋅ 𝐷∇ and 𝑨 is an
averaging matrix that assigns the density of the advected particle in space to the cell centers. This
is derived via operator splitting where the advective step is performed using a particle-in-cell
method and the backward Euler method is used for the diffusive step, see [REF] for more details.
Notice, the density for any time step now depends only on the velocity 𝒗 and initial density 𝝁5 .
Considering that the initial density is fixed by the given image 𝝁5 = 𝝁A:A< , we have reduced the
parameter space of our objective cost functional (1), so that we only need find the optimal velocity.
A straightforward discretization of the OMT energy functional ℛ [𝑣 ] (1) (as just noted we ignore
the density term) is given as
𝓡[𝒗] ≔ 𝑑𝑡(𝑑𝑥)i 𝝁o (𝑰q ⊗ [𝑰u |𝑰u |𝑰u ])(𝒗⨀𝒗), (12)
where ⨂ denotes the Kronecker product, [⋅ | ⋅] denotes block matrices and ⨀ denotes the
Hadamard product. We seek the velocity 𝒗 that characterizes the density 𝝁 which interpolates
between the given initial and final densities, 𝝁A:A< and 𝝁BA:CD , seen to evolve according to the
advection/diffusion equation (11) with minimal energy, as described by the discrete objection
function 𝓡[𝒗] (12). Lastly, in anticipation of noise in the signal intensity, we do not attempt to
match the final density exactly (3). Instead, we explicitly regard the final image as a noisy state of
the tracer distribution
𝜇q + 𝜓 = 𝜇BA:CD (13)
where 𝜓 is independent, identically distributed Gaussian noise with covariance Ψ, treated as a free
temporal endpoint of the partial differential equation. As such, the discrete regularized OMT
problem is given as
inf 𝓡[𝒗] + 𝜉||𝝁q − 𝝁BA:CD ||1…

(14)

(𝑰u − 𝑑𝑡𝑫)𝝁:w4 = 𝑨(𝒗: )𝝁: ,
†𝝁5 = 𝝁A:A< .
𝝁≥0

𝑛 = 0, … , 𝑁 − 1 (15)
(16)
(17)

such that

Here, the free-endpoint condition added to the objective function (14) inhibits the erroneous
influence of noise on the velocity, inversely weighted by the covariance and the parameter 𝜉
indicates the relative significance of fitting the data to minimizing the transport energy.
Using no diffusion or too small of a diffusion value yields implausible results (e.g. non-smooth
velocity fields due to overcompensation by advection which therefore cannot reflect proper
trajectories), but too large a value will have an accumulated effect that may end up over-smoothing
the images over time (e.g. intensity gradients will be blurred yielding fictitious advective behavior
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

attempting to reverse the spreading and subtler information will be lost). Multiple levels of
diffusion were tested to determine values that afforded an appropriate balance. We note that for
small changes in diffusion values (i.e. changes of the same order of magnitude), we found the
model to be robust to the diffusivity. The aforementioned implausible behavior was only observed
when the magnitude of the diffusivity was changed by an order of 2 or more, as expected. One
would expect that increasing diffusion in a system of diffuse particles would allow for more
random or unexpected behavior to occur. In this manner, diffusion allows for a natural description
of stochastic particle trajectories thereby regularizing the flow. Accordingly, adding the diffusion
term to the classical OMT constraint enables our model to account for more behavior than would
be possible with advection alone. We therefore refer to our system of equations (14)-(17) as the
free regularized OMT problem (frOMT), used interchangeably with rOMT), which turns out to
be a quadratic optimization problem with linear constraints with respect to 𝒗. The optimal velocity
and interpolated densities are then found using a Gauss-Newton method.
rOMT data analysis: DCE-MRI images were fed as inputs into our rOMT model in order to
capture advective and diffusive transport in different compartments including CSF spaces, grey
matter (GM), white matter (WM), brain regions (and PVS) along the MCA. Unless otherwise
specified, all computation was carried out in MATLAB (Version 2016b). The rOMT procedure
was run in parallel on all 14 whole brain datasets (8 WKY, 6 SHRSP) on the SeaWulf (Stony
Brook University) CPU cluster (with a total of 4592 nodes and 128 gigabytes RAM per node) to
model a 120 min time period of tracer transport captured across 21 images and took approximately
52 hours to execute. We note that fewer interpolated time steps could have been used to achieve a
shorter runtime, but we felt a thorough investigation warranted the extended time. rOMT was
performed on the 8 higher resolution MCA datasets (4 WKY and 4 SHRSP) in the same manner
over a time period of 144 min captured across 25 images with a total runtime of approximately 66
hrs. More time was required due to the longer time period being considered and decreased signalto-noise ratio but again, fewer intermediate steps could be used with minimal differences in output
for future applications.
We used the Lagrangian OMT formulation (vide supra) to construct the pathlines for visualizing
GS transport flows over the 120 min time period in one comprehensive figure, derived from the
rOMT returned velocity field and interpolated images. In order to extract and visualize trajectories
from 4D data in a meaningful way, the several steps were performed on each dataset. First, pathline
start points were selected uniformly among voxels that showed at least 12% increase in signal as
compared to baseline throughout the imaging acquisition interval. This was done in order to reduce
the complexity of the visualization, as the trajectory of a parcel from a location with such low
fluctuation may be attributed to noise or insignificant behavior. Pathlines were then parametrized
by the Lagrangian coordinates (15) associated with each start point and were computed by
integrating the augmented time-varying velocity field (13), as described above. Particle attributes
such as speed, informing on the state of the particle along its trajectory, were simultaneously
recorded and referred to as speed-lines. The pathlines were subsequently clustered by spatial
proximity using the QuickBundles algorithm66 in Python (Version 3.5.4), and pathlines of small
clusters deemed ‘insignificant’, as determined by a predefined threshold, were removed from
consideration. ‘Significant’ pathlines were then converted back from spatial coordinates to the cell
centered grid using a tri-linear averaging matrix and saved in nifty format for visualization in
Amira. Runtime for the Lagrangian procedure is ~3 min per dataset on a standard laptop with a
2.2 GHz Intel Core i7 processor.
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Time-varying particle attributes associated with the pathlines, such as speed and density, provide
more detailed information regarding the particle dynamics. We selectively focus on the speed for
the novel insight it provides. Specifically, speeds that makeup the aforementioned speedlines are
computed as the magnitudes of the rOMT-derived transport vectors ascribed to the time and place
of each point along the particle’s path and then visualized to analyze speed trajectories in different
brain regions and across normotensive and hypertensive states.
For each rat, one Lagrangian rOMT image reflecting pathlines and one reflecting pathline speed
(i.e. speedlines) at a voxel resolution of 0.3x0.3x0.3 for whole brain and 0.15x0.15x0.15 mm3 for
hemispheric data were computed. For the whole brain data, total pathline volume and mean
pathline speed were extracted from CSF, GM, WM and four predetermined brain regions (basal
forebrain, superior colliculus, hippocampus and cerebellum). For MCA data, pathline volume and
mean pathline speed were extracted in regions along the MCA segment on the base of the brain
(a.k.a. MCA ‘root’) and along the left MCA.
Immunohistochemistry: Animals were deeply anesthetized with ketamine/dexmedetomidine
(150 mg kg-1/2 mg kg-1 i.p) and were transcardially perfused with phosphate buffered saline (PBS)
followed by paraformaldehyde (PFA; 4% in PBS). The brains were extracted, post-fixed overnight
in PFA at 4°C and transferred to PBS. All incubations were carried out at room temperature unless
specified. Brains were sectioned coronally (50 µm) with a vibratome (Leica VT1000 S) and
underwent heat-induced epitope retrieval in citrate buffer (10 mM citric acid, 0.05% Tween 20,
pH 6.0) at 85°C for 30 min. The sections were then blocked and permeabilized for 1.5 h (1% BSA,
1% normal goat serum, and 0.3% Triton) and incubated for 2 h at 25°C with primary antibodies:
rabbit anti-AQP4 (Novus, NBP1-87679, 1:500) and chicken anti-GFAP (Abcam, ab4674, 1:1000)
in PBS, 0.05% Tween 20, and 1% BSA. Following this, sections were incubated for 2 h at 25°C
with Alexa Fluor-Plus goat anti-rabbit 555 and Alexa Fluor goat anti-chicken 647 secondary
antibodies (Invitrogen, 1:1000) in PBS with 0.05% Tween 20. The sections were then mounted on
slides and cover slipped.
The MCA brains were also processed for GFAP, AQP4 and collagen IV. The PFA fixed brains
were cryoprotected in 30% (w/v) sucrose in PBS, embedded in O.C.T. compound and snap-frozen
at -80°C. Sections were cut coronally (20 µm) using a cryostat, mounted on Colorfrost / Plus slides
and stored at -80oC. The sections were rehydrated in PBS, incubated with proteinase K
for 15 min (0.2 mg/ml) and incubated in blocking buffer for 30 min (0.3% Triton in SuperBlock
buffer). The sections were then incubated overnight at 4oC with primary antibodies: goat anticollagen IV (Novus, NBP-126549,1:200), rabbit anti-GFAP (Dako, Z0334, 1:250), rabbit antiAQP4 (Novus, NBP-1-87679) and goat anti-Iba-1 (Novus, NBP-100-1028, 1:250). The next day,
sections were incubated with Alexa Fluor 594 or 488 secondary antibodies (Invitrogen, 1:1000).
The sections were then cover slipped and sealed. Images were captured using a Keyence
fluorescence microscope BZ-X700 system.
Quantification of AQP4 polarization: Images of AQP4 immunofluorescence were captured on
a Keyence BZ-X700 automated fluorescence microscope using 4-20 ´ air objectives as z-stack
tile-scans with 3 µm z-steps in maximum contrast projections. Quantification of AQP4
polarization was done in the ventral hippocampus and occipital cortex using ImageJ software
(Image J 1.52i). The AQP4 digitized images were imported into ImageJ, scaled and converted to
optical density images. In order to unbias the analysis, a grid (150 numbered boxes) was overlaid
over the ventral hippocampus (each box area = 228 x 228 pixels) and occipital cortex (each box
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

area = 282 x 282 pixels). 15 boxes from hippocampal or cortical sections were randomly selected
for a total of ~30 small vessels and ~30 capillaries for WKY rats and the same number of vessels
in SHRSP rats. Representative line segments (300 µm for small vessels) and 100 µm for capillaries
were used to extract immuno-intensity across the micro-vessels selected in each grid-box. The
polarization index for each vessel was calculated (peak-to-baseline level).
Quantification of GFAP and AQP4 mRNA by real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR):
Astrogliosis and AQP4 water channel expression were evaluated in the brains of WKY and SHRSP
rats suing real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR). Specifically, for this purpose, mRNA levels of
the two targets (GFAP and AQP4) by qPCR was performed with the QuantStudio 3 Real-Time
PCR system (Applied Biosystems). Brain tissues of interest (WKY, N=8; SHRSP, N=8) were
quickly dissected, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 oC. Total RNA extraction was
carried out using the PARIS kit (Invitrogen) following brief homogenization using the
TissueRuptor II (Qiagen). Total RNA concentrations were measured using the SpectraMax i3x
Multi-Mode microplate reader (Molecular Devices). Samples were then treated with ezDNase
enzyme (Invitrogen) to degrade any genomic DNA and subsequently reverse transcribed to cDNA
using the Superscipt IV VILO kit (Invitrogen). Quantification of target mRNA was performed
using TaqMan gene expression assays (ThermoFisher Scientific). The PCR cycle parameters were
set according to the recommended guidelines for the TaqMan Fast Advanced Master Mix (Applied
Biosystems), which was used to run the qPCR reactions (95 °C for 2 min [polymerase activation]
followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 1 s [denture] and 60 °C for 20 s [anneal/extend]). TaqMan
primer/probe sets for AQP4 (Rn00563196_m1) and GFAP (Rn00566603_m1) were used. mRNA
target signals were normalized to the housekeeping gene RPLP0 (Rn00821065_g1). Relative fold
change values were calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method67. The mRNA target signals were firstly
normalized to the reference housekeeping gene RPLP0. Following this, relative fold change values
were calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method by normalizing the data to the cerebellum, which was
used a reference region.
Statistical information: Group sizes for the whole brain glymphatics studies were estimated
based on previous studies37, 59. For peak magnitude point comparisons, group sample sizes of 6
(WKY) and 6 (SHRSP) achieve 80% power to detect a Cohen’s effect size of 2.0, and with a
significance level (α) of 0.025 using a two-sided two-sample unequal-variance t-test. All data are
presented as mean ± SD. If data showed normal distribution, a paired or unpaired Student’s t-test
was used to compare groups. When data lacked normal distribution, groups were compared using
non-parametric testing (Mann-Whitney test for unpaired comparison, Wilcoxon signed rank test
for paired comparisons). For within-group regional differences Friedman's ANOVA was used. A
at a 0.05 level of significance and stated in the figure legends. Blinding for data analysis was done
where possible. All statistical analyses were performed using XLSTAT statistical and data analysis
solution (Addinsoft (2019). XLSTAT statistical and data analysis solution. Boston, USA.
https://www.xlstat.com) or GraphPad Prism 7 (GraphPad Software).

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References. (up to 70 references allowed)
1.

Iliff JJ, et al. A paravascular pathway facilitates CSF flow through the brain parenchyma
and the clearance of interstitial solutes, including amyloid beta. Science translational
medicine 4, 147ra111 (2012).

2.

Nedergaard M. Neuroscience. Garbage truck of the brain. Science 340, 1529-1530
(2013).

3.

Iliff JJ, et al. Impairment of glymphatic pathway function promotes tau pathology after
traumatic brain injury. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society
for Neuroscience 34, 16180-16193 (2014).

4.

Benveniste H, Liu X, Koundal S, Sanggaard S, Lee H, Wardlaw J. The Glymphatic
System and Waste Clearance with Brain Aging: A Review. Gerontology 65, 106-119
(2019).

5.

Brown R, et al. Understanding the role of the perivascular space in cerebral small vessel
disease. Cardiovasc Res, (2018).

6.

Zeppenfeld DM, et al. Association of Perivascular Localization of Aquaporin-4 With
Cognition and Alzheimer Disease in Aging Brains. JAMA Neurol 74, 91-99 (2017).

7.

Eide PK, Ringstad G. Delayed clearance of cerebrospinal fluid tracer from entorhinal
cortex in idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus: A glymphatic magnetic resonance
imaging study. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab, 271678X18760974 (2018).

8.

Iliff JJ, et al. Brain-wide pathway for waste clearance captured by contrast-enhanced
MRI. J Clin Invest 123, 1299-1309 (2013).

9.

Cserr HF. Role of secretion and bulk flow of brain interstitial fluid in brain volume
regulation. Ann N Y Acad Sci 529, 9-20 (1988).

10.

Cserr HF, Depasquale M, Patlak CS, Pullen RG. Convection of cerebral interstitial fluid
and its role in brain volume regulation. Ann N Y Acad Sci 481, 123-134 (1986).

11.

Weed LH. Studies on Cerebro-Spinal Fluid. No. III : The pathways of escape from the
Subarachnoid Spaces with particular reference to the Arachnoid Villi. J Med Res 31, 5191 (1914).

12.

Smith AJ, Verkman AS. The "glymphatic" mechanism for solute clearance in
Alzheimer's disease: game changer or unproven speculation? FASEB J 32, 543-551
(2018).

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

13.

Smith AJ, Yao X, Dix JA, Jin BJ, Verkman AS. Test of the 'glymphatic' hypothesis
demonstrates diffusive and aquaporin-4-independent solute transport in rodent brain
parenchyma. Elife 6, (2017).

14.

Jin BJ, Smith AJ, Verkman AS. Spatial model of convective solute transport in brain
extracellular space does not support a "glymphatic" mechanism. J Gen Physiol 148, 489501 (2016).

15.

Abbott NJ, Pizzo ME, Preston JE, Janigro D, Thorne RG. The role of brain barriers in
fluid movement in the CNS: is there a 'glymphatic' system? Acta Neuropathol 135, 387407 (2018).

16.

Smith AJ, Verkman AS. CrossTalk opposing view: Going against the flow: interstitial
solute transport in brain is diffusive and aquaporin-4 independent. J Physiol, (2019).

17.

Smith AJ, Verkman AS. Rebuttal from Alex J. Smith and Alan S. Verkman. J Physiol,
(2019).

18.

Simon M, Iliff J. Rebuttal from Matthew Simon and Jeffrey Iliff. J Physiol, (2019).

19.

Iliff JJ, et al. Cerebral arterial pulsation drives paravascular CSF-interstitial fluid
exchange in the murine brain. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the
Society for Neuroscience 33, 18190-18199 (2013).

20.

Rennels ML, Gregory TF, Blaumanis OR, Fujimoto K, Grady PA. Evidence for a
'paravascular' fluid circulation in the mammalian central nervous system, provided by the
rapid distribution of tracer protein throughout the brain from the subarachnoid space.
Brain Res 326, 47-63 (1985).

21.

Mestre H, et al. Flow of cerebrospinal fluid is driven by arterial pulsations and is reduced
in hypertension. Nat Commun 9, 4878 (2018).

22.

Abbott NJ. Evidence for bulk flow of brain interstitial fluid: significance for physiology
and pathology. Neurochem Int 45, 545-552 (2004).

23.

Holter KE, et al. Interstitial solute transport in 3D reconstructed neuropil occurs by
diffusion rather than bulk flow. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114, 9894-9899 (2017).

24.

Asgari M, de Zelicourt D, Kurtcuoglu V. Glymphatic solute transport does not require
bulk flow. Sci Rep 6, 38635 (2016).

25.

Gupta S, Soellinger M, Boesiger P, Poulikakos D, Kurtcuoglu V. Three-dimensional
computational modeling of subject-specific cerebrospinal fluid flow in the subarachnoid
space. J Biomech Eng 131, 021010 (2009).

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

26.

Rey J, Sarntinoranont M. Pulsatile flow drivers in brain parenchyma and perivascular
spaces: a resistance network model study. Fluids Barriers CNS 15, 20 (2018).

27.

Keith Sharp M, Carare RO, Martin BA. Dispersion in porous media in oscillatory flow
between flat plates: applications to intrathecal, periarterial and paraarterial solute
transport in the central nervous system. Fluids Barriers CNS 16, 13 (2019).

28.

Rachev ST, Rüschendorf L. Mass Transportation Problems. Springer (1998).

29.

Ratner V, et al. Cerebrospinal and interstitial fluid transport via the glymphatic pathway
modeled by optimal mass transport. NeuroImage 152, 530-537 (2017).

30.

Yongxin C, Eldad H, Kaoru Y, T. GT, Tannenbaum A. An Efficient Algorithm for
Matrix-Valued and Vector-Valued Optimal Mass Transport. J Scientific Computing 77,
79-100 (2018).

31.

Brenier Y, et al. Reconstruction of the early Universe as a convex optimization problem.
Mon Not R Astron Soc 346, 501-524 (2003).

32.

Kolouri S, Park SR, Thorpe M, Slepcev D, Rohde GK. Optimal Mass Transport Signal
processing and machine-learning applications. Ieee Signal Proc Mag 34, 43-59 (2017).

33.

Villani C. Optimal Transport: Old and New. Grundlehr Math Wiss 338, 1-973 (2009).

34.

Benamou JD, Brenier Y. A computational fluid mechanics solution to the MongeKantorovic mass transfer problem. Numirische Mathematik 84, 375-393 (2000).

35.

Peng W, et al. Suppression of glymphatic fluid transport in a mouse model of
Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiology of disease 93, 215-225 (2016).

36.

Kress BT, et al. Impairment of paravascular clearance pathways in the aging brain.
Annals of neurology 76, 845-861 (2014).

37.

Nygaard Mortensen K, et al. Impaired Glymphatic Transport in Spontaneously
Hypertensive Rats. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for
Neuroscience, (2019).

38.

Jiang Q, et al. Impairment of the glymphatic system after diabetes. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 37, 1326-1337 (2017).

39.

Lee H, et al. Quantitative Gd-DOTA uptake from cerebrospinal fluid into rat brain using
3D VFA-SPGR at 9.4T. Magn Reson Med 79, 1568-1578 (2018).

40.

Bedussi B, et al. Enhanced interstitial fluid drainage in the hippocampus of
spontaneously hypertensive rats. Sci Rep 7, 744 (2017).

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

41.

Koundal S, et al. Brain Morphometry and Longitudinal Relaxation Time of
Spontaneously Hypertensive Rats (SHRs) in Early and Intermediate Stages of
Hypertension Investigated by 3D VFA-SPGR MRI. Neuroscience 404, 14-26 (2019).

42.

Ritter S, Dinh TT. Progressive postnatal dilation of brain ventricles in spontaneously
hypertensive rats. Brain Res 370, 327-332 (1986).

43.

Ghosh D, Ghosh PP, Gambhir S, Kohli A. Normal pressure hydrocephalus role of
radionuclide cisternography. Neurol India 45, 231-239 (1997).

44.

Benveniste H, Huttemeier PC. Microdialysis--theory and application. Prog Neurobiol 35,
195-215 (1990).

45.

Nicholson C, Sykova E. Extracellular space structure revealed by diffusion analysis.
Trends in neurosciences 21, 207-215 (1998).

46.

Xie L, et al. Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain. Science 342, 373-377
(2013).

47.

Benveniste H, et al. Anesthesia with Dexmedetomidine and Low-dose Isoflurane
Increases Solute Transport via the Glymphatic Pathway in Rat Brain When Compared
with High-dose Isoflurane. Anesthesiology, (2017).

48.

Mestre H, et al. Aquaporin-4-dependent glymphatic solute transport in the rodent brain.
Elife 7, (2018).

49.

Monge G. Mémoire sur la théorie des déblais et des remblais. . In: Histoire de l’Académie
Royale des Sciences de Paris, avec les Mémoires de Mathématique et de Physique pour
la même année (ed^(eds). Paris: De I'Imprimerie Royale (1871).

50.

Lee H, et al. Quantitative Gd-DOTA uptake from cerebrospinal fluid into rat brain using
3D VFA-SPGR at 9.4T. Magn Reson Med In Press, (2017).

51.

White FM. Viscous fluid flow, 3rd edn. McGraw-Hill Higher Education (2006).

52.

White FM, Corfield I. Viscous fluid flow. McGraw-Hill (2006).

53.

Lee H, et al. The Effect of Body Posture on Brain Glymphatic Transport. The Journal of
neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 35, 11034-11044
(2015).

54.

Davoodi-Bojd E, et al. Modeling glymphatic system of the brain using MRI. NeuroImage
188, 616-627 (2019).

55.

Horn B. Robot vision, MIT Press edn. MIT Press ; McGraw-Hill (1986).

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

56.

Wardlaw JM, Smith C, Dichgans M. Mechanisms of sporadic cerebral small vessel
disease: insights from neuroimaging. The Lancet Neurology 12, 483-497 (2013).

57.

Pedder H, Vesterinen HM, Macleod MR, Wardlaw JM. Systematic review and metaanalysis of interventions tested in animal models of lacunar stroke. Stroke 45, 563-570
(2014).

58.

Chen Y, Georgiou TT, Tannenbaum A. Interpolation of matrices and matrix-valued
densities: The unbalanced case. European Journal of Applied Mathematics 30, 1-23
(2019).

59.

Benveniste H, et al. Anesthesia with Dexmedetomidine and Low-dose Isoflurane
Increases Solute Transport via the Glymphatic Pathway in Rat Brain When Compared
with High-dose Isoflurane. Anesthesiology 127, 976-988 (2017).

60.

Kjonigsen LJ, Lillehaug S, Bjaalie JG, Witter MP, Leergaard TB. Waxholm Space atlas
of the rat brain hippocampal region: three-dimensional delineations based on magnetic
resonance and diffusion tensor imaging. NeuroImage 108, 441-449 (2015).

61.

Ashburner J. A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm. NeuroImage 38, 95-113
(2007).

62.

Ashburner J, Friston KJ. Unified segmentation. NeuroImage 26, 839-851 (2005).

63.

Chen Y, Georgious TT, Payon M. On the relation between optimal transport and
Schrödinger bridges: A stochastic control viewpoint. Journal of Optimization Theory and
Applications 169, 671-691 (2016).

64.

Tofts PS, et al. Estimating kinetic parameters from dynamic contrast-enhanced T(1)weighted MRI of a diffusable tracer: standardized quantities and symbols. J Magn Reson
Imaging 10, 223-232 (1999).

65.

Steklova K, Haber E. Joint hydrogeophysical inversion: state estimation for seawater
intrusion models in 3D. Computat Geosci 21, 75-94 (2017).

66.

Garyfallidis E, Brett M, Correia MM, Williams GB, Nimmo-Smith I. QuickBundles, a
Method for Tractography Simplification. Front Neurosci 6, 175 (2012).

67.

Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD. Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time
quantitative PCR and the 2(T)(-Delta Delta C) method. Methods 25, 402-408 (2001).

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Information for “Glymphatic Optimal Mass Transport with Lagrangian
Workflow Reveals Advective and Diffusion Driven Solute Transport” by Koundal et al.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Fig. 1: Morphometric brain analysis of WKY and SHRSP rats. Voxel wise
deformation-based morphometry results displayed as a color-coded p-value map overlaid on
spatially normalized, population averaged proton-density weighted anatomical MRI brain images
of WKY (n=6) and SHRSP (n=6) rats. The top series of images shows regions that are larger in
WKY compared to SHRSP rats, including areas associated with the white matter of cerebellum
and the splenium of corpus callosum. The bottom series of images highlights areas that are
significantly larger in SHRSP than WKY rats, including frontal cortical regions, the periaqueductal
grey, and the aqueduct.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Fig. 2: Processing steps for rOMT Lagrangian GS transport flow
derivatives
DCE-MRI images (% Signal change from baseline)

a

rOMT

Model output (interpolated images and velocity fields)

b

Time window of rOMT
35

GLaD

% Signal change from baseline

30

d

c

25

Speedlines

Pathlines

20

15

10

5

0
0

50

100

150

200

Time (min)
rOMT an alysis
(0-160
min) min)
Experimental
window
(0-160

rOMT
WBanalysis
(50-160 min)
(50-160 min)

e

Compartmental
analysis

Supplementary Fig. 2: Regularized optimal mass transport (rOMT) and Lagrangian
representation of Glymphatics Dynamics (GLaD) pipeline for visualizing transport flows
over a predetermined time interval (a) DCE-MRIs over a 120 min experimental window (50160 min) were fed as inputs into the rOMT model (b) The model returns the interpolated density
images and velocity fields which are (c) subsequently processed by our GLaD visualization
framework. (d) Advective and diffusive GS transport is expressed by the pathlines captured in the
Lagrangian analysis with corresponding dynamic speedlines. Binary pathlines were used to extract
flow volume and speedlines were used to assess spatial distribution of speed trajectories in whole
brain as well as to derive mean speed values. (e) Thereafter, compartmental analysis is carried out
based on tissue masks derived from the morphometric analysis.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Fig. 3: Diffusion phantom for validating diffusion constraint in the rOMT
formulation.

Supplementary Fig. 3: Diffusion phantom with microdialysis tube
We validated that the rOMT algorithm captures Fick’s law using a custom built ‘diffusion’
phantom with a microdialysis membrane. A linear designed microdialysis probe (outer diameter
260µm, molecular weight cut off 55kDa, CMR 31) was inserted through the center of a 3D printed,
MR compatible holder containing 0.5% agar (20x20x30 mm). The phantom was placed in the 9.4T
MRI scanner equipped with 40 mm ID RF transmit/receive coil and the microdialysis membrane
was perfused for 43 min (108 µl) with Gd-DOTA (12 mM) at 2.5 µl/min using a micro-infusion
pump after which Gd-DOTA solutes moved into the agar medium driven by diffusion. Pre- and
post-contrast DCE-MRI were acquired using the same parameters as for the in vivo study. A total
of 140 frames were collected at an interval of 2.5 min per frame under constant temperature (2122oC).

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Fig. 4: Directional tracer movement from CSF into the tissue

Supplemental Fig. 4 rOMT relation to compartmental models. (a) 3D rendering of boundary
𝐵 of tissue compartment 𝐶. (b) Representative slice of the whole brain showing the CSF
compartment in red and the tissue compartment (gray matter and white matter) in pink. Normal
vectors (of unit length) pointing from the CSF compartment into the tissue compartment are shown
along the CSF-tissue boundary as black arrows. (c) Mean (advective + diffusive) flux that moved
from CSF into the tissue compartment is significantly higher in normotensive (WKY) than
hypertensive (SHRSP) cases.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Fig. 5: Measuring AQP4 polarization index in WKY and SHRSP rats

Supplementary Fig. 5: (a) AQP4 immunofluorescence at the level of ventral hippocampus from
a WKY rat. (b) For quantification of AQP4 polarization, a uniform, 154 box grid was overlaid
using ImageJ (Image J 1.52i). (c) 10 and 15 random numbers were selected from the 154-box grid
for measurement of small vessels and capillaries, respectively. The arrow points to the linear ROIs
crossing the lumen of the small vessel of interest in the grid of interest. (d) The optical density
profile from the ROI in (c) is displayed along with the calculated polarization index. Specifically,
for polarity calculation, the peak intensity of the vascular end-feet was divided by the average of
the baseline.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Fig. 6: qPCR analysis of GFAP and AQP4 in WKY and SHRSP rats

Regional GFAP expression
across strains

0.800
0.600
0.400
0.200

Co
rte
x

po
ca
m
pu
s
St
ria
tu
m
Th
al
am
us
Ce
re
be
llu
m

0.000

WKY (N=8)

SHRSP (N=8)

1.500

1.000

0.500

0.000
po
ca
m
pu
s
St
ria
tu
m
Th
al
am
us
Ce
re
be
llu
m

1.000

2.000

Hi
p

1.200

2.500

Co
rte
x

Relative-fold change (normalized to cerebellum

1.400

Hi
p

Relative fold change in AQP4 (normalized to cerebllum)

Regional AQP4 expression
across strains

WKY (N=8)

SHRSP (N=8)

Supplementary Fig. 6: qPCR analysis of GFAP and AQP4 expression in WKY and SHRSP
rats. qPCR analysis of AQP4 (left) and GFAP (right) mRNA expression in WKY (n=8) and
SHRSP (n=8) rats assessed in cortex, hippocampus, striatum and thalamus. Relative fold change
values were calculated by normalizing to the cerebellum. Data are expressed as mean relative fold
change values ± standard deviation. No significant differences were found between regional AQP4
and GFAP mRNA expression across strains. All statistical analyses were performed using
Addinsoft (2019). XLSTAT statistical and data analysis solution. Boston, USA.
https://www.xlstat.com.

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Fig. 7 Exploration of vasculature and microvasculature at the level of circle
of Willis in WKY and SHRSP rat

Supplementary Fig. 7: Exploration of the microvasculature in WKY and SHRSP at the level
of circle of Willis. (a, b) Contrast enhanced MRIs from a WKY rat at the level of the circle of
Willis near the take off of the middle cerebral artery (MCA). Contrast in the perivascular space
along the circle of Willis and middle cerebral artery is evidenced as a high intensity signal along
the vasculature (black signal). (c) Collagen IV immunofluorescence of a WKY rat. Insert shows
the area of interest near the large vessels at the ventral surface of the brain. (d-f) Representative
confocal montages of collagen IV labeling from three different WKY rats at the site highlighted
by the white box in (c). Smaller networks of capillaries (7-10 µm in diameter) were observed at
the base of the brain surrounding penetrating arteries and appear interweaved into a small network.
(g-i) In corresponding images from the SHRSP rats, collagen IV labeling showed the capillary
networks (a.k.a. rete) were distributed over slightly larger areas around penetrating arteries.
Further, the capillary networks appeared denser and the individual vessels were larger (10-20 µm
in diameter). We speculate that the microvascular network remodeling might have affected the
PVS transport from the circle of Willis in SHRSP compared to WKY rats.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/765370; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Movie 1. Regularized OMT model (rOMT) captures diffusive agar phantom
behavior. rOMT-returned interpolated images (right) are consistent with DCE-MRI phantom
data (left). rOMT successfully models diffusive transport from regions of higher intensity to
regions of lower intensity in accordance with Fick’s law, shown by diffusive flux vectors in
green. See Movie1.mov.
Supplementary Movie 2: Contrast-enhanced dynamic MRI from normal WKY rat showing signal
changes along the middle cerebral artery over ≈3hr CSF Gd-DOTA circulation. See Movie2.mpg.
Supplementary Table 1: Physiological data and anesthetics
Experiment
Parameter
Animals
WKY
anesthetized? (N=11)
Non-invasive Systolic blood
No
116 ± 14
Blood
pressure (mmHg)
pressure
Diastolic blood
No
85 ± 11
pressure (mmHg)
Pulse pressure
No
32 ± 9
(mmHg)
Experiment
Parameter
Animals
WKY
anesthetized? (N=6)
Invasive
Mean arterial
Yes
76 ± 14
blood
blood pressure
pressure
(mmHg)
Experiment
Parameter
Animals
WKY
anesthetized? (N=11)
Glymphatics Mean heart rate
Yes
221 ± 20
Experiments (bpm)
Mean respiratory
Yes
45 ± 6
rate (breath/min)
Mean infusion rate N/A
0.10 ± 0.03
of
dexmedetomidine*
(ml/hr)
Mean inspiratory
N/A
1.1 ± 0.2
isoflurane
concentration (%)

SHRSP
(N=11)
150 ± 23

p-value

98 ± 21

0.151

51 ± 13

0.001

SHRSP
(N=5)
123 ± 25

p-value

SHRSP
(N=10)
235 ± 14

p-value

46 ± 7

0.650

0.10 ± 0.03

0.748

1.0 ± 0.2

0.932

0.0004

0.004

0.049

Data are mean ± SD. *Concentration of dexmedetomidine used for infusion: 0.025mg/ml.

39

