bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Genomics of clinal local adaptation in Pinus sylvestris under
continuous environmental and spatial genetic setting

Jaakko S. Tyrmi1, 2, *, Jaana Vuosku1, Juan J. Acosta3, Zhen Li4,5, Lieven Sterck4,5, Maria T.
Cervera6, Outi Savolainen1, 2 and Tanja Pyhäjärvi1, 2

1

Department of Ecology and Genetics, University of Oulu, FI-90014 Oulu, Finland

2

Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, FI-90014 Oulu, Finland

3

Camcore, Department of Forestry and Environmental Resources, North Carolina State

University, Raleigh, NC, USA
4

Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Technologiepark

71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium
5

VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 71, 9052 Ghent, Belgium

6

Centro de Investigación Forestal (CIFOR), Instituto Nacional de Investigaciones Agrarias

(INIA), 28040 Madrid, Spain
*Corresponding author E-mail: jaakko.tyrmi@gmail.com

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Understanding the consequences of local adaptation at the genomic diversity is a central goal
in evolutionary genetics of natural populations. In species with large continuous geographical
distributions the phenotypic signal of local adaptation is frequently clear, but the genetic
background often remains elusive. We examined the patterns of genetic diversity in Pinus
sylvestris, a keystone species in many Eurasian ecosystems with a huge distribution range and
decades of forestry research showing that it is locally adapted to the vast range of
environmental conditions. Making P. sylvestris an even more attractive subject of local
adaptation study, population structure has been shown to be weak previously and in this
study. However, little is known about the molecular genetic basis of adaptation, as the
massive size of gymnosperm genomes has prevented large scale genomic surveys. We
generated a both geographically and genomically extensive dataset using a targeted
sequencing approach. By applying divergence-based and landscape genomics methods we
found that several coding loci contribute to local adaptation. We also discovered a very large
(ca. 300 Mbp) putative inversion with a signal of local adaptation, which to our knowledge is
the first such discovery in conifers. Our results call for more detailed analysis of structural
variation in relation to genomic basis of local adaptation, emphasize the lack of large effect
loci contributing to local adaptation in the coding regions and thus point out to the need for
more attention towards multi-locus analysis of polygenic adaptation.

Keywords: adaptation, population genetics – empirical, landscape genetics, gymnosperms

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Populations of species with vast continuous distributions often inhabit very different
environments. These populations are often locally adapted, defined as each population having
higher fitness than any introduced population at its home site (Kawecki & Ebert, 2004),
preferably demonstrated by performing reciprocal transplant experiment (Savolainen,
Lascoux, & Merilä, 2013) as has been done with many plant species, such as the Arabidopsis
genus (e.g. Leinonen, Remington, & Savolainen, 2011, Ågren & Schemske, 2012, Hämälä et al.,
2018). Local adaptation can also be inferred from patterns of phenotypic variation or
environmental correlation, as has been shown for example, in Drosophila melanogaster
(Adrion, Hahn, & Cooper, 2015), humans (Fan, Hansen, Lo, & Tishkoff, 2016) and also forest
trees (Alberto, Derory, et al., 2013; Savolainen, Pyhäjärvi, & Knürr, 2007).

Local adaptation with a polygenic basis has received more attention lately, because a great
deal of adaptive variation is quantitative with multiple underlying loci (Berg & Coop, 2014;
Buckler et al., 2009; Rockman, 2012; Yeaman, 2015). A well-known model of polygenic
adaptation of a single population in a new environment is presented by the Fisher/Orr model
(Fisher, 1918; Orr, 1998) which predicts an exponential distribution of QTL effects (see
Nicholas H. Barton & Keightley, 2002). However, local adaptation takes place due to
differential selection in different populations in variable environments, possibly connected by
gene flow. This kind of selection often results in phenotypic clines (Huxley 1938). Several
theoretical predictions for the underlying genetic architecture of clines have been proposed.
While differential selection along environmental gradients in continuous populations on single

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

locus governed traits is expected to result in allele frequency clines (e.g. Slatkin, 1973), for
polygenic models the expectations are more complex.

Barton (Barton, 1999) has examined a model with polygenic architecture where a subset of
loci will have successive, sharp allele frequency clines along the environmental gradient and
maintain the phenotypic mean close to the optimum. The underlying loci are, perhaps
unrealistically, expected to have similar effect size on the trait. Such sharp allele frequency
clines would be seen as FST outliers, although the majority of loci governing the underlying
traits may remain undetected as most alleles are expected to stay near fixation throughout
the range in this model.

Latta (Latta, 1998, 2003) and LeCorre and Kremer (Kremer & Le Corre, 2012; Le Corre &
Kremer, 2003a, 2012) show that in a high gene flow and strong selection scenario of a
polygenic trait, the contribution of covariance between loci becomes more important than
between population allele frequency differentiation. Also, in a simulation study Yeaman
(2015) has shown that local adaptation is indeed a possible outcome even when only small
effect alleles are present given that there is enough standing genetic variation. Most
importantly in this model, the contributions of individual loci may be transient making
detection of the contributing loci more difficult. Nonetheless, allele frequency clines have
been observed in many empirical studies (e.g. (Adrion et al., 2015; Savolainen et al., 2007;
Schmidt et al., 2008).

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Even with genome-wide datasets of tens or hundreds of thousands of loci sampled across
localities, identifying the loci underlying adaptive clinal variation remain a challenge. The
majority of methods for uncovering adaptive loci are based on the island model of population
structure (Excoffier, Hofer, & Foll, 2009; Foll & Gaggiotti, 2008; Lewontin & Krakauer, 1973;
Vitalis, Gautier, Dawson, & Beaumont, 2014) and do not fully utilize the spatial information
on the clinal genetic variation. Environmental association analysis (Coop, Witonsky, Di Rienzo,
& Pritchard, 2010) and simple regression models can be used to identify clinal trends (e.g.
Chen et al., 2012; S T Kujala et al., 2017; Ma, Hall, St. Onge, Jansson, & Ingvarsson, 2010).

It is also important to consider putative effects of recombination across adaptive loci on the
genetic architecture of local adaptation. The effect of gene flow is expected to override the
effect of weak differential selection on a particular locus. However, physical linkage between
multiple small effect alleles makes them behave like a single large effect allele, as described
by Yeaman and Whitlock (2011). They show that local adaptation under gene flow may favor
genetic architecture where recombination is reduced between loci contributing to local
adaptation, which may be caused by physical proximity, transposable element action,
translocations or inversions (Kirkpatrick & Barton, 2006). This will result in increased linkage
disequilibrium (LD), and thus the examination of unusual LD patterns may be a fruitful
approach in discovering the genetic architecture of local adaptation.

The range of Pinus sylvestris (Scots pine) spans a huge distribution area in Eurasia from
southern Spain to northern Scandinavia and eastern Russia. Its distribution is mostly
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

continuous displaying only limited population structure in the nuclear genome, with the
exception of some of the more isolated populations for instance in Spain and Italy (Karhu et
al., 1996; Kujala & Savolainen, 2012; Pyhajarvi et al., 2007). However, differentiation within
the main range can be seen in mitochondrial haplotype structure, providing information about
the recent colonization routes of P. sylvestris (Cheddadi et al., 2006; Naydenov, Senneville,
Beaulieu, Tremblay, & Bousquet, 2007; T Pyhäjärvi et al., 2007).

In P. sylvestris multiple latitudinal phenotypic clines have been repeatedly observed in traits
important for abiotic adaptation such as cold tolerance (Aho, 1994; Eiche, 1966; Hurme, Repo,
Savolainen, & Pääkkönen, 1997; Hurme, Sillanpää, Repo, Arjas, & Savolainen, 2000) and the
timing of growth start and cessation (Beuker, 1994; Karhu et al., 1996; Mikola, 1982). These
traits vary latitudinally with environmental conditions, such as temperature, day length, UV
radiation intensity and seasonality. Common garden experiments have shown that these traits
have a considerable genetic basis suggesting local adaptation (Alberto, Aitken, et al., 2013).
When searching for genomic basis of local adaptation, demographic effects may lead to
spurious signals if the underlying population structure remans unaccounted for (Hoban et al.,
2016). Lack of genome-wide structure, together with highly differentiated phenotypic
variation, makes P. sylvestris an ideal species for investigating the genetic basis of local
adaptation in large genome. Furthermore, low level of genetic diversity (Kujala & Savolainen,
2012) and lack of any known hybridization with other species should aid in detecting nonequilibrium patterns in the genome. Genetic background of the adaptation remains largely
unknown even though some details have been uncovered in previous studies using data from

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

few candidate genes. Only few FST outliers have been found, but several cases of latitudinal
allele frequency clines and variants associated to timing of bud set have been uncovered
(Kujala et al., 2017; Kujala & Savolainen, 2012). Similar observations of allele frequency clines
have been made in other tree species as well, such as Populus (Evans et al., 2014; Ma et al.,
2010) and Picea (e.g. Chen et al., 2012; Holliday, Ritland, & Aitken, 2010).

Clinal variation, genetic differences across the range and the effect of natural selection in P.
sylvestris are obvious at the phenotypic level. In this study we use the first genome-wide
dataset of genetic diversity in P. sylvestris to answer the following questions regarding the
manifestation of the phenotypic patterns at the molecular level of variation: 1) Are there
deviating levels of genome-wide genetic diversity or LD patterns indicating the impact of local
selection? 2) Have dispersal patterns (wind pollination) and the continuous distribution,
common in tree species, resulted in spatially continuous isolation-by-distance pattern across
the genome and distribution range? 3) Do we see genomic signatures of local adaptation in
the form of allele frequency clines, FST outliers or differentiation of structural variation in P.
sylvestris?

Materials and methods
Plant material and genotyping
Seeds from 109 P. sylvestris samples from 12 populations spanning 31 degrees of latitude
were used in generating the dataset for this study (Figure 1, Table 1). The main sampling area
included two latitudinal gradients, one from northern Finland to Poland and another north-

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

south gradient in western Russia. A total of 120 samples were initially genotyped, of which
one was later removed due to sampling the same tree twice and additional 10 were removed
due to low sequencing coverage. Haploid genomic DNA was extracted from
megagametophyte tissue by using E.Z.N.A.® SP Plant DNA kit (Omega Biotek). DNA was
fragmented to an average length of 200 nucleotides with Bioruptor® ultrasonicator
(Diagenode). Libraries were prepared by using NEBNext® DNA Library Prep Master Mix Set for
Illumina and NEBNext Multiplex Oligos for Illumina E7600S (New England BioLabs) for
multiplex sequencing, multiplexing libraries of four samples. Targeted capture was performed
for each pool according to MycroArray MYbaits protocol v.2.3.1.

Bait design for targeted sequence capture
The genome size of the P. sylvestris is about 23.6 Gbp (Zonneveld, 2012) and there is no
reference genome available. As whole genome resequencing approaches are not
economically feasible at large scale, baits targeting genic regions together with Illumina paired
end sequencing were used to assess allele frequency patterns at genome wide level. Bait
design was based on a set of P. sylvestris transcripts described previously (Z. Li et al., 2017).
Briefly, transcriptomes of P. sylvestris were assembled from 454 read data derived from
different developmental stages using the Newbler software (v2.8.1). Those were then
integrated with public transcriptomes from PlantGDB-assembled Unique Transcripts (based
on GeneBank release 187) and a public set of EST assemblies. This initial set contains 121,538
transcripts on which 36,106 open reading frames (ORFs) were predicted by TransDecoder
(r20131117). The ORFs were then mapped against the repeat masked P. taeda reference

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

genome version 1.01 (Neale et al., 2014) with gmap (Wu & Nacu, 2010) in order to obtain exon
sequences. An ORF was omitted if it could be mapped equally well to several locations of the
reference suggesting a paralogous sequence. In total 10,330 ORFs encompassing an area of
12,221,835 bp were selected as targets for initial bait design.

MycroArray MYbaits (Ann Arbor, MI) service was used to create an initial set of 100 base long
baits with 2x tiling resulting in a total of 176,334 baits. Four pilot experiments including target
capture and sequencing were then conducted to determine bait performance. The putative
position of each bait in the genome was determined by aligning the bait sequences to the P.
taeda reference genome v. 1.01 (Neale et al., 2014) with blastn. A well working bait was
defined as having a unique high-quality hit to omit possible paralogous sequences, at least 75
out of 100 bases aligning to omit baits on exon-intron boundaries and less than 4 %
mismatches to ensure successful alignment. To analyze bait ability to capture target areas 2 x
100 bp paired-end sequencing reads were generated in total for 32 P. sylvestris
megagametophyte and needle samples with Illumina Hiseq 2500 instrument and 2 x 150 bp
paired-end reads with MiSeq instrument. Baits failing to capture any sequence were omitted
from the final bait set. After filtering 60,000 high quality bait sequences were selected as the
final bait set that was used for examining the 109 samples used in this study.

Genotype calling workflow
Raw reads from Illumina sequencing were aligned to P. taeda reference genome version 1.01
with bowtie2 version 1.1.1 (Langmead & Salzberg, 2012) with parameters --no-mixed --no9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

discordant --no-unal. The resulting SAM files were modified with Picard toolkit
(http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/) and SAMTools (H. Li et al., 2009) by converting SAM
files to BAM format with SamFormatConverter, sorting with SortSam, removing duplicate
sequences with MarkDuplicates, defining read groups with AddOrReplaceReadGroups and
indexing with SAMTools index. Examination of alignments revealed that the repetitive nature
of the P. sylvestris genome was causing issues in read alignment and possibly leading to
spurious SNP calls. The process of detecting the issue and circumventing incorrect SNP calls is
described in supplementary methods. In short, the SNP calling was performed twice using
freebayes, first to detect problematic areas identified as heterozygous SNP calls not expected
when sequencing haploid DNA, and second time to call SNPs in only in problem-free areas.

The technical quality was evaluated by generating a fastqc quality report for raw reads,
samtools flagstat report for alignment success, along with visual inspection of alignments with
samtools tview and Integrative Genomics Viewer (Thorvaldsdóttir, Robinson, & Mesirov,
2013). Based on these reports, 10 samples were removed due to low technical quality. Variant
calls were filtered with VCFtools (Danecek et al., 2011) to remove sites with quality score
below 30 and read depth lower than 5. The entire variant position was removed if it contained
non-SNP variants, non-biallelic variants, or had more than 33 % missing data. The final highquality dataset contained 81,301 SNPs. The genotype calling workflow was parallelized using
workflow management software STAPLER (Tyrmi, 2018).

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Diversity and population structure
To estimate the levels of genetic diversity, pairwise nucleotide diversity (Nei & Li, 1979) was
calculated with a modified version of python script provided in Garner et al. (2016). The size
of available genome used for analysis was 3.8 Mbp. To calculate Tajima’s D and pairwise Fst
the SNP data set was filtered with vcftools --thin parameter to remove variants closer than 10
kbp from each other to reduce correlation between sites due to physical proximity. After
filtering, a set of 4,874 SNPs were available.

Tajima’s D estimates (Tajima, 1989) were calculated for the whole dataset and also for each
population separately using ¶a¶i (Gutenkunst, Hernandez, Williamson, & Bustamante, 2009).
The allele frequency spectrum was generated using ¶a¶i with first down-projecting the sample
size to 86 to account for missing data. Hudson’s (1992) pairwise FST values were then
calculated for each population pair by using the equation developed by Bhatia et al. (2013) for
a two-population, two locus scenario. An unbiased genome-wide estimate of FST for each
population pair was obtained by calculating the nominator and denominator of equation 10
presented in Bhatia et al. (2013) separately for each site, averaged over all sites after which
the division was performed.

Population structure was also examined with principal component analysis (PCA) (McVean,
2009) using the prcomp R package. Sample size was evened between different populations to
six as uneven sample sizes may distort the PCA projections. For the analysis singleton variants
were removed as recommended for instance by Galinsky et al. (2016).
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Population structure was further analyzed by using STRUCTURE software (Pritchard, Stephens,
& Donnelly, 2000). As STRUCTURE is computationally demanding the SNP set was stringently
filtered to obtain a smaller high-quality data set of 4,197 bi-allelic SNPs. At least 10 kbp
distance between variants, minor allele frequency of 0.3 and maximum proportion of missing
data per site of 0.2 was used. Burn-in length of 250,000 and run length of 50,000 steps were
used. K values from 1 to 10 were tested with three replicate runs for each value of K. The
software package Clumpak (Kopelman, Mayzel, Jakobsson, Rosenberg, & Mayrose, 2015) was
used to visualize the results and in determining the most likely value of K by using the method
of Evanno et al. (2005).

The R-package conStruct (Bradburd, Coop, & Ralph, 2018) was used for spatial analysis of
population structure. It allows explicit testing for presence of isolation-by-distance, often
found in continuous populations and thus reduces the probability of overestimating the
number of potential clusters. Two models, non-spatial which is similar to the model the
ADMIXTURE software uses (Alexander, Novembre, & Lange, 2009), and a spatial model which
accounts for isolation-by-distance patterns, were tested. For both models K-values from 1 to
5 were examined using 50,000 iterations in each. To test whether the spatial or non-spatial
model better explains the genetic variation and to compare results between different K-values
the cross-validation pipeline provided with conStruct was used with 50 iterations up to K value
of 8 (Figure S1).

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The level of LD in the dataset was estimated with the allelic frequencies correlation coefficient
r2 (Hill & Robertson, 1968). r2 was calculated between all variants located within the same
scaffold over all populations as the populations are nearly panmictic according to the
conStruct analysis. Singletons were omitted from this analysis.

To detect loci forming allele frequency clines along the sampled latitudinal gradients, possibly
indicating that they are under varying selective pressure along the gradient, a test of
generalized linear mixed effect models was fitted for all loci using R package lme4. The first
model was created with glmer function for each SNP by setting genotypes as a response
variable, population information as a fixed effect and latitude as a random effect. The second
model was created similarly but with latitude omitted. The two models were then compared
to each other by calculating a p-value with ANOVA to infer whether or not latitude contributes
to the model. The Baza population was omitted from all selection scan analyses as it was
shown to be the only population clearly differentiated from the others in every analysis of
population structure. In addition the method bayenv (Coop et al., 2010) was tested, but the
results are not reported because extreme inconsistencies were observed between
independent runs that included population covariance structure, indicating a high risk of false
positive outliers.

To identify putative loci responsible for local adaptation we used the program pcadapt (Luu,
Bazin, & Blum, 2017). It infers population structure with PCA and then identifies putative
outliers with respect to how they are related to the population structure, making it well suited
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

for examining datasets containing isolation-by-distance patterns. We used all SNPs with minor
allele count over 10 and with Baza population omitted for generating PCA. The number of
principal components to be used in the outlier analysis was chosen as two, by first producing
a scree plot (Figure S2) with pcadapt and then applying Cattell’s graphical rule.

To further detect potential loci underlying local adaptation, we also used the Bayesian FSToutlier method bayescan (Foll & Gaggiotti, 2008) that is based on identifying locus specific
components affecting allele frequencies as a signal of selection. Bayescan was run with default
parameters with the exception of setting prior odds for the neutral model to 100 from the
default of 10 to account for the large set of SNPs as per the recommendation of bayescan
documentation.

Bayescan analysis also revealed the presence of a large haplotype structure in 11 samples with
SNPs in complete LD in several scaffolds. To find all scaffolds included in the haplotype
structure an r2 value was calculated between one of the SNPs contained in the haplotype and
all other SNPs in our dataset. Scaffolds containing one or more SNPs with r2 value of 1.0 in this
comparison were then assumed to be part of the haplotype structure. As it is possible that
SNPs are in complete LD only by chance, we examined how likely it is that the whole haplotype
structure would be due to chance. This was done by randomly choosing 10,000 sets of
scaffolds with each set having similar properties to the ones containing the haplotypes and
testing how often similar haplotype structure could be seen. More specifically, each
randomized set contained similar number of scaffolds (59) with similar number of SNPs (25
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

per scaffold) and contained at least one SNP with equally high or higher minor allele frequency
(11/109) as the scaffolds containing the haplotype.

Raw Illumina sequences are openly available at NCBI SRA with accession number (TBA). Scripts
and relevant output files are accessible at Dryad (TBA) (Tyrmi et al. 2019).

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results
Nucleotide diversity
Pairwise synonymous nucleotide diversity averaged over populations was 0.0039 with
different populations showing similar diversity (Table 1). 𝜋" /𝜋# ratio was on average 0.394
and again similar levels can be seen in all populations indicating homogenous levels of
negative selection across populations. Tajima’s D value over all populations was -1.29 and it
was also negative within every sampled population with Baza population having a higher value
compared to others (Table 1). This result is also reflected in the minor allele frequency
spectrum calculated for all samples (Figure 2), which shows an excess of rare alleles compared
to the standard neutral expectation.

Assessing population structure
We performed a pairwise FST (Hudson et al., 1992), STRUCTURE (Pritchard et al., 2000) and
PCA (McVean, 2009) analysis to evaluate the genetic relationships between populations. All
analysis indicate that the Spanish Baza population is differentiated from other populations
and in addition to that, very subtle population structure separates eastern and western
samples from each other. In general, pairwise FST estimates show low level of differentiation
between most sample populations (Table 2) with overall FST of 0.031. Contrasts with Baza are
higher (average of 0.079).

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The STRUCTURE results (Figure 3) analyzed using Evanno method indicate that the most likely
value of K is three. Again, Baza population forms a distinct group compared to the main
distribution. However, the rest of the range is divided into two groups, where the other
contains all samples of Ust-Kulom population and parts of other, mainly eastern, populations.
PCA analysis suggests that the genetic differentiation within and across populations in general
is continuous as each principal component explains just small fraction of total variance (Figure
4A), although some trends can be observed. The samples originating from Baza population
are separated from the rest by the first principal component. The rest of the range is being
clustered more closely together, with a trend separating the eastern and western samples
from each other (Figure 4B, 4C).

ConStruct analysis was performed using the both non-spatial model and the spatial model,
which incorporated information on the geographical distance between populations. A crossvalidation test indicated that for the spatial and non-spatial models the predictive accuracy
improved with more layers, but only modest improvement can be seen after K2 (Figure S1).
At K2 the spatial model has a better fit than the non-spatial model. Even though the K2 model
has two layers, the second layer contributes very little (1-2 %) to populations other than Baza
where it contributes 8 %. We also inspected the value of parameter 𝛼% which controls the
shape of the decay of covariance in the spatial model, with values close to 0 indicating no
isolation-by-distance (equation 3 in Bradburd et al., 2018). The first layer with larger
proportion produces a value of 0.0020 for 𝛼% indicating that a very weak isolation-bydistance-pattern can be detected through most of the sampled distribution. The isolation-by-

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

distance pattern is described by 𝛼% together with other layer parameters ( 𝛼& =0.0098,
𝛼' =0.093, 𝜑=0.004, 𝛾=0.144) and nugget values for each population (0.051-0.058) (Figure 5C
for K1 and Figure S3 for K2). Most of the covariance shown in the figure (0.185) is explained
by the covariance originating from the same ancestry (i.e. layer). The within population
covariance (dots) is slightly higher by 0.06. The contribution of IBD to covariance defined by
alpha-values is very small, only 0.006, but nonetheless explains the data better than a spatial
model, which omits the alpha parameters.
Identifying loci responsible for local adaptation
Linear regression on latitude
Comparison of linear regression models with or without latitude was used to identify clinal
allele frequency patterns. At a p-value cutoff of 0.001 a total of 263 genes were outliers,
including several genes with interesting function (Table S1). However, controlling for false
discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995) with q-values obtained from the p-value
distribution no outliers at 0.10 FDR were found, suggesting that a high proportion of top
candidates are false positives.
Genome scans for selection
Bayescan, an FST outlier detection method, was used to detect putative SNPs underlying local
adaptation. Using 0.1 FDR level we obtained a single outlier locus, which is located in noncoding area of the P. taeda reference genome v. 1.01 in position 404,961 of tscaffold3905.
However, blast search of the surrounding sequence against all known gymnosperm genes at
ConGenIE (http://congenie.org/) (Sundell et al., 2015) revealed that the outlier locus appears
to lie within a gene with an unknown function. The outlier locus has a distinct allele frequency
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pattern (Figure 6A) where the frequency of the alleles varies along latitude with steeper cline
in the east. Interestingly, the second highest scoring variant, although above the 0.05 FDR
limit, shows a very similar allele frequency cline pattern to the first outlier (Figure 6B). The
variant is located within an intron of a Rubisco gene family member. The two top variants are
not in LD nor do they appear to be located in the same scaffold of the P. taeda reference
genome. Further, the subsequent SNPs in p-value rank, although also above the FRD limit,
seem to have identical allele frequencies population-wise with high minor allele frequency
especially in the Ust-Kulom population. These SNPs were further examined by studying their
LD patterns.

We also used pcadapt (Luu et al., 2017) to identify loci under selection by searching for excess
divergence along principal components of population structure. P-values of each SNP assigned
by pcadapt (Figure S4) were used to obtain FDR estimates. With a q-value cutoff 0.1 a total of
489 SNPs are assigned as outliers.

Linkage disequilibrium patterns
Linkage disequilibrium patterns (Figure 7) suggest that LD decays quickly within the P.
sylvestris genome as the 𝑟 ' values fall below 0.2 within 145 bp. However, bayescan analysis
revealed that many SNPs in different scaffolds had identical allele frequencies with particularly
high minor allele frequency in the Ust-Kulom population. More careful examination of the LD
pattern for these SNPs revealed a distinct haplotype structure in 11 samples, of which five

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

belong to the Ust-Kulom, two to Megdurechensk, two to Penzenskaja, one to Ust-Chilma and
one to Radom population.

In total 169 variants located in 59 different reference sequence scaffolds had identical allele
frequency and LD pattern (Figure 8A). The possibility of detecting such haplotype structure by
change was explored using a permutation test showing that the chance for such is very low
with a p-value of < 0.001. In the set of samples exhibiting the haplotype structure, the average
nucleotide diversity within the 1-kbp area surrounding each outlier variant was only 0.0003,
compared to value of 0.0034 within the same region observed between other samples.
Average pairwise nucleotide diversity value calculated between the samples exhibiting the
haplotype structure and other samples was 0.0093 for the same area.

Westbrook et al. (2015) generated a consensus genetic map for P. taeda and aligned many of
their EST sequences corresponding to the marker data to the P. taeda reference genome v.
1.01, thus providing putative physical location for many scaffolds of the reference. There were
12 cases where the EST sequence alignment covers or is within a few kbp of the SNPs
belonging to the P. sylvestris haplotype structure. In ten of these cases the Westbrook et al.
(2015) data suggests that the scaffolds belong to linkage group one, but one scaffold seem to
be part of linkage group 3 and another on of linkage group 10. The SNPs positioned in linkage
group 1 are located between positions 51.12 cM and 94.54 cM. This 43.42 cM area is 23.48 %
of the total length of the first linkage group. Given that the 12 chromosomes of P. sylvestris
seem to be similar in size, we can expect each chromosome to be roughly 2.0 Gbp long. We
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

can then, naively, take the proportion the haplotype structure covering the first
chromosome’s genetic map and apply it to the expected physical size of the chromosome.
This approach gives us an estimated size of 470 Mbp for the haplotype structure. Another way
for estimating the haplotypes minimum size is to simply sum the lengths of the P. taeda
reference scaffolds containing the haplotype structure, which gives a size estimate of 35.9
Mbp. As we have a capture target in 11.0 % of P. taeda reference genome scaffolds, we
estimate that the total area covered by the haplotype structure is roughly 35.9 / 0.11 = 326
Mbp.

Allele frequencies of the haplotype structure were highly similar to the detected population
structure patterns. To investigate whether the haplotype drove the observed population
structure, STRUCTURE, PCA and pairwise FST analysis were redone without the scaffolds
containing the haplotype structure. No change was observed in the STRUCTURE results.
However, the FST results appear to be affected such that lower values are now seen between
Ust-Kulom and other populations (Table S2). In the PCA results, the projection where Baza
samples are omitted (Figure 5B), the samples containing the haplotype structure are
separated by the second principal component and the other eastern samples are separated
from western samples by the first principal component (Figure 5B). Removing also the samples
that contain the haplotype structure results in projection where Eastern and Western samples
occupy the opposing ends of the first principal component.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Discussion
This first genome-wide analysis of P. sylvestris genetic diversity covering a large proportion of
its distribution show estimates of genetic diversity and population structure largely in line with
previous studies. Many loci possibly contributing to local adaptation were discovered that
have been shown to be targets of selection in previous studies (Table S1) for example in A.
thaliana (Knoth & Eulgem, 2008) and Eucalyptus (Jordan, Hoffmann, Dillon, & Prober, 2017).
Furthermore, a previously unidentified large structural variation, possibly related to local
adaptation, was uncovered.
Indications of population structure
The neutral nucleotide diversity found in this study is similar to what has been observed in
previous studies of this species (Kujala & Savolainen, 2012) and in several other conifers
(Brown, Gill, Kuntz, Langley, & Neale, 2004; Eckert et al., 2013; Grivet et al., 2017). Given the
mostly continuous distribution of wind-pollinated P. sylvestris and the previous findings of
near-absent population structure, only very negligible differences between populations were
anticipated, with the exceptions of geographically isolated populations (Kujala & Savolainen,
2012; Tanja Pyhäjärvi et al., 2007; Wachowiak, Balk, & Savolainen, 2009). It has been
suggested that putative P. sylvestris refugia during the last glaciation has existed in the
Mediterranean area, northern Europe and also in the east, possibly in Ural mountains
(Naydenov et al., 2007). Therefore, genetic structure suggesting expansion from two distinct
refugia, from east and west, would not have been entirely unexpected.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

All approaches of population structure analysis uniformly indicated that the Baza population,
geographically isolated from the main distribution, was most, although still weakly
differentiated from the other populations. STRUCTURE and PCA analysis also gave some
indication that the most likely number of groups is three. However, the models of these
frequently used methods do not explicitly account for geographic isolation-by-distance, which
can be assumed to exist within the distribution of many species, including P. sylvestris.
Omission of this phenomenon from the models may cause these methods to spuriously assign
populations to separate groups, when the genetic variation could in fact be explained by
isolation-by-distance (Bradburd et al., 2018). This also seems to have happened with our P.
sylvestris analysis, where STRUCTURE suggested three distinct clusters, but the conStruct
spatial model explains the genetic covariance by within sampling location effect accompanied
with weak isolation-by-distance pattern across populations.

Our results are in contrast with results from many other tree species, such as Picea abies
where considerable structure has been detected despite many similarities in distribution,
population size and reproductive biology (Chen et al., 2012). Several studies in Populus have
also suggested the presence of distinct population structure (Evans et al., 2014; Geraldes et
al., 2014; Kelleret al., 2010). P. sylvestris rarely hybridizes with other species, and is not
capable of clonal reproduction, but the exact connection between these characteristics and
lack of major population structure is not understood. This lack of genome-wide structure is an
advantage when investigating the genetic basis of adaptation, as such structure is a
complicating factor in selection scans (Hoban et al., 2016).

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Putative signs of local adaptation
As P. sylvestris is known to be locally adapted to various environmental conditions within its
vast distribution (Savolainen et al., 2007), we anticipated to identify signs of natural selection
in the genomic variation. We performed an FST -based outlier scan, which identified only single
statistically significant outlier SNP with an allele frequency cline in western transect and a
particularly strong cline in the eastern transect, with another non-significant variant exhibiting
very similar allele frequency cline to the top outlier. The first outlier did not have any reliable
annotation, but the second variant was located within an intron of a Rubisco gene, which has
been suggested to have a role in ecological adaptation to different temperatures and CO2
concentrations (Hermida-Carrera et al., 2017). A large number of outliers in FST based selection
scan would have been unexpected considering earlier findings (Kujala & Savolainen, 2012) and
most theory suggesting that the nature of the underlying genetic architecture is likely highly
polygenic, but observing only single outlier is surprising. It is possible that higher number of
populations and samples for bayescan analysis would have allowed more outliers to be
uncovered.

We also applied the pcadapt method, which accounts for the possible population structure
via principal component analysis and identifies outliers relative to this structure. The approach
yielded 489 putative outliers. As expected, the outliers also included the SNPs identified as
part of the haplotype structure discussed below. Linear regression of allele frequencies to

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

latitude was performed to discover if allele frequency clines, but even though many
interesting genes were in the top candidates, no high confidence outliers were detected.

Several putative explanations exist for detecting low number of outliers in the bayescan and
linear regression outlier analysis. Firstly, as the targeted sequencing approach by definition
will only allow examination of very small proportion of the genome, much of the adaptive
variation cannot be detected. In species with large genomes, proportionately more adaptive
variation is expected to be found outside coding region (Mei, Stetter, Gates, Stitzer, & RossIbarra, 2018), which may also explain the lack of adaptive signal in the data obtained by exome
capture. Secondly, as discussed above, it is possible that the eastern and western parts of our
sampling have in fact originated from different refugia after the most recent glacial period, or
several periods as the same refugia may have existed during many or most such periods.
Therefore distinctive genetic adaptations may have evolved within each refugium, as
suggested for instance by Naydenov et al. (2007), rendering in particular landscape genetics
approaches ineffective. Thirdly, the genetic basis of local adaptation has shown to be mostly
polygenic, only a low proportion of all variants can be expected to be under strong enough
selection for prolonged period to be detected. For instance Latta (1998, 2003) and Kremer and
Le Corre (2012; Le Corre & Kremer, 2003b, 2012) describe how the contribution of covariance
(linkage disequilibrium) between loci becomes more important relative to between
population allele frequency differentiation when the number of loci contributing to genetic
variation of a given trait increases. Further, Yeaman (2015) presented a model where a large
number of loci with alleles of small effect contribute to local adaptation under gene flow, with

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

temporally varying frequencies. Under such models only very limited number of large effect
alleles are expected to contribute to local adaptation. As the large effect loci are often the
ones detected in FST -outlier tests and forming allele frequency clines, the absence of such loci
in this study may not be surprising. Detection of alleles with smaller effect may require
considerably larger sample size and different approaches (Berg & Coop, 2014; Field et al.,
2016; Racimo, Berg, & Pickrell, 2018), but even when applying such methods it may be
challenging to control for population structure to avoid false positive signal (Berg et al., 2019).
Linkage disequilibrium patterns and putative large inversion
Earlier work has shown that LD decays very rapidly within the P. sylvestris genome (Dvornyk,
Sirviö, Mikkonen, & Savolainen, 2002; Tanja Pyhäjärvi et al., 2007; Wachowiak et al., 2009)
and also in other conifers such as P. taeda (Acosta et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2016). This study
allows for examining longer range patterns of LD than before as in many cases multiple target
sequences are positioned within the same scaffold. Our findings are in line with the previous
studies showing that 𝑟 ' fall below 0.2 within 145 bp. The advantage of low the level of
genome-wide LD observed previously (Tanja Pyhäjärvi et al., 2007), and in this work, is that
variants detected in the outlier scans are probably very close to the causative polymorphism
(Neale & Savolainen, 2004).

Interestingly, the bayescan analysis revealed a large number of SNPs forming an unexpected
haplotype structure. Given that the LD decays very quickly within the P. sylvestris genome, the
LD pattern detected here is very likely not due to chance. Analysis of pairwise nucleotide
differences of the affected region shows that very low level of nucleotide diversity can be
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

observed within the samples where the haplotype is present, but in the other samples the
diversity level seems comparable to average genome-wide level. Due to the fragmented
nature of the P. taeda reference genome, and the lack of P. sylvestris reference, it is not
possible to directly verify the position and the size of the haplotype structure, but some crude
estimates could be made to indicate that it is very likely to be several hundred million base
pairs long.

We did not find any putative technical explanations for the phenomenon, as stringent
parameters were used in the read alignment and SNP calling, where only concordantly,
uniquely aligned reads were retained. In addition, the read alignments were visually inspected
using samtools tview, and no abnormalities were found. Haplotype patterns can be created
by partial selective sweeps but considering that the haplotype structure spans 43 cM in the P.
taeda genetic map, this explanation of sweep does not seem possible under the normal
recombination rates, but requires structural variation. Therefore, inversion considerably
reducing recombination and extending impact of partial sweep is a very likely explanation for
the phenomenon.

Possible role of inversions in local adaptation had been recognized in genetics research early
on (Dobzhansky, 1970), and the concept of ‘supergenes’ has since been further explored
(Thompson & Jiggins, 2014). Kirkpatrick and Barton (2006) presented models to study how
inversions containing beneficial variants may contribute to local adaptation in various
scenarios. They show that if an inversion encompasses two or more locally adapted alleles, it
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

has a fitness advantage over other haplotypes with fewer locally adapted alleles. A further
contribution to the fitness advantage may occur, if the inversion contains alleles with positive
epistasis (Feldman, Otto, & Christiansen, 1997). Also, particularly low deleterious mutation
load within the inversion can lead or contribute to fitness advantage (Nei, Kojima, & Schaffer,
1967). If fitness advantage arises, the inversion will rise in frequency within the geographic
area it provides selective advantage until it reaches migration-selection balance. Locally
advantageous mutations can also accumulate after initial spread (Faria, Johannesson, Butlin,
& Westram, 2019). Inversions can create large areas of restricted recombination as they
prevent proper chromatid pairing, although gene conversion and double cross-overs may
allow some genetic exchange between inverted and non-inverted haplotypes (Andoflatto,
Depaulis, & Navarro, 2001). Empirical studies have inversions contributing to local adaptation
for instance in D. melanogaster (Kapun & Flatt, 2018), sticklebacks (Jones et al., 2012), yellow
monkeyflower (Gould, Chen, & Lowry, 2018), teosinte (Tanja Pyhäjärvi, Hufford, Mezmouk, &
Ross-Ibarra, 2013), humans (Puig, Casillas, Villatoro, & Cáceres, 2015) and in many others
(Wellenreuther & Bernatchez, 2018).

Pine genomes typically have high synteny even between species (Komulainen et al., 2003).
Signs of putative inversions within P. sylvestris are rare in literature, although some earlier
cytological studies have detected putative inversions in the eastern part of the species
distribution (Muratova, 1994), but many observations of inversions have been made in other
conifer species (e.g. Pederick, 1968). The reason relatively few large inversions have been
detected may be due to difficulty in detecting them, as contemporary resequencing or

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

genome assembly approaches combined even with the current long-read sequencing
platforms may not be sufficient, and often complementary approaches such as optical
mapping are required (Kronenberg et al., 2018; Levy-Sakin et al., 2019). The detection may be
particularly difficult in conifers due to the fragmented nature of their reference genomes, as
common methods for detecting of structural variation often rely on examining long scaffolds
or identifying exact breakpoints making targeted sequencing data unsuitable (Cáceres &
González, 2015).

The size of the putative inversion found here is very large, although sizeable inversions, up to
191 Mbp, have currently been predicted in the human genome in the invFEST database
(Martínez-Fundichely et al., 2014). Large inversions have been suggested as being targets of
selection in many species (Wellenreuther & Bernatchez, 2018), with the largest such
inversions exceeding 200 Mbp between two Helianthus sister species (Barb et al., 2014). To
our knowledge, the putative inversion detected in our study remains as the largest one to
suggested to contribute to local adaptation to date, although the relative size the inversion
compared to whole genome size is certainly not as large as inversions in some other species.
If more such large inversions exist in the P. sylvestris genome, it can also have drastic effects
for breeding efforts as recombination is very limited within the inversion in polymorphic
crosses.

If the inversion contains loci with alternative alleles affecting the timing of bud set formation
and similar traits contributing to adaptation to environmental gradients, selection for local
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

adaptation may have driven the inversion to its current high local frequencies. The samples
containing the inversion polymorphism seem to be located broadly in the similar, but not
identical, geographic area where STRUCTURE and PCA analysis indicate slight population
structure border. This may suggest that the inversion event may have occurred within the
speculated eastern refugium, but further investigation would be required to uncover the
possible origin and fitness effects. Reflecting the suggestion of large inversions contributing
to reproductive isolation (Noor, Gratos, Bertucci, & Reiland, 2001) to our findings of samples
containing the putative inversion appearing somewhat differentiated in PCA and the
respective populations in FST results, raises the question whether barrier to gene exchange is
now introduced between samples containing the inversion and others. It is difficult to rule out
such hypothesis without crossing experiments, but there is no evidence clearly suggesting this.
In the case of PCA the lack of any other structure within the main species range may lead to
projections emphasizing the difference within the inversion. FST results between Ust-Kulom,
where the inversion has highest frequency, and others are reduced when scaffolds known to
be part of the inversion are removed, although they still remain elevated. It may be that
several scaffolds that are part of the inversion are not identified as part of it, as they happen
to not contain the SNPs used to identify the inversion. STRUCTURE and conStruct results
remain unaffected by the removal of the putative inversion.

Conclusions
In this work we have examined the genetic diversity of P. sylvestris along a large portion of its
range. Some patterns of population structure can be seen in a marginal population but within

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the continuous main range the isolation-by-distance explains well any differentiation
detected, unlike in many other tree species. This mitigates the issues caused by structure in
detecting signs of selection, but our results also show that while clear phenotypic signals of
local adaptation have been detected, the molecular background remains largely elusive even
if many well-established approaches were used here to detect the signature of selection.
However, many interesting outliers were detected that have been shown to contribute to
local adaptation in earlier studies. Furthermore, in this study we find a putative very large
inversion, likely spanning an area equivalent to several Arabidopsis thaliana genomes. To our
knowledge, this is the first time that an inversion has been shown to putatively contribute to
local adaptation in conifers, even though such occurrences can certainly be expected by
theory (Yeaman, 2013).

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Skogforsk for providing seeds for sequencing, Matias Kirst for helping with
developing the exome capture protocol, Gideon Bradburd for help with conStruct and
members of the Plant Genetics Research group in the University of Oulu for many helpful
comments and suggestions. We thank the CSC-IT Center for Science, Finland, for
computational resources. This work was supported by European Comission 7th Framework
Programme project ProCoGen (289841) to O.S., Biocenter Oulu, Emil Aaltosen Säätiö (160284
O), Oulun Läänin Talousseuran Maataloussäätiö to JT, Academy of Finland (287431 and
293819) to T.P. Z.L. is funded by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Special Research Fund of
Ghent University (BOFPDO2018001701).

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Author Contributions
J.S.T., O.S. and T.P. designed the study. J.S.T., Z.L., L.S., J.J.A, J.V. and M.T.C. generated data
and analytical tools. J.S.T. and T.P. analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript with O.S. All
authors commented the manuscript.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
Acosta, J. J., Fahrenkrog, A. M., Neves, L. G., Resende, M. F. R., Dervinis, C., Davis, J. M., …
Kirst, M. (2019). Exome Resequencing Reveals Evolutionary History, Genomic Diversity,
and Targets of Selection in the Conifers Pinus taeda and Pinus elliottii. Genome Biology
and Evolution, 11(2), 508–520.
Adrion, J. R., Hahn, M. W., & Cooper, B. S. (2015). Revisiting classic clines in Drosophila
melanogaster in the age of genomics. Trends in Genetics, 31(8), 434–444.
doi:10.1016/j.tig.2015.05.006
Ågren, J., & Schemske, D. W. (2012). Reciprocal transplants demonstrate strong adaptive
differentiation of the model organism Arabidopsis thaliana in its native range. New
Phytologist, 194(4), 1112–1122.
Aho, M. (1994). Autumn frost hardening of one-year-old Pinus sylvestris (L.) seedlings: Effect
of origin and parent trees. Scandinavian Journal of Forest Research, 9(1–4), 17–24.
doi:10.1080/02827589409382808
Alberto, F. J., Aitken, S. N., Alía, R., González-Martínez, S. C., Hänninen, H., Kremer, A., …
Savolainen, O. (2013). Potential for evolutionary responses to climate change - evidence
from tree populations. Global Change Biology, 19(6), 1645–61. doi:10.1111/gcb.12181
Alberto, F. J., Derory, J., Boury, C., Frigerio, J.-M., Zimmermann, N. E., & Kremer, A. (2013).
Imprints of natural selection along environmental gradients in phenology-related genes
of Quercus petraea. Genetics, 195(2), 495–512. doi:10.1534/genetics.113.153783
Alexander, D. H., Novembre, J., & Lange, K. (2009). Fast model-based estimation of ancestry
33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

in unrelated individuals, 1655–1664. doi:10.1101/gr.094052.109.vidual
Andoflatto, P., Depaulis, F., & Navarro, A. (2001). Inversion polymorphisms and nucleotide
variability in Drosophila. Genetics Research, 77(01), 1–8.
doi:10.1017/S0016672301004955
Barb, J. G., Bowers, J. E., Renaut, S., Rey, J. I., Knapp, S. J., Rieseberg, L. H., & Burke, J. M.
(2014). Chromosomal evolution and patterns of introgression in Helianthus. Genetics,
197(3), 969–979. doi:10.1534/genetics.114.165548
Barton, N. H. (1999). Clines in polygenic traits. Genetical Research, 74(3),
S001667239900422X. doi:10.1017/S001667239900422X
Barton, N. H., & Keightley, P. D. (2002). Multifactorial Geneticsunderstanding Quantitative
Genetic Variation. Nature Reviews Genetics, 3(1), 11–21. doi:10.1038/nrg700
Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and
Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
(Methodological). WileyRoyal Statistical Society. doi:10.2307/2346101
Berg, J. J., & Coop, G. (2014). A Population Genetic Signal of Polygenic Adaptation. PLoS
Genetics, 10(8). doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1004412
Berg, J. J., Harpak, A., Sinnott-Armstrong, N., Joergensen, A. M., Mostafavi, H., Field, Y., …
others. (2019). Reduced signal for polygenic adaptation of height in UK Biobank. ELife,
8, e39725.
Beuker, E. (1994). Adaptation to climatic changes of the timing of bud burst in populations of
Pinus sylvestris L. and Picea abies. Tree Physiology, 14(7–9), 961–970.
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Bhatia, G., Patterson, N., Sankararaman, S., & Price, A. L. (2013). Estimating and interpreting
FST: The impact of rare variants. Genome Research, 23(9), 1514–1521.
doi:10.1101/gr.154831.113
Bradburd, G. S., Coop, G. M., & Ralph, P. L. (2018). Inferring continuous and discrete
population genetic structure across space. Genetics, 210(1), 33–52.
Brown, G. R., Gill, G. P., Kuntz, R. J., Langley, C. H., & Neale, D. B. (2004). Nucleotide diversity
and linkage disequilibrium in loblolly pine. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 101(42), 15255–15260.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0404231101
Buckler, E. S., Holland, J. B., Bradbury, P. J., Acharya, C. B., Brown, P. J., Browne, C., … others.
(2009). The genetic architecture of maize flowering time. Science, 325(5941), 714–718.
Cáceres, A., & González, J. R. (2015). Following the footprints of polymorphic inversions on
SNP data: From detection to association tests. Nucleic Acids Research, 43(8).
doi:10.1093/nar/gkv073
Cheddadi, R., Vendramin, G. G., Litt, T., François, L., Kageyama, M., Lorentz, S., … Lunt, D.
(2006). Imprints of glacial refugia in the modern genetic diversity of Pinus sylvestris.
Global Ecology and Biogeography, 15(3), 271–282. doi:10.1111/j.1466822X.2006.00226.x
Chen, J., Källman, T., Ma, X., Gyllenstrand, N., Zaina, G., Morgante, M., … Lascoux, M. (2012).
Disentangling the roles of history and local selection in shaping clinal variation of allele
frequencies and gene expression in Norway spruce (Picea abies). Genetics, 191(3), 865–

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

81. doi:10.1534/genetics.112.140749
Coop, G., Witonsky, D., Di Rienzo, A., & Pritchard, J. K. (2010). Using environmental
correlations to identify loci underlying local adaptation. Genetics, 185(4), 1411–23.
doi:10.1534/genetics.110.114819
Danecek, P., Auton, A., Abecasis, G., Albers, C. A., Banks, E., DePristo, M. A., … Durbin, R.
(2011). The variant call format and VCFtools. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 27(15),
2156–8. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr330
Dobzhansky, T. (1970). Genetics of the evolutionary process (Vol. 139). Columbia University
Press.
Dvornyk, V., Sirviö, A., Mikkonen, M., & Savolainen, O. (2002). Low nucleotide diversity at
the pal1 locus in the widely distributed Pinus sylvestris. Molecular Biology and
Evolution, 19(2), 179–188. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a004070
Eckert, A. J., Bower, A. D., Jermstad, K. D., Wegrzyn, J. L., Knaus, B. J., Syring, J. V., & Neale,
D. B. (2013). Multilocus analyses reveal little evidence for lineage-wide adaptive
evolution within major clades of soft pines (Pinus subgenus Strobus). Molecular
Ecology, 22(22), 5635–5650. doi:10.1111/mec.12514
Eiche, V. (1966). Cold Damage and Plant Mortality in Experimental Provenance Plantations
with Scots Pine in Northern Sweden. STUDIA FORESTALIA SUECICA, 36, 1–219.
Evanno, G., Regnaut, S., & Goudet, J. (2005). Detecting the number of clusters of individuals
using the software STRUCTURE: A simulation study. Molecular Ecology, 14(8), 2611–
2620. doi:10.1111/j.1365-294X.2005.02553.x
36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Evans, L. M., Slavov, G. T., Rodgers-Melnick, E., Martin, J., Ranjan, P., Muchero, W., …
DiFazio, S. P. (2014). Population genomics of Populus trichocarpa identifies signatures
of selection and adaptive trait associations. Nature Genetics, 46(10), 1089–1096.
doi:10.1038/ng.3075
Excoffier, L., Hofer, T., & Foll, M. (2009). Detecting loci under selection in a hierarchically
structured population. Heredity, 103(4), 285–98. doi:10.1038/hdy.2009.74
Fan, S., Hansen, M. E. B., Lo, Y., & Tishkoff, S. A. (2016). Review of Recent Human
Adaptation. Science, 354(6308), 54–59. doi:10.1126/science.aaf5098
Faria, R., Johannesson, K., Butlin, R. K., & Westram, A. M. (2019). Evolving Inversions. Trends
in Ecology and Evolution, 34(3), 239–248. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2018.12.005
Feldman, M. W., Otto, S. P., & Christiansen, F. B. (1997). Population Genetic Perspectives on
the Evolution of Recombination. Annual Review of Genetics, 30(1), 261–295.
doi:10.1146/annurev.genet.30.1.261
Field, Y., Boyle, E. A., Telis, N., Gao, Z., Gaulton, K. J., Golan, D., … Pritchard, J. K. (2016).
Detection of human adaptation during the past 2000 years. Science, 354(6313), 760–
764. doi:10.1126/science.aag0776
Fisher, R. (1918). The Correlation Between Relatives on the Supposition of Mendelian
Inheritance. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh, 52, 399–433.
Foll, M., & Gaggiotti, O. (2008). A genome-scan method to identify selected loci appropriate
for both dominant and codominant markers: a Bayesian perspective. Genetics, 180(2),
977–93. doi:10.1534/genetics.108.092221
37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Galinsky, K. J., Bhatia, G., Loh, P. R., Georgiev, S., Mukherjee, S., Patterson, N. J., & Price, A. L.
(2016). Fast Principal-Component Analysis Reveals Convergent Evolution of ADH1B in
Europe and East Asia. American Journal of Human Genetics, 98(3), 456–472.
doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.12.022
Garner, A. G., Kenney, A. M., Fishman, L., & Sweigart, A. L. (2016). Genetic loci with parentof-origin effects cause hybrid seed lethality in crosses between Mimulus species. New
Phytologist, 211(1), 319–331. doi:10.1111/nph.13897
Geraldes, A., Farzaneh, N., Grassa, C. J., McKown, A. D., Guy, R. D., Mansfield, S. D., … Cronk,
Q. C. B. (2014). Landscape genomics of Populus trichocarpa: the role of hybridization,
limited gene flow, and natural selection in shaping patterns of population structure.
Evolution, 68(11), 3260–3280.
Gould, B. A., Chen, Y., & Lowry, D. B. (2018). Gene Regulatory Divergence Between Locally
Adapted Ecotypes in Their Native Habitats. Molecular Ecology, (January), 1–15.
doi:10.1111/mec.14852
Grivet, D., Avia, K., Vaattovaara, A., Eckert, A. J., Neale, D. B., Savolainen, O., & GonzálezMartínez, S. C. (2017). High rate of adaptive evolution in two widespread European
pines. Molecular Ecology, 26(24), 6857–6870. doi:10.1111/mec.14402
Gutenkunst, R. N., Hernandez, R. D., Williamson, S. H., & Bustamante, C. D. (2009). Inferring
the joint demographic history of multiple populations from multidimensional SNP
frequency data. PLoS Genetics, 5(10). doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000695
Hämälä, T., Mattila, T. M., & Savolainen, O. (2018). Local adaptation and ecological

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

differentiation under selection, migration, and drift in Arabidopsis lyrata*. Evolution,
72(7), 1373–1386. doi:10.1111/evo.13502
Hermida-Carrera, C., Fares, M. A., Fernández, Á., Gil-Pelegrín, E., Kapralov, M. V, Mir, A., …
others. (2017). Positively selected amino acid replacements within the RuBisCO enzyme
of oak trees are associated with ecological adaptations. PloS One, 12(8), e0183970.
Hill, W. G., & Robertson, A. (1968). Linkage disequilibrium in finite populations. TAG
Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 38(6), 226–231. doi:10.1007/bf01245622
Hoban, S., Kelley, J. L., Lotterhos, K. E., Antolin, M. F., Bradburd, G., Lowry, D. B., … Whitlock,
M. C. (2016). Finding the Genomic Basis of Local Adaptation: Pitfalls, Practical Solutions,
and Future Directions. The American Naturalist, 188(4), 379–397. doi:10.1086/688018
Holliday, J. a., Ritland, K., & Aitken, S. N. (2010). Widespread, ecologically relevant genetic
markers developed from association mapping of climate-related traits in Sitka spruce
(Picea sitchensis). New Phytologist, 188(2), 501–514.
Hudson, R. R., Slatkin, M., & Maddison, W. P. (1992). Estimation of levels of gene flow from
DNA sequence data. Genetics, 132(2).
Hurme, P., Repo, T., Savolainen, O., & Pääkkönen, T. (1997). Climatic adaptation of bud set
and frost hardiness in Scots pine ( Pinus sylvestris ). Canadian Journal of Forest
Research, 27(5), 716–723. doi:10.1139/x97-052
Hurme, P., Sillanpää, M., Repo, T., Arjas, E., & Savolainen, O. (2000). Genetic basis of climatic
adaptation in Scots pine by Bayesian QTL analysis. Genetics, 156(1930), 1309–1322.
Huxley, J. (1938). Clines: an Auxiliary Taxonomic Principle. Nature, 142, 219–220.
39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

doi:10.1038/142219a0
Jones, F. C., Grabherr, M. G., Chan, Y. F., Russell, P., Mauceli, E., Johnson, J., … Kingsley, D. M.
(2012). The genomic basis of adaptive evolution in threespine sticklebacks. Nature,
484(7392), 55–61. doi:10.1038/nature10944
Jordan, R., Hoffmann, A. A., Dillon, S. K., & Prober, S. M. (2017). Evidence of genomic
adaptation to climate in Eucalyptus microcarpa: implications for adaptive potential to
projected climate change. Molecular Ecology, 0–2. doi:10.1111/mec.14341
Kapun, M., & Flatt, T. (2018). The adaptive significance of chromosomal inversion
polymorphisms in Drosophila melanogaster. Molecular Ecology.
doi:10.1111/mec.14871
Karhu, A., Hurme, P., Karjalainen, M., Karvonen, P., Kärkkäinen, K., Neale, D., & Savolainen,
O. (1996). Do molecular markers reflect patterns of differentiation in adaptive traits of
conifers? Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 93(1–2), 215–221.
doi:10.1007/s001220050268
Kawecki, T. J., & Ebert, D. (2004). Conceptual issues in local adaptation. Ecology Letters,
7(12), 1225–1241. doi:10.1111/j.1461-0248.2004.00684.x
Keller, S. R., Olson, M. S., Salim, S., William, S. A., & Peter, T. (2010). Genomic diversity,
population structure, and migration following rapid range expansion in the Balsam
Poplar, Populus balsamifera. Molecular Ecology, 19(6), 1212–1226. doi:10.1111/j.1365294X.2010.04546.x
Kirkpatrick, M., & Barton, N. (2006). Chromosome Inversions, Local Adaptation and
40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Speciation, 434(May), 419–434. doi:10.1534/genetics.105.047985
Knoth, C., & Eulgem, T. (2008). The oomycete response gene LURP1 is required for defense
against Hyaloperonospora parasitica in Arabidopsis thaliana. The Plant Journal, 55(1),
53–64.
Komulainen, P., Brown, G. R., Mikkonen, M., Karhu, A., Garc??a-Gil, M. R., O’Malley, D., …
Savolainen, O. (2003). Comparing EST-based genetic maps between Pinus sylvestris and
Pinus taeda. Theoretical and Applied Genetics, 107(4), 667–678. doi:10.1007/s00122003-1312-2
Kopelman, N. M., Mayzel, J., Jakobsson, M., Rosenberg, N. A., & Mayrose, I. (2015). Clumpak:
A program for identifying clustering modes and packaging population structure
inferences across K. Molecular Ecology Resources, 15(5), 1179–1191. doi:10.1111/17550998.12387
Kremer, A., & Le Corre, V. (2012). Decoupling of differentiation between traits and their
underlying genes in response to divergent selection. Heredity, 108(4), 375–385.
doi:10.1038/hdy.2011.81
Kronenberg, Z. N., Fiddes, I. T., Gordon, D., Murali, S., Cantsilieris, S., Meyerson, O. S., …
Eichler, E. E. (2018). High-resolution comparative analysis of great ape genomes.
Science, 360(6393). doi:10.1126/science.aar6343
Kujala, S., Knürr, T., Kärkkäinen, K., Neale, D. B., Sillanpää, M. J., & Savolainen, O. (2017).
Genetic heterogeneity underlying variation in a locally adaptive clinal trait in Pinus
sylvestris revealed by a Bayesian multipopulation analysis. Heredity, 118(5), 413–423.

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

doi:10.1038/hdy.2016.115
Kujala, S., & Savolainen, O. (2012). Sequence variation patterns along a latitudinal cline in
Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris): Signs of clinal adaptation? Tree Genetics and Genomes,
8(6), 1451–1467. doi:10.1007/s11295-012-0532-5
Langmead, B., & Salzberg, S. L. (2012). Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nature
Methods, 9(4), 357–9. doi:10.1038/nmeth.1923
Latta, R. G. (1998). Differentiation of Allelic Frequencies at Quantitative Trait Loci Affecting
Locally Adaptive Traits Differentiation of Allelic Frequencies at Quantitative Trait Loci
Affecting Locally Adaptive Traits. The American Naturalist, 151(3), 283–292.
doi:10.1086/286119
Latta, R. G. (2003). Gene flow, adaptive population divergence and comparative population
structure across loci. New Phytologist, 161(1), 51–58. doi:10.1046/j.14698137.2003.00920.x
Le Corre, V., & Kremer, A. (2003a). Genetic variability at neutral markers, quantitative trait
loci and trait in a subdivided population under selection. Genetics, 164(3), 1205–1219.
Retrieved from http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.00043210649&partnerID=tZOtx3y1
Le Corre, V., & Kremer, A. (2003b). Genetic variability at neutral markers, quantitative trait
loci and trait in a subdivided population under selection. Genetics, 164(3), 1205–1219.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-9-177
Le Corre, V., & Kremer, A. (2012). The genetic differentiation at quantitative trait loci under
42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

local adaptation. Molecular Ecology, 21(7), 1548–66. doi:10.1111/j.1365294X.2012.05479.x
Leinonen, P. H., Remington, D. L., & Savolainen, O. (2011). Local adaptation, phenotypic
differentiation, and hybrid fitness in diverged natural populations of Arabidopsis lyrata.
Evolution; International Journal of Organic Evolution, 65(1), 90–107.
doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.2010.01119.x
Levy-Sakin, M., Pastor, S., Mostovoy, Y., Li, L., Leung, A. K. Y., McCaffrey, J., … Kwok, P. Y.
(2019). Genome maps across 26 human populations reveal population-specific patterns
of structural variation. Nature Communications, 10(1), 1–14. doi:10.1038/s41467-01908992-7
Lewontin, R. C., & Krakauer, J. (1973). Distribution of gene frequency as a test of the theory
of the selective neutrality of polymorphisms. Genetics, 74(1), 175–195.
Li, H., Handsaker, B., Wysoker, A., Fennell, T., Ruan, J., Homer, N., … Durbin, R. (2009). The
Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics, 25(16), 2078–2079.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp352
Li, Z., De La Torre, A. R., Sterck, L., Cánovas, F. M., Avila, C., Merino, I., … Van De Peer, Y.
(2017). Single-copy genes as molecularmarkers for phylogenomic studies in seed plants.
Genome Biology and Evolution, 9(5), 1130–1147. doi:10.1093/gbe/evx070
Lu, M., Krutovsky, K. V, Nelson, C. D., Koralewski, T. E., Byram, T. D., & Loopstra, C. A. (2016).
Exome genotyping , linkage disequilibrium and population structure in loblolly pine (
Pinus taeda L .). BMC Genomics, 1–11. doi:10.1186/s12864-016-3081-8

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Luu, K., Bazin, E., & Blum, M. G. B. (2017). pcadapt: an R package to perform genome scans
for selection based on principal component analysis. Molecular Ecology Resources,
17(1), 67–77. doi:10.1111/1755-0998.12592
Ma, X. F., Hall, D., St. Onge, K. R., Jansson, S., & Ingvarsson, P. K. (2010). Genetic
differentiation, clinal variation and phenotypic associations with growth cessation
across the Populus tremula photoperiodic pathway. Genetics, 186(3), 1033–1044.
doi:10.1534/genetics.110.120873
Martínez-Fundichely, A., Casillas, S., Egea, R., Ràmia, M., Barbadilla, A., Pantano, L., …
Cáceres, M. (2014). InvFEST, a database integrating information of polymorphic
inversions in the human genome. Nucleic Acids Research, 42(D1), 1027–1032.
doi:10.1093/nar/gkt1122
McVean, G. (2009). A genealogical interpretation of principal components analysis. PLoS
Genetics, 5(10). doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000686
Mei, W., Stetter, M. G., Gates, D. J., Stitzer, M. C., & Ross-Ibarra, J. (2018). Adaptation in
plant genomes: Bigger is different. American Journal of Botany, 105(1), 16–19.
doi:10.1002/ajb2.1002
Mikola, J. (1982). Bud-set phenology as an indicator of climatic adaptation of Scots pine in
Finland [Pinus sylvestris]. Population Genetics of Forest Trees, 16(2), 178–184.
Muratova, E. N. (1994). Cytogenetical study on Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris L.) in the Central
Yakutia. Cytogenetic Studies of Forest Trees and Shrub Species: Proc. First IUFRO
Cytogenetics Working Party, 2–04. Retrieved from

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

http://18a.akadem.ru/Articles/LSVD/2/Muratova4.pdf
Naydenov, K., Senneville, S., Beaulieu, J., Tremblay, F., & Bousquet, J. (2007). Glacial
vicariance in Eurasia: Mitochondrial DNA evidence from Scots pine for a complex
heritage involving genetically distinct refugia at mid-northern latitudes and in Asia
Minor. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 7(1), 1–12. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-7-233
Neale, D. B., & Savolainen, O. (2004). Association genetics of complex traits in conifers.
Trends in Plant Science, 9(7), 325–330.
Neale, D. B., Wegrzyn, J. L., Stevens, K. A., Zimin, A. V, Puiu, D., Crepeau, M. W., … Langley, C.
H. (2014). Decoding the massive genome of loblolly pine using haploid DNA and novel
assembly strategies. Genome Biology, 15(3), R59. doi:10.1186/gb-2014-15-3-r59
Nei, M., Kojima, K.-I., & Schaffer, H. E. (1967). Frequency changes of new inversions in
populations under mutation-selection equilibria. Genetics, 57(4), 741.
Nei, M., & Li, W.-H. (1979). Mathematical model for studying genetic variation in terms of
restriction endonucleases, 76(10), 5269–5273.
Noor, M. A. F., Gratos, K. L., Bertucci, L. A., & Reiland, J. (2001). Chromosomal inversions and
the reproductive isolation of species. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 98(21), 12084–12088. doi:10.1073/pnas.221274498
Orr, H. A. (1998). The population genetics of adaptation: The distribution of factors fixed
during adaptive evolution. Evolution, 52(4), 935–949. Retrieved from
http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.00031714655&partnerID=tZOtx3y1
45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Pederick, L. A. (1968). Chromosome inversions in Pinus radiata. Silvae Genet, 17, 22–26.
Pritchard, J. K., Stephens, M., & Donnelly, P. (2000). Inference of population structure using
multilocus genotype data. Genetics, 155(2), 945–959.
Puig, M., Casillas, S., Villatoro, S., & Cáceres, M. (2015). Human inversions and their
functional consequences. Briefings in Functional Genomics, 14(5), 369–379.
doi:10.1093/bfgp/elv020
Pyhäjärvi, T, Garcia-Gil, M. R., Knurr, T., Mikkonen, M., Wachowiak, W., & Savolainen, O.
(2007). Demographic history has influenced nucleotide diversity in European
\emph{Pinus sylvestris} populations. Genetics, 177(3), 1713–1724.
doi:10.1534/genetics.107.077099
Pyhäjärvi, Tanja, García-Gil, M. R., Knürr, T., Mikkonen, M., Wachowiak, W., & Savolainen, O.
(2007). Demographic history has influenced nucleotide diversity in European Pinus
sylvestris populations. Genetics, 177(3), 1713–1724. doi:10.1534/genetics.107.077099
Pyhäjärvi, Tanja, Hufford, M. B., Mezmouk, S., & Ross-Ibarra, J. (2013). Complex patterns of
local adaptation in teosinte. Genome Biology and Evolution, 5(9), 1594–1609.
doi:10.1093/gbe/evt109
Racimo, F., Berg, J. J., & Pickrell, J. K. (2018). Detecting polygenic adaptation in admixture
graphs. Genetics, 208(4), 1565–1584.
Rockman, M. V. (2012). The QTN program and the alleles that matter for evolution: All that’s
gold does not glitter. Evolution, 66(1), 1–17. doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.2011.01486.x
Savolainen, O., Lascoux, M., & Merilä, J. (2013). Ecological genomics of local adaptation.
46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Nature Reviews. Genetics, 14(11), 807–20. doi:10.1038/nrg3522
Savolainen, O., Pyhäjärvi, T., & Knürr, T. (2007). Gene Flow and Local Adaptation in Trees.
Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 38(1), 595–619.
doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.38.091206.095646
Schmidt, P. S., Zhu, C.-T., Das, J., Batavia, M., Yang, L., & Eanes, W. F. (2008). An amino acid
polymorphism in the couch potato gene forms the basis for climatic adaptation in
Drosophila melanogaster. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(42),
16207–16211.
Slatkin, M. (1973). GENE FLOW AND SELECTION IN A CLINE. Genetics, 75(4), 733–756.
Sundell, D., Mannapperuma, C., Netotea, S., Delhomme, N., Lin, Y., Sj, A., … Street, N. R.
(2015). The Plant Genome Integrative Explorer Resource : PlantGenIE . org, 1149–1156.
Tajima, F. (1989). Statistical method for testing the neutral mutation hypothesis by DNA
polymorphism. Genetics, 123(3), 585–595. doi:PMC1203831
Thompson, M. J., & Jiggins, C. D. (2014). Supergenes and their role in evolution. Heredity,
(August 2013), 1–8. doi:10.1038/hdy.2014.20
Thorvaldsdóttir, H., Robinson, J. T., & Mesirov, J. P. (2013). Integrative Genomics Viewer
(IGV): High-performance genomics data visualization and exploration. Briefings in
Bioinformatics, 14(2), 178–192. doi:10.1093/bib/bbs017
Tyrmi, J. S. (2018). STAPLER: a simple tool for creating, managing and parallelizing common
high-throughput sequencing workflows. BioRxiv, 445056. doi:10.1101/445056

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Vitalis, R., Gautier, M., Dawson, K. J., & Beaumont, M. a. (2014). Detecting and measuring
selection from gene frequency data. Genetics, 196(3), 799–817.
doi:10.1534/genetics.113.152991
Wachowiak, W., Balk, P. A., & Savolainen, O. (2009). Search for nucleotide diversity patterns
of local adaptation in dehydrins and other cold-related candidate genes in Scots pine
(Pinus sylvestris L.). Tree Genetics & Genomes, 5(1), 117–132. doi:10.1007/s11295-0080188-3
Wellenreuther, M., & Bernatchez, L. (2018). Eco-Evolutionary Genomics of Chromosomal
Inversions. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 33(6), 427–440.
doi:10.1016/j.tree.2018.04.002
Westbrook, J. W., Neves, L. G., Kirst, M., Peter, G. F., Chamala, S., Nelson, C. D., … Echt, C. S.
(2015). A Consensus Genetic Map for Pinus taeda and Pinus elliottii and Extent of
Linkage Disequilibrium in Two Genotype-Phenotype Discovery Populations of Pinus
taeda . G3&amp;#58; Genes|Genomes|Genetics, 5(8), 1685–1694.
doi:10.1534/g3.115.019588
Wu, T. D., & Nacu, S. (2010). Fast and SNP-tolerant detection of complex variants and
splicing in short reads. Bioinformatics, 26(7), 873–881.
Yeaman, S. (2013). Genomic rearrangements and the evolution of clusters of locally adaptive
loci. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(19), E1743–E1751.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1219381110
Yeaman, Sam. (2015). Local Adaptation by Alleles of Small Effect. The American Naturalist,

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

186(S1), S74–S89. doi:10.1086/682405
Yeaman, Sam, & Whitlock, M. C. (2011). The genetic architecture of adaptation under
migration-selection balance. Evolution; International Journal of Organic Evolution,
65(7), 1897–911. doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.2011.01269.x
Zonneveld, B. J. M. (2012). Conifer genome sizes of 172 species, covering 64 of 67 genera,
range from 8 to 72 picogram. Nordic Journal of Botany, 30(4), 490–502.
doi:10.1111/j.1756-1051.2012.01516.x

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Population

Latitude

Longitude

𝝅𝟒 (× 𝟏𝟎0𝟑 )

𝝅𝟎 /𝝅𝟒

Tajima's D

r (× 𝟏𝟎0𝟑 )

Inari

68° 54' N

27° 1' E

3.90

0.404

-0.250

1.63

Kolari

67° 10' N

24° 3' E

3.71

0.393

-0.290

1.81

Kalvia

63° 51' N

23° 27' E

3.94

0.395

-0.259

1.49

Punkaharju

61° 45' N

29° 23' E

3.87

0.395

-0.283

2.27

Kalsnava

56° 43' N

26° 1' E

3.79

0.384

-0.299

1.21

Radom

50° 24' N

20° 3' E

3.85

0.400

-0.290

1.47

Ust-Chilma

65° 22' N

52° 21' E

3.94

0.396

-0.223

1.60

Megdurechensk 63° 4' N

50° 49' E

4.04

0.397

-0.283

1.81

Ust-Kulom

61° 30' N

54° 0' E

3.76

0.380

-0.301

1.19

Penzenskaja

53° 27' N

46° 6' E

4.12

0.398

-0.272

2.16

Volgogradskaja 47° 45' N

44° 30' E

4.19

0.400

-0.278

1.89

Baza

2° 49' W

3.82

0.389

-0.156

1.11

37° 46' N

Table 1. Study populations location and summary statistic information.

50

Volgogradskaja

Penzenskaja

Ust-Kulom

Megdurechensk

Ust-Chilma

Radom

Kalsnava

Punkaharju

Kalvia

Inari

Population

Kolari

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Kolari

0.013

Kalvia

-0.001

0.016

Punkaharju

0.000

0.017

0.005

Kalsnava

0.019

0.019

0.023

0.020

Radom

0.002

0.021

0.005

0.007

0.015

Ust-Chilma

0.010

0.022

0.013

0.010

0.034

0.018

Megdurechensk

0.008

0.021

0.011

0.009

0.029

0.016

0.001

Ust-Kulom

0.064

0.045

0.063

0.064

0.044

0.052

0.054

0.052

Penzenskaja

0.009

0.023

0.011

0.013

0.033

0.015

0.008

0.009

0.060

Volgogradskaja

0.000

0.017

0.005

0.005

0.023

0.007

0.010

0.006

0.063

0.000

Baza

0.068

0.082

0.073

0.071

0.077

0.065

0.083

0.077

0.117

0.081

0.072

Table 2. Weighted genome-wide averages of pairwise FST estimates for all populations. Higher values are marked with
darker shades of grey.

51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

70

Inari
Kolari
Ust−Chilma
Kalvia

Megdurechensk

Punkaharju

Ust−Kulom

60

Kalsnava

lat

Penzenskaja
Radom
50

Volgogradskaja

40

Baza

30

0

25

50

long

Figure 1. Map of sampling locations with P. sylvestris distribution marked with green color.

52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

0.4

Proportion

0.3

Type
0−fold
0.2

4−fold
simulated

0.1

0.0
0

10

20

30

40

Frequency

Figure 2. Minor allele frequency spectrum calculated over all samples. Spectrum is projected down to 87 samples to account
for missing data.

Figure 3. Visualization of STRUCTURE results using K values of 2 and 3.

53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A)
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●

0

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

−10

●
●●
−5

0

5

10

20

20

25

C)

●
15

●

●

−5
−10

−5

0

PC 1PC1
(2.5 %)

10

5

5

●

0

●
●●

●
●
●
●

−5

5

●
●
●
●●
●●
●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●
●
●

−10

●

●

PC2

10

●
●

●
●

PC 2 (2.3 %)

15

●

0

PC2

15

PC PC1
1 (2.7 %)

B)

PC 2 (2.1 %)

Inari
Kolari
Kalvia
Punkaharju
Kalsnava
Radom
Ust−Chilma
Megdurechensk
Ust−Kulom
Penzenskaja
Volgogradskaja
Baza

●
●

−5

PC2

PC 2 (2.2 %)

5

●

−10

−5

0

5

10

PC 1 (2.7 %)
PC1

Figure 4. PCA projections of two first principal components of all samples (A), excluding Baza population samples (B) and
excluding Baza and the samples containing the putative inversion (C). Circles represent the populations of the western cline,
squares the eastern cline and triangles the isolated Baza population where included. Total variance explained by principal
component is indicated within parentheses next to respective principal component axis header.

54

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

B)

A)

C)
0.26
●
●
●
●
●
●

Covariance

0.24

0.22

0.20

0

1000

2000

3000

Distance (km)

Figure 5. Admixture proportions for two layers estimated for different populations using conStruct A) spatial and B) nonspatial models. C) shows the within population covariance (dots) and the decrease of covariance between populations as
between-population distance increases (line) for the first layer.

55

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

rcoef_all 0.0246 rcoef_e 0.0493 rcoef_w 0.0206 r2_all 0.342 r2_east 0.877 r2_west 0.75
ID=PITAhm_003105;Name=PITAhm_003105;Note=PITA_000007603
PITA_000007604;Alias=PREDICTED: ruBisCO large subunit−binding protein subunit alpha
Interpro:IPR002423 Chaperonin Cpn60/TCP−1 family
Pfam:PF00118 Cpn60_TCP1
note:complete

rcoef_all 0.0231 rcoef_e 0.0497 rcoef_w 0.016 r2_all 0.233 r2_east 0.867 r2_west 0.852

0.8
0.6
0.0

0.2

0.4

current_allele_frequencies_west

0.6
0.4
0.2

current_allele_frequencies_west

0.8

1.0

1.0

B)

0.0

Minor allele frequency

A)

50

55

60

Latitude

current_env_variables_west

65

50

55

60

65

current_env_variables_west

Latitude

Figure 6. A) Bayescan outlier locus allele’s frequency at sampling sites (Y-axis) along the latitude of the sites (X-axis). Populations are marked with red
(eastern) and blue (wester) squares with respective least squares trend line. B) Allele frequency of the second highest scoring bayescan result. The two
figures do not share add data points due to missing data.

56

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 7. Pairwise linkage disequilibrium coefficients (r2) based on all pairwise SNP comparisons for all samples. Black line
shows the trendline for the nonlinear regression (r2) against physical distance between the SNPs.

57

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/647412; this version posted October 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

B)

C)
0.5

●

0.4

0.3

r2

A)

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

0.2

0.1

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Figure 8. A) Heatmap visualization of allelic correlation coefficient (𝑟 ' ) values calculated between all SNPs identified as
being part of an inversion, and all variants within their surrounding 1 kbp areas. Alternating thick and thin X and Y axis
borders denotes variants belonging to the same scaffolds. B) Similar heatmap to A, but random variants with similar allele
frequency to the inversion were selected along with their 1 kbp surrounding areas to visualize typical linkage disequilibrium
patterns. Some scaffolds show LD within them, but between scaffolds mostly only low values 𝑟 ' can be seen. C) Means of 𝑟 '
values for 10,000 random 1kb areas (one of which is visualized in 1B heatmap) marked in black and the mean 𝑟 ' value of
blocks containing the inversion haplotype marked in red.

58

