bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Emergence of β and γ networks following multisensory
training
Daria La Roccaa,b , Philippe Ciuciua,b , Denis Alexander Engemanna,b ,
Virginie van Wassenhovea,c,∗
a

CEA/DRF/Joliot, Université Paris-Saclay, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette,France.
INRIA, Parietal team, Université Paris-Saclay, 91120 Palaiseau, France.
c
Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, INSERM, Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay,
NeuroSpin center, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
b

Abstract
Our perceptual reality relies on inferences about the causal structure of the
world given by multiple sensory inputs. In ecological settings, multisensory
events that cohere in time and space benefit inferential processes: hearing and seeing a speaker enhances speech comprehension, and the acoustic
changes of flapping wings naturally pace the motion of a flock of birds.
Here, we asked how a few minutes of (multi)sensory training could shape
cortical interactions in a subsequent perceptual task, and investigated oscillatory activity and functional connectivity as a function of sensory history in
training. Human participants performed a visual motion coherence discrimination task while being recorded with magnetoencephalography (MEG).
Three groups of participants performed the same task with visual stimuli
only, while listening to acoustic textures temporally comodulated with the
strength of visual motion coherence, or with auditory noise uncorrelated
with visual motion. The functional connectivity patterns before and after
training were contrasted to resting-state networks to assess the variability of
common task-relevant networks, and the emergence of new functional interactions following training. One main finding is the emergence of a large-scale
synchronization in the high γ (gamma: 60−120Hz) and β (beta:15−30Hz)
bands for individuals who underwent comodulated multisensory training.
The post-training network involved prefrontal, parietal, and visual cortices.
Our results suggest that the integration of evidence and decision-making
strategies become more efficient following congruent multisensory training
through plasticity in network routing and oscillatory regimes.
∗

Corresponding author: e-mail: virginie.van.wassenhove@gmail.com (VvW)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Keywords: multisensory, motion coherence, acoustic textures, oscillations,
functional connectivity, MEG

1. Introduction
The brain can infer the causal structure of its surroundings by integrating multisensory signals originating from the same physical source while
segregating those originating from different causes [Par+12; PE16; Der+16;
KS15; RN15]. The resolution of this causal inference problem weighs in
the reliability and the degree of correspondence between multisensory inputs [Roa+06; Spe11; Mad+15]. In ecological settings, the temporal comodulation of sensory signals helps perceptual scene analysis: for instance,
an interlocutor’s mouth movements are temporally coherent with the envelope of the acoustic speech signals providing the listener with strong binding
cues for predictive inferences [GS00; VW+05; Sch+08b; Nah+15; Was13;
Mad+15]. Temporally congruent signals enhance the detectability [Bur+08;
Mad+15] and the identification [KVW12; Zil+14] of events, whereas temporally incongruent signals hinder their identification [KVW12; Mad+15].
Herein, we explored the cortical mechanisms by which the internalized temporal structure of coherent multisensory events may subsequently regulate
visual processing.
Using magnetoencephalography (MEG), we characterized the impact of uniand multi-sensory training history on human brain activity when participants (N = 36) performed a visual motion coherence task (Figure 1.A).
The task consisted in reporting the color of the most coherent cloud of dots
amongst two intermixed red and green clouds of moving dots. After initially
performing the task with visual stimuli only (PRE), participants were split
into three experimental groups for specific training: one group performed
the task with visual stimuli only (V), another one with acoustic textures
spectro-temporally congruent with the most coherent visual cloud of the
two (AV) and a third one, with distracting auditory noise uncorrelated with
any of the two visual clouds (CTRL). After performing the training for 20
minutes, all participants were again tested with visual stimuli only (POST).
Behaviorally, all participants improved their perceptual discrimination with
the AV group showing the largest perceptual benefits and the initial analysis of the MEG evoked activity suggested the implication of a large-scale
network following training [Zil+14].
In the present work, we re-analyzed data collected in [Zil+14] and characterized the oscillatory networks following different perceptual histories by

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

assessing the changes of brain activity between PRE and POST blocks,
when all participants performed the task with visual stimuli only (Figure
1.B). Although we did not focus on the effects of feed-forward integration
of multisensory features, or selective attention on brain activity, our analytical approach built on seminal work suggesting the implication of distinct neural oscillatory coupling within large-scale networks [Sen+08; KS18],
[Hip+11]). The dynamic regimes mediating the binding of multisensory information across brain regions have started being characterized [Lak+08;
Sen+08; KS18; Att+14], yet little is known regarding the oscillatory networks which may actively contribute to supramodal or multisenory object
representations [Was13; Zil+14; Biz+16]. Given this experimental approach,
we expected a strong implication of top-down oscillatory components and
networks specifically in the best learning group (AV) implicating β oscillations, which is a critical spectral signature of efficiency in feedback and
sensorimotor decision-making [EF10] as well as a marker of integrative functions [Sie+11].
To characterize the different oscillatory networks, we estimated oscillatory activity within, and across, experimental groups using univariate timefrequency analyses (Figure 1.C) and large-scale functional connectivity (FC)
measures based on the weighted phase lag index (wPLI) [Vin+11] (Figure 1.D). We investigated a large network including prefrontal, parietal,
occipital and temporal cortices with regions orthogonally selected for their
functional relevance in the task (cf [Zil+14], see Methods). Among regions
of interest were the ventro-lateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC), a massive site
of convergence for visual, auditory and multisensory information processing [Rom07; RH12], whose neurons selectively respond to the color of visual
objects [Rom12] and low-level abstraction [Wut+18]; the intra-parietal sulcus (IPS), which plays a central role in multisensory processing [And97;
BM11; Pas+10] and visual motion area (MT), sensitive to perceptual
changes in this task [Zil+14]. Both IPS and MT are known to interact in
the β range during perceptual decision-making [Don+09]. We first started
by exploring the modulation of local oscillatory activity during visual motion discrimination [Sie+06; Sie+11], and followed up with the exploration
of changes in functional connectivity as a function of sensory history in
training.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1: Experimental procedure and Methods. (A) Left panel: each trial started
with the presentation of a fixation cross lasting 0.6 to 0.8 s followed by the presentation
of two intermixed clouds of dots moving incoherently. One cloud was red, the other,
green. After a variable delay (0.3 − 0.6 s) of incoherent motion, one of the clouds (here,
red) moved coherently for 1 s while the other remained fully incoherent (here, green).
Seven possible strength of motion coherence were tested; the direction and color were
randomized across trials. Participants selected which of the red or green cloud was most
coherent (videos S1 and S2 in [Zil+14]). Right panel: schematic operationalization of
the motion coherence discrimination task entailing the integration of motion and color for
decision-making. (B) MEG recordings were collected from 36 participants, who performed
the task described in (A) in the PRE and POST blocks. Between the PRE and POST,
participants were split in three experimental training groups who performed the task
visually (V), with acoustic textures congruent with the most coherent cloud of dot (AV),
or with auditory noise uncorrelated with the visual stimuli (CTRL). All new analyses
were carried out on the PRE and POST blocks, when all participants were performing the
visual task described in (A). All participants improved their behavioral scores in POST as
compared to PRE blocks: the AV group showed the largest perceptual benefit followed by
the V and the CTRL group [Zil+14]. Following preprocessing and source estimations, (C)
univariate time-frequency analysis and (D) multivariate functional connectivity analyses
were performed to provide (E) complementary insights on the oscillatory mechanisms
implicated in the effect of (multi)sensory training history in unisensory processing.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Participants
36 healthy human participants were recruited for the study (age range:
18 to 28 y.o.; mean age: 22.1 ±2.2 s.d.; 3 groups of 12 participants each: V: 4
females; AV: 6 females; AVr: 6 females ). All participants were right-handed,
had normal hearing and normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Before the experiment, all participants provided a written informed consent in accordance
with the Declaration of Helsinki (2008) and the local Ethics Committee on
Human Research at NeuroSpin (Gif-sur-Yvette, France). Prior to the MEG
acquisition, participants were randomly split into 3 experimental groups (V,
AV, and CTRL) as detailed below.
2.2. Task
The MEG experiment consisted of interleaved MEG blocks alternating
between rest and task. The task blocks included: a 12 minutes pre-training
block (PRE) consisting of the visual coherence discrimination task; a 20 minutes training (4 successive blocks of 5 minutes each) on the same task using
purely visual stimuli (V group), congruent audiovisual stimuli (AV group) or
incongruent audiovisual stimuli (CTRL group); a 12 minutes post-training
block (POST) consisting of the same visual coherence discrimination task
as in PRE. Thus, the PRE and POST blocks consisted of the same visual
only coherence discrimination task for all three experimental groups and
using the exact set of visual stimuli. Only the training was either visual or
audiovisual. The task requirements in PRE, training, and in POST were
otherwise identical in all runs: two clouds of colored dots were intermixed
on the screen and participants had to tell which of the red or green cloud
of dots was the most coherent. In PRE and POST, participants also rated
their confidence on a scale of 1 to 5 after they provided their main response
regarding the color of the most coherent cloud of dots.
In PRE and POST, the initial and final motion coherence discrimination
threshold of each participant was assessed by testing seven strength of visual motion coherence (15%, 25%, 35%, 45%, 55%, 75% and 95%). 28 trials
for each strength of visual motion coherence were collected in PRE and in
POST for a total of 196 trials in each block. In the training (4 blocks, 5
min each), four visual coherence levels were tested corresponding to ± 10%
and ±20% of an individuals discrimination threshold computed in PRE (see
[Zil+14] for more details). 28 trials for each strength of visual motion coherence were presented for a total of 112 trials in a given training block. These

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

data were not considered in this study as our main question focused on contrasting brain activity to identical experimental conditions given a different
training history. Further experimental details can be found in [Zil+14].
The first resting block occurring prior to any task or training will be thereafter referred to as REST and was used as baseline for functional connectivity analysis.
2.3. Stimuli
Visual stimuli consisted of intermixed red and green clouds of dots (Figure 1.A) calibrated to isoluminance using heterochromatic flicker photometry on a per individual basis prior to MEG data acquisition. A white
fixation cross was at the center of a 4◦ gray mask disk and dots were presented within an annulus of 4◦ to 15◦ of visual angle. Dots had a radius
of 0.2◦ . The motion flow was 16.7 dots per deg2 × s with a speed of 10◦ /s
and its direction confined within an angle of 45◦ − 90◦ around the azimuth.
50% of the trials were upward coherent motion and the remaining 50% of
the trials were downward coherent motion. The color and the direction of
the most coherent cloud o dots were thus pseudo-randomized across trials
and both color and direction were orthogonal to the task goal.
The V group underwent training using visual only stimuli. The AV group underwent training using temporal comodulated audiovisual associations comparable to those used in sensory substitution devices such as the vOICe [Mei92]
and the EyeMusic [LT+12], with intuitive perceptual associations between
sensory modalities [MO87; Mae+04]. Here, we used parametric sounds or
acoustic textures (cf [Ove+10] with sampling frequency = 44.1 kHz, frequency range: 0.2 to 5 kHz) which enabled to pair each visual dot with a
linear frequency-modulated acoustic sweep whose slope depended on the direction taken by the visual dot (see [Zil+14] for more details). The maximal
slope was 16 octaves/s corresponding to motion directions of 82.9◦ − 90◦ . A
visual dot moving upwards was associated with an upward acoustic ramp,
whereas a downward moving dot was associated with a descending acoustic
ramp. The duration of a ramp was also identical to the life-time of a visual
dot. The CTRL group underwent training with acoustic noise of the same
duration and amplitude as the acoustic textures used for the AV group.
Crucially, the acoustic noise was thus fully uncorrelated with the visual coherent motion and served as a control regarding the specificity of audiovisual
associations in this task.
In the task and for all experimental groups, a given trial started with a
variable duration (0.3 to 0.6s) mixing both red and green clouds of dots
being fully incoherent (0% of coherent motion). Then, one cloud of dots
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

became more coherent than the other for a duration of one second. In PRE
and POST, the coherence level taken by the most coherent cloud was one
of seven possible values described in the Task section. During training, the
coherence level taken by the most coherent cloud took one of four values
described in the Task section. Inter-trials intervals (ITI) varied from 0.6 to
0.8s. Samples of the video trials can be experienced (Movies S1 and S2 in
[Zil+14]).
2.4. MEG and MRI data acquisition
Electromagnetic brain activity was recorded in a magnetically shielded
room using a 306 MEG system (Neuromag Elekta LTD, Helsinki). MEG
signals were sampled at 2 kHz and band-pass filtered between 0.03-600 Hz.
Four head position coils (HPI) were used to measure the head position of participants before each block; three fiducial markers (nasion and pre-auricular
points) were used during digitization as a reference for coregistration of
anatomical MRI (aMRI) immediately following MEG acquisition. Electrooculograms (EOG) and electrocardiogram (ECG) were recorded simultaneously with MEG. Five minutes of empty room recordings were acquired
before each block for the computation of the noise covariance matrix.
The T1 weighted aMRI was recorded using a 3-T Siemens Trio MRI scanner.
Parameters of the sequence were: field-of-view: 256×256×176 mm3 (transversal orientation), voxel size: 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.1 mm; acquisition time: 466 s;
echo time TE = 2.98 ms, inversion time TI = 900 ms, repetition time
TR = 2300 ms and flip angle (FA): 9◦ . For each participant, cortical reconstruction and volumetric segmentation of T1 weighted aMRI was performed
using FreeSurfer1 . Once cortical models were complete, deformable procedures were executed using the MNE software [Gra+14] to register source
estimates of each individual onto the FreeSurfer average brain for group
analysis.
2.5. MEG preprocessing
The analysis of the MEG data was carried out using the MNE-python
toolbox [Gra+13]. After applying an anti-aliasing FIR filter (low-pass cutoff frequency at 130 Hz), MEG data were down-sampled to 400 Hz, and
preprocessed (Figure 1.B) to remove external and internal interferences, in
accordance with accepted guidelines for MEG research [Gro+13]. Signal
1

http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Space Separation (SSS) was applied with MaxFilter to remove exogenous artifacts and noisy sensors [TS06]. Ocular and cardiac artifacts (eye blinks and
heart beats) were removed using Independent Component Analysis (ICA)
on raw signals. ICA were fitted to raw MEG signals, and sources matching
the ECG and EOG were automatically found and removed before signals
reconstruction following the procedure described in [Gra+14]2 .
2.6. Univariate time-frequency analysis in sensor space
The oscillatory activity in α, β and γ ranges was established using a
univariate time-frequency analytical approach in sensor space(Figure 1.C).
Oscillatory activity in the post-stimulus (POST) period was contrasted with
pre-stimulus (PRE) period. Due to the variability in the duration of the
initial incoherence period of the stimuli as well as the natural variability in reaction times (RTs), data were locked and epoched according to
three different types of events. A first epoching ranged from −600 ms to
+900 ms post-incoherent motion onset (initial stimulus display); the second
epoching ranged from 0 ms to +1500 ms post-coherent motion onset; the
third epoching ranged from −1000 to +500 ms around the button press (RT).
Importantly, the 600 ms interval preceding the incoherence onset was used
as baseline for all sets of epochs.
For each set of epochs, a group-level non-parametric spatio-temporal cluster analysis was computed on single-trial time-frequency transform of the
signals obtained with Morlet complex-valued wavelets and averaged in each
frequency band of interest. The number of cycles in the Morlet wavelet
was defined for each frequency (f ) as f /2. To assess the statistical significance of the obtained clusters we randomly flipped r = 104 times the
sign of the time-frequency transformed data, and cluster-level correction for
multiple comparisons was based on the maximum statistic method [MO07].
The spatio-temporal clustering was used to identify the sensors showing
event-related activity and latencies in PRE and in POST. One of these sensors was used for the subsequent univariate analysis. This ensured that
any inference made on a particular frequency band was first determined
independently of an ad-hoc working hypothesis motivating the subsequent
contrasts. Specifically, time-frequency cluster analyses was used in PRE to
perform group-level statistics (N = 36, low vs. high MC, and correct vs.
incorrect trials). Moreover, a statistical contrast was performed between
2

https://github.com/mne-tools/mne-python/blob/master/tutorials/plot_
artifacts_correction_ica.py

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

POST and PRE blocks, pooling all participants together (N = 36) as well
as considering each group separately (N = 12). Statistical significance for
all these contrasts was assessed using random permutations as discussed
above.
To test the modulation of oscillatory activity during task execution, we
used a general linear model (GLM) on the power of the oscillatory activity
regimes averaged on a single trial basis and over specific time intervals defined by significant latencies found in the cluster analysis. A non-parametric
approach to GLM based on random permutations was employed to obtain
a robust and unbiased linear regression [AL99; DR17]. A GLM was employed to test linear regression according to the equation y = wT x + . Here
y ∈ IR was the MEG mean power in a significant cluster of sensors; x was
the vector [1, x1 , x2 , · · · , xp−1 ]T ∈ IRp containing p regressor variables. To
find the best fitting model, we tested different combinations of regressors
including motion coherence, reaction times, correctness, confidence ratings
and their interactions. In particular, each regressor was first tested in an
independent linear model, and significant explanatory variables were subsequently tested in the same model, together with their interactions in order
to identify possible driving effects. w contained the p regression coefficients
including the constant term, and  was the error term. Iteratively reweighted
least squares was used to obtain an estimate of w and a value of the Wald
statistic wref . A non-parametric approach based on random permutations
was used to obtain robust and unbiased significance levels and confidence
intervals. Specifically, to test the significance of each estimated regression
coefficient wi , r = 10, 000 random permutations of the corresponding regressor variable xi were generated, yielding a distribution of Wald statistics w∗
for each partial regression coefficient under the null hypothesis H0 : wi = 0.
For each estimated coefficient, the p-value was calculated as the proportion
of w∗ grater then or equal to wref , in absolute value. Permutation inference
for the GLM in common neuroimaging applications has been proposed as a
non-parametric test to relax assumptions on data distributions [Win+14].
The 36 participants were pooled together in PRE (N = 36) whereas groupspecific analyses (n = 12) were performed on POST data to study the effects
of (multi)sensory training. This analysis was carried out for the three sets
of epochs locked to the three different events (incoherence onset, coherence
onset, response).
2.7. MRI-MEG coregistration and source reconstruction
The coregistration of MEG data with the individual aMRI was carried
out by realigning the digitized fiducial points with the markers in MRI slices,
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

using MRILAB (Neuromag-Elekta LTD, Helsinki) and mne analyze tools
within MNE ([Gra+14]). Individual forward solutions for all source reconstructions located on the cortical sheet were computed using a 3-layers
boundary element model constrained by the individual aMRI. Cortical surfaces were extracted with FreeSurfer and decimated to about 5,120 vertices
per hemisphere with 4.9 mm spacing. The forward solution, noise and source
covariance matrices were used to calculate the noise-normalized dynamic statistical parametric mapping (dSPM) ([Dal+00]) inverse operator (depth =
0.8). The inverse solution was obtained using a loose orientation constraint
on the transverse component of the source covariance matrix (loose = 0.4).
The estimates of the reconstructed dSPM time series were interpolated onto
the FreeSurfer average brain for group-level source space analysis. Only
the radial components of the estimated currents were considered for further
analysis.
After source estimation, 28 regions of interest (ROIs) covering both hemispheres were identified on each individual cortex by using FreeSurfer cortical
parcellations3 . The obtained ROIs comprised regions shown to be involved
in multisensory processing, perceptual decision making and motion discrimination ([Zil+14]), together with control regions, namely: frontopolar regions
(FP), frontal eye field (FEF), ventro-lateral prefrontal cortex (vlPFC), premotor cortex and supplementary motor region (BA6), primary motor cortex
(PMC), intra-parietal sulcus (IPS), inferior temporal cortex (ITC), auditory
cortex (AUD), superior temporal sulcus (aSTS, mSTS and pSTS), middle
temporal visual area (MT), visual area V4, and primary and secondary visual cortices (V1-V2). The average activities over all the vertices within
each of these cortical regions (labels) were used for the subsequent functional connectivity analysis.
2.8. Functional connectivity analysis
2.8.1. Adjacency matrices
Functional interaction between brain regions was assessed by evaluating
the similarity of brain activity across remote brain areas, namely functional
connectivity (FC) (Figure 1.D). Several studies have compared a subset
of FC methods with respect to their ability to correctly detect the presence of simulated connectivity schemes in a multivariate data set [AA+06].
The outcomes showed that the performance of the measures depended on
the characteristics of the dataset and the methods. No single method out3

https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/CorticalParcellation

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

performed the others in all cases. A practical and reasonable approach
thus consisted in predetermining the FC method according to the plausible
working hypotheses of the experimental study. To characterize FC in the
absence of a priori knowledge about its nature and the generating model,
non-parametric measures could first be used.
The notion of phase coupling derives from the study of oscillatory nonlinear
dynamical systems. Based on this notion, Phase Lag Index (PLI) [Sta+07]
aims at quantifying in a statistical sense the phase delay between such systems from experimental data [Saz+09] according to the following formula:

P LI ij = |E{sign[∆Φij (tk )]}|, ∈ [0, 1]

(1)

where ∆ij Φ(tk ) = Φi (tk ) − Φj (tk ) quantifies the instantaneous phase difference between two source reconstructed time series si (t) and sj (t) at time
point t = tk . In Eq. (1), the expectation is typically replaced by the empirical mean over consecutive time points. PLI was shown to be robust
with respect to instantaneous linear mixing effects which may lead to the
detection of spurious functional couplings not caused by brain interactions
(instantaneous linear mixing effects) [Sta+07].
Moreover, PLI has the advantage of not being influenced by the magnitude of
phase delays. Weighted PLI (wPLI) also solves the problem of discontinuity
around zero [Vin+11], by using the magnitude of the imaginary part of the
cross-spectrum as weights. To measure pairwise interactions between the
extracted cortical labels, we used the definition of wPLI in the frequency
domain, exploiting the phase of the Fourier-based cross-spectrum Si,j (f ) of
two time series si (t) and sj (t):
wP LI ij (f ) =

|E{|={Sij (f )}|sign(={Sij (f )})}|
, ∈ [0, 1]
E{|={Sij (f )}|}

(2)

where = stands for the imaginary part, and the expectations were replaced
by their empirical estimates averaged over epochs. Here, f usually spans a
specific frequency band such as oscillatory regimes (α, β or γ). Therefore,
each FC observation consisted of a symmetric adjacency matrix of size 28 ×
28. 10 instances of FC were obtained for each participant and each block
performing a partition of epochs into 10 non-overlapping subsets. In order to
ensure the balance of the number of epochs used to obtain each FC instance
for the different participants, the total number of epochs was set to the
minimum observed across participants.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2.8.2. Statistical analysis of FC
A widely employed approach to extract the FC network of interest from
an adjacency matrix consists in applying a threshold to the strength of the
estimated connections (Figure 4.A). The threshold is obtained according to
a suitable criterion [DVF+14]. The resulting FC patterns correspond to the
strongest connections, which do not necessarily reflect the most significant
differences between experimental conditions. Additionally, while such approach is particularly suitable for graph-theoretic network analysis, it does
not allow direct quantitative comparisons, owing to the variability of significant connections.
Here, the goal was to separately investigate changes that were task-dependent
(i.e. significant changes in the contrast PRE or POST vs. REST) and cortical interactions driven by (multi)sensory training. Hence, the comparison
between FC estimates obtained for the three experimental groups was addressed using a different approach. First, adjacency matrices were separately
averaged over each frequency band of interest, each block (REST, PRE
and POST) and each participant (Figure 4.A). Second, for each frequency
band and each experimental group (AV, V, and CTRL), the task-relevant
networks were extracted by performing a group-level permutation t-test between FC estimated in REST and FC estimated in task blocks (PRE, POST)
(Figure 4.B). Third, considering only the subset of task-related connections
common to PRE and POST blocks (i.e. the connections significantly changing both in PRE and POST as compared to REST), the variability driven
by the training (POST vs. PRE) was evaluated using a permutation t-test
(Figure 4.C, top).
All statistical tests were corrected for multiple comparisons using the maximum statistic method [MO07]. Finally, the reorganization of FC in POST
was addressed by highlighting the emergence of new task-relevant FC in
POST, which were not observed in PRE (Figure 4.C, bottom). Importantly,
this approach considered the FC at REST as the baseline for all other FC
analyses. This allowed to better disentangle the different FC patterns and
their changes between PRE and POST. Hence a linear correlation analysis based on Pearson’s correlation coefficient was performed between the
average increase of post-specific interactions from PRE to POST and the
corresponding increase of confidence ratings, for each frequency band and
each training group separately.
2.8.3. Topological analysis of FC
A complementary and conventional topological analysis of FC networks
was also carried out [BS09]. Specifically, the networks with density thre12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

shold given by 3/Nrois , where Nrois is the number of regions [DVF+17], were
first extracted for each participant, each block and each frequency band.
Weighted node degree Di , a topological property which is a conceptually
simple measure of centrality of a node i within a network, was then computed
for each label in the extracted networks, according to the formula:
Di =

K
X

ri,k

(3)

k=1

where K is the number of nodes in the network (cortical labels), and ri,k
is the estimated FC value between nodes i and k. Permutation t-test were
performed to evaluate the differences of node degree values between REST
and task blocks (i.e. PRE or POST) as well as between PRE and POST.
Again, the maximum statistic method was used to correct the statistical
tests for multiple comparisons [MO07].
3. Results
We first assessed the broad-band oscillatory activity following the presentation of visual motion stimuli. For this, we combined the PRE trials in response to all motion coherence levels for all three experimental
groups (N = 36), and performed a time-frequency analysis of the MEG
responses. A spatio-temporal clustering permutation test corrected for multiple comparisons (see Experimental Procedures) on post-stimulus timefrequency activity (Figure 2.A, left panel) revealed a significant decrease
of α (alpha: 7 − 14Hz) power (p < 0.001) with a significant increase in the
power of broadband high γ (60−120Hz, p < 0.001) as compared to baseline.
Significant changes in β (15 − 30Hz) were also found. The significant clusters observed for both the sustained decrease in α power and the increase in
high-frequency γ power were localized in the occipital sensors (Figure 2.A,
middle panel). This pattern lasted throughout the presentation of visual
motion coherence. Consistent with the topographical pattern at the scalp
level, source estimations of the α and the high γ responses suggested generators located in bilateral visual cortices (Figure 2.A, right panel). This
time-frequency pattern during unisensory visual motion coherence was consistent with previously reported time-frequency responses induced by visual
motion stimuli [Don+07; Sie+06]. The significant increase in γ band during visual motion coherence was also consistent with a previous report of
visual motion eliciting a stronger γ response than stationary visual stimuli [Swe+09]. We then asked whether the post-stimulus power changes in α,
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

γ, and β were linked to the strength of visual motion coherence in PRE (for
all participants) and in POST (as a function of the experimental group),
and then proceeded with the exploration of the β band.
3.1. Occipital α suppression is independent of sensory evidence and training
history
In PRE, i.e., prior to any training, we used the grand average data (N =
36) and assessed the occipital α power from the onset of motion coherence
on (Figure 2.A, left panel, white demarcation lines) as a function of motion
coherence (Figure 2.B) using non-parametric statistics and a general linear
model. We found no significant relationships between α power and motion
coherence. The same regression analysis was performed in the POST data,
independently for each experimental group (N = 12) in order to preserve
the distinct training history of each group. Again, we found no significant
relationships between α power and motion coherence, and no significant differences in α power between PRE and POST experimental blocks. Overall,
we found no substantial evidence that α power varied as a function of motion coherence strength or training history. While the absence of systematic
occipital α modulation limits the functional specificity of α in this task,
the general decrease of α power during stimulus presentation was generally
consistent with the inhibitory gating of visual information [JM10; Zum+14]
thereby an α power decrease could be taken as an index of selective attention [FS11].
3.2. Broadband high-γ power increases with the strength in motion coherence
and post-training performance
Before training (PRE, N = 36), the occipital broadband high γ following the presentation of visual motion coherence showed a significant increase
with the strength of visual motion coherence (wM C = 0.0053, p < 0.05; Figure 2.C, left top panel). A similar analysis performed on POST data separately for each experimental group (N = 12) revealed a significant linear
relationship between the post-stimulus γ power increase and the increase in
stimulus motion coherence. This effect was seen in all three groups irrespective of training history (wM C = 0.0058 , p < 0.05; Figure 2.C, left bottom
panel). This observation was consistent with the important role of high
γ power during motion discrimination and its modulation by the strength
in visual motion ([Sie+06]. In PRE, no other effects or interactions were
found when adding participants’ behavioral correctness (C), reaction times
(RT), or confidence ratings (CR) to the general linear model (see Experimental Procedures; additional information regarding behavioral outcomes
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2: Occipital low-frequency suppression and motion strength (and POSTaccuracy) dependent broadband γ increase. (A) Significant occipital time-frequency
clusters of low-frequency (< 45 Hz) power suppression and γ (45 − 120 Hz) band increase
were found during the presentation of motion coherence (left panel). Time-frequency analysis was locked to the onset of coherent motion (first black vertical line) and to coherence
onset (first white vertical line; the second white vertical is the offset) as well as responselocked (second black vertical line). The three separate analyses stacked together provide
the full unfolding of oscillatory activity during the trial. The group average (N = 36)
time-frequency response of the PRE trials showing a sustained decrease of low-frequency
power with an increase in broadband γ power is reported for an occipital sensor from the
obtained spatial clusters (highlighted yellow sensor in the central panel). Source estimates
of α (7 − 14 Hz) power and broadband γ revealed the implication of visual and parietal
cortices (right panel). (B) In occipital sensors, we found no significant modulations of α
power as a function of motion coherence in PRE (top panel) or in POST (bottom panel).
Bars are 1 s.e.m. (C) High γ activity increased with motion coherence in PRE (left top
panel) and in POST (left bottom), but increased with accuracy only in POST (right bottom). Bars are 1 s.e.m. (D) Source estimates showed a significant linear relationship
between high γ and motion coherence in occipital cortices, supporting the patterns seen
at the scalp level.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

provided in [Zil+14]). To the contrary, in POST, a positive interaction between correctness and motion coherence drove the regression analysis on its
own (N = 36, wM C−C = 0.0055, p < 0.005). In fact, irrespective of training
history, the interaction between the strength of motion coherence and performance explained the linear relationship between participants’ correctness
and occipital broadband high γ power (see Figure 2.C, right panels). Subsequent source estimations (see Experimental Procedures) suggested that
the increased modulation of high γ band power originated in visual cortices
(Figure 2.D). This observation is in general agreement with previous findings
linking local γ band activity to the encoding of sensory evidence [VSS00]
during a visual motion discrimination task [Sie+06; Sie+11], and suggested
that irrespective of sensory history in training, the reliability of visual sensory evidence contributed to successful task performance.
3.3. β power is sensitive to integrated evidence during decision-making
In addition to the post-stimulus α and γ effects found in PRE (N = 36),
we also observed two significant β clusters (15 − 30Hz) partially overlapping over the frontal sensors during the presentation of coherent motion: a
bilateral early increase in β band power (p < 0.005) was subsequently followed by a significant decrease (p < 0.005) over the left hemispheric sensors.
The decrease in β band power started around 600 ms following the onset
of visual motion coherence (Figure 3.A). The same analysis performed on
POST data (N = 36) showed, overall, that the decrease in β power was
left-lateralized and occurred more strongly over left frontal sensors. In what
follows, we further investigate changes in β power.
In a first working hypothesis, we considered prior work showing that changes
in β power contribute to perceptual decision-making [Don+09; Ala+17], and
that motor β power can be modulated by attention when anticipating motion
coherence onset [Sal+10] and may index functional inhibition during perceptual discrimination tasks engaging different sensory modalities [Cas+01;
Bau+12]. To test whether these affected the observed β power suppression
in our study, we performed cluster permutations on time-frequency data
locked to the onset of motion coherence, and devised three contrasts of interest (Figure 3.B): correct vs. incorrect trials in PRE as in [Don+09] (top
panel), high vs. low motion coherence in PRE (middle panel) and PRE
vs. POST trials (bottom panel). In all three contrasts, we found a significant decrease of β power so that the a priori easiest trials yielded a larger
suppression of β power compared to the more difficult trials. Specifically,
we found a systematic late decrease of β power in the high vs. low motion

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3: The modulations of β power activity indicate a gain in efficiency. (A)
Group average (N = 36) time-frequency maps during the PRE block. The analysis was
separately performed on trials locked to the incoherent stimulus onset (white vertical line),
locked to the coherent motion (first black vertical line) and locked to the response (second
black vertical line). All three analyses were stacked for illustration and provided for a
left hemispheric sensor (red dot on left topographic map). Time-frequency permutation
clustering statistics revealed two β (15 − 30 Hz) components partially overlapping over
frontal sensors (topography and represented sensor reported on the bottom right corner)
during the presentation of the coherent dot motion: a significant bilateral early increase of
β power (red) was followed by a significant decrease solely over the left hemispheric sensors.
(B) Statistical contrasts tested the changes in β power between correct vs. incorrect trials
(top panel), high vs. low motion coherence trials (middle panel) and POST vs. PRE trials
(lower panel). All three contrasts revealed a stronger decrease of β power. (C) Consistent
with contrasts in (B), β power linearly decreased with increasing motion coherence in
PRE and in POST (left top and bottom, respectively) but linearly increased with RT in
PRE and POST (right top and bottom, respectively). (D) The AV group showed the
strongest β power decrease from PRE (gray) to POST (red) for all strengths of visual
motion coherence (left panel). Bars are 1 s.e.m. Thus, during motion coherence stimuli
the strongest overall β power decrease from PRE to POST was observed for the AV group
(histogram on the right). Source estimates of β power showed a significant decrease in
POST as compared to PRE over (E) the motor and parietal cortices. This effect was
strongest for the AV group.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

coherence contrast (p < 0.01; Figure 3.B, top) and in the correct vs. incorrect trials (p < 0.05; Figure 3.B, middle). A similar, yet longer-lasting
and left-lateralized frontal effect, was found in the POST vs. PRE contrast
(p < 0.01; Figure 3.B, bottom).
As the decrease in β power was found locked to the coherence onset but late
in the trial – i.e. just before participants’ responses –, it may have reflected
the seminal β suppression preceding movement onset [PDS99] seen when
locking epochs to the individuals’ reaction times (RT) (Figure 3.A, second
black line). To test for the possibility that the observed β suppression reflected β event-related desynchronization shaped by motor readiness and
action execution [Mim+99; JB11], we thus locked the trials to participants’
RT and tested the same contrasts as those performed previously on the trials
locked to the onset of motion coherence (i.e., correct vs. incorrect in PRE
data, high vs. low motion coherence in PRE data and PRE vs. POST). The
correct vs. incorrect, and the high vs. low motion coherence response-locked
contrasts did not reveal a decrease but, instead, a small but significant increase (p < 0.05) of β power before movement preparation. This pattern
was only detected when locking the data to the RT (Figure 3.B first two
rows on the right) and was distributed over the posterior and frontal sensors. This effect appeared to converge with previous observations [Sie+11],
with β power suggested to mediate stages of decision-making linking sensory
evidence encoding with choice-related action execution. Here, we did not
observe significant differences when contrasting the PRE and POST activity for this effect (Figure 3.B third row on the right), and we thus did not
pursue the analysis of this specific effect previously investigated in detail.
Importantly however, this response-locked β activity did not seem to be
shaped by sensory history in training and the changes in β power locked to
motion coherence onset (Figure 3.A and Figure 3.B) were thus distinct from
the seminal response-locked effect.
Second, as the modulations of β power suppression were not solely specific
to the presentation of motion coherence, but also sensitive to the correctness and the type of training participants underwent, we tested whether, in
the absence of task, the same β power decrease could be seen. For this, we
used the localizer data during which participants attended coherent motion
stimuli in the absence of a task – namely, during passive viewing. We contrasted brain responses elicited by coherent motion with those obtained in
response to incoherent motion. We found no significant β power changes in
this contrast, suggesting that being engaged in the discrimination task was
necessary to observe the β suppression effects.
Third, we performed a separate regression analysis (GLM) on the PRE (N =
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

36) and the POST data (independently for each experimental group, N =
12) (Figure 3.C, top and bottom panels, respectively). We used the strength
of motion coherence and three behavioral variables (correctness, RT, confidence ratings) as regressors. With this approach, we assessed which of the
stimulus motion coherence, or of the three behavioral outcomes, contributed
most to the variance of the observed modulation in β power. We found that
β power significantly decreased with increasing strength in motion coherence in PRE (N = 36, w = −0.08, p < 0.001), (Figure 3.C, left top panel).
We also found a significant positive interaction between motion coherence
and RT (N = 36, w = 0.02, p < 0.001; (Figure 3.C, right top panel)): In
other words, for a given strength of visual motion coherence, we observed a
decrease of β power with faster RT. Altogether, we thus observed that the
strongest visual motion coherence and the fastest RT showed the lowest β
power.
We then applied the same regression analysis on POST data separately for
the three experimental groups (N = 12). To make the group-specific results comparable, β power from PRE data were separately subtracted from
each individual group’s POST data. This analysis revealed a decrease in
the slope of the regression between β power and the strength of visual motion coherence in all three experimental groups (Figure 3.C, bottom left).
This was consistent with the fact that all participants improved their performance after training with increased accuracy, decreased RT, and increased
confidence rating [Zil+14]. Similar to the PRE effects, we found a positive
interaction between the strength of visual motion coherence and RT with β
power (Figure 3.C, bottom right). Crucially, an overall decrease of β power
from PRE to POST was consistently observed for all levels of visual motion
coherence in the AV group as compared to the V and the CTRL groups (Figure 3.D). That motion coherence and RT were the main contributors to the
β power variability was consistent with the observation that all experimental groups were faster in POST as compared to PRE. Interestingly however,
that the AV group displayed the largest decrease of β power overall after
training was also consistent with its overall better performance compared to
the other groups (and not with a faster response as the RT were comparable
across groups, [Zil+14]). In other words, each group showed an overall decrease of β power as a function of the strength of visual motion coherence,
which may indicate an overall gain in stimulus processing efficiency as the
regression slopes across groups were comparable (Figure 3.D, left panel).
Additionally, this decrease was shifted down for the AV group as indicated
by the histogram in Figure 3.D, that shows the overall difference (mean and
s.e.m. over subjects) of β power between POST and PRE for each group,
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

separately. Finally, the performance on the task showed a significant correlation with β power but only when using an independent linear regression
model, suggesting that motion coherence and RT contributed most to the β
power effects, which in turn affected performance.
To sum up our observations on β power locked to the onset of visual motion
coherence, the task-related decrease in β power over the frontal sensors got
generally stronger with integrated evidence to perform the task. Additionally, congruent multisensory training (AV) induced a larger (POST-PRE)
decrease of β power than other unisensory (V) or conflicting audiovisual
(CTRL) trainings. Consistent with the scalp data, the POST vs. PRE statistical contrasts of source estimates showed a strong β power decrease over
parieto-central regions especially for the AV group; this decrease was also
observed in the V and in the CTRL groups to a smaller extent (Figure 3.E).
The observed β power suppression during motion coherence discrimination
converges with previous literature reporting a central role of β power during
perceptual decision making tasks [Wya+12; Don+09; Ala+17].
As interim summary for the univariate oscillatory analysis, we observed that
α and broadband γ responses during the presentation of visual coherent motion were not significantly affected by training history, in contrast to β oscillatory activity seemingly affected by the degree of integrated evidence during
training. β oscillations may play an important role in (multi)sensory perceptual discrimination consistent with its role in mediating interactions across
distant structures during perceptual decision-making [Sie+11]. To disentangle the possible networks mediating these effects, we turned to multivariate
functional connectivity (FC) analysis and investigated whether medium- and
long-range interactions between cortical regions could provide complementary insights on the specificity of oscillatory regimes as a function of sensory
history in training (Figure 1.E).
3.4. Task-related network synchronization during visual coherent motion discrimination
To characterize the functional connectivity (FC) induced by (multi)sensory training in the different oscillatory regimes, we estimated the PRE
and POST activity during the presentation of motion coherence (i.e., excluding the initial incoherence interval of the stimuli) using 28 cortical regions (ROIs; Figure 4.A). Hence, the bivariate FC was estimated using the
weighted phase-lag index (wPLI) (Figure 4.A) in three main synchronization
regimes (α, β and high γ). ROIs were selected in a manner orthogonal to
the contrasts of interest, mainly by performing a source estimation of the

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4: Overview of statistical contrasts performed to extract functional oscillatory networks. (A) Functional connectivity (FC) estimates during the presentation of
coherent motion, in PRE and in POST, contrasted with resting-state FC patterns (REST).
For illustration, we report the full and thresholded α oscillatory networks separately for
PRE, REST and POST (top to bottom panels, respectively). Statistical contrasts were
based on non-parametric permutation t-tests and performed on the 28 cortical regions. (B)
Pairwise phase couplings were contrasted to show significant differences of weighted Phase
Lag Index (wPLI) values characterizing the task-related FC network (PRE vs. REST and
POST vs. REST). (C) The FC patterns computed in (B) were compared to assess the
variability of the task-related FC in PRE and in POST, as well as to characterize the
appearance of new connectivity patterns in POST. FP: frontopolar; FEF: frontal eye
field; vLPFC: ventro-lateral prefrontal cortex; PMC: primary motor cortex; BA6: supplementary motor cortex; IPS: intra-parietal sulcus; ITC: inferior temporal cortex; AUD:
auditory cortex; aSTS: anterior superior temporal sulcus; mSTS: middle STS; pSTS: posterior STS; MT: middle temporal visual motion area; V4: visual area 4; V1-V2:primary
and secondary visual cortices.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

grand average data across all experimental conditions ([Zil+14], see Methods). All statistical contrasts (Figure 4.B) were based on non-parametric
permutation t-tests. Only phase coupling values showing significant differences (p < 0.01) were retained in the resulting functional networks herein
reported.
First, we estimated the functional connectivity pattern during PRE and
POST (i.e. during task) that significantly differed from resting-state (PRE
vs. REST and POST vs. REST; Figure 4.B). The subtraction of the restingstate FC from PRE and POST was used as an equivalent of baseline in univariate analyses, and thus was performed to ensure that we characterized
the task-relevant FC in both POST and PRE relative to the resting-state
network. A direct comparison of POST vs. PRE FC without consideration
of the initial resting-state FC could be a confounding factor in the interpretation of the results, and could falsely assign significant changes of FC
to training effects, when they may in fact simply result from transitioning
from REST to task. We then considered the task-relevant network common
to PRE and POST (Figure 4.C, top) and explored the effects of training
on the changes of cortical interactions and oscillatory couplings.
Consistent with the occipital decrease in α band power observed in the univariate time-frequency analysis, we found a significant uncoupling of the α
oscillatory network in task (both in PRE and in POST) as compared to
REST (Figure 5.A, bottom left panel). A relative increase in synchronization modulated by sensory history (Figure 5.A, left column) was found from
PRE to POST, involving a large network comprising occipital, temporal
and parietal regions. This relative significant increase in α synchronization
was observed in the V and in the AV groups, but not in the CTRL group.
A similar analysis was performed for the β and the γ oscillatory regimes
and, in contrast to α, a strengthening of large-scale coupling in the β and γ
bands were observed between REST and task (PRE, POST) (Figure 5.A,
bottom panels). The task-related β network present in all groups implicated
vlPFC, IPS and MT but showed a significant strengthening from PRE to
POST solely in the AV group ( 5.A, middle column). The significant POST
vs. PRE increase of task-related FC was also observed for the AV group in
the high γ between the auditory regions and the pSTS. In sum, all three
groups displayed a characteristic desynchronization of the α network when
engaged in the task but a higher synchronization in POST than in PRE of
the α network for the AV and V groups. Conversely, an increased synchronization of specific β and γ networks was found in all three groups from
resting-state to PRE, and again to POST, but only in the AV group did we
see an increase of β and γ synchronization post-training.
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5: Fluctuations of the task-related networks in pre- and post-training.
(A) Source estimation was performed to obtain cortical activity in 28 regions of interest
(see Section 2.7 for details). Pairwise cortical interactions based on wPLI, and averaged in
each frequency band of interest, have been estimated for each condition (REST, PRE and
POST). POST vs PRE contrasts of cortical interactions (lines connecting two regions in
the figure) within the task-related FC network common to PRE and POST was separately
studied for α (left), β (middle), and γ (right) and for the 3 training groups (AV:top, V:
middle; CTRL: bottom). A qualitative description of FC changes (significant increases
and decreases of interactions) is provided at the bottom, showing that increases from PRE
to POST were relative to REST, with an initial desynchronization of α from REST to task,
and a relative synchronization of β and γ from REST to task for all three groups. Most
notably, both the AV and the V groups showed an overall increase of α FC between PRE
and POST. Although a significant β phase-coupling in task-related FC network linking
IPS, vLPFC and MT was found in all groups, only the AV group showed a significant
increase of this β network following training. (B) Topological changes in FC networks
from REST to PRE (top) and from PRE to POST (bottom). POST vs. PRE contrasts
were performed for each training group separately. In the β network, the node degree in
PRE increased in frontal and parietal regions, whereas it decreased in occipito-temporal
regions as compared to REST. The reverse pattern was observed in the β network from
PRE to POST in the AV group.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

3.5. Brain network analysis and topological differences in regional connectivity
To investigate the degree of interaction of each brain region, a brain
network analysis was carried out using a measure of centrality as index (cf
Eq. (3)). This analysis allowed investigating whether specific regions played
a central role by assessing the topology of the estimated FC networks based
on the number of phase coupling values (connections) over a specific threshold for each ROI (i.e. node degree, see Experimental Procedures). This
quantification revealed distinct patterns for each oscillatory regime (Figure
5.B), all corroborating our previous analyses (Figure 5.A). The changes in
the node degree within the estimated FC networks were assessed with the
statistical contrasts PRE vs. REST combining all groups, and POST vs.
PRE on a per group basis.
First, a general task-related decrease of node degree from REST to PRE
(Figure 5.B, α blue nodes, top left) was observed in parietal, occipital and
temporal regions for the α oscillatory network. This observation was consistent with the global α desynchronization during task as compared to REST.
The same contrast for the β network (Figure 5.B, β, top middle) showed an
increase of node degree in PRE in frontal and parietal regions (red nodes),
but a decrease in occipito-temporal regions (blue nodes) as compared to
REST networks. This pattern was expected considering that long-range
cortical interactions in the β band are known to involve fronto-parietal regions during perceptual decision-making [Don+07; Sie+11]. Motor cortices
also showed a higher node degree in PRE than in REST, reflecting the information flow during task execution mediated by β oscillatory networks. The
same contrast for the γ network (Figure 5.B, γ, top right) showed mainly a
left-lateralized decrease of node degree but an increase in posterior regions.
We then investigated the changes in FC between POST and PRE as
a function of training (Figure 5.B, bottom rows). For the AV group, the
analysis of β oscillatory networks revealed a clear reversal of the node degree pattern in the POST vs. PRE contrast as compared to the PRE vs.
REST contrast: an increase of node degree from PRE to POST was observed in occipito-temporal regions (mainly in the right hemisphere), while
a decrease was found in frontal regions (mainly in the left hemisphere). The
node degree value of β oscillatory networks implicating motor cortices also
decreased with training in all three experimental groups. Conversely, the
right mSTS region, which showed a decreasing node degree from REST to
PRE, now consistently increased from PRE to POST in all three groups.
This suggested the implication of the mSTS during actual training, the synchronization of which got stronger and more extensive (up to visual regions
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

V4) following training.
In the topological analysis of high γ oscillatory networks, frontal regions
exhibited opposite dynamics as compared to our observation in the β band.
The node degree of the left frontal BA6 region (pre-motor and supplementary motor regions) decreased from REST to PRE, and increased from PRE
to POST for the three groups. These results were in line with previous
literature [Don+07] showing that high γ and β choice-predictive activities
showed opposite changes during perceptual decision-making. In the same
study [Don+07], oscillatory activities build up gradually during stimulus
evidence encoding to reflect the integration of high γ activity in MT. Here,
on the other hand, the node degree in mSTS and MT regions selectively increased after congruent multisensory training, consistent with the observed
selective implication of these regions in the task [Zil+14].
3.6. Emergence of β and γ functional networks following training with coherent audiovisual motion
The potential emergence of new functional coupling of cortical brain
networks after training (i.e., POST-specific) was addressed on a per group
basis (Figure 4.C, bottom). In Figure 6.A, we report cortical interactions
that were specific to post-training, i.e., phase couplings among brain regions
that were not significantly seen in the PRE vs. REST contrast but which
significantly emerged after training in the POST vs REST contrast (see
Methods). These POST-specific couplings between cortical regions emerged
in a training-selective manner in the β band and only for the AV training
group (Figure 6.A). This suggested that multisensory training with temporally comodulated audiovisual stimuli could subsequently affect the organization of cortical interactions during a purely visual discrimination task.
The observed reorganization notably encompassed long-range interactions
in POST-specific networks around temporal cortices, consistent with the
results of the topological analysis shown in Figure 5.B. Additionally, the
emergence of high γ phase-coupling after training was found mainly in the
AV and the V training groups, while POST-specific α connectivity emerged
in the CTRL group. Intriguingly, the sole behavioral variable relevant to
the emergence of the β connectivity was participants’ confidence ratings: a
significant linear correlation (N = 12, r = 0.72, p = 0.011) was observed
so that an increase in POST-specific β band connectivity solely observed
in the AV group was commensurate with an increase in these participants’
confidence ratings on the task.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6: Emerging oscillatory networks following training. (A) The phase synchronization based on pairwise wPLI between brain regions (lines connecting two regions
in the figure) in α, β, and γ oscillatory regimes was investigated separately as a function
of training group. The central finding was the emergence of novel mid- to long-range
cortical interactions (POST-specific network, not present during PRE) in the β and γ
networks especially in the AV group. The group trained with incongruent AV stimuli
(i.e. CTRL) showed the largest synchronization in α. (B) A linear correlation between
the average increase of the β band POST-specific interactions from PRE to POST and
the increase in participants’ confidence ratings was observed solely for the AV group (top
panel). The β band POST-specific network was mainly characterized by fronto-occipital
and temporo-parietal interactions (bottom panel).

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

4. Discussion
In this study, we asked how internalized content established on the basis
of temporally coherent audiovisual signals could subsequently benefit the
discrimination of visual motion coherence. The spectral signatures during
the presentation of visual motion coherence included a decrease in occipital α and frontal β power, and an increase of occipital γ power. While
the occipital γ correlated with the strength in visual motion coherence and
post-training performance, α activity showed no functional modulation as
a function of stimulus property, sensory evidence, performance or training.
Additionally, several contrasts revealed that the local β power captured an
integrated aspect of evidence based decision-making as a function of training history. Second, multivariate functional connectivity analysis based on
oscillatory phase coupling showed a relative global increase of α (8 − 14 Hz)
phase synchronization post-training in the V and AV groups as compared
to the CTRL group. Third, and importantly, we report the emergence of
long-range β (15 − 30 Hz) and γ (60 − 120 Hz) synchronization networks implicating temporal, prefrontal, parietal and visual cortices. The emergence
of the β and γ networks was essentially observed following congruent (but
not incongruent) multisensory training and the β network was indicative
of participants’ confidence rating in post-training. Despite the limit represented by the number of participants in this study (N = 36), altogether, our
results suggest that sensory history in training can subsequently strengthen
decision-making networks through the regulation of large-scale oscillatory
synchronizations. It would thus be beneficial in the future to increase the
number of participants for robust estimation of network changes and characterization. It would also be interesting to test whether similar pattern of
beta network can be seen in sensory-impaired populations. The patterns
observed in the present study arose from a selected number of cortical regions of interest investigated, which represent a second limit to overcome in
future research.
4.1. Interplay between top-down α and feedforward γ
Attending stimuli increases both the local and large-scale synchronization of rhythmic neuronal activity in the γ band [Eng+01; Fri+01; Var+01;
Wan10; Fri15]. An increase γ power has been reported during binding
([SG95; Fri+97]), multisensory integration [Bha+02; Mis+07] and semantic
congruence across sensory modalities [YGD07; Sch+08a]. Here, we observed
an increase in occipital high γ band during the presentation of visual motion
which, consistent with previous work [Sok+99; Sie+06; Sie+11], increased
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

with increasing strength in visual motion coherence. This effect was seen
in visual cortices for all three experimental groups, both before and after their respective training. This pattern converged with the notion that
γ power provides a spectral index of sensory evidence encoding [Sie+06;
Sie+11], and here, may further be a significant indicator of participants’
correct perceptual discrimination following training. As expected [Fri+01;
Fri09; Sie+12; JM10], we also observed a concomitant decrease in occipital α power. Seminal work has suggested that α suppression was stronger
for the detection of meaningful objects than for scrambled ones [Van+97],
and associated with visuo-spatial [Sau+05] and object-based [FS11] selective
attention. An increase in pre-stimulus α power is known to impair detection [Bus+09; VD+08; Han+07; Hae+11; Jon+10; ZD10; Gra+17] and,
conversely, an increase in α power is often observed in unattended modalities [BV10; Kel+06; Wor+00]. α oscillations are deemed instrumental for
selective attention and the top-down control of information ([SK16]). The
modulation of occipital α was previously shown to correlate with behavioral
improvements of visual motion discrimination in presence of congruently
moving sounds [GK14a]. Here, no systematic changes in the occipital α
were found as a function of experimental or behavioral variables, and this
was likely due to differences in paradigmatic and methodological approaches:
the most notable one being that we did not directly contrast unisensory vs
multisensory stimulations per se. Rather, the stable level of occipital α
power over experimental conditions parsimoniously indicated that all participants were effectively attentive to the stimuli irrespective of the strength
of motion coherence or training history. Recent work has also suggested that
γ and α (and β) oscillations were markers of feedforward and feedback propagation, respectively [VK+14; Wan10; Lee+13; Bas+12; Bas+15; Buf+11;
Mic+16; Ric+17]. Given the pattern of stable α suppression and increased γ
power as a function of motion coherence (and post-training correctness), one
possible working hypothesis is that, given a stable and sustained endogenous
attentional control exerted in the α range, perceptual training may improve
the efficiency with which γ activity propagates sensory evidence up the hierarchy.
4.2. The effect of sensory history in training on α and γ network phasesynchronization
In line with the notion that α oscillations actively contribute to the selection of cortical regions during task [PP11; PP07], an increase of global α
phase synchronization was observed from resting-state to task in all groups.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Yet, and perhaps more importantly, a global α synchronization in parietofrontal network further increased post-training in the control group trained
with distracting or uncorrelated sounds and, to some extent, in the V group
– but not the AV group. The presence of large-scale α synchronization in
the CTRL group could be primarily explained by the selective function of α
networks, which may help decouple brain regions during conflicting inputs
(CTRL). At the same time, while the type of sensory history in training did
not selectively affect occipital γ, we observed a global strengthening of the
post-training γ synchronization network. γ-band synchronization in brain
networks is fundamental in cortical communication as phase-coupling across
brain regions may promote the transmission of information across largescale neuronal networks [Fri09; Fri15; Bas+15]. Global γ synchronization
is notably considered to denote “effective, precise and selective” communication [Fri15]). In this study, training may have improved long-range γ
synchronization with a possible gain in communication efficiency consistent
with the general improvement on the task observed in all groups [Zil+14].
Sensory history in training affected the general increase of γ phase synchronization so that the group with the largest behavioral improvement, i.e.
the AV group, also showed the strongest increase followed by the V and the
CTRL group. Altogether, theses results suggest that the type of sensory
inputs during a very short training (here a total of 20 minutes) can selectivity affect the coordination of brain regions implicated in the endogenous
control of information processing.
4.3. β oscillations as integrated evidence
Very recently, β oscillations have been proposed to be markers of internal content [SH17] and supramodal processing [Hae+17]: following learning,
rhythms such as β oscillations may regulate the feedback processing of sensory analysis [BM16] based on abstract categorical representations. These
internal network dynamics were observed in prefrontal cortices, and operated
in the α/β bands [BM16]. An important finding in our study is the fundamental role of β oscillations, both as local power decrease during sensory
encoding and decision-making in all groups, and as an emergent large-scale
network following congruent multisensory AV training. Several studies have
reported an increased coherence or synchronization in the β band associated
with multisensory stimulation [Ste+99; Mer+15] and, consistent with the
implication of the β band in sensorimotor processing [EF10], β activity was
related to participants response speed in multisensory context. Gleiss and
Kayser [GK14b] reported an early difference in β band activity but did not
find any correlation with behavior. Consistent with another study [Mer+15],
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

we found that modulations of β power were observed when participants were
engaged in the task but not during passive viewing, and that RT was the
main contributor for this effect: the decrease in local β power was found
for contrasts in which evidence-based decisions were most successful (i.e.,
for strongest as compared to weakest visual motion coherence, for correct
as compared to incorrect trials and for post- compared to pre-training trials). Under the working hypothesis that abstract internal content [BM16;
Wut+18] has been learned to drive the processing of incoming sensory information, the strengthening of the large-scale β coupling in the group that has
received congruent AV training would further suggest that performing the
task with temporally coherent audiovisual events strengthened the ability to
predict motion coherence in vision. In other words, the changes in β power
and network synchronization may capture endogenous top-down activations
of task-relevant (supramodal) cortical representations, which facilitate communication between brain regions [Kop+00; Sie+11; SH17; Hae+17; BR15].
In this context, recent predictive coding models drawing from audiovisual
speech processing [VW+05; Was13; Arn+11] and neurophysiological work
[Ric+17; BR15] have pushed forward the notion that prediction errors from
one sensory modality to another may be communicated in the γ range,
whereas top-down predictions may be mediated by β oscillations [Arn+11].
As the emergent β network was solely seen for the AV group in which it was
linearly related to confidence rating, we speculate that the hypothesized
combined effects of increased communication efficiency in a feedfoward γ
network, the endogenous selectivity in the α network, and the predictive β
propagation in the AV group may all contribute to the local selective changes
previously reported in MT as a change in the neurometric threshold [Zil+14].
The notion that internal content (as supramodal or abstract representations)
may constrain sensory analysis early on provides additional evidence for the
implication of large-scale neural oscillations in integrative and predictive
brain functions.
Taken together, our results support the notion that cortical computations encompass sensory-based processing and that, consistent with the role
of prefrontal cortices shifting activity from feedforward inputs to internal
dynamics [BM16], the internal content shaped by multisensory inputs during training can strengthen the selectivity of large-scale oscillatory networks
for later adaptive purposes.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ANR-16-CE33-0020 MultiFracs, France,
and the Marie Curie IRG-249222 and the ERC-YStG-263584 to V.vW. We
thank Dr Laetitia Grabot, Dr Sophie Herbst, and Dr Tadeusz Kononowicz
for their comments on the initial version of the MS.
References
[Par+12]

Cesare V Parise, Charles Spence, and Marc O Ernst. “When
correlation implies causation in multisensory integration”. In:
Current Biology 22.1 (2012), pp. 46–49.

[PE16]

Cesare V Parise and Marc O Ernst. “Correlation detection as
a general mechanism for multisensory integration”. In: Nature
communications 7 (2016).

[Der+16]

Ophelia Deroy, Charles Spence, and Uta Noppeney. “Metacognition in multisensory perception”. In: Trends in cognitive sciences 20.10 (2016), pp. 736–747.

[KS15]

Christoph Kayser and Ladan Shams. “Multisensory causal inference in the brain”. In: PLoS biology 13.2 (2015), e1002075.

[RN15]

Tim Rohe and Uta Noppeney. “Cortical hierarchies perform
Bayesian causal inference in multisensory perception”. In: PLoS
Biology 13.2 (2015), e1002073.

[Roa+06]

Neil W Roach, James Heron, and Paul V McGraw. “Resolving multisensory conflict: a strategy for balancing the costs
and benefits of audio-visual integration”. In: Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 273.1598 (2006),
pp. 2159–2168.

[Spe11]

Charles Spence. “Crossmodal correspondences: A tutorial review”. In: Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics 73.4 (2011),
pp. 971–995.

[Mad+15]

Ross K Maddox et al. “Auditory selective attention is enhanced
by a task-irrelevant temporally coherent visual stimulus in human listeners”. In: Elife 4 (2015).

[GS00]

Ken W Grant and Philip-Franz Seitz. “The use of visible speech
cues for improving auditory detection of spoken sentences”. In:
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 108.3 (2000),
pp. 1197–1208.
31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[VW+05]

Virginie Van Wassenhove, Ken W Grant, and David Poeppel.
“Visual speech speeds up the neural processing of auditory
speech”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 102.4 (2005), pp. 1181–1186.

[Sch+08b]

Charles E Schroeder et al. “Neuronal oscillations and visual
amplification of speech”. In: Trends in cognitive sciences 12.3
(2008), pp. 106–113.

[Nah+15]

Olha Nahorna, Frédéric Berthommier, and Jean-Luc Schwartz.
“Audio-visual speech scene analysis: characterization of the dynamics of unbinding and rebinding the McGurk effect”. In:
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 137.1 (2015),
pp. 362–377.

[Was13]

Virginie van Wassenhove. “Speech through ears and eyes: interfacing the senses with the supramodal brain”. In: Frontiers in
psychology 4 (2013), p. 388.

[Bur+08]

Erik Van der Burg et al. “Pip and pop: nonspatial auditory signals improve spatial visual search.” In: Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 34.5 (2008),
p. 1053.

[KVW12]

Anne Kösem and Virginie Van Wassenhove. “Temporal structure in audiovisual sensory selection”. In: PLoS One 7.7 (2012),
e40936.

[Zil+14]

Nicolas Zilber et al. “Supramodal processing optimizes visual
perceptual learning and plasticity”. In: Neuroimage 93 (2014),
pp. 32–46.

[Sen+08]

Daniel Senkowski et al. “Crossmodal binding through neural
coherence: implications for multisensory processing”. In: Trends
in neurosciences 31.8 (2008), pp. 401–409.

[KS18]

Julian Keil and Daniel Senkowski. “Neural Oscillations Orchestrate Multisensory Processing”. In: The Neuroscientist (2018),
p. 1073858418755352.

[Hip+11]

Joerg F Hipp, Andreas K Engel, and Markus Siegel. “Oscillatory synchronization in large-scale cortical networks predicts
perception”. In: Neuron 69.2 (2011), pp. 387–396.

[Lak+08]

Peter Lakatos et al. “Entrainment of neuronal oscillations as a
mechanism of attentional selection”. In: science 320.5872 (2008),
pp. 110–113.
32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[Att+14]

Nienke van Atteveldt et al. “Multisensory integration: flexible
use of general operations”. In: Neuron 81.6 (2014), pp. 1240–
1253.

[Biz+16]

Jennifer K Bizley, Ross K Maddox, and Adrian KC Lee. “Defining auditory-visual objects: Behavioral tests and physiological
mechanisms”. In: Trends in neurosciences 39.2 (2016), pp. 74–
85.

[EF10]

Andreas K Engel and Pascal Fries. “Beta-band oscillationssignalling the status quo?” In: Current opinion in neurobiology
20.2 (2010), pp. 156–165.

[Sie+11]

Markus Siegel, Andreas K Engel, and Tobias H Donner. “Cortical network dynamics of perceptual decision-making in the
human brain”. In: Frontiers in human neuroscience 5 (2011),
p. 21.

[Vin+11]

Martin Vinck et al. “An improved index of phase-synchronization
for electrophysiological data in the presence of volume-conduction,
noise and sample-size bias”. In: Neuroimage 55.4 (2011), pp. 1548–
1565.

[Rom07]

Lizabeth M Romanski. “Representation and integration of auditory and visual stimuli in the primate ventral lateral prefrontal
cortex”. In: Cerebral Cortex 17.suppl 1 (2007), pp. i61–i69.

[RH12]

LM Romanski and J Hwang. “Timing of audiovisual inputs to
the prefrontal cortex and multisensory integration”. In: Neuroscience 214 (2012), pp. 36–48.

[Rom12]

Lizabeth M Romanski. “Integration of faces and vocalizations
in ventral prefrontal cortex: implications for the evolution of
audiovisual speech”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 109.Supplement 1 (2012), pp. 10717–10724.

[Wut+18]

Andreas Wutz et al. “Different Levels of Category Abstraction
by Different Dynamics in Different Prefrontal Areas”. In: Neuron 97.3 (2018), pp. 716–726.

[And97]

Richard A Andersen. “Multimodal integration for the representation of space in the posterior parietal cortex”. In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological
Sciences 352.1360 (1997), pp. 1421–1428.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[BM11]

Nadia Bolognini and Angelo Maravita. “Uncovering multisensory processing through non-invasive brain stimulation”. In:
Frontiers in psychology 2 (2011).

[Pas+10]

Siavash Pasalar, Tony Ro, and Michael S Beauchamp. “TMS of
posterior parietal cortex disrupts visual tactile multisensory integration”. In: European Journal of Neuroscience 31.10 (2010),
pp. 1783–1790.

[Don+09]

Tobias H Donner et al. “Buildup of choice-predictive activity
in human motor cortex during perceptual decision making”. In:
Current Biology 19.18 (2009), pp. 1581–1585.

[Sie+06]

Markus Siegel et al. “High-frequency activity in human visual
cortex is modulated by visual motion strength”. In: Cerebral
Cortex 17.3 (2006), pp. 732–741.

[Mei92]

Peter BL Meijer. “An experimental system for auditory image
representations”. In: IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering 39.2 (1992), pp. 112–121.

[LT+12]

Shelly Levy-Tzedek et al. “Fast, accurate reaching movements
with a visual-to-auditory sensory substitution device”. In: Restorative neurology and neuroscience 30.4 (2012), pp. 313–323.

[MO87]

Robert D Melara and Thomas P O’brien. “Interaction between
synesthetically corresponding dimensions.” In: Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 116.4 (1987), p. 323.

[Mae+04]

Fumiko Maeda, Ryota Kanai, and Shinsuke Shimojo. “Changing pitch induced visual motion illusion”. In: Current biology
14.23 (2004), R990–R991.

[Ove+10]

Tobias Overath et al. “Cortical mechanisms for the segregation
and representation of acoustic textures”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 30.6 (2010), pp. 2070–2076.

[Gra+14]

Alexandre Gramfort et al. “MNE software for processing MEG
and EEG data”. In: Neuroimage 86 (2014), pp. 446–460.

[Gra+13]

Alexandre Gramfort et al. “MEG and EEG data analysis with
MNE-Python”. In: Frontiers in neuroscience 7 (2013), p. 267.

[Gro+13]

Joachim Gross et al. “Good practice for conducting and reporting MEG research”. In: Neuroimage 65 (2013), pp. 349–363.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[TS06]

Samu Taulu and Juha Simola. “Spatiotemporal signal space
separation method for rejecting nearby interference in MEG
measurements”. In: Physics in medicine and biology 51.7 (2006),
p. 1759.

[MO07]

Eric Maris and Robert Oostenveld. “Nonparametric statistical
testing of EEG-and MEG-data”. In: Journal of neuroscience
methods 164.1 (2007), pp. 177–190.

[AL99]

Marti J Anderson and Pierre Legendre. “An empirical comparison of permutation methods for tests of partial regression
coefficients in a linear model”. In: Journal of statistical computation and simulation 62.3 (1999), pp. 271–303.

[DR17]

Cyrus J DiCiccio and Joseph P Romano. “Robust permutation
tests for correlation and regression coefficients”. In: Journal of
the American Statistical Association (2017), pp. 1–10.

[Win+14]

Anderson M Winkler et al. “Permutation inference for the general linear model”. In: Neuroimage 92 (2014), pp. 381–397.

[Dal+00]

Anders M Dale et al. “Dynamic statistical parametric mapping:
combining fMRI and MEG for high-resolution imaging of cortical activity”. In: Neuron 26.1 (2000), pp. 55–67.

[AA+06]

Karim Ansari-Asl et al. “Quantitative evaluation of linear and
nonlinear methods characterizing interdependencies between brain
signals”. In: Physical Review E 74.3 (2006), p. 031916.

[Sta+07]

Cornelis J Stam, Guido Nolte, and Andreas Daffertshofer. “Phase
lag index: assessment of functional connectivity from multi channel EEG and MEG with diminished bias from common sources”.
In: Human brain mapping 28.11 (2007), pp. 1178–1193.

[Saz+09]

Andrei V Sazonov et al. “An investigation of the phase locking
index for measuring of interdependency of cortical source signals
recorded in the EEG”. In: Biological cybernetics 100.2 (2009),
p. 129.

[DVF+14] Fabrizio De Vico Fallani et al. “Graph analysis of functional
brain networks: practical issues in translational neuroscience”.
In: Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 369.1653 (2014), p. 20130521.
[BS09]

Ed Bullmore and Olaf Sporns. “Complex brain networks: graph
theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems”. In:
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10.3 (2009), pp. 186–198.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[DVF+17] Fabrizio De Vico Fallani, Vito Latora, and Mario Chavez. “A
topological criterion for filtering information in complex brain
networks”. In: PLoS computational biology 13.1 (2017), e1005305.
[Don+07]

Tobias H Donner et al. “Population activity in the human dorsal
pathway predicts the accuracy of visual motion detection”. In:
Journal of Neurophysiology 98.1 (2007), pp. 345–359.

[Swe+09]

Jennifer B Swettenham, Suresh D Muthukumaraswamy, and
Krish D Singh. “Spectral properties of induced and evoked
gamma oscillations in human early visual cortex to moving and
stationary stimuli”. In: Journal of neurophysiology 102.2 (2009),
pp. 1241–1253.

[JM10]

Ole Jensen and Ali Mazaheri. “Shaping functional architecture
by oscillatory alpha activity: gating by inhibition”. In: Frontiers
in human neuroscience 4 (2010), p. 186.

[Zum+14]

Johanna M Zumer et al. “Occipital alpha activity during stimulus processing gates the information flow to object-selective
cortex”. In: PLoS biology 12.10 (2014), e1001965.

[FS11]

John J Foxe and Adam C Snyder. “The role of alpha-band brain
oscillations as a sensory suppression mechanism during selective
attention”. In: Frontiers in psychology 2 (2011), p. 154.

[VSS00]

Astrid Von Stein and Johannes Sarnthein. “Different frequencies for different scales of cortical integration: from local gamma
to long range alpha/theta synchronization”. In: International
journal of psychophysiology 38.3 (2000), pp. 301–313.

[Ala+17]

Mohsen Alavash et al. “Large-scale network dynamics of betaband oscillations underlie auditory perceptual decision-making”.
In: Network Neuroscience 1.2 (2017), pp. 166–191.

[Sal+10]

Maryam Saleh et al. “Fast and slow oscillations in human primary motor cortex predict oncoming behaviorally relevant cues”.
In: Neuron 65.4 (2010), pp. 461–471.

[Cas+01]

François Cassim et al. “Does post-movement beta synchronization reflect an idling motor cortex?” In: Neuroreport 12.17 (2001),
pp. 3859–3863.

[Bau+12]

Markus Bauer, Steffan Kennett, and Jon Driver. “Attentional
selection of location and modality in vision and touch modulates low-frequency activity in associated sensory cortices”. In:
Journal of neurophysiology 107.9 (2012), pp. 2342–2351.
36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[PDS99]

Gert Pfurtscheller and FH Lopes Da Silva. “Event-related EEG/MEG
synchronization and desynchronization: basic principles”. In:
Clinical neurophysiology 110.11 (1999), pp. 1842–1857.

[Mim+99]

Tatsuya Mima et al. “Force level modulates human cortical
oscillatory activities”. In: Neuroscience letters 275.2 (1999),
pp. 77–80.

[JB11]

Ned Jenkinson and Peter Brown. “New insights into the relationship between dopamine, beta oscillations and motor function”. In: Trends in neurosciences 34.12 (2011), pp. 611–618.

[Wya+12]

Valentin Wyart et al. “Rhythmic fluctuations in evidence accumulation during decision making in the human brain”. In:
Neuron 76.4 (2012), pp. 847–858.

[Eng+01]

Andreas K Engel, Pascal Fries, and Wolf Singer. “Dynamic predictions: oscillations and synchrony in top–down processing”.
In: Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2.10 (2001), p. 704.

[Fri+01]

Pascal Fries et al. “Modulation of oscillatory neuronal synchronization by selective visual attention”. In: Science 291.5508
(2001), pp. 1560–1563.

[Var+01]

Francisco Varela et al. “The brainweb: phase synchronization
and large-scale integration”. In: Nature reviews neuroscience
2.4 (2001), p. 229.

[Wan10]

Xiao-Jing Wang. “Neurophysiological and computational principles of cortical rhythms in cognition”. In: Physiological reviews
90.3 (2010), pp. 1195–1268.

[Fri15]

Pascal Fries. “Rhythms for cognition: communication through
coherence”. In: Neuron 88.1 (2015), pp. 220–235.

[SG95]

Wolf Singer and Charles M Gray. “Visual feature integration
and the temporal correlation hypothesis”. In: Annual review of
neuroscience 18.1 (1995), pp. 555–586.

[Fri+97]

Pascal Fries et al. “Synchronization of oscillatory responses
in visual cortex correlates with perception in interocular rivalry”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
94.23 (1997), pp. 12699–12704.

[Bha+02]

Joydeep Bhattacharya, Ladan Shams, and Shinsuke Shimojo.
“Sound-induced illusory flash perception: role of gamma band
responses”. In: Neuroreport 13.14 (2002), pp. 1727–1730.
37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[Mis+07]

Jyoti Mishra et al. “Early cross-modal interactions in auditory
and visual cortex underlie a sound-induced visual illusion”. In:
Journal of Neuroscience 27.15 (2007), pp. 4120–4131.

[YGD07]

Shlomit Yuval-Greenberg and Leon Y Deouell. “What you see
is not (always) what you hear: induced gamma band responses
reflect cross-modal interactions in familiar object recognition”.
In: Journal of Neuroscience 27.5 (2007), pp. 1090–1096.

[Sch+08a]

Till R Schneider et al. “Enhanced EEG gamma-band activity
reflects multisensory semantic matching in visual-to-auditory
object priming”. In: Neuroimage 42.3 (2008), pp. 1244–1254.

[Sok+99]

Alexander Sokolov et al. “Gamma-band MEG activity to coherent motion depends on task-driven attention”. In: Neuroreport
10.10 (1999), pp. 1997–2000.

[Fri09]

Pascal Fries. “Neuronal gamma-band synchronization as a fundamental process in cortical computation”. In: Annual review
of neuroscience 32 (2009), pp. 209–224.

[Sie+12]

Markus Siegel, Tobias H Donner, and Andreas K Engel. “Spectral fingerprints of large-scale neuronal interactions”. In: Nature
Reviews Neuroscience 13.2 (2012), p. 121.

[Van+97]

Simo Vanni, Antti Revonsuo, and Riitta Hari. “Modulation of
the parieto-occipital alpha rhythm during object detection”. In:
Journal of Neuroscience 17.18 (1997), pp. 7141–7147.

[Sau+05]

Paul Sauseng et al. “A shift of visual spatial attention is selectively associated with human EEG alpha activity”. In: European
Journal of Neuroscience 22.11 (2005), pp. 2917–2926.

[Bus+09]

Niko A Busch, Julien Dubois, and Rufin VanRullen. “The phase
of ongoing EEG oscillations predicts visual perception”. In:
Journal of Neuroscience 29.24 (2009), pp. 7869–7876.

[VD+08]

Hanneke Van Dijk et al. “Prestimulus oscillatory activity in the
alpha band predicts visual discrimination ability”. In: Journal
of Neuroscience 28.8 (2008), pp. 1816–1823.

[Han+07]

Simon Hanslmayr et al. “Prestimulus oscillations predict visual
perception performance between and within subjects”. In: Neuroimage 37.4 (2007), pp. 1465–1473.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[Hae+11]

Saskia Haegens, Barbara F Händel, and Ole Jensen. “Top-down
controlled alpha band activity in somatosensory areas determines behavioral performance in a discrimination task”. In:
Journal of Neuroscience 31.14 (2011), pp. 5197–5204.

[Jon+10]

Stephanie R Jones et al. “Cued spatial attention drives functionally relevant modulation of the mu rhythm in primary somatosensory cortex”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 30.41 (2010),
pp. 13760–13765.

[ZD10]

Yan Zhang and Mingzhou Ding. “Detection of a weak somatosensory stimulus: Role of the prestimulus mu rhythm and its top–
down modulation”. In: Journal of cognitive neuroscience 22.2
(2010), pp. 307–322.

[Gra+17]

Laetitia Grabot et al. “Prestimulus Alpha Oscillations and the
Temporal Sequencing of Audiovisual Events”. In: Journal of
cognitive neuroscience 29.9 (2017), pp. 1566–1582.

[BV10]

Niko A Busch and Rufin VanRullen. “Spontaneous EEG oscillations reveal periodic sampling of visual attention”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107.37 (2010),
pp. 16048–16053.

[Kel+06]

Simon P Kelly et al. “Increases in alpha oscillatory power reflect an active retinotopic mechanism for distracter suppression
during sustained visuospatial attention”. In: Journal of neurophysiology 95.6 (2006), pp. 3844–3851.

[Wor+00]

Michael S Worden et al. “Anticipatory biasing of visuospatial attention indexed by retinotopically specific-band electroencephalography increases over occipital cortex”. In: J Neurosci
20.RC63 (2000), pp. 1–6.

[SK16]

Sepideh Sadaghiani and Andreas Kleinschmidt. “Brain networks
and α-oscillations: structural and functional foundations of cognitive control”. In: Trends in cognitive sciences 20.11 (2016),
pp. 805–817.

[GK14a]

Stephanie Gleiss and Christoph Kayser. “Oscillatory mechanisms underlying the enhancement of visual motion perception
by multisensory congruency”. In: Neuropsychologia 53 (2014),
pp. 84–93.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[VK+14]

Timo Van Kerkoerle et al. “Alpha and gamma oscillations characterize feedback and feedforward processing in monkey visual
cortex”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
111.40 (2014), pp. 14332–14341.

[Lee+13]

Jung H Lee, Miles A Whittington, and Nancy J Kopell. “Topdown beta rhythms support selective attention via interlaminar interaction: a model”. In: PLoS computational biology 9.8
(2013), e1003164.

[Bas+12]

Andre M Bastos et al. “Canonical microcircuits for predictive
coding”. In: Neuron 76.4 (2012), pp. 695–711.

[Bas+15]

Andre Moraes Bastos et al. “Visual areas exert feedforward and
feedback influences through distinct frequency channels”. In:
Neuron 85.2 (2015), pp. 390–401.

[Buf+11]

Elizabeth A Buffalo et al. “Laminar differences in gamma and
alpha coherence in the ventral stream”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 108.27 (2011), pp. 11262–11267.

[Mic+16]

Georgios Michalareas et al. “Alpha-beta and gamma rhythms
subserve feedback and feedforward influences among human visual cortical areas”. In: Neuron 89.2 (2016), pp. 384–397.

[Ric+17]

Craig G Richter et al. “Top-down beta enhances bottom-up
gamma”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 37.28 (2017), pp. 6698–
6711.

[PP11]

Satu Palva and J Matias Palva. “Functional roles of alphaband phase synchronization in local and large-scale cortical networks”. In: Frontiers in psychology 2 (2011), p. 204.

[PP07]

Satu Palva and J Matias Palva. “New vistas for α-frequency
band oscillations”. In: Trends in neurosciences 30.4 (2007), pp. 150–
158.

[SH17]

Bernhard Spitzer and Saskia Haegens. “Beyond the Status Quo:
A Role for Beta Oscillations in Endogenous Content (Re) Activation”. In: Eneuro 4.4 (2017), ENEURO–0170.

[Hae+17]

Saskia Haegens et al. “Beta oscillations reflect supramodal information during perceptual judgment”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences (2017), p. 201714633.

[BM16]

Scott L Brincat and Earl K Miller. “Prefrontal cortex networks
shift from external to internal modes during learning”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 36.37 (2016), pp. 9739–9754.
40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560235; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[Ste+99]

Astrid von Stein et al. “Synchronization between temporal and
parietal cortex during multimodal object processing in man”.
In: Cerebral Cortex 9.2 (1999), pp. 137–150.

[Mer+15]

Manuel R Mercier et al. “Neuro-oscillatory phase alignment
drives speeded multisensory response times: an electro-corticographic
investigation”. In: Journal of Neuroscience 35.22 (2015), pp. 8546–
8557.

[GK14b]

Stephanie Gleiss and Christoph Kayser. “Oscillatory mechanisms underlying the enhancement of visual motion perception
by multisensory congruency”. In: Neuropsychologia 53 (2014),
pp. 84–93.

[Kop+00]

N Kopell et al. “Gamma rhythms and beta rhythms have different synchronization properties”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 97.4 (2000), pp. 1867–1872.

[BR15]

Steven L Bressler and Craig G Richter. “Interareal oscillatory
synchronization in top-down neocortical processing”. In: Current opinion in neurobiology 31 (2015), pp. 62–66.

[Arn+11]

Luc H Arnal, Valentin Wyart, and Anne-Lise Giraud. “Transitions in neural oscillations reflect prediction errors generated
in audiovisual speech”. In: Nature neuroscience 14.6 (2011),
p. 797.

41

