bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

LARGE MICROBIOTA SURVEY REVEALS HOW THE MICROBIAL ECOLOGY OF
COOKED HAM IS SHAPED BY DIFFERENT PROCESSING STEPS.

Marine Zagdoun1, Gwendoline Coeuret1, Méry N’Dione1, Marie-Christine ChampomierVergès1 and Stéphane Chaillou1,#.

1

Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, MIcalis Institute, 78350,
Jouy-en-Josas, France

#

Author for correspondence: stephane.chaillou@inra.fr

0

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ABSTRACT
The production of cooked ham involves numerous steps shaping the microbial communities of
the final product, with consequences on spoilage metabolites production. To identify the main
factors driving the ecology of ham and its spoilage, we designed a study encompassing five
variables related to ham production: type of storage during meat transportation, churning
speed, drain-off time, slicing line and O2 packaging permeability. We obtained about 200
samples from the same facility and we characterized i) their microbiota based on gyrB amplicon
sequencing ii) their production of spoilage-related metabolites based on E-Nose analysis and
enzymatic assays. The slicing was the most critical step, shaping two general types of
microbiota according to the slicing line: one dominated by Carnobacterium divergens and
another one dominated by Leuconostoc carnosum and Serratia proteamaculans. Regarding
metabolites production, L. carnosum was associated to D-lactic acid, ethanol and acetic acid
production, whereas Serratia proteamaculans was associated to acetic acid production. This
last species prevailed with highly O2-permeable packaging. Within a given slicing line, we
observed campaign-based variations, with Lactobacillus sakei, Leuconostoc mesenteroides
and Carnobacterium maltaromaticum prevalent in summer. L. sakei was associated with Llactic acid production and C. maltaromaticum with formic and acetic acid productions.

KEYWORDS
Microbial ecology; cooked ham; process; spoilage metabolites

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1. INTRODUCTION
The production of cooked ham involves many processing steps, with each being a potential
source of bacterial contamination or re-contamination post-cooking. As a consequence, the
shelf-life of this meat product is strongly dependent on the microbiota dynamic through these
various steps. It is also related with how the process parameters will influence the metabolic
activities of the growing bacterial species during storage (Audenaert et al., 2010; Dušková et
al., 2016; Han et al., 2011; Raimondi et al., 2019; Piotrowska-Cyplik et al., 2017; Vasilopoulos
et al., 2010).
The variability of ham begins at the most upstream step of the process as initial raw pork cuts
usually contain diverse microbiota depending on the slaughtering and butchering process (De
Filippis et al., 2013; Wheatley et al., 2014). Bacterial contamination usually increases in the
processing plants through the contamination of surfaces and tools (Stellato et al., 2016) along
the various processing steps (Hultman et al., 2015; Samelis et al., 1998), as well as with
ingredients used in the brine such as spices (Benson et al., 2014). Furthermore, the efficiency
of brining requires a churning incubation time, a step which was shown to participate in the
selection of some bacterial species, such as Brochothrix thermosphacta or Carnobacterium
divergens (Samelis et al., 1998). After churning, bacterial load is close to 105 cfu/g (Dušková
et al., 2016; Samelis et al., 1998; Vasilopoulos et al., 2010). The following cooking step at 70°C
generally reduces the bacterial load back to practically zero (Dušková et al., 2016;
Vasilopoulos et al., 2010). However, some studies showed that thermoduric strains such as
Leuconostoc carnosum or Weissella viridescens could resist cooking (Björkroth et al., 1998;
Comi and Iacumin, 2012). Other studies showed that Leuconostoc mesenteroides and L.
carnosum were also brought by the post-cooking downstream processing steps, either through
the hands of worker while de-molding, via the slicing machine, the packaging or even via the
air (Björkroth and Korkeala, 1997; Dušková et al., 2016; Mol et al., 1971; Samelis et al., 1998).
Then, depending on the storage temperatures and the type of packaging used, a final reduction

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of bacterial diversity takes place, selecting psychrotrophic anaerobic microbiota (Audenaert et
al., 2010; Chaillou et al., 2015), the activity of which will eventually cause spoilage.
Thus, if the microbiota of ham after cooking does probably result of both surviving microbiota
after cooking and post-cooking contaminations, it is yet unclear to what extent raw meat and
pre-cooking process steps can shape the final microbiota of ham. In this line of view, Geeraerts
and co-workers (2017) have nevertheless underlined the variability of bacterial communities
of hams between different facilities. They have also shown that those communities can vary
according to the sampling period. Even hams produced within a same facility revealed to
harbor variable communities (Audenaert et al., 2010; Vasilopoulos et al., 2010, 2008). More
recently, Raimondi and co-workers (2019) described a wide variability in the microbial
assemblages of cooked ham from ten different producers in Europe. Despite the low number
of ham analyzed in this study (14 different ham in total), their work showed that the quality of
hams at the end of the storage period, as measured by organic volatile compounds analysis,
was highly dependent on the microbiota present on these products.
Given this complex processing, the spoilage microbial ecology of ham remains difficult to
decipher and it is hard for the meat industry to implement useful support decision tool for
process management and prevention of food losses. To us, the works described above
represent a revealing illustration of the necessity of adopting a large sampling strategy and
robust statistical analysis in order to capture the overwhelming variability created by the many
steps of cooked ham processing. The aim of this study was to provide such type of large-scale
approach based on a factorial design to allow the analysis of variations within five main
processing steps. We focused our analysis on a single processing factory, located in France,
and by designing a large sampling (over 200 samples), spanning a production period of six
months. To improve our accuracy in tracing bacterial taxa throughout processing, we
performed gyrB amplicon sequencing, a powerful alternative to 16S rRNA gene sequencing
for accurate bacterial identification at the intra-species level (Poirier et al., 2018b). We then
combined this diversity analysis with the quantification of pH and of five metabolites (ethanol,
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

D-

and L-lactate, acetate, formate), used as indicators of fermentation end-products

contributing to the pattern of ham spoilage.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1.

Industrial ham production

Raw pork meat for the production of ham was obtained from a single slaughterhouse. After
deboning, raw meat was transported to the ham production factory (see processing step in
Table 1). Meat was then brined to reach a final concentration (wt/wt) in the product of 1.4%
sodium chloride, 0.5% glucose, 0.08% sodium nitrite, and 0.03% sodium ascorbate. Each subbatch (determined by variations in processing parameters; see Table 1) was then churned and
molded into individual loaves and cooked until the center reached 70°C. After cooking,
draining-off, and slicing, hams were packed under 50% CO2/50% N2 modified-atmosphere
conditions.
2.2.

Ham storage conditions

Industrial hams were sent to our laboratory immediately after packaging using refrigerated
transportation (2 days at 4°C). Hams were stored in FRIOCELL 55 refrigerated incubators
(MMM Medcenter, Planegg, Germany) at 4°C for 5 more days, then at 8°C until the Use-ByDate (UBD) or for 15 more days (past UBD). Control samples (T0) were immediately frozen at
-20°C after packaging and sent frozen to our laboratory. At the end of storage, all ham samples
were frozen at -20°C until pH measurement, DNA extraction, and recovery of the microbiota
were performed.
2.3.

Gas and pH measurements

O2 and CO2 levels were quantified using an Oxybaby probe (WITTGAS, Morsang-sur-Orge,
France). Then, pH was measured using a FiveEasy FE20 surface pH probe (Mettler Toledo
AG, Schwerzenbach, Schwitzerland). The pH data correspond to a mean of five
measurements per sample at various areas on the slices.
2.4.

Identification and relative quantification of volatile organic compounds.

Volatile compounds in ham samples were detected with a Heracles II electronic nose (Alpha
MOS, Toulouse, France), using ultra-fast gas chromatography. Samples were analyzed on two

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

independent columns of different polarity (nonpolar MXT-5 and medium polar MXT-1701,
length 10 m each) for an accurate identification of compounds using their KOVAT number.
Agrochembase, an internal database of AlphaMOS, provided information on chemical analysis
and sensorial olfactory descriptors.
2.5.

Microbiota recovery and bacterial load quantification

For each ham sample, four independent DNA extractions were performed (each of one quarter
of a ham) and were subsequently pooled. Our protocol was based on that of Fougy and
colleagues (Fougy et al., 2016), adapted as follows: 20 g of meat were homogenized for 2 x
30 s in a stomacher bag (BagPage, Interscience, Saint-Nom-la-Bretèche, France) with 40 mL
of sterile ultrapure water supplemented with 1% Tween 80 (Acros Organics, Waltham, USA).
Large meat debris were filtered from the bag and 33 mL of the microbe-containing ham solution
was collected. One milliliter was reserved to estimate viable bacterial counts, and the
remaining 32 mL were centrifuged at 500 x g for 3 min at 4°C (Allegra X-15R, Beckman Coulter,
Villepinte, France) to spin down the remaining meat fibers and debris. A maximum volume of
25 mL of supernatant was then centrifuged at 3000 x g for 5 min at 4°C to spin down microbial
cells. The supernatant was frozen at -80°C for further metabolite quantification, and the
bacterial pellets were washed in 1 mL of sterile ultrapure water, centrifuged at 3000 x g for 5
min at 4°C (Centrifuge 5424, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), and frozen at -20°C for bacterial
DNA extraction. For quantification of the bacterial population, the reserved 1 mL of ham
solution was subjected to decimal dilutions and plated on Columbia agar with 5% sheep blood
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Illkirch Graffenstaden, France) in order to estimate the overall
cultivable bacterial load. Bacterial colonies were counted after 72 hours of incubation at 20°C.
2.6.

Quantification of end-products

Supernatants of ham samples were clarified to eliminate proteins using the Carrez clarification
kit (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany). Proteins were precipitated via the successive addition
of 600 µL of Carrez reagent I and 600 µL of Carrez reagent II to 5 mL of supernatant. After
adjusting the pH to be between 7.5 and 8.5 (required for enzymatic assays), the samples were
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

centrifuged at 5000 x g for 20 min to spin down precipitated proteins. Residual proteins were
then eliminated by filtration on 0.22-µm high-protein-retention Ministart syringe filters (Sartorius
Stedim Biotech GmbH, Goettingen, Germany). Megazyme enzymatic assays (Megazyme
Wicklow, Ireland) were used to quantify concentrations of ethanol (K-ETOH), L- and D-lactic
acid (K-LAC), acetic acid (K-ACET), and formic acid (K-FORM), according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. For all kits, NADH absorbance was measured using a microplate
reader (SYNERGY Mx, BIOTEK, Colmar, France).
All calculations of end-product concentrations took into account the dilution factor (20 g of meat
in 40 mL of sterile water with 1% Tween 80 for microbiota recovery, and addition of 1.2 mL of
Carrez reagents) in order to estimate the real concentrations in meat.
2.7.

Bacterial DNA extraction and quality control

Bacterial DNA was extracted with a High Pure PCR Template Preparation kit (Roche
Diagnostics Ltd, Burgess Hill, West Sussex, UK), with the following adaptations: for cellular
lysis, bacterial pellets were resuspended in 200 µL PBS that contained lysozyme (final
concentration of 20 mg.mL-1) and Mutanolysin (12U). This solution was incubated at 37°C for
60 min in a water bath (Polystat 86602, Bioblock Scientific, Illkirch, France). Then, 200 µL of
binding buffer and 40 µL of Proteinase K were added; the solution was vortexed and incubated
at 70°C for 30 min in a second water bath (APELEX, JULABO, Seelbach, Germany). DNA was
precipitated and purified on columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with the
exception of a reduction of the final elution volume to 100 µL in order to concentrate the DNA.
Technical replicates for each ham sample were pooled following DNA extraction and frozen at
-20°C. After pooling, double-strand DNA quantification was performed with the Qubit dsDNA
HS assay kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA).
2.8.

PCR protocols for gyrB and 16S V3-V4 rRNA gene amplification, purification
and quality control of amplicons

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The internal fragment of the gyrB gene (around 280 bp) was amplified as described in (Barret
et al., 2015; Poirier et al., 2018b) with AccuPrime Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
USA) and F64 and R353 degenerated primers (5’-MGNCCNGSNATGTAYATHGG-3’ and 5’CNCCRTGNARDCCDCCNGA-3’, respectively). The forward and reverse primers carried the
Illumina

adapters

5’-CTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT-3’

GGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCT-3’,

respectively.

To

balance

and

5’-

the

high

degeneration rate of the primers, the final primer concentration was increased to 1000 nM.
PCR was performed on 10 ng of each pooled DNA sample using a PTC-200 thermal cycler
(Peltier, BioRad, Hercules, USA). Amplification started with an initial denaturation step of 2 min
at 94°C. This was followed by 35 cycles of denaturation (94°C for 30 s), annealing (55°C for
60 s), and elongation (68°C for 90 s), and ended with a final elongation step of 10 min at 68°C.
PCR bias was minimized by pooling three independent PCR replicates per sample.
To assess potential biases in the recovered microbial diversity, controls using 16Sr V3-V4
rRNA gene amplifications (around 450 bp) were performed on fourteen selected samples;
these amplifications used MolTaq 16S DNA polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) and two
primers that targeted the V3 and V4 region (Klindworth et al., 2013; Poirier et al., 2018a), 5’ACGGRAGGCWGCAGT-3’ and 5’-TACCAGGGTATCTAATCCT-3’. The forward and reverse
primers carried the Illumina adapters 5’-CTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT-3’ and 5’GGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCT-3’, respectively. The final primer concentration
was 200 nM. PCR was performed on 10 ng of the pooled DNA sample with a PTC-200 thermal
cycler, with the following cycling parameters: initial denaturation for 1 min at 94°C, followed by
30 cycles of denaturation (94°C for 60 s), annealing (65°C for 60 s), and elongation (72°C for
60 s), and a final elongation step of 10 min at 72°C. PCR bias was minimized by pooling three
independent PCR products per sample.
The gyrB and 16S rRNA gene amplicons were purified using a QIAquick kit (Qiagen, Hilden,
Germany) and their quality and concentration were checked with a DNA1000 chip (Agilent
Technologies, Paris, France).
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2.9.

Illumina MiSeq library preparation and sequencing

In order to pool and sequence a large number of libraries simultaneously, samples were coded
with individual barcode sequences during library preparation: 6-bp unique indices and the
second part of the forward (5’-AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACT-3’) and reverse
adapters

(5’-CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGAT-NNNNNN-GTGACT-3’)

were

added

during the Illumina PCR. PCR comprised an initial denaturation step at 94°C for 10 min,
followed by 12 amplification cycles of 94°C for 1 min, 65°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 1 min, and
a final elongation step at 72°C for 10 min. Amplicons were then purified on Clean PCR
magnetic beds (Clean NA, Alphen aan den Rijn, The Nederlands). Their concentration after
purification was estimated with a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientif, Whaltham,
USA) and their quality was checked using a Fragment Analyzer (AATI, Santa Clara, USA).
Reads from libraries were pooled in equal amounts, in order to obtain a final concentration for
sequencing between 5 and 20 nM. Pools were denatured with NaOH, mixed with the PhiX
control library v3 (diluted to 7 pM; Illumina, San Diego, USA), and loaded on an Illumina MiSeq
cartridge. The MiSeq Reagent Kit v3 (2x300 paired-end reads, 15 Gb output) was used
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The quality of the obtained sequences was
checked with FastQ files generated at the end of the run (MiSeq Reporter Software, Illumina,
USA) and additional PhiX Control. The corresponding pairs of sequences were then attributed
to their respective samples using the individual multiplexing barcodes.
2.10.

Quality control of raw MiSeq reads and OTU clustering parameters

Samples were sequenced in three runs (295 amplicons of gyrB analyzed in runs 1 and 2 and
28 amplicons of 16S rRNA gene analyzed in run 3). Quality controls indicated a quality score
of at least 30 for 91% of the reads and a median number of 44,022 ± 33,312 reads per sample.
We used FastQC (https://github.com/s-andrews/FastQC) to assess sequencing quality.
Paired-end sequences were then merged using PEAR v0.9.10 (Zhang et al., 2014) with a
minimum overlap of 20 nucleotides for both gyrB and 16S rRNA gene and a threshold p-value
of 0.01. We retained merged sequences with a size of 280 ± 50 bp for gyrB and 450 ± 50 bp
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

for 16S rRNA gene. Primer-binding sequences were removed using CUTADAPT v1.12 (Martin,
2011) with a maximum error rate of 0.01; low-quality bases at the ends of the merged
sequences (quality threshold of 20, sequences with ambiguous bases N) were eliminated
using SICKLE v1.330 (https://github.com/najoshi/sickle).
Quality-filtered merged sequences were then loaded in the FROGS (Find Rapidly OTUs with
Galaxy Solutions) pipeline (Escudié et al., 2018) and dereplicated. SWARM clustering (Mahé
et al., 2014) was performed using a maximal aggregation distance of three nucleotides for 16S
rRNA gene sequences; for gyrB sequences, clustering was more stringent, with a maximal
aggregation distance of two nucleotides in order to potentially assign OTUs to the subspecies
level. Chimeras were removed using the VCHIM feature of the VSEARCH package
(https://github.com/torognes/vsearch). Clusters were further filtered to remove spurious lowabundance OTUs arising from sequencing artifacts. As reported by Bokulich and colleagues
(2013), these types of OTUs appear in very few samples with very low abundance (<0.005%).
Therefore, for the gyrB reads we retained OTUs with at least 100 reads in the whole dataset
(0.002% of 5.9 million reads in total), and for the 16S rRNA gene used as controls, we retained
OTUs with at least 10 reads in the whole dataset, since there were fewer samples than for
gyrB (0.0008% of 1.3 million reads in total).
These steps resulted in the retention of 238 gyrB OTUs and 88 16S rRNA gene OTUs. An
otu_table with the respective normalized abundances of the different OTUs in each sample
was constructed for both the gyrB and 16S rRNA gene datasets and is available as
supplementary dataset S2. The total number of reads per sample was normalized based on
the median sequencing depth of all samples.
2.11.

Taxonomic assignment and phylogenetic tree construction

For certain species of Firmicutes, PCR amplification of gyrB can also recover the parE gene,
which encodes the β subunit of DNA topoisomerase IV. In order to determine which of the two
genes had been amplified for each species, the OTU sequences were blasted against the

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

gyrB/parE databases established by Poirier and colleagues (2018b), using the Blastn+
algorithm (Camacho et al., 2009) for taxonomic assignment. Both gyrB and parE OTUs were
retained in our diversity analysis. We considered taxonomic assignments to be valid when 94%
of a sequence matched over 200 bp of coverage; valid matches were assigned identifications
at least at the species level and in some cases at the subspecies level.
Sequences of 16S rRNA gene were identified using the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP)
Classifier (Wang et al., 2007) and the SILVA 128 SSU databases (Quast et al., 2013).
Taxonomic assignment of the different OTUs to genera and, when possible, to the species
level was carried out based on a threshold of 97% identity. The Ez-taxon-e database was used
to identify uncultured species (Kim et al., 2012) that had not been previously identified with
SILVA.
For each dataset, phylogenetic trees were created with SeaView software (Gouy et al., 2010)
using the Kimura-2-parameter algorithm (Kimura, 1980) as distance estimator. Distance
matrices were converted to trees using the BioNJ neighbor-joining method (Gascuel, 1997).
2.12.

Alpha/beta diversity and statistical analyses

Bacterial diversity analyses were performed using the phyloseq package (v1.24.2) of R
(McMurdie and Holmes, 2013). The relative abundance of bacterial species in samples was
plotted with the function plot_composition. A dendrogram based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity
index values was plotted with the function as.dendogram, using the ward.D2 method, and
visualized with the function fviz_dend in the gglot2 package (v3.0.0) of R. To visualize the
results of principal coordinate analyses (PCoA), samples were first ordered according to BrayCurtis dissimilarity index values using a non-metric dimensional scaling (NMDS) approach,
and then plotted with the function s.class within the ade4 package (v1.7-13) of R (Chessel et
al., 1987). Bacterial diversity was compared among different groups of samples with
permutational ANOVA, specifically using the adonis function within the vegan package (v2.52; https://github.com/vegandevs/vegan) of R. Boxplots were drawn with the ggboxplot function

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

from R’s ggpubr package, v0.1.8. In Figure 5, the significance of differences between groups
of samples was assessed with ANOVA, followed by a Student’s t-test. In Figure S5, the
significance of the differences between groups of samples was estimated with a Mann &
Whitney non-parametric test, since the number of samples was less than 30 for each group.
For correlation plots, the correlation coefficient was calculated with the cor function using the
Pearson method and visualized using the corrplot function within the corrplot package, v0.84
(https://github.com/taiyun/corrplot). A heatmap was drawn with the plot_heatmap function of
the ggplot2 package, v3.0.0 (Wickham, 2010).
Data availability. Raw paired sequences have been deposited in the Sequence Read Archive
database under the accession numbers SAMN11405181 to SAMN11405379 and
SAMN11936727 to SAMN11936732, corresponding to BioProject PRJNA532535.

3. RESULTS
3.1.

Sampling strategy

Through a survey of a single production unit, we identified five processing steps as potential
sources of bacterial contamination, with each step potentially able to induce variations in
bacterial species diversity and population level. These steps were the transportation of raw
meat from the slaughterhouse to the ham-producing factory, churning, drain-off after cooking,
slicing, and packing. Although this is an industrial process, over the course of a year, these
steps are often subject to important variations in duration or in exposure to
aerobiosis/anaerobiosis conditions. To assess the role of each step in shaping bacterial
diversity, we set up a complete factorial design in which each of the five processing steps was
sampled at two different levels, chosen specifically from those encountered in the focal
production unit (Table 1). With this sampling design, a total of 32 hams were sampled, each
produced under slightly different conditions (Fig. 1). Although all meat was purchased from the
same slaughterhouse, we also assessed possible variations due to changes in the initial meat
microbiota over an extended period; specifically, we conducted four separate sampling
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

campaigns over a period of six months: in June (Campaign C1), August (Campaign C2),
September (Campaign C3), and November (Campaign C4). Overall, 128 different hams (32 x
4) were sampled.
The variations in ham production that were evaluated by our factorial design were necessarily
accompanied by variations in the total length of processing, from a minimum of 12 days to a
maximum of 28 days. However, optimal operational procedures for slicing and packing
required that these two steps be carried out with the shortest delay possible. Due to these
constraints, each sampling campaign required the use of four different batches of raw meat for
ham production, as shown in Figure S1. Although our study was primarily focused on the final
bacterial diversity of ham (after cooking, slicing, and packing), we incorporated some controls
by measuring the bacterial diversity before cooking (after churning) in two campaigns (C2 and
C3). Finally, each cooked ham was analyzed at two storage times: at the use-by date (UBD)
and after 15 days of extended storage (past UBD), corresponding respectively to samples
stored at 8°C for 28 and 43 days (see Fig. S1). Altogether, the sampling comprised a total of
256 hams.
3.2.

Bacterial diversity in cooked ham was low and was shaped by both pre- and
post-cooking processing steps

Bacterial diversity was assessed with MiSeq paired-end gyrB amplicon sequencing, which
enabled accurate taxonomic assignment of OTUs to the species level (Poirier et al., 2018b).
Amplification of 16S rRNA gene was performed for fourteen samples as a control and
confirmed that there was no bias in species detection resulting from the use of gyrB (see
supplementary Fig. S2). For gyrB amplicon sequencing, the success rate for DNA extraction
and sequencing was around 80%, which yielded a dataset of 200 samples out of the 256
initially planned. However, the failed samples were scattered throughout the factorial design
and campaigns and thus did not reduce the effectiveness of our statistical analysis. From the
whole gyrB dataset, 157 OTUs were identified and assigned to 44 different bacterial species
(average of four OTUs per species, see supplementary dataset S3 for a table detailing OTU
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

abundance). As shown in Table 2, the mean number of species identified per sample was
approximately 15 species.
The majority of the bacterial diversity in cooked ham samples was represented by
approximately fourteen different species in various combinations, which together
corresponded to a mean of 98% of the total relative bacterial abundance (Fig. 2). To correlate
differences in bacterial community composition to variations in processing steps, we performed
a comparative compositional analysis using the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index and non-metric
multi-dimensional scaling (NMDS). This analysis revealed that ham bacterial communities at
the UBD were not significantly different from those past the UBD, and further revealed that
slicing line and sampling campaign were the main factors that shaped these communities (Fig.
3). In order to better understand these differences, bacterial assemblages were plotted
according to these two processing parameters. Figure 4 illustrates how these parameters
influenced both the relative abundance and presence/absence of core bacterial species.
Briefly, the identity of the slicing line influenced the overall distribution of multiple bacterial
genera (e.g., Carnobacterium in line A versus Leuconostoc and Serratia in line B). Within each
genus, the slicing line also influenced the identity of the species present (e.g., C. divergens in
line A versus C. maltaromaticum in line B). Certain species also appeared in multiple sampling
campaigns of a given line (e.g., L. mesenteroides present in campaign C1 and C2 for line A;
L. gelidum subsp. gelidum present in campaign C3 for line B; L. sakei present in campaign C1
for line B; C. maltaromaticum present in campaign C2 and C3 for line B).
It should be noted that the effect of churning time on the cooked ham microbiota was also
revealed to be statistically significant, although it was less obvious from the NMDS analysis
(see supplementary Fig. S4). Indeed, this effect was mostly significant in cooked ham from
slicing line A. Similarly, O2 packaging permeability had a significant effect on the microbiota of
line B only. We linked this observation to the fact that S. proteamaculans, the only dominant
Proteobacteria found among cooked ham samples, was much more prevalent in samples from
slicing line B (in 58% of samples from line B versus 17% of samples from line A). Moreover,
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

samples of line B differed greatly in the relative abundance of this species, which suggests the
influence of another processing step than the slicing line. Indeed, when samples from line B
were analyzed separately, we observed that S. proteamaculans was significantly more
abundant in samples produced with processing steps that had higher oxygen levels (air
transportation and high O2 packaging permeability; see Fig. 5 Panel P1). We also noted that,
at the UBD, O2 was not detected in cooked ham samples packed in highly permeable
packaging (data not shown). Therefore, any O2 that permeated the packaging seemed to have
been rapidly consumed by the microbiota. In slicing line A, instead, the relative abundance of
C. divergens appeared to be correlated with churning, as the abundance of this species
increased in ham that was churned quickly (see Fig. 5 Panel P2).
To summarize, our data indicated that the four main processing parameters that shaped the
types of bacterial communities present in cooked ham were, in decreasing order of influence,
identity of slicing line, sampling campaign (different meat batches over six months of sampling),
O2 permeability of packaging, and churning speed. Two of these processing steps occurred
post-cooking (slicing line and packaging type) and two occurred pre-cooking (campaign and
churning speed).
3.3.

Bacterial species present in cooked ham mostly originated from raw meat
and were among the most abundant species in meat samples after churning

Because the slicing line had a strong influence on the type of microbiota present in ham
samples, even in samples that originated from the same batch of raw meat, we next
investigated whether the bacterial species identified after cooking were also present before
cooking. Furthermore, the slight influence of pre-cooking factors such as sampling campaign
and churning speed on the relative abundances of certain species raised questions regarding
the effectiveness of the cooking step in controlling bacterial populations. As shown in Fig. 6,
we found that the most abundant species in cooked hams were also present in raw meat after
churning: C. divergens, L. sakei, C. maltaromaticum, L. carnosum, L. gelidum, S.
proteamaculans, and L. mesenteroides, in decreasing order of abundance. Overall, cooking
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

eliminated only 50% of the species present in raw churned meat, mostly those that were
subdominant. Among species that were highly abundant in raw churned meat, the cooking
step eliminated Proteobacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas species) more effectively than Firmicutes,
with the exception of S. proteamaculans. However, we also found evidence for post-cooking
contamination, as illustrated by the presence of species in cooked hams that had not been
detected in raw churned meat for those sampling campaigns (e.g., Vagoccocus fluvialis).
3.4.

The production of fermentation-derived metabolites, used as spoilage
indicators, was species-dependent and driven by population abundance.

Next, we focused our analysis on the consequences of these different community patterns for
the quality of the cooked ham. Of the important characteristics of spoilage, we chose to assess
bacterial load, decrease in pH (an indicator currently used in the meat industry to detect
spoilage), and the production of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Additionally, since ham
contains glucose, we also measured the concentration of end-products from the mixed-acid
fermentation of pyruvate (both L- and D-lactic acid, acetic acid, formic acid, and ethanol).
Because no differences were detected in the bacterial communities at the two sampling times
(UBD or past UBD), we narrowed our analysis to UBD samples only (n=128) in order to
determine whether any significant differences in spoilage characteristics were detectable in
hams at the end of storage, prior to consumption.
At the UBD, the bacterial load of cooked hams from slicing line A (7.1 ± 1.0 log10 cfu.g-1) was
not significantly different from that of hams from slicing line B (7.7 ± 0.6 log10 cfu.g-1). However,
there were notable differences among ham samples, with a range of 4 to 9 log. Furthermore,
we were intrigued that at a similar bacterial load, the mean decrease in pH from immediately
after packaging (6.15 ± 0.06) to the UBD (6.05 ± 0.15) was significantly larger in samples from
slicing line B (Fig. S5) and only when the bacterial load reached 7 log10 cfu.g-1. This prompted
us to analyze the possible correlation between decrease in pH, production of volatile organic
compounds, pyruvate-derived end-products, and population abundances of the different
bacterial species present in the microbiota of the two slicing lines.
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

From an initial screening of volatile organic compound production in hams, we noticed that the
majority of VOCs were pyruvate-derived end-products, with ethanol representing around 90%
of the total volatilome (see supplementary data Fig. S6), followed by butan-2,3-dione and
butan-2-one in smaller proportions. Compounds derived from amino-acid metabolism, such 2methylbutanal and 2-methyl-1-butanol, were also detected, but represented less than 5% of
the total volatilome. Because of this, we focused our subsequent analyses on the main
pyruvate-derived end-products.
As shown in Fig. 7, an analysis of Pearson correlations revealed that decrease in pH was
positively correlated to the production of D-lactic acid, acetic acid, and formic acid. The
production of D-lactic acid was strongly correlated to that of ethanol and to the population
abundance of Leuconostoc species (mainly L. carnosum). This observation is also illustrated
in supplementary data Figure S7 showing the relationship between the production of endproducts and the population abundance of each of the bacterial species that were targeted as
potential producers. Instead, the production of acetic acid also showed a strong positive
correlation with that of formic acid and to many of the species that are co-occurring on ham
from slicing line B; namely S. proteamaculans, C. maltaromaticum and V. fluvialis (and to a
lesser extent with B. thermosphacta). C. maltaromaticum in particular showed the strongest
correlation to the production of formic acid. As presented earlier in Fig. 4, L. carnosum, C.
maltaromaticum, and S. proteamaculans were the most dominant species in samples from
slicing line B, indicating that this type of microbiota may have a higher potential for spoilage
than that of slicing line A. Conversely, the bacterial community of ham samples from slicing
line A, in which these three species were subdominant with respect to C. divergens, correlated
to lower production of these compounds. The production of L-lactic acid, on the other hand,
was correlated to the abundance of L. sakei and C. mobile.
These results also prompted us to verify the effect of post-cooking factors (slicing line and O2
packaging permeability) on the metabolic indicators (see Fig. 8). With the exception of L-lactic
acid, all compounds were present in higher concentrations in cooked ham from slicing line B.
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Furthermore, changes in the O2 permeability of the packaging resulted in a switch from L-lactic
acid production (low O2) to acetic acid production (high O2).
4. DISCUSSION
The aim of this study was to perform a large-scale analysis of bacterial diversity in order to
survey and characterize the influence of the processing steps in the microbial ecology of
cooked ham. Among the various parameters described in previous studies and known to play
a role in the variability of this food product, we have chosen five of them upstream or
downstream of the cooking step. To do this, we focused on a single facility and deployed an
extensive sampling strategy, with a complete factorial design and we applied it several times
over four months of production to strengthen our findings. Our study shows evidences for the
role of major and minor factors on both sides of the cooking steps that are driving the microbial
ecology of cooked ham and hence the ham quality.
4.1.

After cooking, the slicing step creates most of the variability in ham bacterial
communities and shapes the development of different spoilage metabolic
profiles

Our first unambiguous demonstration is that, the slicing line was the main source of variability
in the microbial assemblages of ham. Although similar implication of the slicing equipment in
bacterial contamination has been previously made by other scientists (Pothakos et al., 2012;
Vasilopoulos et al., 2008), our analysis provides a better view of the impact that this process
parameter is playing in ham quality. Indeed, in addition to prove that ham samples originating
from the same batch of raw churned meat ended up with different bacterial communities based
on the slicing line on which they had been cut after cooking, we demonstrate that each slicing
line has a proper microbial fingerprint which remains rather stable in time. In the present case,
the time spanned over several months from June to November during which the slicing lines
were used several hundreds of times in the production unit between each sampling campaign.
Furthermore, we show that the quality of cooked hams is also impacted by this specific

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

processing step. It is important to remember here that the cooked ham samples that we
analyzed at the UBD were generally not spoiled, and the production of spoilage metabolic
indicators was usually very low. However, samples from line B showed higher production levels
of fermentation-derived spoilage metabolites and a stronger pH decrease than those from line
A. Unsurprisingly, production of D-lactic acid and ethanol was positively correlated with the
prevalence and population abundance of species from the genus Leuconostoc (especially L.
carnosum) and thus was more elevated in samples from line B. Such finding corroborates
previous studies which showed that members of the Leuconostocaceae family are generally
identified as strong putative spoilers, since their presence in high amounts in meat samples is
often associated with gas production, greening, ethanol production and/or acidification
(Björkroth et al., 1998; Comi and Iacumin, 2012; Samelis et al., 1998; Raimondi et al., 2019).
This finding is also consistent with two aspects of Leuconostoc biology. Firstly, the well-known
heterolactic fermentation of glucose by species belonging to the Leuconostocaceae family
under anaerobiosis (Cogan and Jordan, 1994; Dols et al., 1997) leading to lactate, acetate and
ethanol as main end products. Secondly, the fact that Leuconostoc species preferentially
produce D-lactate due to several D-lactate dehydrogenase-encoding genes in their genome.
Our results allowed us to draw similar conclusions on the impact of the slicing line on the
production of acetic acid and formic acid (both with high correlation to pH decrease), increased
in hams from line B when compared to hams from line A. The production of acetic acid by the
ham microbiota is more challenging to interpret because, in addition to Leuconostocs species,
several other species found on samples from line B can be involved in this process, most of
which

demonstrate

co-occurrence

relationships,

such

as

C.

maltaromaticum,

B.

thermosphacta, S. proteamaculans, and V. fluvialis. Nevertheless, our data are pointing out
that the slicing line, as the main influencing factor on the microbiota structure, is modifying the
production profile of these two acids. Thus, our results show that C. maltaromaticum and S.
proteamaculans are the second confounding spoilers (after Leuconostocs) of cooked ham as
they correlate with accumulation of acetic and formic acids. In particular, these two species
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

distinguish themselves by specific production of formic acid in case of C. maltaromaticum,
corroborating previous observations on Carnobacterium metabolism in meat (Borch and Molin,
1989; Zhang et al., 2019); and acetic acid by S. proteamaculans..
One of the reasons we suspect this Serratia species of being involved in acetic acid production
is the influence played by the packaging with high O2 permeability on both parameters, thereby
indicating that this processing factor is also playing a role in the microbial ecology of cooked
ham. This post-cooking condition favored both higher concentrations of acetic acid and the
growth of S. proteamaculans in samples sliced on line B, while it did not affect microbial
communities of hams sliced on line A (mostly deprived of S. proteamaculans). It is known that
this facultative anaerobic species grows preferentially in the presence of O2, as shown in a
previous study of batch culture that compared growth with and without O2 (Alfaro et al., 2013).
However, we were not able to detect oxygen in the packages of cooked ham at the UBD,
indicating that when it permeates through the packaging, it is rapidly consumed by the
microbiota and that S. proteamaculans alternates between quick aerobic respiration (when O2
permeates the packaging) and longer period of glucose fermentation to acetate (when the O2
is depleted).
4.2.

Raw meat microbiota is another source of bacterial variability between
samples and has a sampling campaign effect

Our data revealed that the composition of the cooked ham microbiota also depended on precooking parameters, in particular on the sampling campaign (different meat batches), but this
effect was somewhat dependent of the slicing line and only specific groups of species are
involved in this variability such as (e.g. L. mesenteroides and L. sakei in June or L. gelidum in
September). Seasonal variability of raw meat microbiota has already been evidenced (Lucquin
et al., 2012). However, our observation that a campaign-based effect can be evidenced on a
cooked product raises the issue of the cooking step’s effectiveness in eliminating initial meat
microbiota. Indeed, such observation has already been done on cooked pork sausages
(Hultman et al., 2015). Here, we clearly show that the cooking step eliminated about half of the
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bacterial species present, mainly those with low abundance on raw churned meat, such as
Staphylococcus, Pseudomonas, and Yersinia; whereas some species were clearly introduced
during production (re-contamination after cooking), such as V. fluvialis. Most interestingly, we
show that the dominant bacterial species identified on cooked ham at UBD could be traced
before and after cooking. We interpret this result as being the likely consequence of two
phenomena :(1) there is a persistence of post-cooking living cells which could explain, for
instance, why air raw meat transportation would influence the prevalence and abundance of
S. proteamaculans or why churning speed would influence the relative abundance of C.
divergens on cooked ham at UBD; (2) the slicing line is either a source of selection or a further
source of contamination. Both assumptions cannot be refuted at this time, as the microbial
ecology of the slicing lines was not included in this study. The two slicing lines studied in the
factory are equipment from two different generations. Surprisingly, the newer line B of which
the cutting mechanism is more complex than that of line A, produces ham with higher spoilage
potential.
5. CONCLUSIONS
Our extensive survey of the microbiota of cooked ham from a single production unit provided
us with a detailed view of the microbiota variability over a long production time and to
characterize the ways in which the microbial ecology of this product is shaped by the various
processing steps. Our results clearly demonstrate that the process (and especially the slicing
step) has a more important microbial fingerprint than the raw meat on the final communities of
cooked ham. This study illustrates the very important role this type of strategy could play in the
food industry if applied more broadly to process management, such as for instance, defining
more precise UBD according to the conditions of production.

21

TABLES
TABLE 1 Levels of the different processing steps
Processing step

Meat transportation

Churning

Drain-off

Slicing line

O2 packaging
permeability

Description of the step variations
Time and storage conditions of the transportation of pork meat
from slaughterhouse to the ham factory may vary as a function
of meat origin.

During ham production, the number of churning rotations is a
constant but pause time between two rotation sessions may
vary in response to the arrival of meat batches and staff
organization.

The drain-off time after cooking may be modified in response
to production demand.

Several types of slicing lines may be present within a
production unit.

Labeling
of levels
Vacuum
Air

Quick

Description of the levels analyzed in this study
Storage in vacuum packaging for ten days at 4°C
Storage in open air for three days at 4°C

Standard quick churning at 4°C, carried out during the workweek

Slow

Slow churning (four times longer than standard churning) at 4°C,
carried out during the weekend

Long

Drain-off for twelve days at 4°C when production demand is low.

Short

Drain-off for four days at 4°C when production demand is high.

Line A

First-generation slicing technology.

Line B

Second-generation slicing technology (more complex equipment).

High O2

Single-layer APET packaging (amorphous polyethylene
terephthalate) has an O2 permeability of 16.3 cm³.m-².day.105 Pa.

The film used for sealing the modified atmosphere packaging
may vary in its degree of permeability to O2.
Low O2

Multiple-layer polyvinyl chloride/vinylic ethylene alcohol/polyethylene
packaging has an O2 permeability of 1.24 cm³.m-².day.105 Pa.

0

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

TABLE 2 Comparative table showing the number of species (after merging OTUs with
similar taxonomic assignments) identified in different subsets of samples

Campaign 1 *
Campaign 2 *
Campaign 3 *
Campaign 4 *
Total number of species

Churned meat
(15 samples)
50 ± 8
41 ± 10
55

Sample subsets
Ham at UBD
(92 samples)
16 ± 3
13 ± 4
13 ± 6
14 ± 7
43
70

Hams past UBD
(108 samples)
13 ± 4
14 ± 5
14 ± 7
25 ± 6
44

* Mean number of species

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

LEGENDS TO THE FIGURES.
FIG 1 Ham sampling strategy.
Sampling strategy based on a complete factorial design, with two levels for each of the five
processing steps: meat transportation, churning, drain-off, slicing, and O2 packaging
permeability.
FIG 2 Ward unsupervised clustering of the microbiota of cooked ham samples
according to Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index.
The clustering analysis revealed two main clusters which were further subdivided into several
clusters of various sample sizes. Below the clustering tree is a species composition plot
(relative abundance) for the fourteen most-abundant species.
FIG 3 Non-metric multi-dimensional scaling analysis of cooked ham microbiotas based
on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index.
Panel P1: The bacterial assemblage of each cooked ham sample is represented by a dot,
colored according to the slicing line on which the ham was processed (red = slicing line B; pink
= slicing line A). Panels P2 and P3: cooked ham assemblages were subdivided based on
slicing line (most discriminant parameter), and each subset (line A in panel P2; line B in panel
P3) was analyzed separately, with the samples colored according to their sampling campaign
of origin (blue = campaign C1; red = campaign C2; green = campaign C3; pink = campaign
C4). The other processing steps had no influence in structuring overall bacterial diversity (see
supplementary Fig. S4). For slicing line and sampling campaign, differences in composition
between the bacterial communities present in the tested conditions were estimated using
permutational ANOVA. Corresponding p-values are indicated under each plot.
FIG 4 Species composition plots of cooked ham microbiota separated by slicing line
and sampling campaign.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Bar plots show the relative abundance of the fourteen core bacterial species in cooked ham.
Cooked ham samples are distributed vertically by slicing line of origin (top = samples from line
A; bottom = samples from line B). Within each slicing line, ham samples are distributed
horizontally according to the four main bacterial genera present (from left to right:
Carnobacterium, Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, and Serratia) and then according to sampling
campaign (C1 to C4).
FIG 5 Comparative analysis of the relative abundance of S. proteamaculans and C.
divergens in cooked ham samples as a function of processing parameters.
Panel P1: relative abundance (in number of reads) of S. proteamaculans in samples from
slicing line B as a function of the other processing parameters. Panel P2: relative abundance
(in number of reads) of C. divergens in samples from slicing line A as a function of the other
processing parameters. Statistical variance between groups of samples was determined with
ANOVA followed by a Student’s t-test. The number of stars indicate the p-value: *** p-value <
0.001; ** p-value < 0.01; * p-value < 0.05.
FIG 6 Heatmap depicting the effect of cooking on bacterial species abundances in ham.
Samples from campaigns C2 and C3 are ordered according to the sample type: left, raw meat
after churning, and right, cooked ham at UBD. Bacterial species are ordered in three groups
from top to bottom: species present only before cooking (hence eliminated by the cooking
step), species present before and after cooking (either resistant to cooking or reintroduced
after cooking), and species present only after cooking (contamination). Within each group,
species are ordered by their taxonomic relationships. Species names colored in red, blue, or
green indicate placement within the phyla Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, or Actinobacteria,
respectively. Stars indicate the fourteen most-abundant species in cooked ham. The scale in
the top-right corner of the heatmap depicts the color palette associated with the relative
numbers of reads of the various species. The black vertical line represents the cooking step.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIG 7 Correlation plot representing the Pearson coefficient between the production of
end-products from the mixed-acid fermentation of pyruvate and the estimated load of
bacterial species on cooked ham at the UBD.
Fermentation end-products are vertically distributed according to the difference between the
final concentration at the UBD and the initial concentration just after packaging. The absolute
load of each bacterial species is distributed horizontally and was estimated using the total
bacterial load weighted by each species' relative abundance (percentage; see Materials &
Methods). The Pearson correlation coefficient between the production of an end-product and
the estimated load of a bacterial species is represented by a colored square. The scale on the
right depicts the color palette associated with the value of the Pearson correlation coefficient
(red, white, and blue corresponding respectively to a negative correlation, no correlation, and
a positive correlation).
FIG 8 Box plots of the production in mg.g-1 of end-products from the mixed-acid
fermentation of pyruvate as a function of the estimated load of bacterial species at the
UBD.
For each graph, all UBD samples were sorted according to their estimated load of a species
of interest within the bacterial community (e.g., samples were sorted according to their
estimated load of C. maltaromaticum). Samples for which the estimated load of the species of
interest was less than 2 log10 cfu.g-1 were not included in order to focus on samples in which
the species was relevant. In some cases, high bacterial loads were not attributable to an
identified species and were labeled "NA". B. thermosphacta and C. mobile were not included
because they were present in too few samples to allow box plot representation. Panels depict
the relationships for different metabolites, from P1 (D-lactic acid) to P5 (formic acid), presented
by decreasing average production levels.
FIG S1 Management of sampling to optimize operational process requirements.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The ham production schedule for a single campaign is shown as a function of variations in the
length of the different steps (depicted in days at the top of the figure). After slicing and packing,
ham samples (represented by red and yellow ellipses) were collected for all campaigns (C1 to
C4), whereas meat samples were collected before cooking (represented by green ellipses) for
campaigns C2 and C3 only.
FIG S2 Principal Coordinates analysis based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index to
compare ham microbial communities of samples using gyrB and 16S rDNA amplicon
sequencing.
Samples S1 to S14 are labeled “gyrB” or “16S” according to the molecular marker used for
bacterial identification. Samples from the four different sampling campaigns (C1 to C4) are
represented: S1 from campaign C1; S2 to S4 from campaign C2; S5 to S10 from campaign
C3; S11 to S14 from campaign C4. Samples S1, S4, S5, S8, S10 and S13 were sliced on line
A and samples S2, S3, S6, S7, S9, S11, S12 and S14 on line B.
FIG S4 Non-metric multi-dimensional analysis of cooked ham samples based on BrayCurtis dissimilarity index.
Samples were analyzed in two separated subsets, corresponding to samples from line A on
the left side and samples from line B on the right side. Within a given subset of samples, ham
samples were colored either according to: the sampling campaign (blue=C1; red=C2;
green=C3; pink=C4); the churning speed (dark blue=slow; light blue=quick); the O2 packaging
permeability (dark green=high O2; light green=low O2); the conditions of transportation of raw
meat (yellow=air; orange=vacuum); the drain-off time after cooking (dark grey=long; light
grey=short); the shelf-life (light purple=UBD; dark purple=past UBD). For each graph,
differences in composition between bacterial communities present in the two tested conditions
were estimated using permutational ANOVA. Corresponding p-values are indicated under
each plot.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIG S5 Boxplots depicting the decrease in pH of ham samples from slicing lines A and
B as a function of total bacterial load.
Bacterial load is represented in log10 cfu.g-1. Samples were segregated by their slicing line of
origin and then sorted by their bacterial load, ranging from 4 to 9 Log10 cfu.g-1. Delta pH depicts
the difference between the initial pH measured just after packaging and the pH at the UBD.
Statistical variance between groups of samples within a slicing line was determined with a
Mann & Whitney test. The number of stars indicates the p-value: * p-value < 0.05; "ns" for pvalue > 0.05.
FIG S6 Boxplots showing the percentage of total emitted volatile compounds of hams
at UBD.
Samples from campaigns C1 and C2 are represented. The compounds are ordered from left
to right in decreasing order of abundance.
FIG S7 Boxplots showing the production level in mg.g-1 of end products from mixedacid fermentation of pyruvate according to the estimated load of bacterial species at
UBD.
For each graph, all UBD samples were sorted according to their estimated load of a species
of interest within bacterial communities (e.g. samples are sorted according to their estimated
load of C. maltaromaticum). Samples where the estimated load of the species of interest was
under 2 log10 cfu.g-1 were not represented, in order to focus on samples where the species
was representative. For some species, high loads were non-attributed and were labeled “NA”.
B. thermosphacta and C. mobile were not represented since they were present in too few
samples to allow boxplot representation. Metabolites are ordered in Panels, from P1 (D-lactic
acid) to P5 (formic acid) by average decreasing production levels.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the MIGALE bioinformatics platform at INRA (http://migale.jouy.inra.fr) for providing
computational resources and data storage. We also thank the INRA @BRIDGe platform for
carrying out the MiSeq sequencing runs. Marine ZAGDOUN was the recipient of ANRT grant
number 2016/1038 (Association Nationale de la Recherche et de la Technologie, Ile de
France). The funders had no role in the study’s design, data collection, and interpretation, or
the decision to submit the work for publication.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

REFERENCES
Alfaro, B., Hernández, I., Le Marc, Y., Pin, C., 2013. Modelling the effect of the temperature and
carbon dioxide on the growth of spoilage bacteria in packed fish products. Food Control,
Predictive Modelling of Food Quality and Safety 29, 429–437.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2012.05.046
Audenaert, K., D’Haene, K., Messens, K., Ruyssen, T., Vandamme, P., Huys, G., 2010. Diversity of lactic
acid bacteria from modified atmosphere packaged sliced cooked meat products at sell-by
date assessed by PCR-denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Food Microbiol. 27, 12–18.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fm.2009.04.006
Barret, M., Briand, M., Bonneau, S., Préveaux, A., Valière, S., Bouchez, O., Hunault, G., Simoneau, P.,
Jacques, M.-A., 2015. Emergence Shapes the Structure of the Seed Microbiota. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 81, 1257–1266. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03722-14
Benson, A.K., David, J.R.D., Gilbreth, S.E., Smith, G., Nietfeldt, J., Legge, R., Kim, J., Sinha, R., Duncan,
C.E., Ma, J., Singh, I., 2014. Microbial Successions Are Associated with Changes in Chemical
Profiles of a Model Refrigerated Fresh Pork Sausage during an 80-Day Shelf Life Study. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 80, 5178–5194. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00774-14
Björkroth, K.J., Korkeala, H.J., 1997. Use of rRNA gene restriction patterns to evaluate lactic acid
bacterium contamination of vacuum-packaged sliced cooked whole-meat product in a meat
processing plant. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63, 448–453.
Björkroth, K.J., Vandamme, P., Korkeala, H.J., 1998. Identification and Characterization of
Leuconostoc carnosum, Associated with Production and Spoilage of Vacuum-Packaged,
Sliced, Cooked Ham. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64, 3313–3319.
Bokulich, N.A., Subramanian, S., Faith, J.J., Gevers, D., Gordon, J.I., Knight, R., Mills, D.A., Caporaso,
J.G., 2013. Quality-filtering vastly improves diversity estimates from Illumina amplicon
sequencing. Nat. Methods 10, 57–59. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2276
Borch, E., Molin, G., 1989. The aerobic growth and product formation of Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc,
Brochothrix, and Carnobacterium in batch cultures. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 30, 81–88.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00256001
Camacho, C., Coulouris, G., Avagyan, V., Ma, N., Papadopoulos, J., Bealer, K., Madden, T.L., 2009.
BLAST+: architecture and applications. BMC Bioinformatics 10, 421.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-10-421
Chaillou, S., Chaulot-Talmon, A., Caekebeke, H., Cardinal, M., Christieans, S., Denis, C., Hélène
Desmonts, M., Dousset, X., Feurer, C., Hamon, E., Joffraud, J.-J., La Carbona, S., Leroi, F.,
Leroy, S., Lorre, S., Macé, S., Pilet, M.-F., Prévost, H., Rivollier, M., Roux, D., Talon, R.,
Zagorec, M., Champomier-Vergès, M.-C., 2015. Origin and ecological selection of core and
food-specific bacterial communities associated with meat and seafood spoilage. ISME J. 9,
1105–1118. https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2014.202
Chessel, D., Dufour, A.B., Thioulouse, J., 1987. The ade 4 package-I : One-table methods.
Cogan, T.M., Jordan, K.N., 1994. Metabolism of Leuconostoc Bacteria. J. Dairy Sci. 77, 2704–2717.
https://doi.org/10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(94)77213-1
Comi, G., Iacumin, L., 2012. Identification and process origin of bacteria responsible for cavities and
volatile off‐flavour compounds in artisan cooked ham. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 47, 114–121.
Dols, M., Chraibi, W., Remaud-Simeon, M., Lindley, N.D., Monsan, P.F., 1997. Growth and energetics
of Leuconostoc mesenteroides NRRL B-1299 during metabolism of various sugars and their
consequences for dextransucrase production. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63, 2159–2165.
Dušková, M., Kameník, J., Lačanin, I., Šedo, O., Zdráhal, Z., 2016. Lactic acid bacteria in cooked hams –
Sources of contamination and chances of survival in the product. Food Control 61, 1–5.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2015.09.019

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Escudié, F., Auer, L., Bernard, M., Mariadassou, M., Cauquil, L., Vidal, K., Maman, S., HernandezRaquet, G., Combes, S., Pascal, G., 2018. FROGS: Find, Rapidly, OTUs with Galaxy Solution.
Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 34, 1287–1294. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btx791
Fougy, L., Desmonts, M.-H., Coeuret, G., Fassel, C., Hamon, E., Hézard, B., Champomier-Vergès, M.-C.,
Chaillou, S., 2016. Reducing Salt in Raw Pork Sausages Increases Spoilage and Correlates with
Reduced Bacterial Diversity. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 82, 3928–3939.
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00323-16
Gascuel, O., 1997. BIONJ: an improved version of the NJ algorithm based on a simple model of
sequence data. Mol. Biol. Evol. 14, 685–695.
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.a025808
Geeraerts, W., Pothakos, V., De Vuyst, L., Leroy, F., 2017. Diversity of the dominant bacterial species
on sliced cooked pork products at expiration date in the Belgian retail. Food Microbiol. 65,
236–243. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fm.2017.03.007
Gouy, M., Guindon, S., Gascuel, O., 2010. SeaView version 4: A multiplatform graphical user interface
for sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree building. Mol. Biol. Evol. 27, 221–224.
https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msp259
Han, Y., Jiang, Y., Sun, X., Xu, B., Zhou, G., 2011. Effect of high pressure treatment on microbial
populations of sliced vacuum-packed cooked ham. Meat Sci. 682–688.
Hultman, J., Rahkila, R., Ali, J., Rousu, J., Björkroth, K.J., 2015. Meat Processing Plant Microbiome and
Contamination Patterns of Cold-Tolerant Bacteria Causing Food Safety and Spoilage Risks in
the Manufacture of Vacuum-Packaged Cooked Sausages. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 81, 7088–
7097. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02228-15
Kim, O.-S., Cho, Y.-J., Lee, K., Yoon, S.-H., Kim, M., Na, H., Park, S.-C., Jeon, Y.S., Lee, J.-H., Yi, H., Won,
S., Chun, J., 2012. Introducing EzTaxon-e: a prokaryotic 16S rRNA gene sequence database
with phylotypes that represent uncultured species. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 62, 716–721.
https://doi.org/10.1099/ijs.0.038075-0
Kimura, M., 1980. A simple method for estimating evolutionary rates of base substitutions through
comparative studies of nucleotide sequences. J. Mol. Evol. 16, 111–120.
Klindworth, A., Pruesse, E., Schweer, T., Peplies, J., Quast, C., Horn, M., Glöckner, F.O., 2013.
Evaluation of general 16S ribosomal RNA gene PCR primers for classical and next-generation
sequencing-based diversity studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, e1.
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks808
Lucquin, I., Zagorec, M., Champomier-Vergès, M., Chaillou, S., 2012. Fingerprint of lactic acid bacteria
population in beef carpaccio is influenced by storage process and seasonal changes. Food
Microbiol., Fermented MeatsFermented Meats 29, 187–196.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fm.2011.08.001
Mahé, F., Rognes, T., Quince, C., Vargas, C. de, Dunthorn, M., 2014. Swarm: robust and fast clustering
method for amplicon-based studies. PeerJ 2, e593. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.593
Martin, M., 2011. Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput sequencing reads.
EMBnet.journal 17, 10–12. https://doi.org/10.14806/ej.17.1.200
McMurdie, P.J., Holmes, S., 2013. phyloseq: an R package for reproducible interactive analysis and
graphics of microbiome census data. PloS One 8, e61217.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0061217
Mol, J.H.H., Hietbrink, J.E.A., Mollen, H.W.M., Tinteren, J.V., 1971. Observations on the Microflora of
Vacuum Packed Sliced Cooked Meat Products. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 34, 377–397.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.1971.tb02297.x
Piotrowska‐Cyplik, A., Myszka, K., Czarny, J., Ratajczak, K., Kowalski, R., Biegańska‐Marecik, R.,
Staninska‐Pięta, J., Nowak, J., Cyplik, P., 2017. Characterization of specific spoilage organisms
(SSOs) in vacuum-packed ham by culture-plating techniques and MiSeq next-generation
sequencing technologies. J. Sci. Food Agric. 97, 659–668. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.7785
Poirier, S., Rué, O., Coeuret, G., Champomier-Vergès, M.-C., Loux, V., Chaillou, S., 2018a. Detection of
an amplification bias associated to Leuconostocaceae family with a universal primer routinely
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/865857; this version posted December 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

used for monitoring microbial community structures within food products. BMC Res. Notes
11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13104-018-3908-2
Poirier, S., Rué, O., Peguilhan, R., Coeuret, G., Zagorec, M., Champomier-Vergès, M.-C., Loux, V.,
Chaillou, S., 2018b. Deciphering intra-species bacterial diversity of meat and seafood spoilage
microbiota using gyrB amplicon sequencing: A comparative analysis with 16S rDNA V3-V4
amplicon sequencing. PloS One 13, e0204629.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0204629
Pothakos, V., Samapundo, S., Devlieghere, F., 2012. Total mesophilic counts underestimate in many
cases the contamination levels of psychrotrophic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) in chilled-stored
food products at the end of their shelf-life. Food Microbiol. 32, 437–443.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fm.2012.07.011
Quast, C., Pruesse, E., Yilmaz, P., Gerken, J., Schweer, T., Yarza, P., Peplies, J., Glöckner, F.O., 2013.
The SILVA ribosomal RNA gene database project: improved data processing and web-based
tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D590–D596. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks1219
Raimondi, S., Luciani, R., Sirangelo, T.M., Amaretti, A., Leonardi, A., Ulrici, A., Foca, G., D’Auria, G.,
Moya, A., Zuliani, V., Seibert, T.M., Søltoft-Jensen, J., Rossi, M., 2019. Microbiota of sliced
cooked ham packaged in modified atmosphere throughout the shelf life: Microbiota of sliced
cooked ham in MAP. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 289, 200–208.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.09.017
Samelis, J., Kakouri, A., Georgiadou, K.G., Metaxopoulos, J., 1998. Evaluation of the extent and type
of bacterial contamination at different stages of processing of cooked ham. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 84, 649–660.
Stellato, G., La Storia, A., De Filippis, F., Borriello, G., Villani, F., Ercolini, D., 2016. Overlap of SpoilageAssociated Microbiota between Meat and the Meat Processing Environment in Small-Scale
and Large-Scale Retail Distributions. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 82, 4045–4054.
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00793-16
Vasilopoulos, C., De Maere, H., De Mey, E., Paelinck, H., De Vuyst, L., Leroy, F., 2010. Technologyinduced selection towards the spoilage microbiota of artisan-type cooked ham packed under
modified atmosphere. Food Microbiol. 27, 77–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fm.2009.08.008
Vasilopoulos, C., Ravyts, F., De Maere, H., De Mey, E., Paelinck, H., De Vuyst, L., Leroy, F., 2008.
Evaluation of the spoilage lactic acid bacteria in modified-atmosphere-packaged artisan-type
cooked ham using culture-dependent and culture-independent approaches. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 104, 1341–1353. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2007.03664.x
Wang, Q., Garrity, G.M., Tiedje, J.M., Cole, J.R., 2007. Naive Bayesian classifier for rapid assignment
of rRNA sequences into the new bacterial taxonomy. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73, 5261–
5267. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00062-07
Wheatley, P., Giotis, E.S., McKevitt, A.I., 2014. Effects of slaughtering operations on carcass
contamination in an Irish pork production plant. Ir. Vet. J. 67, 1.
https://doi.org/10.1186/2046-0481-67-1
Wickham, H., 2010. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis, 1st ed. 2009. Corr. 3rd printing 2010.
ed. Springer-Verlag New York Inc., New York.
Zhang, J., Kobert, K., Flouri, T., Stamatakis, A., 2014. PEAR: a fast and accurate Illumina Paired-End
reAd mergeR. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 30, 614–620.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt593

36

