bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SHORT REPORT
Title: Polarized Entamoeba: A model for stable bleb driven motility
Running title: Stable bleb driven motility of Entamoeba
Authors: Deepak Krishnan, Sudip Kumar Ghosh
Affiliation: Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur
721302, India.

Author for correspondence:
Sudip Kumar Ghosh, PhD
Professor
Department of Biotechnology,
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,
Kharagpur 721302
West Bengal, India.
Email: sudip@bt.iitkgp.ac.in
Author contributions: D.K. and S. K.G designed research; D. K performed research; D.K. and
S. K.G. wrote the paper.

Keywords: Pentoxifylline, Cell polarization, Stable bleb, Chemokinesis, Directional migration,
Chemotaxis.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Summary statement
Pentoxifylline, the adenosine receptor antagonist induced a stable bleb driven polarized
morphology in Entamoeba characterized by fast, directionally persistent and highly chemotactic
motility.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Protozoan parasites Entamoeba histolytica and Entamoeba invadens formed a polarized
phenotype, an elongated shape with a single leading edge and a trailing edge when treated with
pentoxifylline. The leading edge of the polarized morphology was a spherical protrusion devoid
of F-actin but with occasional F-actin scars, indicating the presence of bleb. The polarized form
was stable bleb driven since the blebbing was limited to the leading edge. Pentoxifylline induced
chemokinesis in Entamoeba as it switched the motility pattern from slow and random to fast and
directionally persistent. Pentoxifylline speeded up the cell aggregation in E. invadens during
growth and encystation due to enhanced chemotaxis of the polarized form. The transformation of
non-polarized adherent trophozoites to nonadherent stable bleb driven form occurred via
lamellipodial and bleb driven adherent intermediate phenotypes. The nonadherent polarized
phenotype was highly motile under confinement and moved by rearward plasma membrane flow.
In contrast to pentoxifylline, adenosine, the adenosine receptor agonist, stimulated the formation
of multiple protrusions leading to random motility. Thus pentoxifylline might prevent lateral
protrusions by inhibiting adenosine receptor, producing the monopodial polarized morphology.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION
Cell migration is an important event in embryonic development, wound healing, immune
response, and cancer progression. The first step in cell migration is the polarization during which
the cells break symmetry to form a leading edge and a trailing edge. Depending on the leading
edge, motility can be of two types, lamellipodial motility driven by actin polymerization and
pressure driven blebbing. Cells like keratocytes and fibroblasts use lamellipodia at the leading
edge while primordial germ cells and amoeboid tumor cells use blebbing motility (Blaser et al.,
2006; Paňková et al., 2010). Bleb driven cell migration have been reported in many biological
events like embryonic development, Dictyostelium chemotaxis, and cancer metastasis (Fackler
and Grosse, 2008) but unlike lamellipodial motility, its mechanics is not well understood.
Enteric parasite Entamoeba histolytica is a highly motile organism, and it has been
reported to use only the bleb driven motility both in vitro and in vivo and thus can be considered
as an important model to study blebbing (Maugis et al., 2010). As shown previously in
progenitor cells (Diz-Muñoz et al., 2010), blebbing reduced directional persistence in E.
histolytica. Here we report that both human pathogen E. histolytica and its reptilian counterpart
and encystation model Entamoeba invadens readily formed a fast moving, elongated morphology
when treated with a millimolar concentration of methylxanthines like pentoxifylline or caffeine.
This morphology showed a single leading edge with stable bleb, making it directionally
persistent.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Methylxanthines induced stable bleb driven polarized morphology in Entamoeba
Entamoeba histolytica (Eh) and Entamoeba invadens (Ei) trophozoites are unpolarized in
vitro growth conditions which were observed from the nearly circular shape (Fig.1A, control)
and the high circularity value of 0.87 (Fig.1B, control), a measure of polarity (Lomakin et al.,
2018). When exposed to a millimolar concentration (0.5-10 mM) of pentoxifylline (Ptx), both the
Entamoeba species turned into a highly elongated morphology with a single leading edge and a
trailing edge called uroid (Fig.1A Ptx; Movie 1) and reduced circularity (Fig.1B Ptx). Ptx
induced polarized morphology was characterized by the aspect ratio (ratio of the major axis to
the minor axis). Both Entamoeba species showed an average aspect ratio of 1.3 in growth

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medium (Fig.1C Control), and pentoxifylline treatment increased the aspect ratio to 2.27 in Eh
and 3.2 in case of Ei (Fig.1C Ptx). Phase contrast micrograph indicates that the cytoplasm of
these elongated cells is separated into a fluid endoplasm and gelled ectoplasm. At the leading
edge, the endoplasm gelled to form stationary ectoplasm and, at the trailing edge, the ectoplasm
was again converted to fluid endoplasm, which can be clearly perceived from the movement of
intracellular particles (Fig.1D; Movie 2).
Since cytoplasmic microtubules are absent in Entamoeba, the actin cytoskeleton alone is
responsible for their morphology and motility (Vayssié et al., 2004). In the unpolarized
trophozoites, F-actin was found in the structures like phagocytic invaginations, stress fibers, and
podosomes (Fig.S1) (Manich et al., 2018). Whereas in the polarized form, most of the F-actin
was localized at the uroid and the subcortical region, and its quantity was found to gradually
decrease from uroid to leading edge (Fig.1 E, F). Actin-based adhesion structures were initially
observed on the ventral side of the cell as they attained polarized form (Fig.1E) but disappeared
with time (Fig.1F). Unlike the actin polymerization-driven lamellipodial migration (Fig.S2), the
single spherical hyaline protrusion at the leading edge contained the lowest amount of F-actin
compared to other regions of the cell. This indicates that the motility of the polarized form was
driven by bleb, stabilized at the leading edge. Similar motility was previously reported in
zebrafish progenitor cells and cancer cells under confinement and low adhesion (Liu et al., 2015;
Ruprecht et al., 2015). Eh used bleb-driven motility, but the blebs were produced all over the
cell, causing random motility (Maugis et al., 2010). The life cycle of a bleb involves
depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton, causing the intracellular pressure to push the
membrane forward, followed by the actin cortex reformation under the plasma membrane. Actin
scars from such cyclic generation and healing of actin cortex were observed in many polarized
cells, especially those performing a turn (Fig.1 G, H). Thus a single spherical leading edge
devoid of F-actin and the occasional presence of F-actin scars also indicate that the motility of
Ptx induced polarized cells are stable-bleb driven.
Motility characteristics of the amoeboid form
The movement of unpolarized and polarized forms of Entamoeba was characterized by
measuring the velocity and the directness (ratio of displacement to distance, a measure of
directional persistence) of the migration (Zengel et al., 2011). The velocity of both the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Entamoeba species in a fresh growth medium was ~0.1 µm/s, and in 12-hour old growth
medium, it increased to ~0.3 µm/s (Fig.2A). This change in velocity could be because of the
chemokinetic effect of chemicals secreted by the trophozoites (Zaki et al., 2006). In both
conditions, the cell movement was random as observed from the low directness values (Fig.2B).
In the case of Ptx induced polarized form, velocity increased to nearly 1 µm/s (Fig.2A, Ptx).
Most importantly, the movement was highly directional with a directness value of 0.7 (Fig.2B,
Ptx). These changes in the motility pattern were easily observed from the migrational tracks
(Fig.2C; Movies 3, 4).
Transwell migration assay was performed to find out whether Ptx induced motility is due
to chemokinesis or chemotaxis. Ptx was added at different concentrations to the bottom chamber
to test chemotaxis and to the top chamber to stimulate chemokinesis. Cell migration increased
dose-dependently in both the cases, but the migration was much higher when Ptx was added to
the upper chamber (10 mM Ptx reduced migration due to extensive cell aggregation in the upper
chamber as discussed below) indicating that the effect was due to chemokinesis (Fig. 2D). The
most important aspect of Ptx induced chemokinesis was the increased directional persistence due
to cell polarization. Factors that increase morphological polarity and directional persistence have
been shown to promote chemotaxis (Bosgraaf et al., 2005; Pankov et al., 2005). Also, blebbing
cells were reported to be strongly chemotactic (Zatulovskiy et al., 2014). To find the chemotactic
potential of polarized Entamoeba cells, Transwell migration of serum-starved Entamoeba
trophozoites towards serum-containing medium was studied. Ptx increased chemotaxis in both
Entamoeba (Fig.2E), but it was more significant in Ei.
Ei cysts are formed only within the galactose ligand-mediated cell aggregates in
encystation media (Turner and Eichinger, 2007). The Ptx induced polarized morphology was
also capable of forming similar galactose ligand-mediated cell aggregates in the growth medium
(Fig.2F; Movie 5). Time-lapse video microscopy showed that during in vitro encystation, Ei
formed the polarized morphology in response to encystation media (Movie 6) and these
polarized cells moved towards the preexisting aggregates and formed larger aggregates (Movie
7). Therefore, the cell aggregation during encystation might be due to chemotaxis of polarized
cells towards the small cells clusters, acting as aggregation centers.

Addition of Ptx to

encystation medium increased the cell aggregation even at low cell density (104 cells/ml against

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

105 cells/ml required for in vitro encystation), and cysts were also formed in such aggregates
(Fig.2G). Ptx also can induce cell aggregation in Eh, but these aggregates were short-lived.
These differences in the chemotactic and aggregation potential may be two important reasons
why the Ei aggregated and encysted in vitro in response to nutrient and osmotic stress but not the
Eh.
Temporal progression of morphological and motility changes during cell polarization
The analysis of morphological changes in Ei by actin staining showed that after treatment
with 1mM Ptx, phagocytic invaginations on the cell surface (Fig.3A a, a’) started disappearing
and the cells started producing lamellipodia (Fig.3A b, b’, c, c’; Fig.S3A; Movie 8). By 4 hours,
the lamellipodia became more and more prominent until a polarized form with lamellipodia at
the leading edge was formed (Fig.3A d, d’). By the 6th hour, blebs started appearing at the
leading edge (Fig. 3A e, e’) and the cell became elongated (Fig. 3A f, f’). Actin-based adhesion
structures, similar to the actin feet of Dictyostelium (Fukui and Inoue, 1997; Uchida and
Yumura, 2004) were found on the ventral side of these initial bleb driven cells (Fig.3A g, g’;
S3B). The adhesion structures disappeared by 8-12 hours, giving rise to adhesion independent,
stable bleb driven morphology (Fig.3A h, h’). These morphological changes depended on the Ptx
concentration, which can be seen in the increment in cell velocity with time (Fig. 3B). Live cell
video microscopy showed that the lack of adhesion structures caused the cells to slip while trying
to move, which was seen as the reduction in velocity in later hours for higher Ptx concentration
(Fig.3B, 10mM, Movie 9). The morphological transition in Eh required higher Ptx concentration
(5-10 mM) than that of Ei (0.5-1 mM). In Eh the lamellipodial form was not seen, and the
adherent cells (Fig.3C a, a’) produced multiple blebs (Fig.3C b, b’) in response to Ptx and
directly formed the stable bleb driven morphology (Fig.3C c, c’).
Ptx was able to reduce cell adhesion dose-dependently (Fig.3D), but these adhesiondeficient cells showed normal locomotion under confinement. During Under-agarose assay, the
velocity of both Eh and Ei cells, under the agarose was found to be ~1 µm/s even in the absence
of Ptx (Fig.3E Control). The multinucleated giant cells of Ei have shown a similar increase in
motility under confinement (Krishnan and Ghosh, 2018) and this could be due to the induction of
bleb-driven movement by mechanical resistance (Zatulovskiy et al., 2014). While velocity
increased, motility remained random with directness values of 0.60 and 0.49 for Ei and Eh,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

respectively (Fig.3F, control). In the presence of Ptx, the velocity under the agarose was further
increased to 1.9 µm/s in Ei, and to 1.69 µm/s in Eh (Fig.3E Ptx) and the motility became highly
directional (D=0.8) for both the species (Fig.3F, Ptx). Under agarose, the polarized Ei were
always found to move collectively after aligning themselves in head-to-tail fashion (Fig.3G,
Movie 10) similar to the streaming in Dictyostelium (McCann et al., 2010). This indicates that Ei
must be secreting some chemo-attractant, which attracted and aligned other cells in a head-to-tail
fashion, but such alignment was not observed in Eh.
Since the stable bleb-driven morphology was adhesion deficient, we tried to find how
these cells move. It has been shown previously that adhesion-independent amoeboid migration is
driven by a rearward flow of plasma membrane (O’Neill et al., 2018). When the unpolarized
cells were stained with plans membrane stain CellMask Orange (CMO), most of the fluorescence
was observed on the membrane and internal vesicles (Fig. 3H, control). In the polarized form,
fluorescence was mostly observed on the uroid (Fig. 3H, Ptx). Large numbers of fluorescent
vesicles were observed originating from uroid and moved forward through the endoplasm, and
these could be replenishing the anterior cell membrane. The membrane movement was also
observed by the rearward flow of membrane proteins by treating the cells with fluorescent
concanavalin A (ConA) (Fig. 3I). When unpolarized cells were briefly incubated with
fluorescent ConA, most of the fluorescence was observed on the cell surface (Fig.3I, control). In
the polarized morphology, the entire fluorescent ConA accumulated at uroid (Fig.3I, Ptx) which
also indicated the rearward flow of membrane.
Pentoxifylline effects are mediated by adenosine receptors
The biological effects of Ptx might be due to either its action on adenosine receptors or
inhibition of phosphodiesterases. Like Ptx, adenosine was also found to be chemokinetic in Ei,
since cell velocity increased to 0.50 µm/s (Fig.4A) when adenosine (0.1-1 mM) was added to the
medium. The most important feature of adenosine-induced chemokinesis was the highly random
movement as observed from the low directness value of 0.3 (Fig.4B) and the migration tracks
(Fig.4C, Movie 11). In the presence of adenosine, protrusions were formed all over the cell
surface in Ei (Fig.4D) causing the cells to move randomly in all directions, and Rhodamine
phalloidin staining showed these protrusions were blebs (Fig.4E). These observations made in Ei
were not clearly visible in Eh due to its isotropic blebbing and inherent random motility (Fig.4A,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B). Thus the effects of adenosine are exactly opposite to those of Ptx, indicating both could be
binding to the same Entamoeba adenosine receptor, which is not yet identified. Simultaneous
stimulation of Entamoeba multiple adenosine receptors produced multiple leading edges causing
the cell to move in opposing directions (Fig.4F), and so there was no productive cell motility. In
contrast, Ptx treatment produced a single leading edge resulting in a polarized morphology
causing the cell to move in a single direction (Fig.4G). These observations could be explained
based on the mutual inhibition between frontness signals and backness signals (Xu et al., 2003;
Wang et al., 2013). Adenosine seems to promote a strong frontness, whereas Ptx, a strong
backness. Ptx and adenosine-induced motility patterns represented two extremes of Entamoeba
morphology and the motility of trophozoites in growth medium over a long time shows elements
of both randomnesses, and directional persistence (Fig.4H).
While Ei formed the polarized morphology in response to stresses and during
encystation, in Eh such morphology was reported only under a chemoattractant gradient like that
of TNF (Blazquez et al., 2006). When Eh and Ei trophozoites were exposed to continuous stress
(oxidative or temperature), large numbers of polarized cells with a fluid-filled hyaline cap at the
leading edge were observed (Fig.S4; Movie 12). These cells were similar to the stable bleb
driven form, morphologically, and as per actin distribution pattern, but its importance is not yet
understood. The polarization and motility of Entamoeba are required for invasive amoebiasis
(Dufour et al., 2015; Aguilar-Rojas et al., 2016). Dominant positive expression of URE3-BP in
Eh induced an elongated morphology which was reported to be highly invasive (Gilchrist et al.,
2010), and so the polarized form may have an important role in the pathogenesis. The role of
adenosine receptors on cell motility indicted the possibility of purinergic signaling (Chen et al.,
2006; Ledderose et al., 2016) in controlling motility and chemotaxis of Entamoeba. Animal cells
contain 5-10 mM of ATP in their cytosol, and the tissue damage by Entamoeba may cause
leakage of ATP from damaged cells. This could lead to accumulation of purine nucleotides in the
surroundings of Entamoeba and may influence the Entamoeba motility, chemotaxis and thus its
pathogenicity. This is the first report of purinergic signaling in protozoan parasites and its
possible involvement in invasiveness. In conclusion, Ei or Eh may be used as a model for
studying different aspects of cell motility as its morphology can be easily controlled in vitro.
Controlled motility and morphology will also be helpful to study the pathogenicity of
amoebiasis.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells and reagents
Entamoeba invadens (strain IP-1) and Entamoeba histolytica (strain HM1-IMSS) were
cultured in TYI-S-33 medium completed with 10% heat-inactivated adult bovine serum
(HiMedia) and 3% Diamond vitamin mix and penicillin and streptomycin at 25°C and 37°C,
respectively. Pentoxifylline, caffeine, Texas Red- concanavalin A, DAPI, adenosine, and
calcofluor white were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Rhodamine conjugated phalloidin, and
CellMask Orange were purchased from Molecular Probes, Invitrogen, USA. Transwell inserts
with 8μM pore were obtained from SPL biosciences.
Cell staining
Clean coverslips were placed in 35 mm cell culture plates, and trophozoites at appropriate
cell density were added and allowed to adhere. After the experiments, the cells were fixed using
pre-warmed 3% paraformaldehyde for 30 minutes, followed by permeabilization with 0.2 %
(v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 minutes. Nucleus was stained with DAPI, and chitin wall was
stained with calcofluor white. The actin cytoskeleton was visualized by staining the cells with
Rhodamine conjugated phalloidin after blocking the permeabilized cells with 2% (w/v) BSA.
Texas Red- concanavalin A (50 µg/ml) and CellMask Orange (1:1000 dilution) were used to
study membrane dynamics during motility.
Microscopy
Time-lapse video microscopy was carried out using Olympus IX51 inverted light
microscope with a camera attachment and photo-editing software (Image Pro Discovery).
Olympus FV1000 confocal microscope with Fluoview software was used for fluorescence
imaging. The raw images were processed using ImageJ.
Encystation
To prepare the encystation medium (LG 47), TYI-S-33 medium without glucose (LG100)
was prepared and diluted to 2.12 times and then completed with 5% adult bovine serum, 1.5 %
vitamin mix and penicillin and streptomycin. To find the response of E. invadens to encystation

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

media, cells were grown in tissue culture plates, and TYI-S-33 medium was replaced with the
LG47 medium. E. invadens cultures below confluency and confluent cultures with small cell
aggregates were used. The formation of chitin positive cysts was observed by staining with
calcofluor white.
Calculation of cell shape descriptors
The changes in the morphology were quantitatively defined using the shape descriptors
like aspect ratio and circularity. From the images, ImageJ was used to calculate the shape
descriptors, aspect ratio, and circularity. Aspect ratio is the ratio of the length of the major axis
to the minor axis for this ellipse. For spherical morphology, the aspect ratio = 1, whereas for an
elongated morphology the aspect ratio is >1. Circularity is calculated as 4π ×
[Area]/[Perimeter]2. Values of 1.0 indicate a perfect circle, and lower values indicate an
increasing formation of protrusions. Stationary un-polarized cells showed high circularity, and
low circularity is a trait of polarized migrating cells.
Analysis of Cell Motility
Time-lapse video microscopy was performed using Olympus IX51 inverted microscopes
with a camera attachment and photo-editing software (Image Pro Discovery). The images were
then taken at appropriate intervals to produce a time-lapse movie. Using the ImageJ software
with plugins like Manual Tracking and MTrackJ, the position of cells at different time points
identified from time-lapse. An average of 20-30 cells was tracked during each experiment, and
each experiment was repeated minimum three times. Then using the Chemotaxis and Migration
Tool (Ibidi), the position of each cell was used to visualize the cell tracks, and from this,
migration velocity and Directness were calculated. The velocity of each cell was calculated as
the total distance covered by a cell divided by time, and the average velocity for each experiment
was calculated. The Directness (D) is the measure of a cell's tendency to travel in a straight line.
It is calculated by dividing the displacement with the distance. D is the average of all values of
directness for all cells. A directness of D = 1 indicates a straight-line migration from start to
endpoint while D<<1 indicates random motility.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Transwell migration assay
Transwell migration assays (Boyden Chamber Assay) were conducted to measure the
chemokinesis and chemotaxis. For this Transwell inserts containing 8 µm pore polycarbonate
membranes and 24 well-cell culture plates were used. To measure chemotaxis, complete TYI-S33 medium or TYI-S-33 medium containing chemoattractant (0.5 ml) were placed in the bottom
chamber. Trophozoites at a concentration of 1.0 x 105 cells/ml in incomplete TYI medium were
then added to the upper well chamber. To test chemokinesis, the chemical was separately added
to the top and bottom chambers. The 24 well plates were then sealed with parafilm and placed in
an anaerobic bag for 3 hours. Trophozoites migrated to the lower chamber were detached from
the culture plate by keeping the plate on the ice, harvested, and counted using a heamocytometer.
The extent of migration was expressed as the fold change of the number of migrated cells
relative to control cells
Under-Agarose assay
For Under-Agarose assay, 0.7% agarose dissolved in 100% LG was poured into 100-mm
plastic Petri dishes and allowed to solidify. A 2-mm-wide trough was made at the center of the
Petri dish. Entamoeba cells were harvested, numbers were adjusted to 105 amoebae/ml in LG100
was added to the trough. Plates were maintained at 25°C and 37°C for E. invadens and E.
histolytica respectively. Once the cells moved under the agarose gels, their movements were
recorded with time-lapse microscopy, and the motility characteristics were analyzed as
previously described.
Statistical Analysis
Quantitative data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation of a minimum of three
independent experiments. The significance of the experimental data was estimated using
Student’s t-test, and the results were considered statistically significant only if p < 0.05.
Statistical significance is represented as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ns not significant.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acknowledgments
DK is the recipient of Senior Research Fellowship from Indian Council of Medical Research,
India. SKG acknowledge DBT, Govt. of India for partial funding. Authors thank FIST, DST,
Govt. of India for the confocal facility.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing or financial interests.
Author contributions
DK and SKG designed research; DK performed research; DK and SKG wrote the paper.
References
Aguilar-Rojas, A., Olivo-Marin, J.C. and Guillen, N. (2016). The motility of Entamoeba
histolytica: finding ways to understand intestinal amoebiasis. Curr. Opin. Microbiol., 34,
24-30.
Blaser, H., Reichman-Fried, M., Castanon, I., Dumstrei, K., Marlow, F.L., Kawakami, K.,
Solnica-Krezel, L., Heisenberg, C.P. and Raz, E. (2006). Migration of zebrafish
primordial germ cells: a role for myosin contraction and cytoplasmic flow. Dev. Cell, 11,
613-627.
Blazquez, S., Guigon, G., Weber, C., Syan, S., Sismeiro, O., Coppée, J.Y., Labruyère, E. and
Guillén, N. (2008). Chemotaxis of Entamoeba histolytica towards the proinflammatory
cytokine TNF is based on PI3K signalling, cytoskeleton reorganization and the
Galactose/Nacetylgalactosamine lectin activity. Cell. Microbiol. 10, 1676-1686.
Bosgraaf, L., Waijer, A., Engel, R., Visser, A.J., Wessels, D., Soll, D. and van Haastert, P.J.
(2005). RasGEF-containing proteins GbpC and GbpD have differential effects on cell
polarity and chemotaxis in Dictyostelium. J. Cell Sci. 118, 1899-1910.
Charras, G. and Paluch, E. (2008). Blebs lead the way: how to migrate without lamellipodia. Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9, 730.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Chen, Y., Corriden, R., Inoue, Y., Yip, L., Hashiguchi, N., Zinkernagel, A., Nizet, V., Insel, P.A.
and Junger, W.G. (2006). ATP release guides neutrophil chemotaxis via P2Y2 and A3
receptors. Science, 314, 1792-1795.
Diz-Muñoz, A., Krieg, M., Bergert, M., Ibarlucea-Benitez, I., Muller, D.J., Paluch, E. and
Heisenberg, C.P. (2010). Control of directed cell migration in vivo by membrane-tocortex attachment. PLoS biology 8, e1000544.
Dufour, A.C., Olivo-Marin, J.C. and Guillen, N. (2015). Amoeboid movement in protozoan
pathogens. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 46, 128-134.
Fackler, O.T. and Grosse, R., 2008. Cell motility through plasma membrane blebbing. J. Cell
Biol. 181, 879-884.
Fukui, Y., and Inoue, S. (1997). Amoeboid movement anchored by eupodia, new actin-rich
knobby feet in Dictyostelium. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 36, 339–354
Gilchrist, C.A., Moore, E.S., Zhang, Y., Bousquet, C.B., Lannigan, J.A., Mann, B.J. and Petri,
W.A. (2010). Regulation of virulence of Entamoeba histolytica by the URE3-BP
transcription factor. MBio 1, e00057-10.
Krishnan, D. and Ghosh, S.K. (2018). Cellular events of multinucleated giant cells formation
during the encystation of Entamoeba invadens. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 8, 262.
Ledderose, C., Hefti, M.M., Chen, Y., Bao, Y., Seier, T., Li, L., Woehrle, T., Zhang, J. and
Junger, W.G., 2016. Adenosine arrests breast cancer cell motility by A3 receptor
stimulation. Purinergic Signal. 12, 673-685.
Liu, Y.J., Le Berre, M., Lautenschlaeger, F., Maiuri, P., Callan-Jones, A., Heuzé, M., Takaki, T.,
Voituriez, R. and Piel, M. (2015). Confinement and low adhesion induce fast amoeboid
migration of slow mesenchymal cells. Cell 160, 659-672.
Lomakin, A.J., Lee, K.C., Han, S.J., Bui, D.A., Davidson, M., Mogilner, A. and Danuser, G.,
2015. Competition for actin between two distinct F-actin networks defines a bistable
switch for cell polarization. Nat. Cell Biol. 17, 1435–1445.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Manich, M., Hernandez-Cuevas, N., Ospina, J.D., Syan, S., Marchat, L.A., Olivo-Marin, J.C. and
Guillen, N. (2018). Morphodynamics of the actin-rich cytoskeleton in Entamoeba
histolytica. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 8, 179.
Maugis, B., Brugués, J., Nassoy, P., Guillen, N., Sens, P. and Amblard, F. (2010). Dynamic
instability of the intracellular pressure drives bleb-based motility. J. Cell Sci. 123, 38843892.
McCann, C.P., Kriebel, P.W., Parent, C.A. and Losert, W., 2010. Cell speed, persistence and
information transmission during signal relay and collective migration. J. Cell Sci. 123,
1724–1731.
O'Neill, P.R., Castillo-Badillo, J.A., Meshik, X., Kalyanaraman, V., Melgarejo, K. and Gautam,
N. (2018). Membrane flow drives an adhesion-independent amoeboid cell migration
mode. Dev. Cell 46, e4.
Pankov, R., Endo, Y., Even-Ram, S., Araki, M., Clark, K., Cukierman, E., Matsumoto, K. and
Yamada, K.M. (2005). A Rac switch regulates random versus directionally persistent cell
migration. J. Cell Biol. 170, 793-802.
Paňková, K., Rösel, D., Novotný, M. and Brábek, J. (2010). The molecular mechanisms of
transition between mesenchymal and amoeboid invasiveness in tumor cells. Cell. Mol.
Life Sci. 6, 63-71.
Ruprecht, V., Wieser, S., Callan-Jones, A., Smutny, M., Morita, H., Sako, K., Barone, V.,
Ritsch-Marte, M., Sixt, M., Voituriez, R. and Heisenberg, C.P. (2015). Cortical
contractility triggers a stochastic switch to fast amoeboid cell motility. Cell 160, 673-685.
Turner, N.A. and Eichinger, D. (2007). Entamoeba invadens: the requirement for galactose
ligands during encystment. Exp. Parasitol. 116, 467-474.
Uchida, K.S. and Yumura, S., 2004. Dynamics of novel feet of Dictyostelium cells during
migration. J. Cell Sci. 117, 1443-1455.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Vayssié, L., Vargas, M., Weber, C. and Guillén, N. (2004). Double-stranded RNA mediates
homology-dependant gene silencing of γ-tubulin in the human parasite Entamoeba
histolytica. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 138, 21-28.
Wang, Y., Ku, C.J., Zhang, E.R., Artyukhin, A.B., Weiner, O.D., Wu, L.F. and Altschuler, S.J.,
2013. Identifying network motifs that buffer front-to-back signaling in polarized
neutrophils. Cell Rep. 3, 1607-1616.
Xu, J., Wang, F., Van Keymeulen, A., Herzmark, P., Straight, A., Kelly, K., Takuwa, Y.,
Sugimoto, N., Mitchison, T. and Bourne, H.R. (2003). Divergent signals and cytoskeletal
assemblies regulate self-organizing polarity in neutrophils. Cell 114, 201-214.
Zaki, M., Andrew, N. and Insall, R.H. (2006). Entamoeba histolytica cell movement: a central
role for self-generated chemokines and chemorepellents. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103,
18751-18756.
Zatulovskiy, E., Tyson, R., Bretschneider, T. and Kay, R.R. (2014). Bleb-driven chemotaxis of
Dictyostelium cells. J. Cell Biol. 204, 1027-1044.
Zengel, P., Nguyen-Hoang, A., Schildhammer, C., Zantl, R., Kahl, V. and Horn, E. (2011). μSlide Chemotaxis: a new chamber for long-term chemotaxis studies. BMC Cell Biol 12,
21.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figures

Fig. 1. Pentoxifylline (Ptx) induced stable bleb driven polarized morphology in Entamoeba. (A)
A)
Normal and polarized morphology of E. invadens (Ei) and E. histolytica (Eh). (B) Circularity and (C)
C)
aspect ratio before and after Ptx treatment. (D) The cytoplasm of polarized form was divided into a fluid
id
endoplasm and a gelled ectoplasm as shown by the speed of particles (coloured tracks) compared to the
he
cell (red). (E, F) In the polarized form, actin was found mainly in the uroid and subcortical regions. Actin
tin
fluorescence intensity decreased towards the leading edge, and it was mostly devoid of F-actin. The early
rly
polarized form showed actin-based adhesion structures on the ventral side of the cell (E), but they
ey
disappeared afterward (F). (G) F-actin scars observed at the leading edge of cells changing direction. (H))
Cross-section of the leading edge. Scale bars: 10 μm.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 2. Motility of pentoxifylline (Ptx) induced polarized morphology. (A) Velocity and (B) Directness
ess
E. histolytica and E. invadens trophozoites in the fresh growth medium, in old medium and after Ptx
tx
treatment. (C) The tracks of randomly chosen Eh and Ei trophozoites before, and after Ptx treatment. (D))
Transwell migration assay showing chemokinetic nature of Ptx. Ptx dose-dependently increased migration
on
but at 10mM Ptx cell aggregation in upper well reduced migration. (E) Ptx increased the chemotaxis of
serum-starved cells towards serum-containing medium. (G) Ptx dose-dependently increased cell
ell
aggregation in growth media. (H) Encystation medium and Ptx together formed cell aggregates at low cell
ell
density and cyst formation inside such aggregates shown by CFW staining (blue). Scale bar: 100 µm.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 3. Morphological changes in response to pentoxifylline (Ptx). (A) In presence of 1 mM Ptx,
tx,
adherent E. invadens trophozoites (a, a’) formed lamellipodial driven form (b, b’ to d, d’) followed by
adherent bleb driven form (e, e’ to g, g’) and finally the non-adherent stable-bleb driven form (h, h’).
’).
(Upper panel: actin + nucleus, lower panel: DIC). (B) The change in cell speed with time after Ptx
tx
treatment. (C) In the presence of 10 mM Ptx, adherent E. histolytica trophozoites (a, a’) formed multiple
le
blebs on the surface (b, b’) and then formed the stable bleb morphology (c, c’). (D) Ptx dose-dependently
tly
reduced cell adhesion. (E) Velocity and (F) Directness during motility under the agarose with and without
ut
Ptx. (G) The polarized cells moved collectively in a head to tail alignment under the agarose. Scale bar:
ar:
50 µm. (H) Plasma membrane staining of control and polarized cells with CellMask Orange (CMO). (I))
Membrane proteins stained with fluorescent concanavalin A in control and polarized morphology. Scale
ale
bar: 10 µm.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 4. Adenosine induces opposite motility characteristics to pentoxifylline. Comparison of (A))
Velocity and (B) Directness of control, adenosine treated and Ptx treated E. invadens (Ei) and E.
histolytica (Eh). (C) The migratory tracks of adenosine treated cells. (D) Multiple protrusions on the
he
adenosine treated cells. (E) Actin staining showing the presence of a large number of blebs (arrow head)
d)
all over the cells. (F) Adenosine binding to Entamoeba adenosine receptor activates frontness and
nd
produces multiple leading edges causing the cell to move in multiple directions. (G) Ptx binding activates
tes
the backness which then confines front to a single position and the cell moves in a single direction. (H))
Comparison of motility using migratory tracks showed that the movement in growth media contained
ed
patterns of both pentoxifylline and adenosine- induced motility. Scale bar: 10 µm.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figures

Fig. S1. Cellular localization of F-actin in E. invadens and E. histolytica trophozoites. (A) In E.
invadens trophozoites, actin is found as stress fibers at the ventral side of the cells and phagocytic and
nd
pinocytic invaginations (a, b, c). In some cases podosome rosettes were observed (d, e). (B) In E.
histolytica it was found as stress fibers (a), phagocytic and pinocytic invaginations (b), podosomes (c) and
nd
podosome rosettes. Scale bar: 5 µm.

Fig. S2. Lamellipodial motility. Lamellipodia based motility which is characterized by actin rich
ch
protrusions. The side view of cell is across the drawn line. Scale bar: 5 µm.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S3. Intermediate morphological stages during the amoeboid transition identified by changes in
F-actin localization. (A) In the un-polarized cells actin is found in the phagocytic and pinocytic
tic
invaginations. Within 1 hour of pentoxifylline treatment (1 mM) lamellipodia started appearing and the
he
phagocytic invaginations started disappearing. Lamellipodia became very prominent by 4 hours and no
phagocytic invaginations were observed. (B) By 4-6 hours as the cell became elongated, the lamellipodia
ia
disappeared and blebs appeared. These cells had large number of actin dots on their ventral surface which
ch
could be adhesion structures. Scale bar: 10 µm.

Fig. S4. Polarized morphology fluid filled hyaline cap. (A, B) When exposed to continuous stress
ss
Entamoeba formed an amoeboid form with fluid filled hyaline cap at the leading edge containing no actin
tin
(C). Scale bar: 10 µm.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Movies

Supplementary Movie 1. Morphological and motility changes induced by Pentoxifylline.

The cytoplasm of polarized form was divided into a fluid endoplasm and a
gelled ectoplasm as shown by the speed of particles (coloured tracks) compared to the cell (red).

Supplementary Movie 2.

Supplementary Movie 3. Motility pattern of unpolarized and polarized cells of

.

tracks

E. invadens shown by cell

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Movie 4. Motility pattern of unpolarized and polarized cells of
cell tracks

E. histolytica shown by

.

Supplementary Movie 5. The pentoxifylline induced cell aggregates was galactose ligand mediated as
they were dispersed by 10 mM Galactose.

Supplementary Movie 6. Cell polarization in response to encystation media.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Movie 7. Migration of polarized morphology towards smaller aggregates response to
encystation media.

Supplementary Movie 8. Lamellipodial motility during early stages of cell polarization.

Supplementary Movie 9. The polarized morphology did not show any cell adhesion causing it to slip
during movement.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/683813; this version posted June 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Movie 10.

The polarized cells moved collectively in a head to tail alignment under the
agarose.

Supplementary Movie 11. Motility pattern of adenosine treated cells of

Supplementary Movie 12.

E. invadens shown by cell tracks.

When exposed to continuous stress Entamoeba formed an amoeboid form with
fluid filled hyaline cap at the leading edge

