bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sisterless A is required for the activation of Sex lethal in the germline
Raghav Goyal1, Ellen Baxter1, Mark Van Doren1,*
1Department of Biology,

Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD, 21218

USA
*Corresponding

author: vandoren@jhu.edu

ABSTRACT
In Drosophila, sex determination in somatic cells has been well-studied and is under the control
of the switch gene Sex lethal (Sxl), which is activated in females by the presence of two X
chromosomes. Though sex determination is regulated differently in the germline versus the soma,
Sxl is also necessary and sufficient for the female identity in germ cells. Loss of Sxl function in the
germline results in ovarian germline tumors, a characteristic of male germ cells developing in a
female soma. Further, XY (male) germ cells expressing Sxl are able to produce eggs when
transplanted into XX (female) somatic gonads, demonstrating that Sxl is also sufficient for female
sexual identity in the germline. As in the soma, the presence of two X chromosomes is sufficient
to activate Sxl in the germline, but the mechanism for “counting” X chromosomes in the germline
is thought to be different from the soma. Here we have explored this mechanism at both cis- and
trans- levels. Our data support the model that the Sxl “establishment” promoter (SxlPE) is activated
in a female-specific manner in the germline, as in the soma, but that the timing of SxlPE activation,
and the DNA elements that regulate SxlPE are different from those in the soma. Nevertheless, we
find that the X chromosome-encoded gene sisterless A (sisA), which helps activate Sxl in the soma,
is also essential for Sxl activation in the germline. Loss of sisA function leads to loss of Sxl
expression in the germline, and to ovarian tumors and germline loss. These defects can be rescued

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

by the expression of Sxl, demonstrating that sisA lies upstream of Sxl in germline sex
determination. We conclude that sisA acts as an X chromosome counting element in both the soma
and the germline, but that additional factors that ensure robust, female-specific expression of Sxl
in the germline remain to be discovered.

INTRODUCTION
Sex determination influences the development of many different tissues, but is particularly
important in the germline to control the production of either sperm or eggs. While in some species
somatic sex is sufficient to determine germline sex via inductive signaling, in flies and humans,
the sex chromosome karyotype also plays a role intrinsically in the germline. Since a failure to
match germline and somatic sex leads to defects in gametogenesis, understanding how intrinsic
sex determination is regulated in the germline is important for our understanding of gonad
development, reproductive biology, and hence human health.
Sex determination in Drosophila is under the control of the switch gene Sex lethal (Sxl)
which is activated in females by the presence of two X chromosomes [1–11]. Sxl is both necessary
and sufficient for the female sexual identity of somatic cells [3,6,12–19]. Expression of Sxl in the
soma is regulated by two different promoters [20,21]. The Sxl “establishment promoter” (SxlPE)
is sex-specific and is activated in the presence of two X chromosomes [2]. Default splicing of the
SxlPE transcript produces a pulse of ‘Early’ Sxl protein starting at embryonic nuclear cycle 12.
Later, at nuclear cycle 14, dosage compensation equalizes X chromosome expression in males and
females and so X chromosomes can no longer be counted. Thus, there is a transition to a second
“maintenance promoter,” SxlPM, which is activated in both sexes [20,21]. The transcript from
SxlPM requires alternative splicing regulated by the early Sxl protein (only made in females) in

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

order to produce more ‘Late’ Sxl protein, creating an auto-regulatory loop that maintains Sxl
expression in females [3]. The initial, female-specific activation of SxlPE in the soma is in direct
response to a diploid dose of X-linked Signaling Elements (XSEs) – genes on the X chromosome
that activate SxlPE when present in two copies, but not one. The somatic XSEs include the
transcription factors Sisterless A (SisA), Sisterless B (SisB) and Runt, along with the JAK/STAT
ligand Unpaired (Upd) [9,22–30].
Unlike sex determination in the soma, which is autonomously dependent on a cell’s sex
chromosome genotype, sex determination in the Drosophila germline is regulated by nonautonomous signals from the soma in addition to the sex chromosome make up of the germline
(reviewed in [31]). In order for proper gametogenesis to occur, the “sex” of the germ cells has to
match the sex of the soma. For example, XX germ cells developing in a male soma result in a testis
with a severely atrophic germline [32–45], while XY germ cells developing in a female soma
produce an ovary with a tumorous germline (“ovarian tumor”) and a complete failure to produce
eggs [32,46–48]. Similar to the soma, Sxl is both necessary and sufficient for determining the
autonomous component of germline sexual identity. Sxl loss-of-function in the germline results in
ovarian germline tumors, similar to male germ cells developing in a female soma
[32,33,37,39,42,46,48,49]. Further, XY (male) germ cells expressing Sxl are able to produce eggs
when transplanted into XX (female) somatic gonads, demonstrating that Sxl is sufficient for female
sexual identity in the germline as long as the surrounding soma is female [50]. Female-specific Sxl
expression in the germline is dependent on the X chromosome dose: XX germ cells express Sxl
while XY germ cells do not [32,39]. Evidence also indicates that SxlPE is important for femalespecific expression of Sxl in the germline. Transcript data from early germ cells show a Sxl
transcript that matches the SxlPE in the soma [50], and data indicate that the positive auto-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

regulation of Sxl expression that occurs in the soma also acts in the germline [49]. However, the
mechanism for activating Sxl expression in the germline appears to be different from the soma
[33,46,50–54]. When germ cells simultaneously heterozygous for Sxl and the somatic XSEs sisA,
sisB, and runt, a genotype that masculinizes somatic cells, were transplanted into wildtype female
embryos, they were still able to undergo oogenesis indicating that the germ cells were not
masculinized [52]. Thus, different XSEs, or at least a different combination of XSEs are required
to activate Sxl expression in the germline.
Here we utilize a combination of approaches to investigate the female-specific activation
of Sxl in the germline. Using RNA FISH and CRISPR-tagging of specific Sxl isoforms, we show
that SxlPE is activated in a female-specific manner in the germline, but that the timing of its
activation relative to SxlPM is different from in the soma. Using promoter/enhancer reporter
constructs, we demonstrate that the regulatory sequences required for female-specific activation
of SxlPE in the germline are different from those required in the soma. Lastly, we show that the
somatic XSE, sisA, is also required for female-specific expression of Sxl in the germline. Together
our data support a model in which sisA acts as a germline XSE, but that additional factors, different
from the somatic XSEs, are also important for Sxl activation in the female germline.

RESULTS
Analysis of Sex lethal transcription in PGCs
Since the activation of SxlPE appears to be the key sex-specific decision in germline sex
determination, similar to what is observed in the soma, we first decided to examine when and
how SxlPE is activated in the germline. We hypothesized that, as in the soma, SxlPE would be
activated prior to SxlPM. To study this, we performed RNA Fluorescent in situ Hybridization

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(FISH) using oligopaints to examine nascent RNA (nRNA) being transcribed from SxlPE and
SxlPM at the Sxl locus. As SxlPM is upstream of SxlPE, we generated one set of probes that
exclusively targets SxlPM-derived transcripts (PM-probe, Cy5, false color in Green), and another
that targets the common transcript from both SxlPE and SxlPM (PE+PM-probe, Cy3, Red) (Fig.
S1A). Thus, if SxlPE alone is active, we should observe signal from the PE+PM-probe (Red) but
not the PM-probe (Green), while if SxlPM is active we should observe signal from both probes
(and cannot make a conclusion about SxlPE).

In the soma, female-specific activation of SxlPE is activated prior to expression of SxlPM.
Consistent with this, in the female soma we initially observed RNA FISH signal as fluorescent
nuclear foci only from the PE+PM-probe but not the PM-probe, indicating that only SxlPE was
activated (Fig. S1C-S1C’’). Subsequently, we observed signals from both probes, indicating that
SxlPM had been activated (Data not shown). Conversely, in the male soma, we always observed a
signal from both the PM- and PE+PM-probes simultaneously (Fig. S1B-S1B’’), indicating that
that SxlPE is not expressed (or does not precede SxlPM activation). These data are consistent with
the previous understanding of Sxl activation in the soma - that SxlPE is on initially only in females
followed by SxlPM activation in both sexes.
In contrast, in both female and male germ cells, we only observed RNA FISH signals from
both the PM-probes and the PE+PM-probes simultaneously and never from the PE+PM-probe
alone (Note: while we observe two foci for Sxl nRNA in XX somatic cells as expected, we only
observe a single focus in XX germ cells suggesting that the X chromosomes may be paired in the
germline). This indicates that SxlPE is not activated before SxlPM in the germline (Fig. 1A-1B’’).
The simultaneous expression of PM-probes and PE+PM-probes occurred in a subset of female
germ cells at stage 5 (11.1%), and increased to 100 % of germ cells by stage 11 (Fig. 1C). Similarly,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

both probe sets were expressed simultaneously in a subset of male germ cells, starting at stage 5
(7%) and increased to 100% of germ cells by stage 11 (Fig. 1D). The gradual increase in the
number of cells expressing SxlPM transcripts is similar to what is observed in the soma [21]. We
conclude that, unlike in female somatic cells, SxlPE does not precede SxlPM activity in the
germline, but instead is likely activated either simultaneously with, or later than, SxlPM. This is
still consistent with a model where ‘Early Sxl’ protein produced from default splicing of the SxlPEderived transcript is required for productive RNA splicing of the SxlPM-derived transcript, and
thus for the subsequent production of ‘Late Sxl’ protein; even if SxlPM is active prior to SxlPE
activation, these transcripts would not be able to produce Sxl protein until SxlPE is activated.

SxlPE activity in the germline requires different cis-regulatory elements than in the soma
We next wanted to identify if and when SxlPE is activated in the germline, and also to compare
the cis-regulatory logic of SxlPE activation in the germline to that in the soma. To do this we used
transcriptional reporter constructs specific for SxlPE. We first tested a SxlPE-EGFP transcriptional
reporter that contains the 1.5kb somatic enhancer immediately upstream of SxlPE (SxlPE-1.5kb),
which had previously been reported to recapitulate both somatic and germline SxlPE activity
[50,74]. Contrary to previous reports, we could not observe EGFP expression from SxlPE-1.5kb
in developing PGCs, even though SxlPE-1.5kb showed sex-specific EGFP expression in somatic
cells (Data not shown). Thus, we conclude that the cis-regulatory region sufficient for sex-specific
expression of SxlPE in the soma is insufficient for SxlPE expression in the germline. We next
extended the SxlPE transcriptional reporter to contain the entire 5.2kb genomic sequence upstream
of SxlPE (but excluding SxlPM) (SxlPE-5.2kb, Fig. S2A). Once again, even though we observed
female-specific nuclear EGFP expression from the SxlPE-5.2kb reporter in somatic cells, we found
no evidence of EGFP expression in the germline of either male or female embryos up to stage 15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Fig. S2B, S2F). To accommodate the possibility of a delay between the activation of the SxlPE5.2kb transgene and our ability to detect EGFP expression (as is observed in the somatic cells), we
also characterized its expression at later stages of development. However, we failed to observe any
germline EGFP expression at the first, second, or third larval instar (L1, L2, or L3 respectively)
stages (Fig. S2B-S2I). Thus, SxlPE-5.2kb also does not contain the cis-regulatory elements
sufficient for SxlPE activity in the germline. Interestingly, SxlPE-5.2kb exhibited sex-specific
EGFP expression in all observed somatic cells until L1, which persisted in the somatic gonad until
L2 (Fig. S2B-S3F). This was unexpected as SxlPE has been reported to shut off in the soma
following activation of dosage compensation in the early embryo. Our observations could be due
to the stability of the EGFP reporter used or may point at a possible mechanism that keeps SxlPE
active even after X chromosomes can no longer be counted.
We next generated a SxlPE-EGFP reporter that includes the 5.2kb sequence discussed
above, as well as an additional 5kb downstream of SxlPE up to the start of Exon 4 (Fig. S3A)
(SxlPE-10.2kb). Flies carrying this transgene showed sex-specific nuclear EGFP expression in the
soma by stage 15 of embryogenesis (Fig. S2J-S2K). Excitingly, we also observed sex-specific
nuclear EGFP expression in the female germline during the first larval instar (L1) stage (Fig. 2A2B’). Together, these data suggest that SxlPE activity in the germline is sex-specific as it is in the
soma, and that it requires additional cis-regulatory elements that lie downstream of SxlPE. Further,
germline SxlPE activation appears to occur later in development than previously thought (L1),
although it is possible that there is a delay between when SxlPE is actually activated and when we
are first able to detect EGFP expression.

Late Sex lethal protein is expressed only after SxlPE is activated in the germline

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Since SxlPE is sex-specifically activated in the germline, we hypothesized that, like in the soma,
Early Sxl protein derived from SxlPE would be required to produce Late Sxl protein derived from
SxlPM. To study expression of the Early and Late Sxl proteins in the germline, we used CRISPRCas9 genome editing to separately tag Sxl’s Early and Late protein products. We inserted a 2x
human influenza hemagglutinin (2xHA) epitope at the N-terminus of the coding sequence of exon
E1, which is specific to the mRNA produced by SxlPE, to generate a HA:SxlE1 ‘Early (E) Sxl’
tag (Fig. S3A). Separately, we inserted a 3xFLAG epitope at the N-terminus of the coding
sequence of exon L2, which is specific to the mRNA produced by SxlPM, to generate a
FLAG:SxlL2 ‘Late (L) Sxl’ tag (Fig. S3A) (Note: these tags are in separate stocks). Both of these
tagged alleles of Sxl appear wildtype for Sxl function.
Using anti-HA antibody, we were able to observe female-specific Sxl Early protein in
somatic cells beginning at stage 9, and this expression was primarily nuclear, consistent with Sxl’s
role in alternative splicing. Early Sxl expression in the soma persisted until the L1 stage (Fig. S3BS3G), and no expression was observed after this time. In addition to the somatic gonadal tissue,
we confirmed Early Sxl expression in the L1 stage in another somatic tissue, the developing gut
(Fig. S3H-S3I). The continued presence of Early Sxl protein at the L1 stage is consistent with what
we observed with the SxlPE-10.2kb reporter and suggests that Early Sxl protein is expressed, or at
the very least maintained, much later in development than previously thought, and well after
dosage compensation has been initiated. To our surprise, we were unable to detect anti-HA
immunolabeling in the developing germline at any stage examined (embryo, and L1-L2). A low
level of signal was observed in the cytoplasm of the germline (arrows in Fig. 2C-D’), but this was
not clearly different between males and females, and may represent background staining.
Detection of Early Sxl in the soma required tyramide amplification of the antibody signal, and so

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Early Sxl protein may be expressed at very low levels, which was undetectable in the germline
even after tyramide amplification. Regardless, this prevents us from making a conclusion about
Early Sxl protein expression in the germline.
Using the FLAG-tagged Late Sxl allele (FLAG:SxlL2), we observed anti-FLAG
immunolabeling in female germ cells starting at the second larval instar (L2) stage (Fig. 2E-2F’).
Female germ cells remained positive for anti-FLAG labeling through to adulthood and expression
patterns were consistent with anti-Sxl antibody labeling (Fig. S3J-S3M’), which can be used to
visualize Sxl in the germline starting at the third larval instar stage and onwards (Data not shown).
No anti-FLAG immunoreactivity was observed in male germ cells. Though our RNA FISH
analysis indicates that expression of SxlPM begins in the germline at stage 5, and is active in most
germ cells by stage 10 (Fig 1C), the SxlPE reporter (SxlPE-10.2kb) is only detectable in L1 germ
cells (Fig 2B), indicating that SxlPE expression begins much later in the germ cells than the soma.
This is consistent with our ability to detect Late Sxl protein only in L2 germ cells; if Early Sxl
protein is required to splice SxlPM transcripts to produce Late Sxl protein, then we would expect
to detect Late Sxl protein only after SxlPE is active in the germline.

sisterless A loss-of-function in the female germline results in ovarian tumors and germline
loss
We next wanted to investigate the trans-acting factors that regulate Sxl in the germline. As
discussed above, previous work indicates that germ cells use a different combination of XSEs than
the soma. However, it remains possible that some of the individual somatic XSEs contribute to the
X chromosome counting mechanism in the germline, perhaps along with unknown germlinespecific XSEs. To investigate the potential role of the individual somatic XSEs in germline Sxl

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

activation, we knocked down their expression specifically in the germline using RNAi (nanosGAL4 ; UAS-sisA RNAi, UAS-sisB RNAi, UAS-sisC RNAi, or UAS-runt RNAi). We then
immunolabeled adult gonads to look for phenotypes resembling Sxl loss of function, such as the
formation of ovarian tumors. We found that RNAi knockdown of sisB, sisC, or runt in the germline
did not result in any aberrant ovarian phenotypes (Fig. S4A-S4D’). Germ cells in these ovaries
appear to differentiate properly as indicated by the progressive increase in the size of their nuclei,
characteristic of polyploid nurse cells during oogenesis.
In contrast, sisA germline RNAi (sisA RNAi 1) resulted in ovaries that exhibited ovarian
germ cell tumors (Fig. 3C-3C’, S5C, S5D) similar to those observed in Sxl LOF (Fig. 3B-3B’,
S5C) or when XY germ cells develop in an XX soma [32,46–48]. In addition, we also observed a
partial loss of germline (Data not shown). To confirm that this phenotype was not due to off-target
effects sometimes seen with RNAi, we generated an additional UAS-sisA RNAi transgene (sisA
RNAi 2) (Fig. S5D). Expression of this RNAi line in the germline also produced ovarian germ cell
tumors (Fig. S5B-S5B’, S5D), but these tumors were less severe and occurred with lower
frequency (Fig. S5C). An additional UAS-sisA RNAi transgene did not result in any observable
phenotypes (Fig. S5D, Data not shown). When 2 copies of nanos-GAL4 were used to drive
increased expression of UAS-sisA RNAi 1, we observed severe germline loss resulting in germ
cell-less ovaries (Fig. 3D-3D’, S5C) and subsequent infertility. This is similar to what is observed
in strong alleles of other sex determination genes such as ovo and ovarian tumor (otu), as well as
when XY germ cells develop in an XX soma [40,75–79].
Next we wanted to investigate the null phenotype of sisA in the germline. Since
homozygous sisA mutant females and hemizygous sisA mutant males are embryonic lethal [57],
we generated sisA germline-specific loss of function mutations using tissue-specific CRISPR-Cas9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

genome editing (“G0 CRISPR”, [69–71]). Male flies that ubiquitously express either 2 or 4
different guide RNAs (gRNAs) targeting the sisA gene region (Fig. S5D) were mated to females
expressing Cas9 in the germline under the nanos promoter. F1 females from this cross also
exhibited ovarian tumors as well as germ cell-less ovaries (Fig. 3E-3G’, S5C), similar to what was
observed using RNAi (Fig. 3C-D’). Taken together, these data indicate that sisA is required for
female germline differentiation and maintenance. Additionally, germline sisA loss of function is
similar to Sxl loss of function, suggesting sisA is a candidate XSE for SxlPE activation in the
germline.

sisterless A expression in the embryonic germline precedes Sex lethal activation
In order for sisA to act as an XSE for activating Sxl in the germline, it should be expressed
zygotically in germ cells prior to sex-specific activation of SxlPE in the germline. It has been
reported that sisA mRNA is excluded from the nuclei that bud off to form pole cells [28]. However,
reported microarray expression data demonstrates that sisA transcripts are enriched in PGCs at the
1-to-3 hour time point [80]. To observe zygotic transcription of sisA in the germline we utilized
RNA FISH against nRNA being transcribed from the sisA locus. As a validation of our approach,
we observed signals from sisA RNA FISH probes as fluorescent nuclear foci in somatic nuclei
starting at nuclear cycle 8 (Fig. S6A-S6A’) and also at later stages in yolk cell nuclei, consistent
with previous reports (Fig. S6B-S6B’) [28,57]. Interestingly, we were able to detect sisA RNA
FISH signals in PGCs at stages 3-6 (3-5 shown in Fig. 4A-4C’). At later stages, the strong
expression levels of sisA RNA in yolk cell nuclei made it difficult to distinguish fluorescent nuclear
foci in neighboring PGCs. This suggests that sisA is indeed zygotically transcribed in the early

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

embryonic germline. We quantified this expression in sexed embryos and found that sisA is
expressed in the PGCs of both sexes (Fig. 4D).
We next wanted to observe SisA protein in the germline. Since no antibodies against SisA
have been generated to date, we used CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing to insert a super-folder Green
Fluorescent Protein (sfGFP) epitope tag at the N-terminus of the SisA protein (sfGFP:SisA) (Fig.
S6C). Importantly, the epitope tag does not appear to affect SisA function as neither females that
were homozygous for this allele, nor hemizygous males, demonstrated lethality, sterility, or had
any observable gonadal phenotypes (Fig. S6D-S6E’). Furthermore, anti-GFP immunolabeling is
restricted to the nucleus, which is consistent with the predicted function of SisA as a bZIP
transcription factor. In somatic cells, we observed expression of sfGFP:SisA in pre-blastoderm
syncytial nuclei (Fig. S6F-S6F’) and in yolk cell nuclei (Fig. S6G-S6G’), consistent with
previously reported somatic SisA expression and our observations using RNA FISH.
Excitingly, similar to what we observed using RNA FISH, sfGFP:SisA expression was also
observed in PGCs at stage 3, 4, and 5 (Fig. 4E-4G’). Additionally, this expression persisted in
PGCs until stage 10 (Fig. S6H-S6H’). This late expression of SisA is consistent with its potential
role in acting as an XSE for SxlPE activation in the germline. Like with sisA RNA, we were only
able to detect sfGFP:SisA in a subset of PGCs in any one embryo. sfGFP:SisA expression was not
observed later in first, second, or third larval instar stages, in either the germline or the soma (Data
not shown). We conclude that SisA is expressed in the embryonic germline and this expression
precedes the activation of SxlPE, which is consistent with a role as a germline XSE for the
activation of Sxl.

sisterless A is required for expression of Sxl in the female germline

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

If sisA acts as an activator of Sxl in the female germline, we would expect a loss of Sxl expression
upon loss of sisA function. Strikingly, using anti-Sxl immunolabeling, we observed that the germ
cell tumors in sisA RNAi ovaries had a strong reduction in Sxl expression when compared with
controls (Fig. 5A-5C’, S7A-S7B’). Tumorous germ cells that were mutant for sisA using G0
CRISPR also had lower levels of Sxl expression (Fig. S7C-S7D’). Somatic Sxl expression
remained unaffected in both cases. To examine Sxl expression specifically in those germ cells that
express highest levels of Sxl (i.e. the early, undifferentiated germline), we performed sisA RNAi
in the germline of bag of marbles (bam) mutants, which are enriched for germ cells robustly
expressing Sxl (Fig 5D-5D’). We found that knocking down sisA using RNAi led to a dramatic
reduction of Sxl antibody labeling in the germ cells of bam mutant ovaries (Fig. 5E-5E’),
demonstrating that knocking down sisA leads to a loss of Sxl expression in the germline.
These data show that sisA is necessary for Sxl expression in the germline, and we next
wanted to test whether ectopic expression of sisA would be sufficient to promote Sxl expression.
Expression of UAS-Sxl in the male germline does not prevent spermatogenesis and testes of this
genotype appear wildtype (Fig. 6B-6B’). Similarly, the expression of the UAS-sisA transgene in
the male germline does not affect the germline. In addition, expression of UAS-sisA does not lead
to detectible expression of Sxl in the testis (Fig. 6C-6C’). This indicates that the overexpression of
sisA alone is not sufficient to activate Sxl in the germline and that, like in the soma, additional
XSEs are required to activate SxlPE in the germline.
If sisA is required for Sxl expression, and this is its primary role in the germline, then
expression of Sxl should bypass the need for sisA in the germline and rescue the germline defects
observed with sisA LOF. To test this we expressed Sxl under the control of a female germlinespecific promoter (otu) in a sisA LOF background. We used the strongest sisA loss of function

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

condition (2x nos-GAL4 > sisA RNAi 1) which results in severe germline loss, tumor formation,
and infertility (Fig. 6D-6D’, S7E). Excitingly, 50% of sisA RNAi + otu > Sxl ovaries exhibited a
wildtype germline morphology (Fig. 6E-6E’, S7E) and were fertile, suggesting Sxl was able to
provide a robust rescue. Another 20% of these ovaries showed a partial rescue of the germline, but
contained pervasive germline tumors (Fig. S7E). Taken together, these data indicate that sisA is
necessary, but not sufficient, for Sxl expression in the female germline and that activation of Sxl is
the primary germline role for sisA.

DISCUSSION
Note: in order to diseminate these data to the community as quickly as possible, we are submitting
this manuscript with a greatly reduced discussion which will be expanded in the final version of
the paper.

The sex-specific activation of SxlPE in the germline
Previous evidence indicated that sex-specific activation of SxlPE is important for Sxl activation in
germline, as it is in the soma. Transcripts from the SxlPE promoter were detected in early germ
cells [50] and positive autoregulation of Sxl was observed in the germline [49], suggesting that the
same mechanism of Early Sxl protein from SxlPE being required for splicing of SxlPM transcripts
occurs in germ cells and soma. Our data also support this model. Using a SxlPE transcriptional
reporter, we found that SxlPE is active in female germ cells by L1 (Fig. 2B-2B’). Further, though
we observed activation of SxlPM during embryogenesis by RNA FISH (Fig. 1B-1B’’, 1C), we
only observed expression of Late Sxl protein in the germ cells at L2 (Fig. 2F-2F’), after we
observed activation of SxlPE. These data are consistent with the somatic mode of Sxl regulation
occurring also in the germline, with SxlPM transcripts being unable to produce Sxl protein until

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

after sex-specific activation of SxlPE. One difference between the germline and the soma appears
to be the timing of SxlPE activation relative to that of SxlPM. In the soma, SxlPE is activated prior
to SxlPM, while in the germline, there is no time at which we detect SxlPE alone by RNA FISH
(Fig. 1C), and SxlPE is activated later in development, as judged by the SxlPE transcriptional
reporter. This is still consistent with the autoregulatory model for Sxl activation, but suggests that
the control of SxlPE activation is different in the germline than the soma.
We also found that the cis-regulatory elements that regulate female-specific SxlPE
expression in the germ cells are different from those in the soma. Previously, it was reported that
a 1.5kb genomic fragment just upstream of SxlPE was sufficient to regulate female-specific
expression in both the soma [20,74] and the germline [50]. However, we were unable to observe
germline expression from this SxlPE reporter. We only observed activation of SxlPE when we
included a much larger genomic region, including sequences both upstream and downstream of
SxlPE (Fig. S2A, 2B-2B’). These data do not exclude sequences within the 1.5 kb region upstream
of SxlPE being important for its activation in the germline, but indicate that these sequences are
not sufficient for activation, as they are in the soma. Similarly, sequences outside this 1.5 kb region
may also augment expression in the soma. The fact that the cis-regulatory logic of SxlPE is
different in the germline than the soma is consistent with previous work demonstrating that the
combination of trans-acting factors, the XSEs, that activate SxlPE in the germline are different
from the soma [33,52,81]. Future work will involve identifying the specific enhancers that regulate
SxlPE expression in the germline, which could in turn help identify additional germline transregulators of Sxl. In summary, we have shown that the cis-regulatory logic of Sxl activation is
different between the germline and the soma, however, the key step in determining the sex of both
these cell types is the female-specific activation of SxlPE.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Finally, a surprising observation from our study was the presence of sex-specific SxlPE
transcriptional reporter activity, as well as Early Sxl protein, in somatic cells as late as the L1 larval
stage (Fig. S2F-S2G, S3E-S3F, S3I). In order for XSEs to act, they need to be expressed at higher
levels in XX cells than XY cells. Once MSL-mediated X chromosome dosage compensation is
initiated at the late blastoderm stage, there should no longer be a difference in XSE expression
between XX and XY cells. This is the entire logic behind the autoregulatory model for Sxl
expression; SxlPE is activated by XSEs only in females, and is then turned off prior to the time
when dosage compensation equalizes XSE expression. Why then is Early Sxl protein and SxlPE
activity detected at the L1 stage? One possibility is that both the GFP reporter and the Early Sxl
protein are stable and perdure to the L1 stage. An alternative possibility, however, is that some
other mechanism, such as feed-forward autoregulation within the sex determination system,
maintains SxlPE activity much longer than previously thought. Interestingly, Sxl contains a highlyconserved binding site for the Doublesex transcription factor which could facilitate such an XSEindependent feed-forward regulation of SxlPE [82].

sisterless A as an activator of Sxl
While the combination of XSEs at work in the germline may be different than in the soma, our
data also indicate that at least one XSE, SisA, is shared between them. Loss of sisA in the germline
leads to the formation of germline tumors (and germline loss) (Fig. 3C-3D’, 3F-3G’, S5B-S5C) as
well as a loss of Sxl expression in the female germline (Fig. 5C-5E’, S7B-S7D’). Additionally, we
report that sisA is expressed in the germline prior to SxlPE (Fig. 4) and that the expression of Sxl
is able to rescue the sisA loss-of-function phenotype in the germline (Fig. 6D-6E’, S7E), indicating

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

that sisA lies upstream of Sxl in the germline sex determination cascade. Taken together, these data
indicate that SisA is a germline activator of Sxl and may act as a germline XSE.
It remains to be seen whether SisA acts directly on Sxl in the germline or acts on other Sxl
regulators, such as ovo or otu. Current thinking is that SisA is a transcriptional activator for SxlPE
in the soma [9,28], and the simplest model would be that it acts similarly in the germline. However,
the gap in timing we observe between sisA expression in the germline (Stage 3-10, Fig. 4E-4G’,
S6H-S6H’) and our ability to detect SxlPE activation (L1 larvae, Fig. 2B-2B’) leaves open the
possibility that there are intermediate steps between sisA and SxlPE. SisA is a somewhat unusual
leucine zipper protein and its DNA binding activity and specificity have never been determined.
Thus, there is no evidence that it regulates SxlPE directly in the soma or germline. The transient
nature of SisA expression during embryogenesis makes it difficult to conduct chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments under native conditions. Instead, we expressed
GFP:SisA in Drosophila S2 tissue culture cells for ChIP analysis, but this experiment also did not
identify SisA genomic binding sites. Lastly, yeast two-hybrid analysis has indicated that SisA
might physically interact with the basic-helix-loop-helix protein Daughterless (Da) [83], but coexpressing GFP:SisA and Da in S2 cells also did not result in an identifiable ChIP signal. Thus,
while our data clearly indicate that sisA is required for activation of Sxl in the germline, and that
this is its primary role in the germline, evidence that SisA is a direct, transcriptional activator of
SxlPE will require identification and study of a SisA-binding enhancer within the Sxl locus.
It is puzzling that Sxl is a critical regulator of both germline and somatic sex determination,
and is regulated by a two-X dose in both cell types, yet its mechanism of activation and its role in
these cell types is so different. It is somewhat simplifying that at least one factor, sisA, is important
for activation of Sxl in both cell types. Yet evidence still suggests that other aspects of Sxl

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

activation in these cells will be different. Further, the most significant Sxl targets in the soma,
transformer for sexual identity and msl-2 for dosage compensation, do not play a role in the
germline [45,47]. Instead, distinct factors such as Phf7 and tdrd5l are regulated by Sxl in the
germline [67,84,85]. It will be interesting to examine how these independent roles for Sxl came to
be, and how conserved each role is in different species.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Fly stocks
The following fly stocks were used: SxlPE-EGFP (BDSC# 24105), SxlPE-EGFP (BDSC# 32565),
vas-Cas9 (BDSC# 51324), vas-Cas9 (BDSC# 56552), alphatub-piggyBac (BDSC# 32070), nosGal4 ([55]), nos-Cas9 (BDSC# 54591), nos-Cas9 (BDSC# 78782), UAS-sisA-RNAi1
(TRiP.HMC03864, BDSC# 55181), UAS-Sxl-RNAi (TRiP.HMS00609, BDSC# 34393), UASsisB-RNAi (TRiP.GL01130, BDSC# 41594), UAS-sisC-RNAi (TRiP.HMS00545, BDSC#
33680), UAS-run-RNAi (TRiP.HMS01186, BDSC# 34707), UAS-mCherry-RNAi control
(BDSC# 35785), bam[1] (Gift from A. Spradling, [56]), bam[delta86] (BDSC# 5427), sisA[5]
(Gift from J. Erickson, [57]), UAS-Sxl (BDSC# 58484), otu-GFP.K10 (BDSC# 29727), otuGFP.SV40 (BDSC# 29729), otu-Sxl (BDSC# 58491). Oregon R flies were used as wildtype flies,
w[1118];Sco/CyO;MKRS/TM6B,Tb,Hu double balancers (Gift from X. Chen) were used for 2 nd
and 3rd chromosome balancing. FM7c was used for X chromosome balancing.

Antibody staining and Tyramide Signal Amplification (TSA)
Adult testes were dissected in 1X PBS and fixed at room temperature for 20 minutes in 4.625%
formaldehyde in PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 (PBTx). Adult ovaries, and larval gonads

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(first, second, and third instar) were dissected in 1X PBS and fixed at room temperature for 20
minutes in 5.25% formaldehyde in PBTx. Blocking and immunostaining was performed as
previously described [58], and samples were mounted in 2.5% DABCO. Embryo collection, fixing,
blocking and staining was performed as described previously [59]. All images were taken with a
Zeiss LSM 700 confocal microscope. The following primary antibodies (sources) and
concentrations were used: chicken anti-Vas 1:10,000 (K. Howard); rabbit anti-Vas 1:10,000 (R.
Lehmann); mouse anti-Sxl 3:100 (M18, DSHB); mouse anti-Fas3 1:50 (7G10, DSHB); rat antiNCad 3:100 (DN-Ex #8, DSHB); mouse anti-Lamin B 1:100 (ADL67.10, DSHB); mouse antiPros 1:10 (MR1A, DSHB); guinea pig anti-TJ 1:1,000 (J. Jemc); rabbit anti-GFP 1:1,000 (ab290,
Abcam); mouse anti-FLAG 1:50 (F3165, Millipore Sigma); rat anti-HA 1:100 (ROAHAHA Clone
3F10, Roche); rabbit anti-HA 1:800 (C29F4 #3724, CST). DSHB: Developmental Studies
Hybridoma Bank; CST: Cell Signaling Technologies. Secondary antibodies were used at 1:500
(Alexa Fluor, Host:Goat, Invitrogen).
TSA was performed using the manufacturer’s protocol (Tyramide SuperBoost Kits with
Alexa Fluor Tyramides, Invitrogen). Larval gonads and embryos were fixed as previously
described (See above). Samples were blocked in 10% Goat Serum for 1 hour at room temperature
followed by incubation with a single primary antibody (target of signal amplification) as
previously described [58,59] overnight at 4C with nutation. Primary antibody was washed off
using 1X PBS and samples were incubated with poly-HRP-conjugated secondary antibody for 1
hour at room temperature. Secondary antibody was washed off using 1X PBS and samples were
incubated in tyramide working solution for 10 minutes at room temperature before stopping the
reaction. Samples were washed with 1X PBS and immunolabeling with TSA was multiplexed with
other antibodies following the standard immunolabeling protocol.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Developmental Staging and Sexing
To obtain stage-specific embryos, embryos were pre-collected overnight on apple juice plates with
fresh yeast paste and discarded to synchronize egg-laying. Embryos were then collected for 2 hours
at 25C after which the flies were removed and the embryos were aged as required. To obtain first
(L1) and second (L2) instar larvae, embryos were aged 20 hours. The plates were cleared of any
larvae that had hatched early. L1 larvae were collected after 4-8 hours. For L2 larvae, the L1 larvae
were transferred to fresh plates with yeast paste and aged for an additional 24 hours. Third instar
(L3) larvae were collected directly from vials. Sex of embryos was determined by counting the
number of Sex lethal or sisterless A RNA FISH signals corresponding to number of X
chromosomes or by somatic EGFP expression using the transcriptional SxlPE-EGFP reporters.
Stage of the embryos was approximately determined by the position of the primordial germ cells
(PGCs). Sex of the first and second larval instar gonads was determined by looking for presence
or absence of a hub using anti-FasIII or anti-NCad immunolabeling. Sex of the third larval instar
gonads was determined by morphology.

Oligopaints Probe Design and Synthesis
Oligopaint probes for RNA FISH were designed using Oligopaints [60–62] by Dr. Kayla Viets
from Dr. Robert Johnston’s laboratory, Department of Biology at Johns Hopkins University. Gene
target sequences (Sex lethal and sisterless A) were run through an open-source bioinformatics
pipeline

made

available

by

the

Wu

lab

at

Harvard

Medical

School

(http://genetics.med.harvard.edu/oligopaints/) to identify sets of 50-bp (Sex lethal) or 30-bp
(sisterless A) optimized probe sequences (libraries) to tile the nascent RNA transcript [63]. Library

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of Cy3-conjugated oligos against sisterless A RNA was ordered individually. Library of oligos
against Sex lethal and its sub-libraries (PM vs. PE+PM probes) were ordered as part of a 90k
oligopool including oligos for other gene targets (Gift from R. Johnston, Johns Hopkins
University). To isolate target-specific probes (Sex lethal), five 19-bp barcording primers, target F
and R; universal (univ) F and R; and sublibrary (sub) F were appended to the 5’ and 3’ ends of
each probe.
PCR using target F and R primers allowed amplification of libraries of probes against target
RNA from oligopool. PCR using sub F and target R primers allowed amplification of sub-libraries
from whole target libraries. PCR using univ F and R primers allowed the conjugation of
fluorophores (Cy3, Cy5), generation of single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) probes as well as addition
of secondary sequences to allow amplification of RNA FISH signal using secondary probes
(conjugated with fluorophores) that bind to primary probes. RNA FISH probes were generated as
previously described [60–62]). Total number of probes per transcript are as follows: sisA RNA –
12 ; SxlPM RNA – 19 ; SxlPE+PM RNA – 36.

RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and immunofluorescence
RNA FISH was performed using modified versions of the protocols described previously [60–63].
Oregon R embryos were collected (after a pre-collection was discarded) on apple juice plates with
fresh yeast paste for 2 hours at 25C and aged as needed. Embryos were collected, rinsed with 1X
PBTx, and dechorionated using 50% bleach for 90 seconds and washed with 1X PBTx. Fixing was
performed in scintillation vials in 50L 10X PBS, 100L 0.25M EGTA, 125L fresh 16%
formaldehyde, 225L Milli-Q H2O, 1L NP-40 (Tergitol solution), and 500L heptane. Embryos
were shaken vigorously by hand for 1 minute, then fixed for 20 minutes at room temperature with

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

gentle agitation. The aqueous phase was removed and the embryos were devitellinized in by adding
500L methanol and vigorous shaking for 2 minutes. Devitellinized embryos were collected
washed three times in methanol. Embryos were rehydrated via 5-minute serial single washes in
75%, 50%, and 25% methanol in 1X PBTx. This was followed by three 5-minute washes in 1X
PBTx and two 15-minute washes in 1X PBTx with 0.2U/L RNase inhibitor. Embryos were
blocked for 1 hour at room temperature in blocking buffer (1X PBTx + Western Blocking Reagent,
1:1) with nutation. They were then incubated in primary antibody diluted in 1X PBTx with 3%
normal goat serum and 0.2U/L RNase inhibitor overnight at 4C with nutation. Primary antibody
was rinsed off followed by three 20-minute washes with 1X PBTx. Embryos were then incubated
with secondary antibody diluted in 1X PBTx with 3% normal goat serum and 0.2U/L RNase
inhibitor for two hours at room temperature. Secondary antibody was rinsed off followed by two
20-minute washes in 1X PBTx and one 20-minute wash in 1X PBS. Embryos were then washed
as follows: four 5-minute washes in 2X SSCT, one 10-minute wash in 20% formamide in 2X
SSCT, one 10-minute wash in 50% formamide in 2X SSCT, one 4-hour wash in 50% formamide
in 2X SSCT at 37C with shaking. Embryos were incubated with primary probe at a concentration
of 5 pmol fluorophore/L in hybridization buffer (50% formamide in 2X SSCT with 10% dextran
sulfate (w/v) + 0.2U/L RNase inhibitor) for 16-20 hours at 37C with shaking. Primary probe
was rinsed and followed by a 1-hour wash in 50% formamide in 2X SSCT at 37C with shaking.
Secondary probes were hybridized for 1 hour at 37C with shaking at a concentration of 5 pmol
fluorophore/L in 50% formamide in 2X SSCT and 0.2U/L RNase inhibitor. This was followed
by two 30-minute washes in 50% formamide in 2X SSCT at 37C, one 10-minute wash in 20%
formamide in 2X SSCT, two 10-minute washes in 2X SSCT at room temperature, and one 10minute wash in 2X SSC at room temperature. Embryos were washed for 10 minutes in 1X PBTx

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

containing DAPI and incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes in SlowFade Diamond with
DAPI, followed by mounting. All images were taken with a Zeiss LSM 700 confocal microscope.

SxlPE reporter transgenes and constructs
SxlPE-10.2kb, a 10.2kb genomic sequence from a Sxl genomic clone BAC# CH321-74P19
(BACPAC Resources Center) cloned into the pJR16 vector in two steps (Gift from R. Johnston,
Johns Hopkins University) using HiFi DNA Assembly (New England Biolabs). pJR16 uses an
EGFP reporter with a nuclear localization sequence (nls). Fragment 1 extended from 116 bp
downstream of SxlPE TSS to 5,116 bp upstream of SxlPE TSS and was assembled into pJR16
digested with AgeI and AscI to generate SxlPE-5.2kb. Fragment 2 extended from 117 bp
downstream of SxlPE TSS to 5,108 bp downstream of SxlPE TSS and was assembled into
Fragment 1 + pJR16 digested with AgeI.
Fragment 1 SxlPE-10.2kb Fw (5’-3’) –
CCACCCCGGTGAACAGCTCCTCGCCCTTGCTCACCATGGTGGCGACCGGTAA
TGGGATAATCACAAAGTT
Fragment 1 SxlPE-10.2kb Rv (5’-3’) –
CATGCTGCAGCAGATCTGGTCTAGAGCCCGGGCGAATTCGCCGGCGCGCCGT
AATTTTTCTTTGCTCCTCCTG
Fragment 2 SxlPE-10.2kb Fw (5’-3’) –
CAGCTCCTCGCCCTTGCTCACCATGCTGTACGATGAATCGA
Fragment 2 SxlPE-10.2kb Rv (5’-3’) –
GAAAAACGTAACTTTGTGATTATCCCATTATGGATTTCAATTTTGATAC

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The primers ensured that EGFP remained in frame with Exon E1’s coding sequence (CDS).
Constructs were injected into embryos and integrated via PhiC31 integrase-mediated transgenesis
(done at BestGene Inc.) into the same genomic location at P{CaryP}attP40 on Chromosome II.

Generation of sisA RNAi 2 and 3
Transcript-specific knockdown was achieved using the VALIUM vector system (PMID:
21460824). A 21-nucleotide (nt) sequence without any off-targets greater than 16nt was selected
based on the algorithm of [64]. The following sequences were selected:
sisA-RNAi 2 Sense - CGCCGACGAGGAGCAACGCUA
sisA-RNAi 2 Antisense – UAGCGUUGCUCCUCGUCGGCG
sisA-RNAi 3 Sense – CCGGUUCUGGUUCGGAUGUCA
sisA-RNAi 3 Antisense - UGACAUCCGAACCAGAACCGG
The top and bottom strands for the short hairpin were as follows:
sisA-RNAi 2 Top Strand –
CTAGCAGTCGCCGACGAGGAGCAACGCTATAGTTATATTCAAGCATATAGCG
TTGCTCCTCGTCGGCGGCG
sisA-RNAi 2 Bottom Strand –
AATTCGCCGCCGACGAGGAGCAACGCTATATGCTTGAATATAACTATAGCGT
TGCTCCTCGTCGGCGACTG
sisA-RNAi 3 Top Strand –
CTAGCAGTCCGGTTCTGGTTCGGATGTCATAGTTATATTCAAGCATATGACATCCGAACCAGAACCGGGCG

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sisA-RNAi 3 Bottom Strand –
AATTCGCCCGGTTCTGGTTCGGATGTCATATGCTTGAATATAACTATGACATC
CGAACCAGAACCGGACTG
The top and bottom strands were annealed and cloned into the VALIUM20 vector #1467
(Drosophila Genomics Resource Center, DGRC). Constructs were injected into embryos and
integrated via PhiC31 integrase-mediated transgenesis (done at BestGene Inc.) into the same
genomic location at P{CaryP}attP40 on Chromosome II. For RNAi-mediated germline-specific
knockdown of sisA, sisB, sisC, runt, Sxl, Ovo, and mCherry, male flies carrying shRNA transgenes
were mated with nanos-GAL4:VP16 virgin females [55] and the crosses were maintained at 29C.
The progeny were reared at 29C until 3-5 days post-eclosion (unless otherwise specified).

CRISPR-tagging
sfGFP:sisA, 2xHA:SxlE1, and 3xFLAG:SxlL2 were generated using scarless genome editing
described in [65] to generate N-terminal tags. Guide RNA (gRNA) sequences were selected using
the FlyCRISPR algorithm (http://flycrispr.molbio.wisc.edu) [66], contain 20 nucleotides each and
have no predicted off-targets. The following gRNAs were selected:
sfGFP:sisA gRNA Target (5’-3’) - GTCCAATGGCAAGCTACCTG
2xHA:SxlE1 gRNA Target (5’-3’) - GCCTCCTTCGATCTTCTACC
3xFLAG:SxlL2 gRNA Target (5’-3’) – GACTTGTTGTTGTAGCCATA
The guides were cloned into the pU6-2-BbsI-gRNA vector #1363 (DGRC) using the listed primers
that were phosphorylated using T4 polynucleotide kinase (PNK).
sfGFP:sisA gRNA Target sense (5’-3’) – CTTCGTCGTTGGCCAATCCGGATGC
sfGFP:sisA gRNA Target antisense (5’-3’) – AAACGCATCCGGATTGGCCAACGAC

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2xHA:SxlE1 gRNA Target sense (5’-3’) – CTTCGCCTCCTTCGATCTTCTACC
2xHA:SxlE1 gRNA Target antisense (5’-3’) – AAACGGTAGAAGATCGAAGGAGGC
3xFLAG:SxlL2 gRNA Target sense (5’-3’) – CTTCGACTTGTTGTTGTAGCCATA
3xFLAG:SxlL2 gRNA Target antisense (5’-3’) –
AAACTATGGCTACAACAACAAGTC
Donor plasmids to facilitate homology dependent repair were generated. The coding sequences of
the different tags are cloned from genomic DNA of vas-Cas9 expressing flies (BDSC# 51324,
56552) adjacent to a piggyBac transposon that contained a DsRed expression construct resulting
in a selectable-tagging-cassette in vectors pHD-sfGFP-ScarlessDsRed #1365, pHD-2xHAScarlessDsRed #1366, pHD-3xFLAG-ScarlessDsRed #1367 (DGRC). Approximately 1kb 5’ and
3’ Homology arms were assembled using HiFi DNA Assembly (New England Biolabs) upstream
and downstream of this cassette with the following primers (5’-3’):
sfGFP:sisA 5’ Arm Fw (5’-3’) - GAATTCGCCAAAGGGATTTC
sfGFP:sisA 5’ Arm Rv (5’-3’) –
CCGGAACCTCCAGATCCACCGGTGATTTTTTTCGATGTGTG
sfGFP:sisA cassette Fw (5’-3’) –
ACACATCGAAAAAAATCACCGGTGGATCTGGAGGTTCC
sfGFP:sisA cassette Rv (5’-3’) AAGTAAAGATGACTCCGTTCGGAACCTCCTGAACCACC
sfGFP:sisA 3’ Arm Fw (5’-3’) CTGGTGGTTCAGGAGGTTCCGAACGGAGTCATCTTTACTTGCC
sfGFP:sisA 3’ Arm Rv (5’-3’) - GGTACCGCATTGGCCCAATTC
2xHA:SxlE1 5’ Arm Fw (5’-3’) - GCAATCTGTGTTCTTGGTATTTTG

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2xHA:SxlE1 5’ Arm Rv (5’-3’) GGAACATCGTATGGGTACATAATGGGATAATCACAAAGTTAC
2xHA:SxlE1 cassette Fw (5’-3’) AACTTTGTGATTATCCCATTATGTACCCATACGATGTTCC
2xHA:SxlE1 cassette Rv (5’-3’) ACAGTATCAAAATTGAAATCGGAACCTCCTGAACCACC
2xHA:SxlE1 3’ Arm Fw (5’-3’) CTGGTGGTTCAGGAGGTTCCGATTTCAATTTTGATACTGTGAC
2xHA:SxlE1 3’ Arm Rv (5’-3’) - CGATCGAAGGTGAGTTTC
3xFLAG:SxlL2 5’ Arm Fw (5’-3’) - CGACCATGTCGTCCTACTATAAC
3xFLAG:SxlL2 5’ Arm Rv (5’-3’) TCATGGTCTTTGTAGTCCATATCCTGAGAGTTGGGAGTG
3xFLAG:SxlL2 cassette Fw (5’-3’) ACACTCCCAACTCTCAGGATATGGACTACAAAGACCATGAC
3xFLAG:SxlL2 cassette Rv (5’-3’) CCCGGATTATTGTTGCCGTAGGAACCTCCTGAACCACC
3xFLAG:SxlL2 3’ Arm Fw (5’-3’) CTGGTGGTTCAGGAGGTTCCTACGGCAACAATAATCCG
3xFLAG:SxlL2 3’ Arm Rv (5’-3’) – GCTAATGAGGGGATTCCTATG
Assembled donor constructs were cloned into pCR2.1-TOPO (TOPO TA Cloning Kit,
ThermoFisher). Site-specific mutagenesis was also used to mutate the PAM sites in each donor
plasmid. For sfGFP:sisA, the included linker sequence between 3’ UTR and the start of sfGFP was
removed using site-specific mutagenesis (QuikChange, Agilent). The gRNA expression plasmid

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and donor plasmid were injected by BestGene into embryos of Vas-Cas9 flies (#56552, #51324,
BDSC). DsRed positive flies were then crossed to a piggyBac transposase expressing line (#32070,
#32073, BDSC) to excise DsRed resulting in an in-frame fusion of the tags’ and the respective
genes’ coding sequences. Successful generation of CRISPR-tags was confirmed by sequencing.

Generation of overexpression constructs
UAS-sfGFP, UAS-sisA, and UAS-da were generated by cloning the ORFs of sfGFP, sisA, and daPD into pUASpB [67] using the listed primers. pUASpB is a modified version of pUASP [68]
including an attB site for phiC31-mediated integration. UAS-sfGFP:sisA was generated by cloning
a flexible linker sequence followed by the ORF of sisA (lacking a start codon) using the listed
primers into UAS-sfGFP that had been linearized with SpeI. Constructs were assembled using
HiFi DNA Assembly (New England Biolabs).
UAS-sfGFP Fw (5’-3’) –
TACCCGCCCGGGGATCAGATCCGCGGCCGCATGGTGTCCAAGGGCGAG
UAS-sfGFP Rv (5’-3’) –
GACTCTAGAGGATCCAGATCCACTAGTTCACTTGTACAGCTCATCCATGC
UAS-sfGFP:sisA Fw (5’-3’) –
GCCGGCATCACCCTGGGCATGGATGAGCTGTACAAGATTAAGGCCGGCGGGT
CG
UAS-sfGFP:sisA Rv (5’-3’) –
ACGTTAACGTTCGAGGTCGACTCTAGAGGATCCAGATCCATCACTGCTCCATT
TCCAGGC
UAS-sisA Fw (5’-3’) –

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CTGTTCATTGGTACCCGCCCGGGGATCAGATCCGCATGGAACGGAGTCATCTT
TACTTGC
UAS-sisA Rv (5’-3’) –
ACGTTAACGTTCGAGGTCGACTCTAGAGGATCCAGATCCATCACTGCTCCATT
TCCAGGC
UAS-da-PD Fw (5’-3’) –
AGGTCCTGTTCATTGGTACCCGCCCGGGGATCAGATCCGCATGGCGACCAGT
GACGATG
UAS-da-PD Rv (5’-3’) –
ACGTTAACGTTCGAGGTCGACTCTAGAGGATCCAGATCCATTAAAAGTGTTG
TACATTTTGTAGGGG
Constructs flies were injected into embryos and integrated via PhiC31 integrase-mediated
transgenesis (done at BestGene Inc.) into the same genomic location at P{CaryP}attP40 on
Chromosome II. For germline-specific overexpression, male flies carrying UAS transgenes were
mated with nanos-GAL4:VP16 virgin females [55] and the crosses were maintained at 29C. The
progeny were reared at 29C until 3-5 days post-eclosion (unless otherwise specified).

G0 CRISPR (Tissue-specific CRISPR)
Guide

RNA

(gRNA)

sequences

were

selected

using

the

FlyCRISPR

algorithm

(http://flycrispr.molbio.wisc.edu) [66], contain 20 nucleotides each and have no predicted offtargets. For sisA, four different gRNA sequences were selected, one within the coding region
(Target 4) and one within the 3’ UTR (Target 3), and two upstream of the gene locus (Targets 1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and 2). As a control, four different gRNA sequences were selected against GFP. The following
gRNAs were selected:
sisA-G0 gRNA Target 1 (5’-3’) - TCGTTGGCCAATCCGGATGCAGG
sisA-G0 gRNA Target 2 (5’-3’) - CACTGAGTCTACCTGATAATTGG
sisA-G0 gRNA Target 3 (5’-3’) - ATAGTGTAGCTATGTGTCGCAGG
sisA-G0 gRNA Target 4 (5’-3’) - GCTGAAAACGGAGCTTGCTATGG
gfp-G0 gRNA Target 1 (5’-3’) - CAGGGTCAGCTTGCCGTAGG
gfp-G0 gRNA Target 2 (5’-3’) - AGCACTGCACGCCGTAGGTC
gfp-G0 gRNA Target 3 (5’-3’) - CGGCCATGATATAGACGTTG
gfp-G0 gRNA Target 4 (5’-3’) – CATGCCGAGAGTGATCCCGG
Four guides (or two) were cloned into the pCFD5 vector #73914 (Addgene) as previously
described [69] using the listed primers.
sisA-G0-4-PCR1-Fw (5’-3’) –
GCGGCCCGGGTTCGATTCCCGGCCGATGCATCGTTGGCCAATCCGGATGCGT
TTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG
sisA-G0-4-PCR1-Rv (5’-3’) –
ATTATCAGGTAGACTCAGTGTGCACCAGCCGGGAATCGAACCC
sisA-G0-4-PCR2-Fw (5’-3’) –
CACTGAGTCTACCTGATAATGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG
sisA-G0-4-PCR2-Rv (5’-3’) –
GCGACACATAGCTACACTATTGCACCAGCCGGGAATCGAACCC
sisA-G0-4-PCR3-Fw (5’-3’) –
ATAGTGTAGCTATGTGTCGCGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sisA-G0-4-PCR3-Rv (5’-3’) –
ATTTTAACTTGCTATTTCTAGCTCTAAAACTAGCAAGCTCCGTTTTCAGCTGC
ACCAGCCGGGAATCGAACCC
GFP-G0-4-PCR1-Fw (5’-3’) –
GCGGCCCGGGTTCGATTCCCGGCCGATGCACAGGGTCAGCTTGCCGTAGGGT
TTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG
GFP-G0-4-PCR1-Rv (5’-3’) –
GACCTACGGCGTGCAGTGCTTGCACCAGCCGGGAATCGAACCC
GFP-G0-4-PCR2-Fw (5’-3’) –
AGCACTGCACGCCGTAGGTCGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG
GFP-G0-4-PCR2-Rv (5’-3’) –
CAACGTCTATATCATGGCCGTGCACCAGCCGGGAATCGAACCC
GFP-G0-4-PCR3-Fw (5’-3’) –
CGGCCATGATATAGACGTTGGTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAG
GFP-G0-4-PCR3-Rv (5’-3’) –
ATTTTAACTTGCTATTTCTAGCTCTAAAACCCGGGATCACTCTCGGCATGTGC
ACCAGCCGGGAATCGAACCC
Constructs were injected into embryos and integrated via PhiC31 integrase-mediated transgenesis
(done at BestGene Inc.) into the same genomic location at P{CaryP}attP40 on Chromosome II.
For germline-specific CRISPR-mediated knockout of sisA and gfp, male flies carrying gRNA
expressing transgenes were mated with nanos-Cas9 virgin females ([70], BDSC# 54591 or [71],
BDSC# 78782) and the crosses were maintained at 29C. The progeny were reared at 29C until
3-5 days post-eclosion (unless otherwise specified).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Generating sisA mutant
CRISPR-Cas9 was used as previously described to generate a sisA deletion mutant [72,73]. 2 guide
RNA (gRNA) sequences were selected flanking the sisA gene using the FlyCRISPR algorithm
(http://flycrispr.molbio.wisc.edu) [66], contain 20 nucleotides each, and have no predicted offtargets. The following gRNAs were selected:
sisA-del gRNA Target 1 (5’-3’) – GTCCAATGGCAAGCTACCTG
sisA-del gRNA Target 2 (5’-3’) – GATTACCTTCGGCCAGGCGA
The guides were cloned into the pU6-2-BbsI-gRNA vector #1363 (DGRC) using the listed primers
that were phosphorylated using T4 PNK.
sisA-del gRNA Target 1 sense (5’-3’) – CTTCGTCGTTGGCCAATCCGGATGC
sisA-del gRNA Target 1 antisense (5’-3’) – AAACGCATCCGGATTGGCCAACGAC
sisA-del gRNA Target 2 sense (5’-3’) – CTTCGCACTGAGTCTACCTGATAAT
sisA-del gRNA Target 2 antisense (5’-3’) – AAACATTATCAGGTAGACTCAGTGC
A donor plasmid to facilitate homology dependent repair was generated. A 5’ homology arm and
a 3’ homology arm were PCR-amplified from genomic DNA of vas-Cas9 expressing flies (BDSC#
51324, 56552) and cloned into multiple cloning sites found upstream and downstream of a
removable 3xP3-DsRed marker in the pHD-DsRed-attP vector #1361 (DGRC).
sisA-del 5’ Arm Fw (5’-3’) –
AGCACACCTGCACGACCGATGAAAATGGAGCAAGTGGAAAGCACACCTGCA
CGACCGATGAAAATGGAGCAAGTGGAA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sisA-del 5’ Arm Rv (5’-3’) –
AGCACACCTGCACGATTAACCTTAGGCAATATGTCAGCCAGCACACCTGCAC
GA TTAACCTTAGGCAATATGTCAGCC
sisA-del 3’ Arm Fw (5’-3’) –
GGCGGCTCTTCCTAAAAAACGAATGCTTTCTTATTGGCGGCTCTTCCTAA
AAAACGAATGCTTTCTTATT
sisA-del 3’ Arm Rv (5’-3’) –
GGCGGCTCTTCCCGGTTTAATATACATATATTTGTGGCGGCTCTTCCCGG
TTTAATATACATATATTTGT
The gRNA expression plasmid and donor plasmid were injected by BestGene into embryos of
Vas-Cas9 flies (#56552, #51324, BDSC). DsRed-positive flies were balanced without DsRed
removal to maintain a selectable marker. Successful deletion of the sisA gene and replacement
with the DsRed marker was confirmed by sequencing.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

REFERENCES

1.

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.

7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.
13.
14.

15.

16.

Bridges CB. Direct proof through non-disjunction that the sex-linked genes of drosophila
are borne by the x-chromosome. Science. 1914;40: 107–109.
doi:10.1126/science.40.1020.107
Erickson JW, Quintero JJ. Indirect effects of ploidy suggest X chromosome dose, not the
X:A ratio, signals sex in Drosophila. PLoS Biol. 2007;5: e332.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050332
Cline TW. Autoregulatory functioning of a Drosophila gene product that establish es and
maintains the sexually determined state. Genetics. 1984;107: 231–277.
Cline TW. Primary events in the determination of sex in Drosophila melanogaster. Origin
and evolution of sex. 1985;
Hannal-Alava A, Stern C. The sex combs in males and intersexes of Drosophila
melanogaster. J Exp Zool. 1957;134: 533–556. doi:10.1002/jez.1401340307
Bell LR, Horabin JI, Schedl P, Cline TW. Positive autoregulation of sex-lethal by
alternative splicing maintains the female determined state in Drosophila. Cell. 1991;65:
229–239. doi:10.1016/0092-8674(91)90157-t
Barbash DA, Cline TW. Genetic and molecular analysis of the autosomal component of the
primary sex determination signal of Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics. 1995;141: 1451–
1471.
Bridges CB. Triploid intersexes in drosophila melanogaster. Science. 1921;54: 252–254.
doi:10.1126/science.54.1394.252
Cline TW. Evidence that sisterless-a and sisterless-b are two of several discrete “numerator
elements” of the X/A sex determination signal in Drosophila that switch Sxl between two
alternative stable expression states. Genetics. 1988;119: 829–862.
Maine EM, Salz HK, Schedl P, Cline TW. Sex-lethal, a link between sex determination
and sexual differentiation in Drosophila melanogaster. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol.
1985;50: 595–604. doi:10.1101/sqb.1985.050.01.072
Bopp D, Bell LR, Cline TW, Schedl P. Developmental distribution of female-specific Sexlethal proteins in Drosophila melanogaster. Genes Dev. 1991;5: 403–415.
doi:10.1101/gad.5.3.403
Cline TW. PRODUCT OF THE MATERNALLY-INFLUENCED SEX-LETHAL GENE
DETERMINES SEX IN DROSOPHILA-MELANOGASTER. Genetics. 1979;
Cline TW. A male-specific lethal mutation in Drosophila melanogaster that transforms sex.
Dev Biol. 1979;72: 266–275. doi:10.1016/0012-1606(79)90117-9
Sánchez L, Nöthiger R. Sex determination and dosage compensation in Drosophila
melanogaster : production of male clones in XX females. EMBO J. 1983;2: 485–491.
doi:10.1002/j.1460-2075.1983.tb01451.x
Sánchez L, Nöthiger R. Clonal analysis ofsex-lethal, a gene needed for female sexual
development inDrosophila melanogaster. Wilhelm Roux’ Archiv. 1982;191: 211–214.
doi:10.1007/BF00848339
Cline TW. The interaction between daughterless and sex-lethal in triploids: a lethal sextransforming maternal effect linking sex determination and dosage compensation in
Drosophila melanogaster. Dev Biol. 1983;95: 260–274. doi:10.1016/0012-1606(83)900271

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

17.
18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.
32.

Lucchesi JC, Skripsky T. The link between dosage compensation and sex differentiation in
Drosophila melanogaster. Chromosoma. 1981;82: 217–227.
Skripsky T, Lucchesi JC. Intersexuality resulting from the interaction of sex-specific lethal
mutations in Drosophila melanogaster. Dev Biol. 1982;94: 153–162. doi:10.1016/00121606(82)90078-1
Uenoyama T, Fukunaga A, Ioshi K. Studies on the sex-specific lethals of Drosophila
melanogaster. V. Sex transformation caused by interactions between a female-specific
lethal, Sxlf 1, and the male-specific lethals mle(3)132, msl-2(27), and mle. Genetics.
1982;102: 233–243.
Keyes LN, Cline TW, Schedl P. The primary sex determination signal of Drosophila acts at
the level of transcription. Cell. 1992;68: 933–943. doi:10.1016/0092-8674(92)90036-c
González AN, Lu H, Erickson JW. A shared enhancer controls a temporal switch between
promoters during Drosophila primary sex determination. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2008;105: 18436–18441. doi:10.1073/pnas.0805993105
Duffy JB, Gergen JP. The Drosophila segmentation gene runt acts as a position-specific
numerator element necessary for the uniform expression of the sex-determining gene Sexlethal. Genes Dev. 1991;5: 2176–2187. doi:10.1101/gad.5.12a.2176
Jinks TM, Polydorides AD, Calhoun G, Schedl P. The JAK/STAT signaling pathway is
required for the initial choice of sexual identity in Drosophila melanogaster. Mol Cell.
2000;5: 581–587. doi:10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80451-7
Sánchez L, Granadino B, Torres M. Sex determination in Drosophila melanogaster: Xlinked genes involved in the initial step of sex-lethal activation. Dev Genet. 1994;15: 251–
264. doi:10.1002/dvg.1020150307
Sefton L, Timmer JR, Zhang Y, Béranger F, Cline TW. An extracellular activator of the
Drosophila JAK/STAT pathway is a sex-determination signal element. Nature. 2000;405:
970–973. doi:10.1038/35016119
Yang D, Lu H, Hong Y, Jinks TM, Estes PA, Erickson JW. Interpretation of X
chromosome dose at Sex-lethal requires non-E-box sites for the basic helix-loop-helix
proteins SISB and daughterless. Mol Cell Biol. 2001;21: 1581–1592.
doi:10.1128/MCB.21.5.1581-1592.2001
Torres M, Sánchez L. The segmentation gene runt is needed to activate Sex-lethal, a gene
that controls sex determination and dosage compensation in Drosophila. Genet Res.
1992;59: 189–198. doi:10.1017/s0016672300030470
Erickson JW, Cline TW. A bZIP protein, sisterless-a, collaborates with bHLH transcription
factors early in Drosophila development to determine sex. Genes Dev. 1993;7: 1688–1702.
doi:10.1101/gad.7.9.1688
Kramer SG, Jinks TM, Schedl P, Gergen JP. Direct activation of Sex-lethal transcription
by the Drosophila runt protein. Development. 1999;126: 191–200.
Avila FW, Erickson JW. Drosophila JAK/STAT pathway reveals distinct initiation and
reinforcement steps in early transcription of Sxl. Curr Biol. 2007;17: 643–648.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2007.02.038
Casper A, Van Doren M. The control of sexual identity in the Drosophila germline.
Development. 2006;133: 2783–2791. doi:10.1242/dev.02415
Steinmann-Zwicky M, Schmid H, Nöthiger R. Cell-autonomous and inductive signals can
determine the sex of the germ line of drosophila by regulating the gene Sxl. Cell. 1989;57:
157–166. doi:10.1016/0092-8674(89)90181-5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

33.

34.
35.
36.

37.
38.

39.

40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

Steinmann-Zwicky M. Sex determination in Drosophila: sis-b, a major numerator element
of the X:A ratio in the soma, does not contribute to the X:A ratio in the germ line.
Development. 1993;117: 763–767.
Andrews J, Oliver B. Sex determination signals control ovo-B transcription in Drosophila
melanogaster germ cells. Genetics. 2002;160: 537–545.
Brown EH, King RC. Studies on the expression of the transformer gene of drosophila
melanogaster. Genetics. 1961;46: 143–156.
Hinson S, Nagoshi RN. Regulatory and functional interactions between the somatic sex
regulatory gene transformer and the germline genes ovo and ovarian tumor. Development.
1999;126: 861–871.
Horabin JI, Bopp D, Waterbury J, Schedl P. Selection and maintenance of sexual identity
in the Drosophila germline. Genetics. 1995;141: 1521–1535.
Nagoshi RN, Patton JS, Bae E, Geyer PK. The somatic sex determines the requirement for
ovarian tumor gene activity in the proliferation of the Drosophila germline. Development.
1995;121: 579–587.
Nöthiger R, Jonglez M, Leuthold M, Meier-Gerschwiler P, Weber T. Sex determination in
the germ line of Drosophila depends on genetic signals and inductive somatic factors.
Development. 1989;107: 505–518.
Oliver B, Kim YJ, Baker BS. Sex-lethal, master and slave: a hierarchy of germ-line sex
determination in Drosophila. Development. 1993;119: 897–908.
Sturtevant AH. A Gene in Drosophila Melanogaster That Transforms Females into Males.
Genetics. 1945;30: 297–299.
Staab S, Heller A, Steinmann-Zwicky M. Somatic sex-determining signals act on XX germ
cells in Drosophila embryos. Development. 1996;122: 4065–4071.
Seidel S. [experimental studies on the principles of sterility of transformer (tra) males in
drosophila melanogaster]. Z Vererbungsl. 1963;94: 217–241.
Van Deusen EB. Sex determination in germ line chimeras of Drosophila melanogaster. J
Embryol Exp Morphol. 1977;37: 173–185.
Marsh JL, Wieschaus E. Is sex determination in germ line and soma controlled by separate
genetic mechanisms? Nature. 1978;272: 249–251. doi:10.1038/272249a0
Schüpbach T. Normal female germ cell differentiation requires the female X chromosome
to autosome ratio and expression of sex-lethal in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics.
1985;109: 529–548.
Schüpbach T. Autosomal mutations that interfere with sex determination in somatic cells
of Drosophila have no direct effect on the germline. Dev Biol. 1982;89: 117–127.
doi:10.1016/0012-1606(82)90300-1
Salz HK, Cline TW, Schedl P. Functional changes associated with structural alterations
induced by mobilization of a P element inserted in the Sex-lethal gene of Drosophila.
Genetics. 1987;117: 221–231.
Hager JH, Cline TW. Induction of female Sex-lethal RNA splicing in male germ cells:
implications for Drosophila germline sex determination. Development. 1997;124: 5033–
5048.
Hashiyama K, Hayashi Y, Kobayashi S. Drosophila Sex lethal gene initiates female
development in germline progenitors. Science. 2011;333: 885–888.
doi:10.1126/science.1208146
Cronmiller C, Cline TW. The Drosophila sex determination gene daughterless has different

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

52.
53.
54.
55.

56.

57.

58.

59.
60.

61.

62.
63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

functions in the germ line versus the soma. Cell. 1987;48: 479–487. doi:10.1016/00928674(87)90198-x
Granadino B, Santamaria P, Sánchez L. Sex determination in the germ line of Drosophila
melanogaster: activation of the gene Sex-lethal. Development. 1993;118: 813–816.
Steinmann-Zwicky M. Sxl in the germline of Drosophila: a target for somatic late
induction. Dev Genet. 1994;15: 265–274. doi:10.1002/dvg.1020150308
Steinmann-Zwicky M. Sex determination of the Drosophila germ line: tra and dsx control
somatic inductive signals. Development. 1994;120: 707–716.
Van Doren M, Williamson AL, Lehmann R. Regulation of zygotic gene expression in
Drosophila primordial germ cells. Curr Biol. 1998;8: 243–246. doi:10.1016/s09609822(98)70091-0
McKearin DM, Spradling AC. bag-of-marbles: a Drosophila gene required to initiate both
male and female gametogenesis. Genes Dev. 1990;4: 2242–2251.
doi:10.1101/gad.4.12b.2242
Walker JJ, Lee KK, Desai RN, Erickson JW. The Drosophila melanogaster sex
determination gene sisA is required in yolk nuclei for midgut formation. Genetics.
2000;155: 191–202.
Gönczy P, Matunis E, DiNardo S. bag-of-marbles and benign gonial cell neoplasm act in
the germline to restrict proliferation during Drosophila spermatogenesis. Development.
1997;124: 4361–4371.
Casper AL, Van Doren M. The establishment of sexual identity in the Drosophila germline.
Development. 2009;136: 3821–3830. doi:10.1242/dev.042374
Beliveau BJ, Boettiger AN, Avendaño MS, Jungmann R, McCole RB, Joyce EF, et al.
Single-molecule super-resolution imaging of chromosomes and in situ haplotype
visualization using Oligopaint FISH probes. Nat Commun. 2015;6: 7147.
doi:10.1038/ncomms8147
Beliveau BJ, Joyce EF, Apostolopoulos N, Yilmaz F, Fonseka CY, McCole RB, et al.
Versatile design and synthesis platform for visualizing genomes with Oligopaint FISH
probes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012;109: 21301–21306. doi:10.1073/pnas.1213818110
Beliveau BJ, Apostolopoulos N, Wu C. Visualizing genomes with Oligopaint FISH probes.
Curr Protoc Mol Biol. 2014;105: Unit 14.23. doi:10.1002/0471142727.mb1423s105
Viets K, Sauria MEG, Chernoff C, Rodriguez Viales R, Echterling M, Anderson C, et al.
Characterization of Button Loci that Promote Homologous Chromosome Pairing and CellType-Specific Interchromosomal Gene Regulation. Dev Cell. 2019;51: 341–356.e7.
doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2019.09.007
Vert J-P, Foveau N, Lajaunie C, Vandenbrouck Y. An accurate and interpretable model for
siRNA efficacy prediction. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006;7: 520. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-7520
Bier E, Harrison MM, O’Connor-Giles KM, Wildonger J. Advances in Engineering the Fly
Genome with the CRISPR-Cas System. Genetics. 2018;208: 1–18.
doi:10.1534/genetics.117.1113
Gratz SJ, Ukken FP, Rubinstein CD, Thiede G, Donohue LK, Cummings AM, et al. Highly
specific and efficient CRISPR/Cas9-catalyzed homology-directed repair in Drosophila.
Genetics. 2014;196: 961–971. doi:10.1534/genetics.113.160713
Yang SY, Baxter EM, Van Doren M. Phf7 controls male sex determination in the
Drosophila germline. Dev Cell. 2012;22: 1041–1051. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2012.04.013

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

68.
69.
70.

71.

72.

73.

74.
75.

76.
77.

78.
79.

80.

81.
82.

83.

84.

85.

Rørth P. Gal4 in the Drosophila female germline. Mech Dev. 1998;78: 113–118.
Port F, Bullock SL. Augmenting CRISPR applications in Drosophila with tRNA-flanked
sgRNAs. Nat Methods. 2016;13: 852–854. doi:10.1038/nmeth.3972
Port F, Chen H-M, Lee T, Bullock SL. Optimized CRISPR/Cas tools for efficient germline
and somatic genome engineering in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014;111:
E2967-76. doi:10.1073/pnas.1405500111
Ren X, Sun J, Housden BE, Hu Y, Roesel C, Lin S, et al. Optimized gene editing
technology for Drosophila melanogaster using germ line-specific Cas9. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2013;110: 19012–19017. doi:10.1073/pnas.1318481110
Gratz SJ, Rubinstein CD, Harrison MM, Wildonger J, O’Connor-Giles KM. CRISPR-Cas9
Genome Editing in Drosophila. Curr Protoc Mol Biol. 2015;111: 31.2.1-20.
doi:10.1002/0471142727.mb3102s111
Gratz SJ, Harrison MM, Wildonger J, O’Connor-Giles KM. Precise Genome Editing of
Drosophila with CRISPR RNA-Guided Cas9. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1311: 335–348.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2687-9_22
Thompson JGP, Schedl P, Pulak R. Sex-specific GFP-expression in Drosophila embryos
and sorting by Copas flow cytometry technique.
Oliver B, Pauli D. Suppression of distinct ovo phenotypes in the Drosophila female
germline bymaleless− andSex-lethalM. Dev Genet. 1998;23: 335–346.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1520-6408(1998)23:4<335::AID-DVG8>3.0.CO;2-M
Oliver B, Pauli D, Mahowald AP. Genetic evidence that the ovo locus is involved in
Drosophila germ line sex determination. Genetics. 1990;125: 535–550.
Wei G, Oliver B, Pauli D, Mahowald AP. Evidence for sex transformation of germline
cells in ovarian tumor mutants of Drosophila. Dev Biol. 1994;161: 318–320.
doi:10.1006/dbio.1994.1032
Oliver B, Perrimon N, Mahowald AP. The ovo locus is required for sex-specific germ line
maintenance in Drosophila. Genes Dev. 1987;1: 913–923. doi:10.1101/gad.1.9.913
Oliver B, Singer J, Laget V, Pennetta G, Pauli D. Function of Drosophila ovo+ in germline sex determination depends on X-chromosome number. Development. 1994;120: 3185–
3195.
Siddiqui NU, Li X, Luo H, Karaiskakis A, Hou H, Kislinger T, et al. Genome-wide
analysis of the maternal-to-zygotic transition in Drosophila primordial germ cells. Genome
Biol. 2012;13: R11. doi:10.1186/gb-2012-13-2-r11
Cline TW. A female-specific lethal lesion in an X-linked positive regulator of the
Drosophila sex determination gene, Sex-lethal. Genetics. 1986;113: 641–663.
Clough E, Jimenez E, Kim Y-A, Whitworth C, Neville MC, Hempel LU, et al. Sex- and
tissue-specific functions of Drosophila doublesex transcription factor target genes. Dev
Cell. 2014;31: 761–773. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2014.11.021
Liu Y, Belote JM. Protein-protein interactions among components of the Drosophila
primary sex determination signal. Mol Gen Genet. 1995;248: 182–189.
doi:10.1007/bf02190799
Shapiro-Kulnane L, Smolko AE, Salz HK. Maintenance of Drosophila germline stem cell
sexual identity in oogenesis and tumorigenesis. Development. 2015;142: 1073–1082.
doi:10.1242/dev.116590
Primus S, Pozmanter C, Baxter K, Van Doren M. Tudor-domain containing protein 5-like
promotes male sexual identity in the Drosophila germline and is repressed in females by

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Sex lethal. PLoS Genet. 2019;15: e1007617. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1007617

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1: SxlPE activity does not precede SxlPM in the germline
A-B) RNA-FISH (+ Immunofluorescence) against the transcript from SxlPM only (PM RNA)
versus the common transcript from SxlPE and SxlPM (PE+PM RNA) in embryonic stage 5
primordial germ cells (PGCs). A) Male PGCs with both PE+PM and PM-probe signals. B) Female
PGCs with both PE+PM and PM-probe signals. Arrows mark fluorescent nuclear foci of RNAFISH signals. Note that a single focus is observed in female PGCs suggesting that X chromosomes
may be paired in the germ cells. VAS stains germ cells. C-D) Graphs showing percentage of PGCs
with observable RNA-FISH probe signals between stages 3 and 11 of embryogenesis.

Figure 2: SxlPE is sex-specifically activated in the germline
A-B’) Immunofluorescence of first instar (L1) gonads from flies bearing SxlPE-10.2kb reporter
transgene. Note the presence of sex-specific nuclear GFP expression in female germ cells only.
Arrows mark nuclei of germ cells. C-D’) Immunofluorescence of first instar (L1) gonads from
flies bearing the HA:SxlE1 (Early Sxl) tag. Arrows mark cytoplasmic HA-background staining.
E-F’) Immunofluorescence of second instar (L2) gonads from flies bearing the FLAG:SxlL2 (Late
Sxl) tag. Arrows mark FLAG-positive germ cells. Note the presence of FLAG (Late Sxl)
expression in female germ cells only. The anti-FLAG immunoreactivity in the fat body of both
sexes is also present in wild-type stocks with no FLAG-tagged proteins, indicating it is antibody
background. VAS stains germ cells.

Figure 3: sisA loss of function in the female germline results in ovarian tumors and germ cell
loss

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A-F’) Immunofluorescence of adult ovaries to characterize germ cell phenotypes. A-A’) Wildtype
ovary from fly with germline-specific mCherry RNAi as control. B-B’) Ovary with germ cell
tumors from fly with germline-specific Sxl RNAi. Knockdown of Sxl causes a germline tumor
phenotype. C-C’) Ovary with germ cell tumors from fly with germline-specific sisA RNAi (sisA
RNAi 1). D-D’) Ovary with severe germ cell loss from fly with strong germline-specific sisA
RNAi (2x GAL4). E-G) Animals expressing Cas9 in the germline along with guide RNAs for
control (gfp) or sisA to create de novo “G0” mutations in the germline. E-E’) Wildtype ovary from
fly with control guide RNAs for gfp. F-F’) Ovary with germ cell tumors from fly with guide RNAs
generating mutations in sisA. G-G’) Germ cell-less ovary from fly with guide RNAs generating
mutations in sisA. VAS stains germ cells. DAPI stains DNA (nucleus).

Figure 4: sisA is zygotically expressed in the germline
A-C’) RNA-FISH (+ Immunofluorescence) against sisA in embryonic PGCs (Stages 3-5 shown).
Smaller white dashed boxes specify the region zoomed in on, and presented in larger white dashed
boxes. Arrows mark fluorescent nuclear foci of RNA-FISH signals. Note that a single focus is
observed in female PGCs suggesting that X chromosomes may be paired in the germ cells. VAS
stains germ cells. D) Graph showing percentage of PGCs with observable RNA-FISH probe
signals between stages 3 and 11 of embryogenesis. sisA is zygotically expressed in PGCs of both
sexes. E-G’) Immunofluorescence of embryonic PGCs (Stages 3-5 shown) from flies bearing
sfGFP:SisA (SisA tag). Note that this expression is nuclear, consistent with SisA’s characterization
as a bZIP transcription factor. Arrows mark GFP-positive germ cell nuclei. VAS stains germ cells.

Figure 5: Sxl expression in the female germline depends on sisA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A-E’) Immunofluorescence of adult ovaries using anti-Sxl antibody (green). A-A’) Wildtype ovary
from fly with germline-specific mCherry RNAi. Sxl staining is highest in the early germ cells and
decreases in differentiating germ cells. B-B’) Ovary with germ cell tumors from fly with germlinespecific Sxl RNAi. Knockdown of Sxl causes a germline tumor phenotype and germ cells lack Sxl
staining. C-C’) Ovary with germ cell tumors from fly with germline-specific sisA RNAi. Note that
tumorous germ cells lack Sxl staining. Somatic Sxl remains unaffected. D-D’) bam mutant ovary
with germline-specific mCherry RNAi. bam mutations cause a germline tumor phenotype and an
expansion of germ cells that highly express Sxl. E-E’) bam mutant ovary with germline-specific
sisA RNAi. Sxl staining is dramatically reduced in the germline. Anti-VAS stains germ cells (blue).

Figure 6: sisA is necessary but not sufficient to feminize the germline
A-C’) Immunofluorescence of adult testes to characterize anti-Sxl staining. A-A’) Wildtype testis
from fly with germline-specific overexpression of gfp. B-B’) Testis from fly with germlinespecific overexpression of Sxl. Sxl staining is observed in the early germ cells. The anterior tip of
the testis looks mildly atrophied. C-C’) Testis from fly with germline-specific overexpression of
sisA. No Sxl staining is observed in the germ cells. The testis resembles the wildtype control. DE) Immunofluorescence of adult ovaries to characterize rescue of sisA loss-of-function by Sxl
expression. All animals strongly express UAS-sisARNAi using two copies of nos-Gal4. D-D’)
Germ cell-less ovary from sisA-RNAi flies with ectopic expression of a control protein (GFP) using
the otu promoter. Flies of this genotype are sterile. E-E’) Ovary from ovary from sisA-RNAi flies
with ectopic expression of Sxl under the control of the otu promoter. Note the rescue of the
germline and the wildtype appearance of the ovary, indicating normal oogenesis. VAS stains germ
cells. SXL stains Sxl. DAPI stains DNA (nucleus).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S1: RNA-FISH against nascent RNA can be used to study Sxl promoter initiation
A) Cartoon showing relevant portion of the Sxl gene locus and span of SxlPM and SxlPE+SxlPM
transcripts probed by PM-probes (Cy5, false colored Green) and PE+PM-probes (Cy3, Red)
respectively, using RNA-FISH. Locus is drawn to scale. Size of probes is not drawn to scale. CDS:
Coding sequences. UTR: Untranslated Region. B-C’’) RNA-FISH (+ Immunofluorescence)
against the transcript from SxlPM only (PM RNA) versus the common transcript from SxlPE and
SxlPM (PE+PM RNA) in embryonic stage 3 somatic cells. B-B’’) Male somatic cells always show
both PE+PM and PM-probe signals. Note that a single focus is observed indicating a single X
chromosome. C-C’’) Female somatic cells first have PE+PM-probe signals, indicative of SxlPE
activity alone. Note that two foci are observed per nucleus indicating the presence of two X
chromosomes that are unpaired. Arrows mark fluorescent nuclear foci of RNA-FISH signals
except in C’’ which has no RNA-FISH signals. PE+PM RNA is probed by PE+PM-probes. PM
RNA is probed by PM-probes. DAPI stains DNA (nucleus).

Figure S2: SxlPE requires different cis-regulatory elements in the soma and the germline
A) Cartoon showing relevant portion of the Sxl gene locus and design of transcriptional reporter
constructs specific for SxlPE. EGFP reporters include a nuclear localization sequence (nls) to aid
in visualization of expression. The 1.5kb somatic enhancer is illustrated. In SxlPE-5.2kb, EGFPnls
replaces the CDS of Exon E1. In SxlPE-10.2kb, EGFPnls replaces the CDS of Exon 4. Locus is
drawn to scale. EGFPnls is not drawn to scale. CDS: Coding sequences. UTR: Untranslated
Region. B-I) Immunofluorescence of developing gonads to characterize SxlPE-5.2kb expression
from stage 15 of embryogenesis to the third larval instar stage (L3). Note the presence of sex-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

specific nuclear GFP expression in female somatic cells. No GFP expression is observed in the
germ cells at any stage. Arrows mark GFP-positive somatic cells. J-J’) Immunofluorescence of
embryonic stage 15 gonads to characterize SxlPE-10.2kb expression. Note the absence of GFP
expression in female germ cells but presence of GFP expression in female somatic cells. Arrows
mark GFP-positive somatic cells. VAS stains germ cells.

Figure S3: Endogenous tagging of Early and Late Sxl isoforms
A) Cartoon showing relevant portion of the Sxl gene locus and location of endogenous tags for
Early and Late Sxl isoforms. A 2X HA tag is inserted at the N-terminus of Exon E1’s CDS to
generate the HA:SxlE1 ‘Early (E) Sxl’ tag. A 3X FLAG tag is inserted at the N-terminus of Exon
L2’s CDS to generate the FLAG:SxlL2 ‘Late (L) Sxl’ tag. Locus is drawn to scale. Tags are not
drawn to scale. B-G) Immunofluorescence of developing gonads to characterize HA:SxlE1
expression from stage 11 of embryogenesis to the second larval instar stage (L2). Note the presence
of sex-specific Early Sxl expression in the nuclei of female somatic cells. Arrows mark HApositive somatic cells. H-I) Immunofluorescence of developing guts to character HA:SxlE1
expression at the first larval instar stage (L1). Note the presence of sex-specific Early Sxl
expression in the nuclei of female gut cells. Arrows mark HA-positive gut cells. J-M’)
Immunofluorescence of developing gonads to characterize FLAG:SxlL2 expression from the third
larval instar stage (L3) to adult stage. Note the presence of sex-specific Late Sxl expression in the
cytoplasm of female germ cells. Arrows mark FLAG-positive germ cells. VAS stains germ cells.
DAPI stains DNA (nucleus).

Figure S4: RNAi against most somatic XSEs does not affect the female germline

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A-D’) Immunofluorescence of adult ovaries to characterize germ cell phenotypes resulting from
RNAi against somatic XSEs. A-A’) Wildtype ovary from fly with germline-specific mCherry
RNAi. B-B’) Ovary from fly with germline-specific sisB RNAi. C-C’) Ovary from fly with
germline-specific sisC RNAi. D-D’) Ovary from fly with germline-specific run RNAi. All ovaries
resemble the wildtype control. VAS stains germ cells. DAPI stains DNA (nucleus).

Figure S5: sisA loss of function in the female germline
A-B’) Immunofluorescence of adult ovaries to characterize germ cell phenotypes. A-A’) Wildtype
ovary from fly with germline-specific mCherry RNAi. B-B’) Ovary with germ cell tumors from
fly with germline-specific sisA RNAi (sisA RNAi 2). Note that the severity of tumors is less than
those observed with sisA RNAi 1. VAS stains germ cells. DAPI stains DNA (nucleus). C) Graph
showing percentage of ovaries exhibiting either wildtype, germ cell tumor, or germ cell-less
phenotypes resultant from different loss of function conditions. D) Cartoon showing extended sisA
locus with target sites for RNAi and guide RNA targets for G0 CRISPR. Locus is drawn to scale.
CDS: Coding sequences. UTR: Untranslated Region.

Figure S6: Characterizing sisA expression
A-B’) RNA-FISH (+ Immunofluorescence) against sisA in embryonic somatic cells. A-A’) Female
somatic cells at stage 3 with sisA RNA-FISH signals. Note that two foci are observed per nucleus
indicating the presence of two X chromosomes that are unpaired. Arrows mark fluorescent nuclear
foci of RNA-FISH signals. B-B’) Yolk cell nuclei with sisA RNA-FISH signals. Arrows mark
fluorescent nuclear foci of RNA-FISH signals. DAPI stains DNA (nucleus). C) Cartoon showing
the sisA gene locus and location of endogenous sfGFP tag. An sfGFP tag is inserted at the N-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

terminus of sisA’s CDS to generate the sfGFP:SisA tag. Locus is drawn to scale. Tag is not drawn
to scale sfGFP D-E’) Immunofluorescence of adult gonads to characterize germ cell phenotypes
caused by the N-terminal sfGFP tag on SisA. The gonads resemble wildtype gonads, suggesting
that the tag does not impair SisA function. F-F’) Immunofluorescence of female somatic cells at
stage 3 expressing sfGFP:SisA. G-G’) Immunofluorescence of yolk cell nuclei expressing
sfGFP:SisA. Note that this expression is nuclear, consistent with SisA’s characterization as a bZIP
transcription factor. H-H’) Immunofluorescence of embryonic stage 10 PGCs from flies bearing
sfGFP:SisA (SisA tag). LAM-B stains nuclear lamina. VAS stains germ cells. DAPI stains DNA
(nucleus).

Figure S7: sisA lies upstream of Sxl in the female germline
A-D’) Immunofluorescence of adult ovaries to characterize Sxl expression. A-A’) Wildtype ovary
from fly with germline-specific mCherry RNAi. Sxl expression is highest in the early germ cells
and decreases in differentiating germ cells. B-B’) Ovary with germ cell tumors from fly with
germline-specific sisA RNAi (sisA RNAi 2). Note that tumorous germ cells lack Sxl expression.
Somatic Sxl remains unaffected. C-C’) Wildtype ovary from fly with mutations in the germline
against gfp. Sxl expression is wildtype. D-D’) Ovary with germ cell tumors from fly with mutations
in the germline against sisA. Note that tumorous germ cells lack Sxl expression. VAS stains germ
cells. SXL stains Sxl. E) Graph showing percentage of ovaries exhibiting either wildtype, germ
cell tumor, or germ cell-less phenotypes, with or without rescue of sisA loss of function by Sxl.

Cartoons in Figures S1A, S2A, S3A, S5D, and S6C were created with Biorender.com

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1 - SxlPE activity does not precede SxlPM in the germline
A’

B

B’

A’’

A

Male

A

Stage 5 PGCs

Female

B’’

20 µM

VAS PE+PM RNA PM RNA

C

PE+PM RNA

% of Female Germ Cells with Sxl RNA-FISH signal

D

100

80

80

60

60

% PGCs

% PGCs

100

40

% of Male Germ Cells with Sxl RNA-FISH signal

40
20

20
0

PM RNA

3

No Signal

4
PE+PM

5
PM

6-8

9

Embryonic Stage
Both probes

10

11

0

3

No Signal

4
PE+PM

5

6-8

9

Embryonic Stage

PM

Both probes

10

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2 - SxlPE is sex-specifically activated in the germline

Male

A

L1 Stage
A’

B’

Female

B

20 µM

VAS SxlPE-10.2kb:GFP
L1 Stage
C’

L2 Stage
E’

Male

E

Male

C

SxlPE-10.2:GFP

F

D’

F’

Female

Female

D

20 µM

20 µM

VAS HA:SXL (E)

HA:SXL (E)

VAS FLAG:SXL (L)

FLAG:SXL (L)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3 - sisA loss of function in the female germline results in ovarian tumors and
germ cell loss
A

nos > mCherry RNAi
A’

B

nos > Sxl RNAi
B’

C

nos > sisA RNAi 1
C’

nos-Cas9 + gfp gRNA

E

E’

F

nos-Cas9 + sisA gRNA
F’

G

nos-Cas9 + sisA gRNA
G’

50 µM

VAS
nos (2x) > sisA RNAi 1
D’

D

50 µM

VAS

DAPI

VAS

DAPI

VAS

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4 - sisA is zygotically expressed in the germline
A’

E

E’

B

B’

F

F’

C

C’

G

G’

Stage 5 PGCs

Stage 4 PGCs

Stage 3 PGCs

A

20 µM

VAS
D
25

sisA RNA

20 µM

sisA RNA

% of Germ Cells with sisA RNA-FISH signal
Male
Female

% PGCs

20
15
10
5
0

VAS

3

4
5
Embryonic Stage

6

GFP:SisA

GFP:SisA

Figure 5 - Sxl expression in the female germline depends on sisA
A

A’

B

B’

C

C’

50 µM

VAS

SXL

SXL

D bam-/-

D’

E bam-/-

E’

nos > sisA RNAi

nos > mCherry RNAi

nos > sisA RNAi 1

nos > Sxl RNAi

nos > mCherry RNAi

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

50 µM

VAS

SXL

SXL

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6 - sisA is necessary but not sufficient to feminize the germline
A

nos > gfp

B

nos > Sxl

C

nos > sfgfp:sisA

50 µM

VAS

SXL

A’

B’

C’

SXL
D

nos > sisA RNAi (2x) + otu-gfp
D’

50 µM

VAS

DAPI

VAS

E

nos > sisA RNAi (2x) + otu-Sxl
E’

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S1 - RNA-FISH against nascent RNA can be used to study Sxl promoter initiation

SxlPM

SxlPE

Exon L1

Exon E1 Exon L2

Exon 3

Exon 4

PM-Probe
PE+PM-Probe

UTR

B

B’

B’’

C

C’

C’’

Male

CDS

Female

A

20 µM

PE+PM RNA PM RNA DAPI

PE+PM RNA

PM RNA

1kb

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S2 - SxlPE reguires different cis-regulatory elements in the soma and the germline
A

SxlPM

SxlPE
Somatic Enhancer

Exon L1

Exon E1 Exon L2

SxlPE-5.2kb

Exon 3

EGFPnls

SxlPE-10.2kb
CDS

EGFPnls

UTR

1kb

Embryo (Stage 15)

C

First Larval Instar

Second Larval Instar
D

E

H

I

Male

B

G

Female

F

20 µM
µM
20

50 µM

VAS SxlPE-5.2kb:GFP

Stage 15 Embryo

J

Exon 4

Male

K

20 µM

VAS SxlPE-10.2kb:GFP

Female

Third Larval Instar

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S3 - Endogenous tagging of Early and Late Sxl isoforms
A

SxlPM

SxlPE

Exon L1

CDS

UTR

Male

E

Exon L2

2X HA

3X FLAG

Early Sxl
Tag

Late Sxl
Tag

Female

Exon 3

Exon 4

1kb

J

J’

K

K’

L

L’

M

M’

L3 Male

Stage 11 Embryo

B

Exon E1

F

D

G

H

I

20 µM

20 µM

VAS HA:SXL (E) DAPI VAS HA:SXL (E) DAPI

Adult Female

L1 Stage

L2 Stage

Adult Male

L1 Stage

L3 Female

C

50 µM

VAS FLAG:SXL (L)

FLAG:SXL (L)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

A’

B

B’

C

C’

D

D’

nos > run RNAi

nos > sisC RNAi

nos > sisB RNAi

nos > mCherry RNAi

Figure S4 - RNAi against most somatic XSEs does not affect the female germline

50 µM

VAS

DAPI

VAS

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

nos > sisA RNAi 2

A’

A

50 µM

VAS

DAPI

VAS

C

B’

B

50 µM

VAS

DAPI

VAS

Quantification of sisA loss-of-function phenotypes

100

Germ cell-less

90

Germ cell tumor

80

Wildtype

70
% Ovaries

60
50
40
30
20
10

sisA
RNAi 3

)
(4
NA
gR

no

s-

Ca

s9

+

si
+
s9
no

s-

Ca

sno

sisA
RNAi 2

si

sA

gf
+
s9
Ca

>
x)
(2
s
no

D

sA

p

gR

NA

gR

(2

)

NA

1
si

no

s

sA

(2

RN

x)

Ai

>

-

2
sA
si
>
s
no

sA
si
>
s
no

RN

Ai
RN

Ai

1

i
>
s
no

s

>

m

Ch

er

Sx

ry

lR

RN

NA

Ai

0

no

nos > mCherry RNAi

Figure S5 - sisA loss of function in the female germline

sisA
RNAi 1

sisA

sisA G0
Target 2

CDS

sisA G0
Target 1

UTR

sisA G0
Target 4

sisA G0
Target 3

100 bp

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S6 - Characterizing sisA expression
Female Embryo (Stage 3)
A
A’

Yolk Cell Nuclei
B’

B

20 µM

20 µM

sisA RNA

LAM-B

sisA RNA

DAPI

sisA RNA

sisA RNA

C
sisA

sfGFP
CDS

UTR

100 bp

Male
D’

D

Female
E’

E

50 µM

50 µM

VAS

DAPI
Embryo (Stage 3)
F’

F

VAS

VAS

sfGFP:SisA

G

20 µM

sfGFP:SisA

Embryo (Stage 10)
H’

H

20 µM

VAS

sfGFP:SisA

VAS

Yolk Cell Nuclei
G’

20 µM

LAM-B

DAPI

sfGFP:SisA

DAPI

sfGFP:SisA

sfGFP:SisA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.880070; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A’ C

A

E

100

Germ cell tumor

80
70

Wildtype

60
50
40
30
20

B’

10

C

C’

D

D’

50 µM

VAS

SXL

SXL

(x
2)
+ >s
ot is
u- A
Sx R
l NA
s
no

no

s

(x
2
+ )>
ot si
u- sA
G
FP RN

Ai

1

i1

0

nos > sisA RNAi 2
nos-Cas9 + gfp gRNA

Germ cell-less

90

B

nos-Cas9 + sisA gRNA

Quantification of sisA rescue by Sxl

% Ovaries

nos > mCherry RNAi

Figure S7 - sisA lies upstream of Sxl in the female germline

