bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/870402; this version posted December 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Effectiveness of topical antibiotics in treating corals affected by Stony Coral Tissue Loss
Disease
K.L. Neely1, K.A. Macaulay1, E.K. Hower1, M.A. Dobler1
1

Nova Southeastern University Halmos College of Natural Sciences and Oceanography, Fort

Lauderdale, FL 33314, USA
Communicating Author: kneely0@nova.edu
Keywords: Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease, antibiotic, disease treatment, Florida Reef Tract
Conflict of interest statement: On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there
is no conflict of interest.

Abstract
Since 2014, Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) has led to mass mortality of the majority
of hard coral species on the Florida Reef Tract. Following the successful treatment of SCTLD
lesions on corals in closed aquaria using water dosed with antibiotics, two pastes were developed
as vehicles for direct antibiotic treatments on wild corals. These pastes were tested as placebos
and with additions of amoxicillin via topical applications over active SCTLD margins on
multiple coral species. The effectiveness of the pastes without antibiotics (placebo treatments)
was less than 10%. Adding amoxicillin to both pastes increased effectiveness. For one of the two
pastes, which was silicone based with a time-release mechanism for the antibiotics, effectiveness
in halting disease lesions reached 86% when amoxicillin was added. Topical antibiotic
application is a viable tool for the preservation of priority corals affected by SCTLD.

Introduction
Beginning in 2014, a disease since named Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD) appeared
on scleractinian corals near Miami, Florida (Precht et al. 2016). The disease is known to affect
over 20 species of corals and is characterized by multifocal acute lesions which in some cases are
preceded by a bleaching margin. It is highly virulent, and capable of being transmitted by
physical contact as well as through seawater (Aeby et al. 2019). Progression of lesions across a
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/870402; this version posted December 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

colony are rapid compared to other coral diseases and in most cases, infection leads to complete
mortality of the colony. Ecosystem impacts are substantial, with significant decreases in coral
cover, colony density, and biodiversity recorded (Precht et al. 2016; Walton et al. 2018).
Efforts to identify the pathogen are ongoing (Meyer et al. 2019), but have not yet been
successful. However, early laboratory work noted that water dosing with antibiotics resulted in
disease cessation (O'Neil et al. 2018; Aeby et al. 2019). Follow up efforts by NOAA’s Coral
Disease and Health Consortium (C. Woodley, pers comm) led to the development of a modified
dental paste that could be applied to disease margins and is still in use by laboratories and
aquariums treating SCTLD-affected corals (O'Neil et al. 2018). However, the usage of the
modified dental paste requires patting the coral dry and maintaining it in low water flow for 18
hours, making it impracticable on wild corals. To resolve this, partnerships between the authors,
the Florida Aquarium, and a pharmaceutical formulation and manufacturing company (Ocean
Alchemists LLC and CoreRx Pharmaceuticals) led to the development of a silicone-based paste
for field applications to determine whether SCTLD could be stopped on actively infected
colonies at the reef.

Methods
Corals affected with Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease were selected for treatment at Sand Key in
the lower Florida Keys. Colonies were located within a 4000 m2 area ranging in depth from 5 to
13 meters.
A total of 67 corals were selected for experimental treatment in October 2019. Colonies had a
maximum linear dimension ranging from 12 to 432 cm. Each colony had between 1 and 12
active SCTLD lesions, and a total of 172 lesions were treated (Fig. 1). Each colony was tagged
and mapped for future identification. Small masonry nails were hammered into each lesion to
identify the location and progression of the disease margin.
Colonies were randomly assigned one of five treatments.
1. Control. Colony was tagged and nails were affixed at the disease margin, but no
treatment was applied.
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/870402; this version posted December 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

2. “Base 2b” Placebo. A silicone-based paste that includes polymers to mimic coral mucus
consistency was applied directly to the disease margin(s).
3. Base 2b + Amoxicillin. The silicone-based paste was hand mixed with powdered
amoxicillin in an 8:1 (base:amoxicillin) by weight ratio. The paste includes time-release
products that regulate release of the amoxicillin over a three-day time period.
4. “New Base” Placebo. A biodegradable hydrophobic ointment designed to hold and
release antibacterial compounds.
5. New Base + Amoxicillin. The New Base Placebo was mixed with powdered amoxicillin
in an 8:1 by weight ratio. Release modifiers in the base facilitate amoxicillin release over
three-days.
Treatments were prepared less than 6 hours before application by mixing amoxicillin into
treatments 3 and 5, and by
packing treatments 2-5 into 60cc
catheter syringes. At each affected
coral, a treatment was squeezed
from the syringe and pressed onto
the length of the disease margin in
a band approximately 1 cm wide;
approximately 0.5 cm of this
anchored onto the dead skeleton
while approximately 0.5 cm
covered live tissue. If there were
multiple lesions on a coral, they
all received the same treatment.
Corals were revisited for
monitoring one week and four
weeks after initial treatment. At
each coral, the number of effective
and ineffective treatments were
tallied. Photographs were also taken

Figure 1. Number of colonies (top) and lesions (bottom) receiving
each treatment (“Amoxi” represents addition of powdered
amoxicillin). Colors show separation by species. Four-letter species
codes represent: Colpophyllia natans (CNAT), Montastraea
cavernosa (MCAV), Orbicella faveolata (OFAV), Orbicella
annularis (OANN), Diploria labyrinthiformes (DLAB),
Pseudodiploria strigosa (PSTR), Dichocoenia stokesii (DSTO).

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/870402; this version posted December 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and arranged so before and after photos of each lesion could be compared. All analyses are based
on the photographic comparisons because more lesions could be positively identified.
Effectiveness was defined as the cessation of disease progression at the treatment line.
Ineffectiveness was defined as the disease continuing unimpeded across the colony. Photographs
were also reviewed to identify whether new lesions had developed on each colony during the
post-treatment interval. After the one-month monitoring, all lesions on all surviving corals were
treated with Base 2b + Amoxicillin.

Results/Discussion
The proportion of effective treatments varied by treatment type (Fig. 2). For the controls
(colonies on which no treatment was applied), 0/17 treatments were effective. Both placebo base
treatments were also largely
ineffective, halting progression on
only 1/27 (4%) lesions treated
with New Base Placebo treatment,
and 4/47 (9%) lesions treated with
Base 2b Placebo. The four
effective Base 2b Placebo
treatments consisted of three
effective treatments on a single C.
natans colony and one effective
treatment on a single D.
labyrinthiformes colony.
Adding amoxicillin to both
placebo bases increased
effectiveness. New Base +
Amoxicillin effectiveness was
61% (11/18). Of the 7 failures, 5
occurred on Colpophyllia natans;
for this species, effectiveness was

Figure 2. Number of effective treated lesions (top) and ineffective
treated lesions (bottom) within each treatment. Colors represent
different species. Total percentage of effectively treated lesions for each
treatment type are shown above the effective lesion bars.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/870402; this version posted December 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

only 28% (2/7). Base 2b + Amoxicillin effectiveness was 86% (54/63). Of the 9 failures, 4
occurred on Pseudodiploria strigosa; for this species, effectiveness was 73% (11/15).
One month after treatment, one of the control colonies and six of the Base 2b Placebo colonies
had died completely. Amoxicillin-treated corals developed new lesions on 4/6 colonies treated
with New Base + Amoxicillin and on 11/23 colonies treated with Base 2b + Amoxicillin.
Topical antibiotic paste was largely effective in halting disease lesions. Though laboratory
antibiotic water dosing had been shown to halt SCTLD lesion progression, this trial tested and
proved that a targeted and topical application was effective on wild colonies. The effect was
directly tied to the addition of amoxicillin, as placebo application alone was ineffective in two
different mixtures. The addition of amoxicillin to each mixture increased effectiveness by 57%
(New Base) and 77% (Base 2b).
Antibiotic effectiveness is likely to remain localized within the region of application rather than
spreading throughout the colony; this is evidenced by the appearance of new lesions on some
amoxicillin-treated corals. To minimize mortality, coral colonies require revisitation in order to
retreat any failed margins and to treat any new lesions.
Treatment of SCTLD-infected colonies using topical amoxicillin paste is an option for SCTLD
disease intervention. Though requiring an investment of time and resources for initial treatment
as well as repeated visitation, it is a valuable tool for preserving high-value corals.

Acknowledgements
Funding for these activities was provided by Florida’s Department of Environmental Protection.
Work was conducted in the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary under permit FKNMS2019-115.

Literature Cited
Aeby G, Ushijima B, Campbell JE, Jones S, Williams G, Meyer JL, Hase C, Paul V (2019) Pathogenesis of a tissue loss
disease affecting multiple species of corals along the Florida Reef Tract. Frontiers in Marine Science 6:678

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/870402; this version posted December 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Meyer JL, Castellanos-Gell J, Aeby GS, Häse CC, Ushijima B, Paul VJ (2019) Microbial Community Shifts Associated
With the Ongoing Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease Outbreak on the Florida Reef Tract. Frontiers in
Microbiology 10
O'Neil K, Neely KL, Patterson J (2018) Nursery management and treatment of idsease-ravaged pillar coral
(Dendrogyra cylindrus) on the Florida Reef Tract. Florida DEP, Miami, FL 13
Precht WF, Gintert BE, Robbart ML, Fura R, van Woesik R (2016) Unprecedented Disease-Related Coral Mortality in
Southeastern Florida. Scientific Reports 6
Walton CJ, Hayes NK, Gilliam DS (2018) Impacts of a Regional, Multi-Year, Multi-Species Coral Disease Outbreak in
Southeast Florida. Frontiers in Marine Science 5

6

