bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Tubulin  recycling  limits  cold  tolerance  
  
Authors:  Gabriella  Li  and  Jeffrey  K.  Moore  
  
Department  of  Cell  and  Developmental  Biology,  University  of  Colorado  School  of  Medicine,  Aurora,  CO,  
USA  
  
Contact  information  for  corresponding  author:  
  
Jeff  Moore  
  
MS8108  
  
12801  E  17th  Ave  
  
Aurora,  CO  80045  
  
Phone:  303-­724-­6198  
  
Fax:  303-­724-­3420  
  
Email:  jeffrey.moore@ucdenver.edu  
  
  
  
  

	  

1  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

  
Abstract  
Although  cold  temperatures  have  long  been  used  to  depolymerize  microtubules,  how  temperature  
specifically  affects  the  polymerization  and  depolymerization  activities  of  tubulin  proteins  and  how  these  
lead  to  changes  in  microtubule  networks  in  cells  has  not  been  established.  We  investigated  these  
questions  in  budding  yeast,  an  organism  found  in  diverse  environments  and  therefore  predicted  to  
exhibit  dynamic  microtubules  across  a  broad  range  of  temperatures.  We  measured  the  dynamics  of  
GFP-­labeled  microtubules  in  living  cells  and  found  that  lowering  the  temperature  from  37ºC  to  10ºC  
decreased  the  rates  of  both  polymerization  and  depolymerization,  decreased  the  amount  of  polymer  
assembled  before  catastrophes  and  decreased  the  frequency  of  microtubule  emergence  from  
nucleation  sites.  Lowering  to  4ºC  caused  rapid  loss  of  almost  all  microtubule  polymer.  We  provide  
evidence  that  these  effects  on  microtubule  dynamics  may  be  explained  in  part  by  changes  in  the  co-­
factor-­dependent  conformational  dynamics  of  tubulin  proteins.  Ablation  of  tubulin-­binding  co-­factors  
further  sensitizes  cells  and  their  microtubules  to  low  temperatures,  and  we  highlight  a  specific  role  for  
TBCB/Alf1  in  microtubule  maintenance  at  low  temperatures.  Finally,  we  show  that  inhibiting  the  
maturation  cycle  of  tubulin  by  using  a  point  mutant  in  b-­tubulin  confers  hyper-­stable  microtubules  at  low  
temperatures,  rescues  the  requirement  for  TBCB/Alf1,  and  improves  the  cold  tolerance  of  the  yeast.  
Together,  these  results  reveal  an  unappreciated  step  in  the  tubulin  cycle  in  cells  and  suggest  that  this  
step  may  be  a  key  limiting  factor  in  the  thermal  tolerance  of  organisms.  

	  

2  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction  
Microtubules  are  distinct  from  other  cytoskeletal  polymers  in  that  they  rapidly  alternate  between  phases  
of  polymerization  and  depolymerization,  a  non-­equilibrium  behavior  known  as  ‘dynamic  instability’  
(Mitchison  and  Kirschner  1984).  This  behavior  depends  on  a  cycle  of  nucleotide-­dependent  
conformational  changes  in  the  heterodimeric  ab-­tubulin  subunits  that  form  microtubules  (Alushin  et  al.  
2014;;  Geyer  et  al.  2015;;  Hyman  et  al.  1995).  Each  heterodimer  binds  two  molecules  of  GTP  (Berry  and  
Shelanski  1972;;  Weisenberg,  Borisy,  and  Taylor  1968)).  One  GTP  is  sandwiched  between  a  and  b,  and  
is  neither  exchanged  nor  hydrolyzed  (Spiegelman,  Penningroth,  and  Kirschner  1977).  The  other  GTP  
binds  to  an  exposed  site  on  b,  known  as  the  exchangeable  site  or  “E-­site”.  This  nucleotide  exchanges  
rapidly  in  solution  and  is  hydrolyzed  to  GDP  during  microtubule  polymerization  (Carlier  and  Pantaloni  
1981;;  Correia  and  Williams  1983;;  Purich  and  Kristofferson  1984).  The  binding  of  GTP  to  the  E-­site  
promotes  tubulin  polymerization  and  microtubule  nucleation,  so  these  rates  exhibit  a  proportional  
dependence  on  the  concentration  of  available  GTP  (Carlier,  Didry,  and  Pantaloni  1987).  Polymerization  
and  nucleation  rate  also  strongly  depend  on  the  concentration  of  tubulin  (Olmsted  et  al.  1974;;  Walker  et  
al.  1988).  In  the  polymer  state,  tubulin  hydrolyzes  the  E-­site  GTP  and  undergoes  conformational  
changes  that  weaken  binding  to  neighboring  tubulins  (Alushin  et  al.  2014;;  Carlier  and  Pantaloni  1981;;  
Hyman  et  al.  1995).  These  conformational  states  have  been  described  in  great  detail  by  recent  cryo-­EM  
studies,  and  the  process  of  conformational  changes  is  referred  to  as  “maturation”  (Alushin  et  al.  2014;;  
Manka  and  Moores  2018;;  Zhang  et  al.  2015).  GDP-­bound  tubulin  dimers  exhibit  an  approximately  six-­
fold  higher  dissociation  constant  than  GTP-­bound  tubulin,  but  can  still  contribute  to  microtubule  
assembly  under  in  vitro  conditions  with  sufficient  concentrations  of  tubulin  and  Mg2+  (Carlier  and  
Pantaloni  1978;;  Hamel  et  al.  1986).  When  microtubules  switch  from  polymerization  to  depolymerization,  
an  event  known  as  catastrophe,  mature  GDP-­bound  tubulin  is  released  from  the  lattice.  In  contrast  to  
polymerization,  depolymerization  rates  are  concentration  independent  (Walker  et  al.  1988)    
Although  the  assembly  activity  of  tubulin  and  its  relation  to  nucleotide  status  is  well  established,  one  
important,  but  unanswered,  question  is  whether  tubulin  visits  intermediate,  assembly-­incompetent  
states  between  the  free  tubulin  and  microtubule  states  following  microtubule  disassembly.  Previous  
studies  have  shown  that  cold  temperatures  can  promote  the  formation  of  tubulin  oligomers  as  a  product  
of  disassembly  in  vitro.  As  protofilaments  peel  away  in  a  ‘ram’s  horn’  shape,  oligomers  of  curved  tubulin  
are  released  from  the  microtubule  (Bordas,  Mandelkow,  and  Mandelkow  1983;;  Lange  et  al.  1988;;  
Mandelkow,  Mandelkow,  and  Milligan  1991).  Increasing  temperature  causes  these  oligomers  to  
dissociate  into  heterodimers  (Bordas  et  al.  1983).  Despite  this  evidence  of  temperature-­dependent  
tubulin  oligomers  from  in  vitro  experiments,  what  remains  unknown  is  whether  these  structures  occur  in  
vivo  and  whether  they  represent  points  for  regulating  the  pool  of  assembly-­competent  tubulin.  
A  potential  mechanism  for  regulating  the  pool  of  assembly-­competent  tubulin  would  be  to  co-­opt  the  
tubulin  biogenesis  pathway.  Tubulin  biogenesis  requires  prefoldin  and  cytosolic  chaperonin  containing  
TCP-­1  (CCT),  to  begin  folding  nascent  a-­  and  b-­tubulin  after  translation  ((Tian  et  al.  1996;;  Vainberg  et  
al.  1998;;  Yaffe  et  al.  1992).  However,  unlike  actin  and  other  proteins  that  require  CCT  activity,  tubulin  
also  requires  an  additional  set  of  tubulin-­binding  co-­factors  (TBCs)  which  bring  together  α-­  and  β-­
tubulin  subunits  to  form  the  assembly-­competent  heterodimer  (Gao  et  al.  1993;;  Tian  et  al.  1997).  In  
addition  to  their  roles  in  tubulin  biogenesis,  TBCs  also  appear  to  regulate  the  activity  of  pre-­formed  
heterodimers.  In  vitro,  TBCC,  TBCD,  and  TBCE  form  a  complex  that  binds  to  pre-­formed  heterodimers  
and  acts  as  a  GTPase  activator  (GAP)  for  tubulin  in  the  absence  of  microtubule  polymerization  
(Nithianantham  et  al.  2015;;  Tian  et  al.  1999).  Both  TBCC  and  TBCE  have  each  been  shown  to  
disassemble  heterodimers  in  vitro,  and  overexpression  of  either  in  HeLa  cells  leads  to  microtubule  loss  
(Bhamidipati,  Lewis,  and  Cowan  2000).  The  dissociation  of  tubulin  heterodimers  by  TBCE  is  enhanced  
greatly  by  the  presence  of  TBCB,  together  forming  a  tri-­partite  complex  of  TBCE,  TBCB  and  a-­tubulin  
(Kortazar  et  al.  2007;;  Serna  et  al.  2015).  These  results  demonstrate  that  TBCs  can  act  on  already  
	  

3  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

formed  tubulin  heterodimers  to  alter  nucleotide-­binding  status  and  interactions  between  tubulins.  While  
it  is  unclear  whether  TBCs  play  a  role  in  the  transition  of  mature  GDP-­bound  tubulin  back  to  a  GTP-­
bound  assembly-­competent  heterodimer,  it  has  been  proposed  that  TBCs  could  provide  a  quality  
control  mechanism  to  regulate  the  concentration  of  GTP-­bound  tubulin  in  cells  (Tian  and  Cowan  2013).    
The  exquisite  temperature  sensitivity  of  microtubule  dynamics  provides  a  potential  window  for  gaining  
insight  into  these  questions.  Early  studies  of  cytoskeletal  polymers  found  that  microtubules  are  uniquely  
cold  sensitive  and  quickly  disappear  upon  incubation  at  low  temperatures  (Breton  and  Brown  1998;;  
Tilney  and  Porter  1967;;  Weber,  Pollack,  and  Bibring  1975;;  Weisenberg  1972).  In  fact,  this  property  of  
tubulin  is  routinely  used  in  protocols  for  purifying  tubulin  through  cycles  of  temperature-­induced  
polymerization  and  depolymerization  (Borisy  et  al.  1975;;  Olmsted  and  Borisy  1973).  The  cold  sensitivity  
of  tubulin  stands  in  contrast  to  F-­actin  polymers  which  persist  after  exposure  to  low  temperatures  
(Breton  and  Brown  1998).  The  loss  of  microtubule  polymer  at  low  temperatures  suggests  a  unique  
disruption  of  the  normal  tubulin  cycle  that  may  trap  tubulin  in  an  assembly-­incompetent  state.    
In  this  study,  we  sought  to  determine  how  low  temperature  impacts  the  tubulin  cycle  to  lead  to  the  loss  
of  microtubules  in  vivo.  We  used  the  budding  yeast  model,  which  has  several  major  advantages  for  our  
study.  Budding  yeast  have  a  simple  microtubule  network  allowing  for  the  measurement  of  single  astral  
microtubules  while  possessing  only  one  β-­tubulin  and  two  α-­tubulin  isotypes,  thus  forming  a  more  
homogeneous  tubulin  pool  than  that  found  in  higher  eukaryotes.  Yeast  are  also  found  in  diverse  
environments  around  the  world,  suggesting  that  yeast  tubulin  may  exhibit  a  broader  dynamic  range  of  
temperature  response.  We  find  that  the  rates  of  yeast  microtubule  polymerization  and  depolymerization  
are  proportional  to  temperature  and  provide  evidence  that  TBCs  promote  tubulin  activity  at  low  
temperatures.  We  propose  a  model  in  which  low  temperatures  trap  tubulin  in  an  assembly-­incompetent  
state,  and  the  pathway  involved  in  tubulin  biogenesis  may  help  return  it  to  assembly  competence.  

	  

4  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results  
Temperature  dependence  of  microtubule  dynamics  in  vivo.  
We  began  by  testing  the  hypothesis  that  microtubules  fail  to  assemble  at  low  temperatures  because  the  
rate  of  microtubule  polymerization  may  be  more  temperature  dependent  than  the  rate  of  
depolymerization.  This  hypothesis  predicts  that  the  polymerization  rate  will  decrease  more  sharply  as  
temperature  decreases,  compared  to  the  depolymerization  rate.  To  test  this  prediction,  we  measured  
the  lengths  of  single  GFP-­Tub1  labeled  astral  microtubules  over  time  in  cells  incubated  at  different  
temperatures  (Fig  1A,  B).  We  controlled  temperature  using  a  stage-­top  microfluidic  device,  shifting  from  
our  standard  temperature  (30ºC)  to  the  target  temperature  for  ~10  minutes  before  imaging  (see  
Materials  and  Methods).  In  our  experimental  set  up,  10ºC  was  the  lowest  temperature  that  could  be  
stably  maintained  during  imaging.  At  the  other  end  of  our  temperature  range,  we  found  similar  
phenotypes  for  37ºC  and  39ºC;;  but  temperatures  higher  than  39ºC  severely  inhibited  microtubule  
assembly  (data  not  shown).  Within  the  range  from  37°C  to  10°C,  we  find  that  median  astral  microtubule  
length  observed  per  cell  over  10  minutes  tended  to  decrease  when  the  temperature  was  lowered  (Fig  
1C).    
We  used  the  full  data  set  of  microtubule  length  measurements  over  time  to  calculate  different  
parameters  of  individual  astral  microtubule  dynamics.  As  expected,  polymerization  rates  of  astral  
microtubules  decrease  as  temperature  decreases  from  37ºC  to  10ºC  (1.589  ±0.1145  at  37ºC,  n=102;;  
1.151  ±0.0730  at  30ºC,  n=104;;  0.9064  ±0.11745  at  25ºC,  n=47;;  0.6226  ±0.15845  at  10ºC,  n=20;;  mean  
±95%CI;;  Fig  1D).    We  also  found  that  depolymerization  rates  decrease  across  this  temperature  range  
(3.013  ±0.2340  at  37ºC,  n=97;;  1.944  ±0.1445  at  30ºC,  n=101;;  1.360  ±0.1585  at  25ºC,  n=49;;  0.5731  
±0.16255  at  10ºC,  n=29;;  mean  ±95%CI;;  Fig  1E).  The  Arrhenius  Plot  in  Figure  1F  depicts  the  rates  of  
change  for  polymerization  and  depolymerization  across  temperatures.  As  temperature  decreases,  the  
rate  of  depolymerization  slows  faster  than  the  rate  of  polymerization,  and  these  rates  are  predicted  to  
intersect  at  ~13°C  (Fig  1F).  Based  on  these  results,  the  decrease  in  microtubule  polymerization  rate  at  
low  temperatures  (<13ºC)  would  be  expected  to  be  offset  by  slower  depolymerization.  Therefore,  the  
loss  of  microtubule  polymer  at  low  temperatures  cannot  be  explained  by  changes  in  polymerization  and  
depolymerization  rates  alone.  
In  addition  to  changes  in  polymerization  and  depolymerization,  we  identified  other  parameters  that  
exhibit  strong  dependence  on  temperature.    To  determine  how  catastrophe  is  impacted  by  temperature  
change,  we  measured  the  length  that  a  microtubule  assembles  before  a  catastrophe  event  and  found  
that  these  assembly  lengths  decrease  as  temperature  decreases  (Fig  1G).  In  other  words,  at  lower  
temperatures,  less  lattice  is  assembled  before  the  microtubule  undergoes  catastrophe.  We  attempted  a  
similar  analysis  to  assess  rescue  events;;  however,  the  scarcity  of  rescue  events  at  10ºC  and  25ºC  does  
not  permit  a  reliable  measurement.  At  these  lower  temperatures,  microtubules  tend  to  depolymerize  
below  our  resolution  limit  (0.213  µm)  and  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  spindle  pole  bodies  (SPBs).  
We  also  measured  dynamicity,  defined  as  the  overall  exchange  of  tubulin  dimers  at  the  microtubule  end  
per  second  (Jordan  et  al.  1993).  We  found  that  dynamicity  decreases  significantly  as  the  temperature  
lowers  from  37°C  to  10°C  (51.07±5.82  at  37ºC,  n=22;;  35.25±1.89  at  30ºC,  n=30;;  25.98±2.47  at  25ºC,  
n=21;;  13.80±2.80  at  10ºC,  n=23;;  mean  ±95%CI;;  Table  1).  
We  next  examined  how  temperature  impacts  the  formation  of  microtubules  from  nucleation  sites  at  the  
SPBs.  We  identified  astral  microtubules  that  depolymerized  to  lengths  below  the  resolution  limit  of  our  
microscope  (0.213µm)  and  measured  the  time  elapsed  before  an  astral  microtubule  re-­emerged  from  
the  SPB  (Fig  1H).  At  lower  temperatures,  we  observed  significant  delays  before  re-­emergence  (Fig  1I;;  
10ºC).  Figure  1H  depicts  the  frequency  of  astral  microtubules  that  emerged  from  the  SPB  within  20  
seconds  of  depolymerizing  below  our  resolution  limit;;  we  termed  this  ‘re-­fire  frequency’.  This  analysis  
shows  that  low  temperature  inhibits  astral  microtubule  emergence  from  the  SPB  (Fig  1I;;  S1).  In  fact,  
	  

5  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

these  data  may  underrepresent  the  impact  of  low  temperature.  We  find  that  at  10ºC,  7  of  22  cells  failed  
to  form  new  astral  microtubules  within  the  10-­minute  timeframe  of  our  analysis,  compared  to  0  of  30  
cells  at  30ºC  and  1  of  21  cells  at  37ºC.  These  results  suggest  that  failure  to  initiate  microtubule  
formation  at  nucleation  sites  may  contribute  to  the  loss  of  microtubule  polymer  at  low  temperature.      
  
ab-­tubulin  levels  are  maintained  at  low  temperature,  despite  loss  of  microtubules  

Because  microtubule  polymerization  rate  depends  on  the  concentration  of  ab-­tubulin  heterodimers,  we  
next  tested  whether  the  loss  of  microtubules  at  low  temperature  could  be  attributable  to  cold-­induced  
destruction  of  ab-­tubulin  heterodimers.  Previous  work  in  human  neuronal  cell  lines  and  iPSC-­derived  
neurons  has  shown  that  exposure  to  low  temperatures  causes  a  loss  of  microtubule  polymer  as  well  as  
a  decrease  in  tubulin  protein  levels  (Huff  et  al.  2010;;  Ou  et  al.  2018).  To  determine  if  budding  yeast  
have  the  same  response  to  low  temperatures,  we  examined  microtubules  and  ab-­tubulin  protein  levels  
in  cells  after  prolonged  exposure  to  low  temperature.  Cells  grown  to  early  log  phase  at  30ºC  and  then  
shifted  to  4°C  lost  all  astral  microtubules  within  15  minutes,  and  this  loss  of  polymer  persisted  after  24  
hours  at  4°C  (Fig  2A,  B).  Nuclear  microtubule  loss  was  more  gradual  than  astral  microtubules,  but  after  
60  minutes  at  4ºC,  most  cells  lacked  both  astral  and  nuclear  microtubules.  In  contrast  to  the  loss  of  
microtubule  polymer,  we  found  no  change  in  tubulin  protein  levels,  based  on  western  blots  for  α-­tubulin  
and  β-­tubulin  in  lysates  from  cells  incubated  at  30°C  or  4°C  for  24  hours  (Fig  2C).  As  a  second  test  of  
whether  tubulin  irreversibly  loses  activity  during  prolonged  exposure  to  low  temperature,  we  measured  
the  kinetics  of  astral  microtubule  recovery  after  shifting  cells  from  4°C  back  to  30°C  (Fig  2D).  We  found  
that  astral  microtubules  recover  quickly,  on  a  time  scale  of  seconds,  when  cells  are  shifted  back  to  
30°C  (Fig  2E).  This  indicates  that  ab-­tubulin  can  quickly  recover  polymerization  activity  when  the  
temperature  is  raised.  The  rapid  time  scale  also  suggests  that  it  is  unlikely  that  recovery  requires  the  
biogenesis  of  a  new  pool  of  tubulin  at  30°C,  which  occurs  on  the  order  of  minutes  (J.  Moore,  
unpublished).  These  results  suggest  that  low  temperature  inhibits  microtubule  assembly  without  
depleting  the  levels  of  tubulin  protein  in  the  cell.    
  
Filamentous  actin  is  not  lost  at  low  temperature.    
Low  temperature  is  expected  to  generally  slow  biochemical  reactions  and  have  pervasive  effects  on  
cellular  homeostasis  that  could  indirectly  inhibit  microtubule  assembly.  To  assess  whether  cytoskeletal  
dynamics  are  generally  diminished  at  low  temperatures,  we  examined  effects  on  the  actin  cytoskeleton.  
We  measured  F-­actin  polymerization  and  depolymerization  across  temperatures  using  the  well-­
established  model  of  endocytic  patch  dynamics  in  budding  yeast  (Lin  et  al.  2010).  We  labeled  F-­actin  
using  Lifeact-­GFP  and  recorded  time-­lapse  images  on  a  spinning  disk  confocal  microscope  at  10°C  and  
37°C  (Fig  3A).  The  lifetimes  of  actin  patches  are  longer  at  10°C,  compared  to  37ºC  (29.92  ±2.72  
seconds  at  10ºC,  n  =  49;;  7.08,  ±0.786  seconds  at  37ºC,  n  =  30;;  p  <0.0001;;  Fig  3A,  B).  Furthermore,  the  
rates  at  which  the  intensity  of  Lifeact-­GFP  at  individual  patches  increase  and  decrease,  indicative  of  F-­
actin  polymerization  and  depolymerization,  are  slower  at  10°C  compared  to  37°C  (Fig  3C).  These  
slower  rates  are  reminiscent  of  the  effects  we  measured  for  microtubule  dynamics.  However,  an  
important  difference  is  that  cells  do  not  lose  F-­actin  polymer  at  low  temperatures.  We  shifted  cells  to  
4°C  for  up  to  24  hours  and  found  that  actin  patches  and  cables  are  still  present  (Fig  3D).  We  conclude  
that  actin  dynamics  slow  at  low  temperatures,  but  unlike  microtubules,  F-­actin  is  not  lost.    
  
Tubulin  chaperones  help  recycle  tubulin  at  low  temperatures  
We  hypothesize  that  low  temperature  may  be  trapping  tubulin  in  an  assembly-­incompetent  state,  such  
as  the  cold  induced  oligomers  seen  in  vitro  (Bordas  et  al.  1983;;  Lange  et  al.  1988;;  Mandelkow  et  al.  
1991),  and  factors  that  bind  tubulin  could  play  a  role  in  recycling  a  heterodimer  back  to  an  assembly-­
	  

6  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

competent  state.  We  sought  to  use  cold  sensitivity  to  identify  cellular  mechanisms  for  recycling  
assembly-­incompetent  tubulin  by  screening  null  alleles  for  a  cold  sensitive  phenotype.  We  
hypothesized  that  cells  might  co-­opt  tubulin  biogenesis  pathways  to  maintain  the  pool  of  assembly-­
competent  tubulin  (Fig  4A),  and  that  this  role  may  become  more  important  at  lower  temperatures.  To  
test  this,  we  systematically  generated  all  viable  null  mutants  in  the  tubulin  biogenesis  pathway  and  
screened  for  growth  defects  at  low  temperature  (Fig  4B,  C).  We  also  screened  mutations  known  to  
regulate  microtubule  dynamics  and  motor  activity  (Fig  S2).  To  distinguish  growth  defects  that  are  
specific  to  cold  sensitivity  from  those  caused  by  general  depletion  of  assembly-­competent  
heterodimers,  we  also  tested  each  mutant  for  sensitivity  to  the  destabilizing  drug  benomyl  (Fig  4B  and  
C;;  S2).  We  found  that  null  mutants  in  the  prefoldin  complex  components  GIM3,  GIM5,  and  YKE2  impair  
growth  at  15°C,  compared  to  wild-­type  controls,  but  also  exhibit  hyper-­sensitivity  to  benomyl  (Fig  4B).  
Although  null  mutants  in  most  CCT  genes  are  lethal  in  yeast,  we  did  test  a  null  mutant  in  PLP1  
(Lacefield  and  Solomon  2003),  but  found  that  this  has  little  to  no  phenotype  at  low  temperature  or  in  the  
presence  of  benomyl  (Fig  4B).  Several  null  mutants  in  the  TBC  genes  showed  sensitivity  to  low  
temperature  and  benomyl;;  however,  the  null  mutant  in  ALF1/TBCB  showed  increased  cold  sensitivity  
but  only  slightly  increased  benomyl  sensitivity,  compared  to  wild-­type  controls  (Fig  4C).  We  therefore  
prioritized  the  ALF1/TBCB  null  mutant  for  further  study.  Our  analysis  also  identified  increased  cold  
sensitivity  for  null  mutants  in  the  microtubule  regulators  Bik1/CLIP170,  Bim1/EB1  and  Cin8/kinesin-­5  
(Fig  S2).    
To  investigate  how  loss  of  ALF1/TBCB  impacts  tubulin  activity  at  low  temperature,  we  created  an  alf1∆  
null  mutant  strain  that  expresses  GFP-­Tub1.  We  initially  sought  to  measure  microtubule  dynamics  in  
this  strain;;  however,  we  found  the  GFP-­Tub1  signal  bleaches  rapidly  in  cells  lacking  ALF1/TBCB.  This  
does  not  appear  to  be  due  to  lower  expression  of  GFP-­Tub1  in  alf1∆  mutants,  based  on  western  
blotting  (data  not  shown);;  and  may  therefore  reflect  a  loss  of  assembly  activity  for  the  GFP-­Tub1  fusion.  
Because  these  mutant  cells  are  not  amenable  for  time-­lapse  imaging,  we  instead  used  our  assay  to  
measure  microtubule  recovery  upon  raising  the  temperature  from  4ºC  to  30ºC.  We  find  that  the  alf1Δ  
mutant  slows  the  recovery  of  microtubules  after  exposure  to  low  temperatures.  When  incubated  at  4°C  
for  25  minutes  before  increasing  the  temperature  back  to  30°C,  alf1Δ  mutant  cells  exhibit  slower  
recovery  of  astral  microtubules  than  wild-­type  cells  (Fig  4E).  This  slower  recovery  of  astral  microtubules  
in  the  alf1Δ  mutant  still  happens  on  a  time  scale  that  is  faster  than  would  be  expected  for  the  
biogenesis  of  new  tubulin.  Accordingly,  this  suggests  that  Alf1  promotes  the  recovery  of  tubulin  
assembly  competence  after  cold  induced  depolymerization.    
To  further  investigate  a  role  for  Alf1/TBCB  in  tubulin  recycling,  we  used  an  α-­tubulin  mutation,  R264C,  
that  was  originally  identified  through  association  with  human  brain  malformations  and  subsequently  
shown  to  disrupt  interaction  with  TBCB  (Tian  et  al.  2008).  We  generated  an  analogous  mutation  at  the  
R265  residue  in  the  major  yeast  a-­tubulin,  TUB1.    We  find  that  tub1-­R265C  mutant  cells  exhibit  a  level  
of  cold  sensitivity  that  is  similar  to  alf1∆  null  mutants  (Fig  4F).  However,  tub1-­R265C  mutants  are  more  
sensitive  to  benomyl  than  alf1∆  null  mutants  (Fig  4F).  Providing  cells  with  an  additional  copy  of  the  
tub1-­R265C  mutant  allele  rescues  benomyl  sensitivity,  but  not  cold  sensitivity  (Fig  4G,  H).  This  
suggests  the  interaction  between  tubulin  and  the  Alf1/TBCB  becomes  essential  at  low  temperature.  
This  supports  our  hypothesis  that  the  tubulin  biogenesis  pathway  plays  a  role  in  recycling  tubulin  to  
replenish  the  assembly-­competent  pool.  
  
Preventing  tubulin  maturation  stabilizes  microtubules  at  low  temperatures  
As  a  second  test  of  our  hypothesis,  we  predicted  that  tubulin  mutants  that  persist  in  an  immature,  
assembly-­competent  state  could  confer  cold  stability  to  microtubules.  To  test  this  prediction,  we  
introduced  a  C354S  substitution  mutation  into  the  β-­tubulin  gene,  TUB2  (Fig  5A).  The  tub2-­C354S  
	  

7  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

mutant  has  been  previously  shown  to  form  hyper-­stable  microtubules  in  vivo  and  in  vitro,  and  
microtubules  assembled  from  tub2-­C354S  heterodimers  in  vitro  preferentially  bind  to  the  yeast  EB  
protein,  Bim1  (Geyer  et  al.  2015;;  Gupta  et  al.  2001,  2002).  Based  on  these  results,  this  mutation  is  
thought  to  block  heterodimer  compaction  associated  with  GTP  hydrolysis,  and  therefore  remain  in  a  
constitutively  immature,  assembly-­competent  state  (Geyer  et  al.  2015).  Consistent  with  previous  
studies,  we  find  that  cells  expressing  tub2-­C354S  exhibit  persistent  astral  microtubules  after  shifting  to  
4°C  (Fig  5B).  These  astral  microtubules  persist  even  after  incubating  mutant  cells  for  24  hours  at  4°C  
(Fig  5C).  In  our  microtubule  dynamics  assay,  we  find  that  tub2-­C354S  slows  microtubule  polymerization  
and  depolymerization  and  exhibits  fewer  catastrophes  and  rescues  than  wild-­type  cells  (Fig  5D).  At  low  
temperature  (10ºC),  tub2-­C354S  microtubules  exhibit  little  change  in  length  over  time,  indicating  that  
the  cold  stability  of  the  mutant  tubulin  is  not  attributable  to  faster  assembly  rates  (Fig  5D,  (Gupta  et  al.  
2002)).  To  test  whether  the  cold-­stability  of  tub2-­C354S  mutant  tubulin  could  be  explained  by  increased  
tubulin  concentration,  we  measured  ab-­tubulin  levels  via  western  blot  and  found  that  wild-­type  and  
tub2-­C354S  cells  maintain  similar  amounts  of  tubulin  across  temperatures  (Fig  5E).  Thus,  blocking  
tubulin  maturation  is  sufficient  to  produce  stable  microtubules  at  low  temperature.  
Not  only  were  tub2-­C354S  microtubules  cold  stable,  but  we  also  found  that  expressing  tub2-­C354S  
shifts  the  optimal  temperature  range  for  yeast  cell  growth.  tub2-­C354S  mutant  cells  grow  better  at  low  
temperatures  than  wild-­type  cells,  but  worse  at  high  temperatures  (Fig  5F,  G;;  (Gupta  et  al.  2001)).  To  
test  if  this  cold  tolerant  growth  was  a  result  of  tub2-­C354S  cells  exhibiting  more  rapid  cell  division  at  
lower  temperatures,  we  used  Spc110-­tdTomato  labeled  strains  to  measure  the  rate  at  which  cells  
released  from  α-­factor  synchronization  at  15°C  formed  bipolar  spindles  (Fig  S3B).  We  did  not  find  a  
difference  in  the  rate  at  which  wild-­type  or  tub2-­C354S  assemble  spindles  at  15ºC  (Fig  S3C).  As  a  
positive  control,  we  were  able  to  detect  a  slowing  of  bipolar  spindle  formation  in  cells  treated  with  
benomyl  to  disrupt  the  microtubule  network  (Fig  S3C).  Thus,  the  improved  growth  of  tub2-­C354S  cells  
at  low  temperature  is  not  clearly  attributable  to  improved  spindle  assembly;;  and  the  source  of  this  
phenotype  remains  unclear.  
  
tub2-­C354S  rescues  the  cold  sensitivity  of  alf1Δ  
Together,  our  data  support  a  model  in  which  low  temperature  traps  mature  tubulin  in  an  assembly-­
incompetent  state,  and  that  the  tubulin  biogenesis  pathway  may  help  tubulin  escape  and  return  to  the  
immature,  assembly-­competent  state.  Based  on  this  model,  we  predict  that  the  tub2-­C354S  mutation  
should  rescue  the  requirement  for  ALF1/TBCB  at  low  temperatures  by  keeping  tubulin  in  an  immature,  
assembly-­competent  state.  To  test  this  prediction,  we  generated  double  mutant  cells  combining  tub2-­
C354S  with  alf1Δ  and  compared  their  growth  at  15°C  and  in  the  presence  of  benomyl  to  that  of  the  
alf1∆  single  mutant.  Consistent  with  our  prediction,  we  find  that  the  double  mutant  rescues  the  growth  
sensitivity  of  alf1Δ  at  low  temperatures  and  sensitivity  to  benomyl  (Fig  6A).  As  a  second  test,  we  
directly  assessed  microtubule  stability  at  low  temperatures.  We  used  a  modified  version  of  our  cold-­shift  
experiment  –  instead  of  incubating  cells  at  4ºC,  where  wild-­type  cells  lose  all  microtubule  polymer,  we  
used  an  intermediate  temperature  of  15°C  and  analyzed  the  portion  of  cells  with  remaining  GFP-­Tub1  
labeled  astral  microtubules  (Fig  6B).    We  find  that  tub2-­C354S  alf1∆  double  mutants  have  a  higher  
frequency  of  cells  with  astral  microtubules  than  wild-­type  controls  or  the  alf1Δ  single  mutant  but  
decreased  compared  to  the  tub2-­C354S  single  mutant  after  120  minutes  at  15°C  (Fig  6C).  We  
confirmed  by  western  blot  that  all  strains  used  in  this  experiment  have  similar  tubulin  concentrations,  
and  that  these  concentrations  are  not  altered  by  shifting  to  low  temperature  (Fig  6D).  Therefore,  the  
tub2-­C354S  mutation  rescues  the  loss  of  ALF1/TBCB  by  restoring  the  quality  of  the  tubulin  pool,  not  the  
quantity.  These  results  add  support  to  our  model  that  Alf1/TBCB  promotes  the  return  of  tubulin  to  an  
assembly-­competent  state.  
	  

8  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

  
  
Discussion  
The  cold  sensitivity  of  microtubules  has  been  known  for  many  years.  In  early  studies,  cold  sensitivity  
distinguished  microtubules  from  other  cytoskeletal  filaments,  and  it  has  since  been  used  as  a  tool  to  
selectively  disrupt  microtubule  networks  in  cells  and  to  purify  tubulin  from  cells  through  cycles  of  
temperature-­induced  depolymerization  and  polymerization  (Inoué  2010;;  Olmsted  et  al.  1974;;  Tilney  and  
Porter  1967).  Although  cold  sensitivity  is  well  known,  why  cells  lose  microtubules  at  low  temperatures  
has  not  been  precisely  defined.  The  goals  of  this  study  are  to  define  the  mechanistic  basis  for  
microtubule  loss  at  low  temperatures,  and  then  to  use  this  as  a  tool  to  gain  broader  insight  into  how  
cells  regulate  microtubule  dynamics.    
An  important  question  is  whether  microtubule  loss  at  low  temperature  is  attributable  to  direct  effects  on  
tubulin  activity,  or  indirect  consequences  of  temperature-­induced  changes  in  cell  physiology.  While  we  
cannot  completely  rule  out  the  impact  of  other  cold-­induced  changes  in  cell  physiology,  several  lines  of  
evidence  indicate  that  microtubule  loss  results  from  direct  effects  on  tubulin  activity.  It  is  well  
established  that  the  activity  of  purified  tubulin  exhibits  strong  dependence  on  temperature.  Microtubules  
reconstituted  in  vitro  from  purified  mammalian  tubulin  are  destabilized  by  low  temperature  and  exhibit  
unique,  curled  protofilament  architectures  that  suggest  temperature-­dependent  changes  in  inter-­  and/or  
intra-­heterodimer  interactions  (Mandelkow  et  al.  1991).  Interestingly,  tubulin  purified  from  psychrophilic  
organisms  forms  microtubules  that  remain  stable  at  low  temperature,  consistent  with  the  notion  that  
interspecies  differences  in  the  tubulin  proteins  may  determine  cold  sensitivity  (Himes  and  Detrich  
1989).  Thus,  temperature  directly  and  potently  impacts  the  tubulin  protein  in  a  way  that  alters  its  
assembly  activity.  By  comparison,  F-­actin  reconstituted  in  vitro  from  purified  mammalian  actin  is  not  
destabilized  by  low  temperature  ((Breton  and  Brown  1998;;  Weber  et  al.  1975).  We  also  find  F-­actin  in  
yeast  cells  is  not  lost  at  low  temperatures  (Figure  3).    Although  the  rates  of  F-­actin  polymerization  and  
depolymerization  do  slow  when  temperature  decreases  to  10ºC,  there  is  no  net  loss  of  F-­actin,  even  
after  prolonged  exposure  to  4ºC  (Figures  3C).  Thus,  polymer  loss  at  low  temperature  is  a  unique  
feature  of  tubulin  and  likely  due  to  temperature-­dependent  effects  on  protein  activity.  
In  seeking  to  define  the  mechanistic  basis  for  microtubule  loss  at  low  temperatures,  we  first  considered  
a  simple  kinetic  model  in  which  changes  in  four  parameters  of  microtubule  dynamics  –  polymerization  
rate,  depolymerization  rate,  catastrophe  frequency,  and  rescue  frequency  –  would  be  sufficient  to  
explain  microtubule  loss  at  low  temperatures.  We  find  that  both  polymerization  and  depolymerization  
rates  decrease  as  the  temperature  decreases  from  37ºC  and  10ºC  (Figure  1;;  Table  1)  consistent  with  
what  has  been  observed  in  vitro  (Fygenson,  Braun,  and  Libchaber  1994).  Surprisingly,  the  effect  of  
temperature  on  depolymerization  rate  is  more  pronounced  than  what  we  observed  for  polymerization  
rate.  The  Arrhenius  plot  in  Figure  1F  shows  these  rates  intersecting  at  ~13°C,  and  at  lower  
temperatures  the  polymerization  rate  is  faster  than  the  depolymerization  rate.  Although  polymerization  
and  depolymerization  are  clearly  impacted  by  temperature  change,  we  conclude  that  these  effects  
alone  are  not  sufficient  to  explain  the  loss  of  microtubule  polymer  at  low  temperatures.  We  did  not  
observe  enough  rescue  events  at  10  ºC  and  25  ºC  to  make  reliable  measurements;;  however,  we  did  
find  that  catastrophe  frequency  increases  at  low  temperature.  Since  polymerization  slows  as  
temperature  decreases,  we  measured  catastrophe  as  a  function  of  microtubule  length  assembled,  
rather  than  as  a  function  of  time.  We  find  that  this  length  value  decreases  as  the  temperature  lowers  
(Figure  1;;  Table  1).  Thus,  at  low  temperatures,  less  microtubule  lattice  is  assembled  before  catastrophe  
occurs.  We  propose  two  models  that  could  explain  how  low  temperature  promotes  catastrophe.  In  the  
first  model,  the  slower  rate  of  tubulin  addition  to  the  plus  end  at  low  temperatures  may  not  outpace  GTP  
hydrolysis.  Accordingly,  plus  ends  may  have  shorter  GTP  caps  at  low  temperatures.  In  the  second  
	  

9  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

model,  low  temperature  may  destabilize  the  plus  end  by  inhibiting  lateral  interactions  between  
protofilaments.  This  model  is  inspired  by  recent  observations  that  assembling  plus  ends  contain  
protofilament  extensions  that  must  zipper  together  to  form  a  complete  lattice  (McIntosh  et  al.  2018),  and  
older  evidence  that  low  temperature  induces  protofilaments  to  adopt  an  outwardly  curled  configuration  
that  prevents  lateral  interactions  (Mandelkow  et  al.  1991).  We  speculate  that  the  increase  in  
catastrophes  may  explain  why  microtubule  polymer  is  lost  at  lower  temperatures.    
In  addition,  our  results  also  suggest  that  low  temperature  inhibits  microtubule  nucleation  activity.  In  this  
model,  microtubules  are  lost  at  low  temperatures  because  they  depolymerize  completely  and  then  
tubulin  fails  to  nucleate  new  microtubules.  Consistent  with  this,  we  find  that  low  temperature  inhibits  the  
emergence  of  microtubules  from  SPBs  (Figure  2A  and  B).  Since  SPBs  contain  Ɣ-­tubulin  small  
complexes  (Ɣ-­TuSCs)  that  nucleate  microtubules,  this  effect  could  be  attributable  to  cold  sensitivity  of  
Ɣ-­TuSC  activity  or  the  intrinsic  nucleation  activity  of  ab-­tubulin  heterodimers  (Sobel  and  Snyder  1995;;  
Zheng  et  al.  1995).  Distinguishing  between  these  possibilities  will  require  further  study.  
We  speculate  that  the  formation  of  assembly-­incompetent  tubulin  may  be  a  pervasive  feature  of  
microtubule  dynamics  that  is  exacerbated  by,  rather  than  unique  to,  low  temperature.  Numerous  in  vitro  
reconstitution  studies  have  shown  that  depolymerized  tubulin  is  intrinsically  capable  of  cycling  back  to  
an  assembly-­competent,  GTP-­bound  state  when  provided  with  optimal  conditions.  These  conditions  
that  include  warm  temperatures,  high  concentrations  of  free  GTP  (1mM),  80mM  PIPES,  high  Mg2+  (≥  
1mM),  and  low  Ca2+(Borisy  et  al.  1975;;  Lee  and  Timasheff  1977;;  Weisenberg  1972).  How  this  transition  
from  mature  GDP-­tubulin  to  assembly-­competent,  GTP-­tubulin  is  achieved  in  a  complex  in  vivo  cellular  
environment  is  an  important  question.  Conditions  in  cells  differ  from  in  vitro  reconstitution  experiments  
in  ways  that  are  likely  to  impact  tubulin  activity.  For  example,  consider  budding  yeast  in  which  the  total  
intracellular  concentration  of  GTP  is  reported  to  be  1.5mM  (Breton  et  al.  2008)  with  many  proteins  
competing  with  tubulin  for  binding  to  this  nucleotide  pool.  Intracellular  Mg2+  ranges  between  500uM  and  
1mM  (Romani  and  Scarpa  1992),  and  most  of  these  cations  are  complexed  with  proteins  and  nucleic  
acids  (Cyert  and  Philpott  2013).  Available  Mg2+  in  vivo  is  therefore  likely  below  the  concentrations  
required  for  microtubule  dynamics  in  vitro.  Finally,  many  eukaryotic  cells  maintain  nM  concentrations  of  
Ca2+  in  the  cytoplasm,  and  budding  yeast  can  survive  with  cytosolic  Ca2+  concentrations  up  to  2mM  
(Halachmi  and  Eilam  1989;;  Kováč  1985);;  however,  in  vitro  microtubule  dynamics  assays  typically  
contain  no  Ca2+(Gell  et  al.  2010).  Thus,  the  conditions  that  support  dynamic  tubulin  assembly  in  vitro  
are  unlikely  to  represent  the  complexity  of  tubulin  regulation  in  vivo.  Extrinsic  factors  are  likely  to  play  
critical  roles  in  regulating  tubulin  activity  in  the  cellular  environment.  
Our  results  also  reveal  an  additional  effect  of  temperature  on  tubulin  where  low  temperature  causes  
tubulin  to  accumulate  in  an  assembly-­incompetent  state  that  is  the  product  of  microtubule  disassembly.  
Our  confirmation  of  the  previous  finding  that  the  C354S  mutation  in  b-­tubulin  maintains  microtubules  at  
low  temperature  indicates  that  a  full  maturation  cycle  is  required  for  tubulin  to  visit  the  assembly-­
incompetent  state  (Figure  5;;(Gupta  et  al.  2001,  2002)).  The  C354S  mutation  is  thought  to  disrupt  the  
tubulin  cycle  and  maintain  an  ‘immature’  state  by  uncoupling  GTP  hydrolysis  from  conformational  
changes  (Geyer  et  al.  2015).  Accordingly,  C354S  mutant  tubulin  may  avoid  the    assembly-­incompetent  
state  by  not  visiting  the  mature  state  of  the  tubulin  cycle.  Importantly,  we  found  that  total  tubulin  
concentration  in  yeast  cells,  for  both  wild-­type  and  C354S  mutants,  does  not  change  when  temperature  
is  decreased  as  low  as  4ºC  (Figure  2E  and  5D).  This  stands  in  contrast  to  the  decrease  in  tubulin  
concentration  during  exposure  to  low  temperatures  that  has  been  previously  reported  in  cultured  
human  neurons  (Huff  et  al.  2010;;  Ou  et  al.  2018).  Based  on  this  evidence,  we  propose  that  when  
tubulin  depolymerizes  at  low  temperature  it  becomes  trapped  in  a  conformationally  matured,  assembly-­
incompetent  state  that  is  incompatible  with  microtubule  polymerization.  This  model  could  therefore  lead  
to  microtubule  loss  by  sequestering  the  pool  of  assembly-­competent  tubulin  contributing  to  slower  
polymerization  rates  observed  at  low  temperatures.    
Our  results  indicate  that  TBCs,  particularly  TBCB/Alf1,  may  play  an  important  role  in  recycling  tubulin  
10  
	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

from  an  assembly-­incompetent  state  to  maintain  the  pool  of  assembly-­competent  tubulin  in  the  cell.  
Interestingly,  previous  studies  found  that  a  complex  of  TBCB  and  TBCE  dissolves  heterodimers  and  
forms  a  tri-­partite  complex  with  a-­tubulin  (Kortazar  et  al.  2007;;  Serna  et  al.  2015).  The  relevance  of  this  
activity  in  cells  has  not  been  established,  but  it  can  be  speculated  that  this  disassembly  activity  could  
be  involved  in  heterodimer  quality  control  or  oligomer  dissociation.  We  find  that  disrupting  individual  
TBCs  and  other  tubulin  biogenesis  factors  further  sensitizes  cells  to  low  temperatures  and  delays  the  
recovery  of  microtubule  polymerization  after  cold  shock  (Figure  4).  Blocking  α-­tubulin  from  interacting  
with  TBCB/Alf1  also  sensitizes  cells  to  cold  temperatures  (Figure  4).  We  reason  that  at  low  
temperatures,  the  role  of  TBCs  in  maintaining  the  tubulin  pool  may  become  more  important  to  help  
tubulin  escape  the  assembly-­incompetent  state.  How  TBCs  might  inhibit  or  resolve  this  tubulin  state,  
and  whether  this  role  extends  to  other  stress  conditions,  are  important  questions  for  further  study.  
Finally,  our  work  highlights  a  critical  role  for  tubulin  in  determining  the  fitness  of  organisms  at  low  
temperature.  We  propose  that  shifting  tubulin  from  a  predominantly  microtubule  polymer  state  to  
cytoplasmic  oligomers  could  impair  homeostasis  at  low  temperatures.  Consistent  with  this,  it  is  striking  
that  a  single  point  mutation,  C354S,  in  b-­tubulin  confers  cold  stability  to  microtubules  and  also  shifts  the  
optimal  growth  temperature  range  of  yeast  cells,  with  mutant  cells  exhibiting  improved  growth  at  low  
temperatures  but  greater  sensitivity  to  high  temperatures,  compared  to  wild-­type  cells  (Figure  5).  We  
find  that  the  cold  sensitivity  of  wild-­type  cells  is  not  primarily  due  to  mitotic  spindle  defects,  since  C354S  
mutants  do  not  exhibit  faster  spindle  assembly  at  low  temperatures  and  mad2Δ  mutant  cells  that  lack  
the  spindle  assembly  checkpoint  show  a  similar  growth  rate  at  low  temperatures  to  wild-­type  controls  
(Figure  S3).  It  is  possible  that  the  increasing  pool  of  tubulin  oligomers  at  low  temperature  triggers  a  
secondary  stress  response  that  is  responsible  for  the  slowing  of  cell  proliferation.  This  suggests  that  
microtubule  stability  is  an  integral  factor  in  determining  the  permissive  growth  temperatures  of  an  
organism.  
  

	  

11  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Materials  and  Methods  
Yeast  Strains,  manipulations,  and  plasmid  construction:  
General  yeast  manipulation,  media  and  transformation  were  performed  by  standard  methods(Amberg,  
Burke,  and  Strathern  2000).  A  detailed  list  of  strains  and  plasmids  is  provided  in  Tables  S1  and  S2.    
GFP-­Tub1  fusions  were  integrated  at  the  LEU2  locus  and  expressed  ectopically,  in  addition  to  the  
native  TUB1  (Song  and  Lee  2001).  Spc110-­tdTomato  was  generated  using  conventional  methods  and  
expressed  from  the  genomic  locus  (Sheff  and  Thorn  2004).  The  tub2-­C354S  mutation  to  TUB2  was  
made  at  the  native  chromosomal  locus  as  previously  described  (Aiken  et  al.  2014)  and  confirmed  by  
sequencing.  Deletion  mutants  were  generated  by  conventional  methods  (Petracek  and  Longtine  2002).  
A  fragment  of  the  TUB1  gene  including  the  open  reading  frame  (with  intron),  992  base  pairs  of  5’  UTR,  
and  487  base  pairs  of  3’  UTR  was  amplified  from  the  genomic  DNA  by  PCR.  This  fragment  was  cloned  
into  the  plasmid  pRS314  (Sikorski  and  Hieter  1989)  using  sticky  end  cloning  with  NotI  and  KpnI  sites,  
and  confirmed  by  sequencing  to  yield  plasmid  pJM267.  QuikChange  Lightning  Site-­Directed  
Mutagenesis  Kit  (Agilent  Technologies;;  Santa  Clara,  CA)  was  used  to  introduce  the  tub1-­R265C  
mutation  to  pJM267  (Aiken  et  al.  2019).  
  
Microtubule  Dynamics  in  Living  Cells:  
Images  were  collected  on  a  Nikon  Ti-­E  microscope  equipped  with  a  1.45  NA  100×  CFI  Plan  Apo  
objective,  piezo  electric  stage  (Physik  Instrumente;;  Auburn,  MA),  spinning  disk  confocal  scanner  unit  
(CSU10;;  Yokogawa),  488-­nm  laser  (Agilent  Technologies;;  Santa  Clara,  CA),  and  an  EMCCD  camera  
(iXon  Ultra  897;;  Andor  Technology;;  Belfast,  UK)  using  NIS  Elements  software  (Nikon).    Cells  were  
grown  asynchronously  to  early  log-­phase  in  non-­fluorescent  media  and  adhered  to  coverslips  coated  
with  concanavalin  A  (Fees,  Estrem,  and  Moore  2017).  Imaging  was  performed  at  the  indicated  
temperature  using  the  CherryTemp  temperature  controller  system  (CherryBiotech;;  Rennes,  France).  
Microtubule  dynamics  were  analyzed  by  measuring  the  lengths  of  astral  microtubules  labeled  with  
GFP-­Tub1  at  5-­s  intervals  for  10  min.  A  6.0  µm  stack  with  a  step  size  of  0.45  µm  was  taken  at  each  
timepoint  and  analyzed  as  a  2D  maximum  intensity  projection  (ImageJ;;  Wayne  Rasband,  NIH).    All  
analyses  were  conducted  in  pre-­anaphase  cells.  Assembly  and  disassembly  events  were  defined  as  at  
least  three  contiguous  data  points  that  produced  a  length  change  ≥0.5  µm  for  25°C,  30°C,  and  37°C  
with  a  coefficient  of  determination  ≥0.8.  For  experiments  at  10ºC,  we  adjusted  the  threshold  for  length  
change  to  ≥0.25  µm.  Microtubule  dynamicity  was  calculated  by  the  total  change  in  length  (growing  and  
shrinking)  divided  by  the  change  in  time  and  expressed  in  tubulin  subunits  changed  per  second  (Jordan  
et  al.  1993).  The  length  of  polymerization  before  a  catastrophe  event  was  calculated  by  determining  the  
total  length  of  polymerization  before  a  switch  to  depolymerization.    Median  microtubule  length  was  
determined  from  time-­lapse  imaging  of  individual  astral  microtubules  over  10  min.    Dynamics  
measurements  for  individual  microtubules  were  pooled  for  each  temperature  and  then  compared  with  
pooled  data  for  different  temperatures.  Student’s  t  test  was  used  to  assess  whether  the  mean  values  for  
different  datasets  were  significantly  different  (Fees  et  al.  2017).  Arrhenius  plot  was  generated  by  
converting  the  polymerization  and  depolymerization  rates  from  µm/min  to  heterodimers/sec,  assuming  
that  1µm  of  yeast  microtubule  contains  1625  tubulin  heterodimers.  
  
Re-­fire  frequency  was  calculated  as  the  proportion  of  astral  microtubules  that  depolymerize  to  a  length  
below  our  level  of  detection  (<  0.213  µm)  and  then  polymerized  to  a  measurable  microtubule  length  (>  
0.213  µm)  within  20  seconds  (4  frames  in  our  analysis),  divided  by  the  total  number  of  astral  
microtubules  that  depolymerize  to  a  length  below  our  level  of  detection.  At  least  21  astral  microtubules  
were  analyzed  for  each  temperature.      
	  

12  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

  
Microtubule  Loss  at  4°C:  
Cells  expressing  GFP-­Tub1  were  grown  overnight  in  rich  liquid  media  in  a  shaking  incubator  at  30oC  for  
~16  hours,  diluted  1:150,  and  grown  to  early  log  phase  in  fresh  media.  The  cultures  were  then  shifted  to  
a  shaking  incubator  at  4°C  for  the  indicated  amount  of  time.  Cells  were  then  fixed  in  3.7%  
Formaldehyde,  0.1  M  KPO4  and  incubated  at  4°C  for  3  minutes.  Cells  were  then  pelleted,  the  
supernatant  was  removed,  and  the  cells  were  suspended  in  quencher  solution  (0.1%  Triton-­X,  0.1  M  
KPO4,  10  mM  Ethanolamine).  The  cells  were  pelleted  again,  supernatant  decanted  and  washed  twice  
in  0.1  M  KPO4.  The  fixed  cells  were  loaded  into  slide  chambers  coated  with  concanavalin  A,  washed  
with  0.1  M  KPO4  and  the  chambers  were  sealed  with  VALAP  (Vaseline,  lanolin  and  paraffin  at  1:1:1)  
(Fees  and  Moore  2018).  
Images  were  collected  on  a  Nikon  Ti-­E  wide  field  microscope  equipped  with  a  1.49  NA  100×  CFI160  
Apochromat  objective,  and  an  ORCA-­Flash  4.0  LT  sCMOS  camera  (Hammamatsu  Photonics,  Japan)  
using  NIS  Elements  software  (Nikon,  Minato,  Tokyo,  Japan).  Microtubules  labeled  with  GFP-­Tub1  were  
imaged  in  Z-­series  consisting  of  a  7  µm  range  at  0.5  µm  steps,  and  a  DIC  image  was  taken  at  the  
equatorial  plane.  
Cells  were  segmented  using  a  custom  ImageJ  macro  previously  described  (Fees  et  al.  2016).  The  data  
were  blinded  for  analysis,  and  the  segmented  cells  were  visually  scored  for  the  presence  of  astral  
microtubules.      
  
Microtubule  Recovery  Assay:  
Cells  expressing  GFP-­Tub1  were  grown  in  rich  liquid  media  in  a  shaking  incubator  at  30oC  for  ~16  
hours,  then  diluted  1:150  and  grown  to  early  log  phase  in  fresh  media.  100  µL  of  each  culture  was  
transferred  to  200  µL  PCR  tubes  and  placed  in  a  Bio-­Rad  T100  Thermal  Cycler  (Hercules,  CA).  The  
cells  were  incubated  at  4°C  for  35  min  and  warmed  to  30°C  for  the  indicated  amount  of  time  before  
being  fixed,  imaged  and  analyzed  for  the  presence  of  astral  microtubules,  as  described  above.  
  
Microtubule  Loss  at  15°C:  
Cells  expressing  GFP-­Tub1  were  grown  in  rich  liquid  media  in  a  shaking  incubator  at  30oC  for  ~16  
hours,  then  diluted  1:150  and  grown  to  early  log  phase  in  fresh  media.  100  µL  of  each  culture  was  
transferred  to  200  µL  PCR  tubes  and  placed  in  a  Bio-­Rad  T100  Thermal  Cycler  (Hercules,  CA).  The  
cells  were  incubated  at  30°C  for  20  min  and  cooled  to  15°C  for  the  indicated  amount  of  time  before  
being  fixed,  imaged  and  analyzed  for  the  presence  of  astral  microtubules,  as  described  above.  
  
  
Actin  Patch  Dynamics  in  Living  Cells:  
Images  were  collected  on  a  Nikon  Ti-­E  microscope  described  above.  Actin  patch  lifetime  and  dynamics  
were  analyzed  by  measuring  the  accumulation  and  decay  of  Lifeact-­GFP  in  single  z-­plane  images  
acquired  every  1-­s  for  3  min.    A  0.852  um  X  0.852  um  region  of  interest  was  used  to  measure  total  
fluorescence  of  each  patch.    The  actin  patch  lifetime  was  defined  as  the  amount  of  time  the  patch  was  
≥  ¾  of  its  maximum  intensity  by  measuring  the  full  width  at  ¾  max  of  the  fluorescence  over  time.  Actin  
patch  polymerization  dynamics  were  determined  by  measuring  the  slope  of  fluorescence  intensity  
versus  time  from  before  the  patch  appears  to  the  maximum  intensity,  and  depolymerization  measured  
by  the  slope  from  maximum  intensity  to  patch  disappearance  with  a  coefficient  of  determination  ≥0.8.  
13  
	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

  
Western  Blot:  
To  compare  tubulin  protein  levels  before  and  after  cold  shift,  cells  were  first  grown  to  log  phase  at  30°C  
in  5  ml  rich  liquid  media  or  selective  drop  out  media  for  strains  containing  a  plasmid,  and  1  ml  was  
removed  for  lysate  preparation.  The  remaining  cell  culture  was  transferred  to  a  platform  shaking  at  
250rpms  at  4°C  for  24  hours,  and  then  1  ml  was  removed  for  lysate  preparation.  Samples  were  pelleted  
and  then  resuspended  in  2  M  lithium  acetate  for  5  minutes.  The  cells  were  then  pelleted  again  and  
resuspended  in  0.4  M  NaOH  for  5  minutes  while  on  ice.  Samples  were  then  pelleted,  resuspended  in  
70  µL  of  2.5X  Laemmli  buffer  and  boiled  for  5  minutes.  The  total  protein  concentration  of  the  clarified  
lysate  was  determined  by  Pierce  660  nm  protein  assay  with  the  Ionic  Detergent  Compatibility  Reagent  
(Cat.1861426  and  22663,  Rockford,  IL),  and  ~5  ug  of  total  protein  lysate  was  loaded  in  each  lane.  
Samples  were  run  on  12%  SDS  PAGE,  transferred  to  PVDF  membrane,  and  blocked  for  1  hour  at  room  
temperature.  Membranes  were  probed  with  mouse-­anti-­α-­tubulin  (4A1;;  at  1:100;;  (Piperno  and  Fuller  
1985)),  mouse-­anti-­β-­tubulin  (E7;;  at  1:100;;  Developmental  Hybridoma  Studies  Bank,  University  of  
Iowa)  and  rabbit-­anti-­Zwf1  (Sigma  A9521;;  at  1:10,000),  followed  by  goat-­anti-­mouse-­680  (LI-­COR  926-­
68070,  Superior,  NE;;  at  1:15000)  and  goat-­anti-­rabbit-­800  (LI-­COR  926-­32211;;  at  1:15000),  and  
imaged  on  an  Odyssey  Imager  (LI-­COR  Biosciences).  Band  intensities  were  quantified  using  ImageJ.  
  
Liquid  Growth  Assay:  
Cells  were  grown  to  saturation  in  rich  liquid  media,  diluted  1:1000  into  fresh  media,  and  transferred  to  a  
96-­well  plate  at  a  volume  of  200ul/well.  Absorbance  values  at  600  nm  were  measured  at  5-­minute  
intervals  over  21  hours  at  specified  temperature  with  orbital  shaking  using  a  Cytation  3  Plate  Reader  
(Biotek;;  Winooski,  VT).  Doubling  time  was  calculated  by  determining  the  OD600  values  to  an  
exponential  curve  as  using  a  custom  Matlab  code  as  described  previously  (Fees  and  Moore  2018).    
Doubling  times  are  based  on  data  from  3  separate  experiments,  and  at  least  3  independent  isolates  for  
each  genotype.  
  
Solid  Growth  Assay:  
Cells  were  grown  in  rich  liquid  media  or  selective  drop  out  media  for  strains  carrying  a  plasmid  to  
saturation  at  30ºC,  and  a  10-­fold  dilution  series  of  each  culture  was  spotted  to  either  rich  media  plates  
or  rich  media  plates  supplemented  with  5  or  10  µg/ml  benomyl.  Plates  were  grown  at  the  indicated  
temperature  for  the  indicated  amount  of  time.  
  
Synchronized  Cell  Cycle  experiment:  
Cells  were  grown  overnight  in  rich  liquid  media  in  a  shaking  incubator  at  30oC  to  early  log  phase.    Cells  
were  pelleted,  resuspended  in  fresh  media  with  5ug/ml  a-­factor,  returned  to  the  shaking  incubator  at  
30ºC  for  1.5  hours,  and  then  an  additional  5ug/ml  of  a-­factor  was  added  for  an  additional  1.5  hours  at  
30ºC.    Cells  were  then  washed  three  times  with  sterile  water  and  resuspended  in  fresh  media  with  
50ug/ml  s.  gris  protease  added  for  synchronous  release  through  START.  Wild-­type  cells  were  treated  
with  either  1%  DMSO  or  5ug/ml  benomyl  in  DMSO  as  indicated.  The  cells  were  then  incubated  at  15°C  
while  shaking  and  fixed  at  the  indicated  timepoint  as  described  above.  Microtubule  labeled  with  GFP-­
Tub1  and  spindle  pole  bodies  labeled  with  Spc110-­tdtomato  were  imaged  as  described  above.  

	  

14  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Cells  were  segmented  using  a  custom  ImageJ  macro  previously  described  (Fees  et  al.  2016).  The  data  
was  blinded  for  analysis,  and  the  segmented  cells  were  visually  scored  for  cell  cycle  stage.      
  
  
Acknowledgements  
We  thank  members  of  the  Moore  lab  and  Dan  Sackett  (NIH  NICHD)  for  helpful  advice  and  discussions.  
This  work  was  supported  by  the  National  Science  Foundation  CAREER  Award  1651841  to  J.K.  Moore.  
G.  Li  was  supported  by  the  Pre-­doctoral  Training  Program  in  Molecular  Biology,  NIH-­T32-­GM008730,  
and  Bolie  Scholar  Award  from  the  Graduate  Program  in  Molecular  Biology.  
  
  
    
Competing  interests  
The  authors  declare  no  competing  interests.

	  

15  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

    
  
REFERENCES  
Aiken,  Jayne,  Georgia  Buscaglia,  A.  Sophie  Aiken,  Jeffrey  K.  Moore,  and  Emily  A.  
Bates.  2019.  “Tubulin  Mutations  in  Brain  Development  Disorders:  Why  
Haploinsufficiency  Does  Not  Explain  TUBA1A  Tubulinopathies.”  Cytoskeleton.  
Aiken,  Jayne,  David  Sept,  Michael  Costanzo,  Charles  Boone,  John  A.  Cooper,  and  
Jeffrey  K.  Moore.  2014.  “Genome-­Wide  Analysis  Reveals  Novel  and  Discrete  
Functions  for  Tubulin  Carboxy-­Terminal  Tails.”  Current  Biology  :  CB  24(12):1295–
1303.  
Alushin,  Gregory  M.,  Gabriel  C.  Lander,  Elizabeth  H.  Kellogg,  Rui  Zhang,  David  Baker,  
and  Eva  Nogales.  2014.  “High-­Resolution  Microtubule  Structures  Reveal  the  
Structural  Transitions  in  Αβ-­Tubulin  upon  GTP  Hydrolysis.”  Cell  157(5):1117–29.  
Amberg,  David  C.,  Daniel  J.  Burke,  and  Jeffrey  N.  Strathern.  2000.  Methods  in  Yeast  
Genetics:  A  Cold  Spring  Harbor  Laboratory  Course  Manual,  2005  Edition.  Cold  
Spring  Harbor  Laboratory  Press.  
Berry,  Robert  W.  and  Michael  L.  Shelanski.  1972.  “Interactions  of  Tubulin  with  
Vinblastine  and  Guanosine  Triphosphate.”  Journal  of  Molecular  Biology  71(1):71–
80.  
Bhamidipati,  A.,  S.  A.  Lewis,  and  N.  J.  Cowan.  2000.  “ADP  Ribosylation  Factor-­like  
Protein  2  (Arl2)  Regulates  the  Interaction  of  Tubulin-­Folding  Cofactor  D  with  Native  
Tubulin.”  The  Journal  of  Cell  Biology  149(5):1087–96.  
Bordas,  Joan,  Eva-­Maria  Mandelkow,  and  Eckhard  Mandelkow.  1983.  “Stages  of  
Tubulin  Assembly  and  Disassembly  Studied  by  Time-­Resolved  Synchrotron  X-­Ray  
Scattering.”  Journal  of  Molecular  Biology  164(1):89–135.  
Borisy,  G.  G.,  J.  M.  Marcum,  J.  B.  Olmsted,  D.  B.  Murphy,  and  K.  A.  Johnson.  1975.  
“PURIFICATION  OF  TUBULIN  AND  ASSOCIATED  HIGH  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT  
PROTEINS  FROM  PORCINE  BRAIN  AND  CHARACTERIZATION  OF  
MICROTUBULE  ASSEMBLY  IN  VITRO.”  Annals  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  
Sciences  253(1  The  Biology  o):107–32.  
Breton,  Annick,  Benoît  Pinson,  Fanny  Coulpier,  Marie  France  Giraud,  Alain  Dautant,  and  
Bertrand  Daignan-­Fornier.  2008.  “Lethal  Accumulation  of  Guanylic  Nucleotides  in  
Saccharomyces  Cerevisiae  HPT1-­Deregulated  Mutants.”  Genetics  178(2):815–24.  
Breton,  Sylvie  and  Dennis  Brown.  1998.  “Cold-­Induced  Microtubule  Disruption  and  
Relocalization  Membrane  Proteins  in  Kidney  Epithelial.”  Journal  of  the  American  
Society  of  Nephrology.  
Carlier,  Marie  France,  Dominique  Didry,  and  Dominique  Pantaloni.  1987.  “Microtubule  
Elongation  and  Guanosine  5’-­Triphosphate  Hydrolysis.  Role  of  Guanine  
Nucleotides  in  Microtubule  Dynamics.”  Biochemistry  26(14):4428–37.  
Carlier,  Marie  France  and  Dominique  Pantaloni.  1978.  “Kinetic  Analysis  of  Cooperativity  
in  Tubulin  Polymerization  in  the  Presence  of  Guanosine  Di-­  or  Triphosphate  
Nucleotides.”  Biochemistry  17(10):1908–15.  
Carlier,  Marie  France  and  Dominique  Pantaloni.  1981.  “Kinetic  Analysis  of  Guanosine  5’-­
Triphosphate  Hydrolysis  Associated  with  Tubulin  Polymerization.”  Biochemistry  
20(7):1918–24.  
	  

16  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Correia,  J.  J.  and  R.  C.  Williams.  1983.  “Mechanisms  of  Assembly  and  Disassembly  of  
Microtubules.”  Annual  Review  of  Biophysics  and  Bioengineering  12:211–35.  
Cyert,  Martha  S.  and  Caroline  C.  Philpott.  2013.  “Regulation  of  Cation  Balance  in  
Saccharomyces  Cerevisiae.”  Genetics  193(3):677–713.  
Fees,  Colby  P.,  Jayne  Aiken,  Eileen  T.  O’Toole,  Thomas  H.  Giddings,  and  Jeffrey  K.  
Moore.  2016.  “The  Negatively  Charged  Carboxy-­Terminal  Tail  of  β-­Tubulin  
Promotes  Proper  Chromosome  Segregation.”  Molecular  Biology  of  the  Cell  
27(11):1786–96.  
Fees,  Colby  P.,  Cassi  Estrem,  and  Jeffrey  K.  Moore.  2017.  “High-­Resolution  Imaging  
and  Analysis  of  Individual  Astral  Microtubule  Dynamics  in  Budding  Yeast.”  Journal  
of  Visualized  Experiments  (122):e55610–e55610.  
Fees,  Colby  P.  and  Jeffrey  K.  Moore.  2018.  “Regulation  of  Microtubule  Dynamic  
Instability  by  the  Carboxy-­Terminal  Tail  of  β-­Tubulin.”  Life  Science  Alliance  
1(2):e201800054.  
Fygenson,  Deborah  Kuchnir,  Erez  Braun,  and  Albert  Libchaber.  1994.  “Phase  Diagram  
of  Microtubules.”  Physical  Review  E  50(2):1579–88.  
Gao,  Yijie,  Irina  Vainberg,  Robert  Chow,  and  Nicholas  J.  Cowan.  1993.  “Two  Cofactors  
and  Cytoplasmic  Chaperonin.”  MOLECULAR  AND  CELLULAR  BIOLOGY  
13(4):2478–85.  
Gell,  Christopher,  Volker  Bormuth,  Gary  J.  Brouhard,  Daniel  N.  Cohen,  Stefan  Diez,  
Claire  T.  Friel,  Jonne  Helenius,  Bert  Nitzsche,  Heike  Petzold,  Jan  Ribbe,  Erik  
Schäffer,  Jeffrey  H.  Stear,  Anastasiya  Trushko,  Vladimir  Varga,  Per  O.  Widlund,  
Marija  Zanic,  and  Jonathon  Howard.  2010.  Microtubule  Dynamics  Reconstituted  in  
Vitro  and  Imaged  by  Single-­Molecule  Fluorescence  Microscopy.  Vol.  95.  
Geyer,  Elisabeth  A.,  Alexander  Burns,  Beth  A.  Lalonde,  Xuecheng  Ye,  Felipe-­Andres  
Piedra,  Tim  C.  Huffaker,  and  Luke  M.  Rice.  2015.  “A  Mutation  Uncouples  the  
Tubulin  Conformational  and  GTPase  Cycles,  Revealing  Allosteric  Control  of  
Microtubule  Dynamics.”  ELife  4:e10113.  
Gupta,  Mohan  L.,  Claudia  J.  Bode,  Cynthia  A.  Dougherty,  Rebecca  T.  Marquez,  and  
Richard  H.  Himes.  2001.  “Mutagenesis  of  β-­Tubulin  Cysteine  Residues  in  
Saccharomyces  Cerevisiae:  Mutation  of  Cysteine  354  Results  in  Cold-­Stable  
Microtubules.”  Cell  Motility  and  the  Cytoskeleton  49(2):67–77.  
Gupta,  Mohan  L.,  Claudia  J.  Bode,  Doug  Thrower,  Chad  G.  Pearson,  Kathy  A.  
Suprenant,  Kerry  S.  Bloom,  and  Richard  H.  Himes.  2002.  “β-­Tubulin  C354  
Mutations  That  Severely  Decrease  Microtubule  Dynamics  Do  Not  Prevent  Nuclear  
Migration  in  Yeast.”  Molecular  Biology  of  the  Cell  13(8):2919–32.  
Halachmi,  D.  and  Y.  Eilam.  1989.  “Cytosolic  and  Vacuolar  Ca2+  Concentrations  in  Yeast  
Measured  with  Ca2+  Sensitive  Dye  Indol  1.”  FEBS  Lett  256(1):55–61.  
Hamel,  Ernest,  Janendra  K.  Batra,  Abbott  B.  Huang,  and  Chii  M.  Lin.  1986.  “Effects  of  
PH  on  Tubulin-­Nucleotide  Interactions.”  Archives  of  Biochemistry  and  Biophysics  
245(2):316–30.  
Himes,  R.  H.  and  H.  W.  Detrich.  1989.  “Dynamics  of  Antarctic  Fish  Microtubules  at  Low  
Temperatures.”  Biochemistry  28(12):5089–95.  
Howes,  Stuart  C.,  Elisabeth  A.  Geyer,  Benjamin  LaFrance,  Rui  Zhang,  Elizabeth  H.  
Kellogg,  Stefan  Westermann,  Luke  M.  Rice,  and  Eva  Nogales.  2017.  “Structural  
	  

17  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Differences  between  Yeast  and  Mammalian  Microtubules  Revealed  by  Cryo-­EM.”  
Journal  of  Cell  Biology  216(9):2669–77.  
Huff,  Lyn  M.,  Dan  L.  Sackett,  Marianne  S.  Poruchynsky,  and  Tito  Fojo.  2010.  
“Microtubule-­Disrupting  Chemotherapeutics  Result  in  Enhanced  Proteasome-­
Mediated  Degradation  and  Disappearance  of  Tubulin  in  Neural  Cells.”  Cancer  
Research  70(14):5870–79.  
Hyman,  Anthony  A.,  D.  Chretien,  Isabelle  Arnal,  and  Richard  H.  Wade.  1995.  “Structural  
Changes  Accompanying  GTP  Hydrolysis  in  Microtubules:  Information  from  a  Slowly  
Hydrolyzable  Analogue  Guanylyl-­(??,??)-­Methylene-­  Diphosphonate.”  Journal  of  
Cell  Biology  128(1–2):117–25.  
Inoué,  Shinya.  2010.  “EFFECT  OF  TEMPERATURE  ON  THE  BIREFRINGENCE  OF  
THE  MITOTIC  SPINDLE.”  Pp.  109–10  in  Collected  Works  of  Shinya  Inoué.  WORLD  
SCIENTIFIC.  
Jordan,  Mary  Ann,  Robert  J.  Toso,  Doug  Thrower,  and  Leslie  Wilson.  1993.  Mechanism  
of  Mitotic  Block  and  Inhibition  of  Cell  Proliferation  by  Taxol  at  Low  Concentrations  
(HeLa  Cells/Microtubule  Dynamics/Vinblastine).  Vol.  90.  
Kortazar,  D.,  M.  L.  Fanarraga,  G.  Carranza,  J.  Bellido,  J.  C.  Villegas,  J.  Avila,  and  J.  C.  
Zabala.  2007.  “Role  of  Cofactors  B  (TBCB)  and  E  (TBCE)  in  Tubulin  Heterodimer  
Dissociation.”  Experimental  Cell  Research  313(3):425–36.  
Kováč,  Ladislav.  1985.  “Calcium  and  Saccharomyces  Cerevisiae.”  Biochimica  et  
Biophysica  Acta  (BBA)  -­  General  Subjects  840(3):317–23.  
Lacefield,  Soni  and  Frank  Solomon.  2003.  “A  Novel  Step  in  β-­Tubulin  Folding  Is  
Important  for  Heterodimer  Formation  in  Saccharomyces  Cerevisiae.”  Genetics  
165(2):531–41.  
Lange,  Gudrun,  Eva-­‐ Maria  -­‐ M  Mandelkow,  Annette  Jagla,  and  Eckhard  Mandelkow.  
1988.  “Tubulin  Oligomers  and  Microtubule  Oscillations:  Antagonistic  Role  of  
Microtubule  Stabilizers  and  Destabilizers.”  European  Journal  of  Biochemistry  
178(1):61–69.  
Lee,  James  C.  and  Serge  N.  Timasheff.  1977.  “In  Vitro  Reconstitution  of  Calf  Brain  
Microtubules:  Effects  of  Solution  Variables.”  Biochemistry  16(8):1754–64.  
Lin,  M.  C.,  Brian  J.  Galletta,  David  Sept,  and  John  A.  Cooper.  2010.  “Overlapping  and  
Distinct  Functions  for  Cofilin,  Coronin  and  Aip1  in  Actin  Dynamics  in  Vivo.”  Journal  
of  Cell  Science  123(8):1329–42.  
Mandelkow,  E.  M.,  E.  Mandelkow,  and  R.  A.  Milligan.  1991.  “Microtubule  Dynamics  and  
Microtubule  Caps:  A  Time-­Resolved  Cryo-­Electron  Microscopy  Study.”  Journal  of  
Cell  Biology  114(5):977–91.  
Manka,  Szymon  W.  and  Carolyn  A.  Moores.  2018.  “The  Role  of  Tubulin–Tubulin  Lattice  
Contacts  in  the  Mechanism  of  Microtubule  Dynamic  Instability.”  Nature  Structural  
and  Molecular  Biology  25(7).  
McIntosh,  J.  Richard,  Eileen  O’Toole,  Garry  Morgan,  Jotham  Austin,  Evgeniy  Ulyanov,  
Fazoil  Ataullakhanov,  and  Nikita  Gudimchuk.  2018.  “Microtubules  Grow  by  the  
Addition  of  Bent  Guanosine  Triphosphate  Tubulin  to  the  Tips  of  Curved  
Protofilaments.”  Journal  of  Cell  Biology  217(8):2691–2708.  
Mitchison,  T.  and  M.  Kirschner.  1984.  “Dynamic  Instability  of  Microtubule  Growth.”  
Nature  312(5991):237–42.  
	  

18  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Nithianantham,  Stanley,  Sinh  Le,  Elbert  Seto,  Weitao  Jia,  Julie  Leary,  Kevin  D.  Corbett,  
Jeffrey  K.  Moore,  and  Jawdat  Al-­Bassam.  2015.  “Tubulin  Cofactors  and  Arl2  Are  
Cage-­like  Chaperones  That  Regulate  the  Soluble  Αβ-­Tubulin  Pool  for  Microtubule  
Dynamics.”  ELife  4.  
Olmsted,  J.  B.  and  G.  G.  Borisy.  1973.  “Microtubules.”  Annual  Review  of  Biochemistry  
42(1):507–40.  
Olmsted,  J.  B.,  J.  M.  Marcum,  K.  A.  Johnson,  C.  Allen,  and  G.  G.  Borisy.  1974.  
“Microtubule  Assembly:  Some  Possible  Regulatory  Mechanisms.”  Journal  of  
Supramolecular  Structure  2(2–4):429–50.  
Ou,  Jingxing,  John  M.  Ball,  Yizhao  Luan,  Tantai  Zhao,  Kiyoharu  J.  Miyagishima,  Yufeng  
Xu,  Huizhi  Zhou,  Jinguo  Chen,  Dana  K.  Merriman,  Zhi  Xie,  Barbara  S.  Mallon,  and  
Wei  Li.  2018.  “IPSCs  from  a  Hibernator  Provide  a  Platform  for  Studying  Cold  
Adaptation  and  Its  Potential  Medical  Applications.”  Cell  173(4):851-­863.e16.  
Petracek,  Marie  E.  and  Mark  S.  Longtine.  2002.  “PCR-­Based  Engineering  of  Yeast  
Genome.”  Methods  in  Enzymology  350(1991):445–69.  
Piperno,  Gianni  and  Margaret  T.  Fuller.  1985.  “Monoclonal  Antibodies  Specific  for  an  
Acetylated  Form  of  α-­Tubulin  Recognize  the  Antigen  in  Cilia  and  Flagella  from  a  
Variety  of  Organisms.”  Journal  of  Cell  Biology  101(6):2085–94.  
Purich,  D.  L.  and  D.  Kristofferson.  1984.  “Microtubule  Assembly:  A  Review  of  Progress,  
Principles,  and  Perspectives.”  Advances  in  Protein  Chemistry  36:133–212.  
Romani,  A.  and  A.  Scarpa.  1992.  “Regulation  of  Cell  Magnesium.”  Archives  of  
Biochemistry  and  Biophysics  298(1):1–12.  
Serna,  Marina,  Gerardo  Carranza,  Jaime  Martín-­Benito,  Robert  Janowski,  Albert  Canals,  
Miquel  Coll,  Juan  Carlos  Zabala,  and  José  María  Valpuesta.  2015.  “The  Structure  
of  the  Complex  between  α-­Tubulin,  TBCE  and  TBCB  Reveals  a  Tubulin  Dimer  
Dissociation  Mechanism.”  Journal  of  Cell  Science  128(9):1824–34.  
Sheff,  Mark  A.  and  Kurt  S.  Thorn.  2004.  “Optimized  Cassettes  for  Fluorescent  Protein  
Tagging  in  Saccharomyces  Cerevisiae.”  Yeast  21(8):661–70.  
Sikorski,  R.  S.  and  P.  Hieter.  1989.  “A  System  of  Shuttle  Vectors  and  Yeast  Host  Strains  
Designed  for  Efficient  Manipulation  of  DNA  in  Saccharomyces  Cerevisiae.”  
Genetics  122(1):19–27.  
Sobel,  Suzanne  G.  and  Michael  Snyder.  1995.  “A  Highly  Divergent  γ-­Tubulin  Gene  Is  
Essential  for  Cell  Growth  and  Proper  Microtubule  Organization  in  Saccharomyces  
Cerevisiae.”  Journal  of  Cell  Biology  131(6  II):1775–88.  
Song,  Sukgil  and  Kyung  S.  Lee.  2001.  “A  Novel  Function  of  Saccharomyces  Cerevisiae  
CDC5  in  Cytokinesis.”  Journal  of  Cell  Biology  153(3):451–69.  
Spiegelman,  B.  M.,  S.  M.  Penningroth,  and  M.  W.  Kirschner.  1977.  “Turnover  of  Tubulin  
and  the  N  Site  GTP  in  Chinese  Hamster  Ovary  Cells.”  Cell  12(3):587–600.  
Tian,  Guoling,  Arunashree  Bhamidipati,  Nicholas  J.  Cowan,  and  Sally  A.  Lewis.  1999.  
“Tubulin  Folding  Cofactors  as  GTPase-­Activating  Proteins.  GTP  Hydrolysis  and  the  
Assembly  of  the  α/β-­Tubulin  Heterodimer.”  Journal  of  Biological  Chemistry  
274(34):24054–58.  
Tian,  Guoling  and  Nicholas  J.  Cowan.  2013.  “Tubulin-­Specific  Chaperones:  Components  
of  a  Molecular  Machine  That  Assembles  the  α/β  Heterodimer.”  Methods  in  Cell  
Biology  115:155–71.  
19  
	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Tian,  Guoling,  Yi  Huang,  Heidi  Rommelaere,  Joel  Vandekerckhove,  Christophe  Ampe,  
and  Nicholas  J.  Cowan.  1996.  “Pathway  Leading  to  Correctly  Folded  β-­Tubulin.”  
Cell  86(2):287–96.  
Tian,  Guoling,  Xiang  Peng  Kong,  Xavier  H.  Jaglin,  Jamel  Chelly,  David  Keays,  and  
Nicholas  J.  Cowan.  2008.  “A  Pachygyria-­Causing  α-­Tubulin  Mutation  Results  in  
Inefficient  Cycling  with  CCT  and  a  Deficient  Interaction  with  TBCB.”  Molecular  
Biology  of  the  Cell  19(3):1152–61.  
Tian,  Guoling,  Sally  A.  Lewis,  Becket  Feierbach,  Timothy  Stearns,  Heidi  Rommelaere,  
Christophe  Ampe,  and  Nicholas  J.  Cowan.  1997.  “Tubulin  Subunits  Exist  in  an  
Activated  Conformational  State  Generated  and  Maintained  by  Protein  Cofactors.”  
Journal  of  Cell  Biology  138(4):821–32.  
Tilney,  Lewis  G.  and  Keith  R.  Porter.  1967.  “Studies  on  the  Microtubules  in  Heliozoa.  II.  
The  Effect  of  Low  Temperature  on  These  Structures  in  the  Formation  and  
Maintenance  of  the  Axopodia.”  The  Journal  of  Cell  Biology  34(1):327–43.  
Vainberg,  Irina  E.,  Sally  A.  Lewis,  Heidi  Rommelaere,  Christophe  Ampe,  Joel  
Vandekerckhove,  Hannah  L.  Klein,  and  Nicholas  J.  Cowan.  1998.  “Prefoldin,  a  
Chaperone  That  Delivers  Unfolded  Proteins  to  Cytosolic  Chaperonin.”  Cell  
93(5):863–73.  
Walker,  R.  A.,  E.  T.  O’Brien,  N.  K.  Pryer,  M.  F.  Soboeiro,  W.  A.  Voter,  H.  P.  Erickson,  
and  E.  D.  Salmon.  1988.  “Dynamic  Instability  of  Individual  Microtubules  Analyzed  
by  Video  Light  Microscopy:  Rate  Constants  and  Transition  Frequencies.”  The  
Journal  of  Cell  Biology  107(4):1437–48.  
Weber,  K.,  R.  Pollack,  and  T.  Bibring.  1975.  “Antibody  against  Tuberlin:  The  Specific  
Visualization  of  Cytoplasmic  Microtubules  in  Tissue  Culture  Cells.”  Proceedings  of  
the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  72(2):459–63.  
Weisenberg,  Richard  C.  1972.  “Microtubule  Formation  in  Vitro  in  Solutions  Containing  
Low  Calcium  Concentrations.”  Science  177(4054):1104–5.  
Weisenberg,  Richard  C.,  Gary  G.  Borisy,  and  Edwin  W.  Taylor.  1968.  “The  Colchicine-­
Binding  Protein  of  Mammalian  Brain  and  Its  Relation  to  Microtubules.”  Biochemistry  
7(12):4466–79.  
Yaffe,  Michael  B.,  George  W.  Farr,  David  Miklos,  Arthur  L.  Horwich,  Mona  L.  Sternlicht,  
and  Himan  Sternlicht.  1992.  “TCP1  Complex  Is  a  Molecular  Chaperone  in  Tubulin  
Biogenesis.”  Nature  358(6383):245–48.  
Zhang,  Rui,  Gregory  M.  Alushin,  Alan  Brown,  and  Eva  Nogales.  2015.  “Mechanistic  
Origin  of  Microtubule  Dynamic  Instability  and  Its  Modulation  by  EB  Proteins.”  Cell  
162(4):849–59.  
Zheng,  Yixian,  Mei  Lie  Wong,  Bruce  Alberts,  and  Tim  Mitchison.  1995.  “Nucleation  of  
Microtubule  Assembly  by  a  γ-­Tubulin-­Containing  Ring  Complex.”  Nature  
378(6557):578–83.  
  

	  

20  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table  1.  Microtubule  dynamics  across  temperatures  
Polymerization  
length  before  
catastrophe  (um)  

Dynamicity  
(subunits/sec)  

0.57  ±  0.16  

0.50  ±  0.21  

13.80±2.80  

1.36  ±0.16  

0.81  ±  0.17  

25.98±2.47  

1.15  ±0.07  

1.94±0.15  

1.01  ±  0.18  

35.25±1.89  

1.59  ±0.11  

3.01±0.23  

1.23  ±  0.21  

51.07±5.82  

2.95±0.29  

  

49.48±5.41  

Polymerization   Depolymerization  
(um/min)  
(um/min)  

	  
10ºC    
(n=23)  
25ºC    
(n=21)  
30ºC    
(n=30)  
37ºC    
(n=22)  
39ºC    
(n=11)  

0.62  ±  0.16  
0.91  ±  0.12  

1.59±0.18  

  
  
Tables  S1.  Plasmids  used  in  this  study	  
Plasmid  ID  

Plasmid  Name  

Source  

pJM0101  

pRS415    PCYC1-­Lifeact-­GFP    LEU2    CEN6    

Lin  et  al.  2010  

pJM0072  

pRS314    TRP1    CEN6    

Sikorski,  R.  S.  and  Hieter,  P.  1989  

pJM0276  

pRS314    TUB1    TRP1    CEN6  

Aiken  et  al.  2019  

pJM0296  

pRS314    tub1-­R265C    TRP1    CEN6  

Aiken  et  al.  2019  

  
  

Tables  S2.  Strains  used  in  this  study	  
Yeast  
Strain  
yJM1837/  
YEF483A  
yJM0562  
yJM0563  
yJM0700  
yJM0785  

Genotype  

Source  

MATa  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  
MATa  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1::LEU2-­GFP-­TUB1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  
MATa  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1::LEU2-­GFP-­TUB1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  
MATa  mad2∆::HIS3MX6    ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  
MATa  SPC110-­tdTomato::HIS3  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1::LEU2-­GFP-­TUB1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63    

yJM0812  

MATα  yke2∆::HIS3MX6  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  

yJM0814  

MATa  rbl2∆::HIS3MX6  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  

yJM0816  

MATa  gim3∆::HIS3MX6  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  

yJM0817  

MATa  cin1∆::HIS3MX6  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  

yJM0819  

MATa  cin2∆::HIS3MX6  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  

yJM0831  

MATα  plp1∆::HIS3MX6    ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  

yJM0961  

MATa  cin4∆::HIS3MX6    ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  

yJM0989  

MATa  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63    [plasmid  pJM0101]  

yJM1086  

MATα  alf1∆::HIS3MX6  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  

yJM1087  

MATa  pac2∆::HIS3MX6  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  

yJM1210  
yJM1342  
yJM1343  

MATa  tub2-­C354S+331::TRP1  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  
MATa  tub2-­C354S+331::TRP1  leu2-­∆1::LEU2-­GFP-­TUB1  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  
MATa  tub2-­C354S+331::TRP1  leu2-­∆1::LEU2-­GFP-­TUB1  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  
MATa  tub2-­C354S+331::TRP1  SPC110-­tdTomato::HIS3  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1::LEU2-­GFP-­TUB1  
his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63    
MATα  gim5∆::HIS3MX6  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  

yJM3362  
yJM3448  

	  

21  

Bi,  E.,  Pringle,  J.  
R.,1996  
Aiken  et  al.  2014  
Aiken  et  al.  2014  
Fees  et  al.  2016  
This  study  
Hanson  et  al.  
2016    
Hanson  et  al.  
2016  
Hanson  et  al.  
2016  
Hanson  et  al.  
2016  
Hanson  et  al.  
2016  
This  study  
Hanson  et  al.  
2016  
This  study  
Hanson  et  al.  
2016    
Hanson  et  al.  
2016  
This  study  
This  study  
This  study  
This  study  
This  study  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

  
yJM3437  
yJM3443  
yJM3542  
yJM3680  
yJM4188  
yJM4189  
yJM4263  
yJM4265  
yJM4267  
  

MATα  alf1∆::HIS3MX6  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1::LEU2-­GFP-­TUB1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  

This  study  

MATα  alf1∆::HIS3MX6  tub2-­C354S+331::TRP1  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  
MATa  mad2∆::HIS3MX6  SPC110-­tdtomato::HIS3  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1::LEU2-­GFP-­TUB1  his3-­
∆200  trp1-­∆63    
MATα  alf1∆::HIS3MX6  tub2-­C354S+331::TRP1  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1::LEU2-­GFP-­TUB1  his3-­∆200  
trp1-­∆63  
MATα  tub1::tub1-­R265C  +487::URA3  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  
MATα  tub1::tub1-­R265C  +487::URA3  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  
MATα  tub1::tub1-­R265C  +487::URA3  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  [plasmid  pJM0072]  
MATα  tub1::tub1-­R265C  +487::URA3  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  [plasmid  pJM0276]  
MATα  tub1::tub1-­R265C  +487::URA3  ura3-­52  lys2-­801  leu2-­∆1  his3-­∆200  trp1-­∆63  [plasmid  pJM0296]  

This  study  

  

	  

22  

This  study  
This  study  
This  study  
This  study  
This  study  
This  study  
This  study  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/812867; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

