bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combining 3D-MOT with motor and perceptual decisionmaking tasks: conception of a life-sized virtual perceptualcognitive training paradigm
Thomas Romeas*1,2,3,4, Romain Chaumillon2, David Labbé1,5, Jocelyn Faubert2,3
1

Department of software and IT engineering, École de technologie supérieure (ÉTS),
Montreal, Qc, Canada
2
Faubert Lab, School of Optometry, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Qc, Canada
3
Faubert Applied Research Center, Montreal, Qc, Canada
4
Institut National du Sport du Québec (INS Québec), Montreal, Qc, Canada
5
Laboratoire de recherche en imagerie et orthopédie (LIO), Centre de recherche du
Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CHUM), Montreal, Qc, Canada
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to:
Thomas Romeas
thomas.romeas@umontreal.ca

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
Abstract:
The present study introduces a virtual life-sized perceptual-cognitive paradigm
combining three dimensional multiple object tracking (3D-MOT) with motor
(Experiment 1) or perceptual (Experiment 2) decision-making tasks. The objectives were
to assess the impact of training on task performance and to determine the best training
conditions for improvement and learning.
Seventy-one participants were randomly trained under one of four training conditions
(isolated 3D-MOT task, 3D-MOT simultaneously combined with a decision-making task,
consolidated 3D-MOT and decision-making task, isolated decision-making task). Task
performance was evaluated using speed thresholds, decision accuracy (%) and reaction
time (s).
Findings showed that the dual-task paradigm allowed satisfactory degrees of performance
on both tasks despite an important dual-task cost. Interestingly, the results seemed to
favor consolidated over simultaneous training for dual-task performance when 3D-MOT
was combined with a motor task. The amount of attentional shared resources in regards to
the nature of the additional task was discussed.
Keywords: perceptual-cognitive training, 3D-MOT, decision-making, dual-task, virtualreality, sport performance

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
Introduction
In the past decades, many off-field perceptual-cognitive training tools were developed to
train anticipation and decision-making abilities in athletes including the 3 DimensionalMultiple Object Tracking (3D-MOT) paradigm (Broadbent, Causer et al. 2015, Romeas,
Guldner et al. 2016). However, while searching for higher performance benefits (i.e. far
transfer), sports scientists have raised concerns in regards to the capability of these
perceptual-cognitive programs. Indeed, some authors suggested that these trainings
should be improved in considering broader, contextual, non-kinematic sources of
information (Canal-Bruland and Mann 2015) as well as perception-action coupling
(Broadbent, Causer et al. 2015).
The 3D-MOT training methodology has been developed to train the processing of visual
dynamic scenes reflecting some of the fundamental and attentional demands required
during sports (i.e. keeping track of teammates, opponents and ball). Correctly perceiving
and integrating relevant information from a dynamic scene is key for an athlete when
executing the most appropriate decision and action in sport. The 3D-MOT exercise
requires the user to process complex motion using dynamic, sustained and distributed
attention as well as working memory (Faubert and Sidebottom 2012, Parsons, Magill et
al. 2016). The paradigm has been shown to be very sensitive to sport expertise and has
demonstrated evidence of transfer across different populations and domains including
sports (Legault and Faubert 2012, Faubert 2013, Parsons, Magill et al. 2016, Romeas,
Guldner et al. 2016, Vartanian, Coady et al. 2016). The main advantages of this noncontextual technique are that it is simple to use, malleable in terms of development,
allows major gains with minimal training time and can be generalized to a variety of
sports or environments (Faubert 2013, Mangine, Hoffman et al. 2014, Harenberg,
McCaffrey et al. 2016, Romeas, Guldner et al. 2016, Hoke, Reuter et al. 2017, Michaels,
Chaumillon et al. 2017). However, this training technique lacks specificity and does not
include the combination of perception and action that would be typically present in the
sport environment.
Consequently, the main challenge of this study was to investigate new training conditions
that would present higher fidelity with the sport requirements (i.e. broader contextual
information) to potentially increase the transfer of learning and therefore athletic
performance. Given that many sports skills involve performing multiple tasks
simultaneously, performance on these skills may be enhanced if training conditions also
incorporate multiple tasks (Gabbett, Wake et al. 2011). A simulated dual-task paradigm
would also be closer to the attentional demand required in the sports environment
(Memmert 2009). Moreover, dual-task training is often used by coaches to increase the
cognitive demand of training sessions. That is why the paradigm employed in this study
combines the processing of specific information with a decision-making action required
while simultaneously performing the 3D-MOT task. In order to improve the ecological
validity of this dual-task training, the life-sized scenario was displayed using virtual
reality. As a result, the perceptual-cognitive challenge raised by this virtual dual-task
paradigm was thought to be very similar to the visual and dynamic sources of information
found within the sports environment.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
The present study served to develop a new 3D-MOT methodology of combined
perceptual-cognitive training seeking higher ecological value to respond to the field
demand. The first objective of this study was to evaluate the impact of the combined
training methodology on task performance. The second objective was to determine the
best training condition for improvement and learning. An additional objective was to
observe the impact of the nature of the decision-making task on the combined training
outcome. Indeed, there is more evidence that the amount of sensory modalities shared
between the combined tasks can impact attentional resources available for task
performance (see Wahn and Konig 2017 for a recent review). In this regard, two
experiments were conducted. The first experiment consisted of a perceptual 3D-MOT
task combined with a motor decision-making exercise. The second experiment focused
on a perceptual 3D-MOT task combined with a perceptual decision-making task.

Experiment 1
A critical requirement for an athlete when competing in his sporting environment is to be
able to perform multiple tasks simultaneously. For exemple, keeping track of relevant
teammates, opponents or a ball while executing specific motor skills. In this regard, the
first experiment consisted of a life-sized combination between 3D-MOT and a sportspecific motor task, i.e. birdie interception (badminton). There are a few attempts of
combining MOT with motor tasks (e.g. locomotion) in the literature. For instance, Pothier
and colleagues (2014) tested MOT while simultaneously walking with young and older
adults (Pothier, Benguigui et al. 2015). They found a decrease in performance on MOT
with increasing complexity of the MOT task. Importantly, an age-related decrease in
MOT and gait performance was found with older adults’ performance being impaired
under high attentional load conditions. This result was congruent with a previous study
by Thomas and Seiffert on MOT and walking (Thomas and Seiffert 2011). This evidence
raised the importance of highly challenging MOT conditions in the context of
performance. One study involving professional athletes showed that training on 3D-MOT
while simultaneously standing up compared to sitting-down could significantly impact
3D-MOT performance all along the training (Faubert and Sidebottom 2012). This result
was corroborated by the findings of a study including Olympian-level water polo,
taewkondo and tennis athletes in which participants were first trained on 3D-MOT
sitting-down (consolidation), then later trained on 3D-MOT while standing-up and
combined with a sport-specific position where balance was required (Quevedo, Blázquez
et al. 2015). The 3D-MOT performance was systematically impacted by the addition of a
secondary motor task but athletes seemed to recover their performance on 3D-MOT after
a few training sessions. The study also hinted at evidence of transfer following training
assessed by self-reports in athletes and coaches. However, whether the combination of
3D-MOT with an additional motor task was simultaneous (Faubert and Sidebottom 2012)
or consolidated (Quevedo, Blázquez et al. 2015), it is still unclear which training
methodology is more beneficial for task performance enhancement mainly because the
additional task performance was not assessed in these previous studies.
In the present experiment, while we anticipate an important dual-task cost generated by
the addition of a motor task to the 3D-MOT exercise, we still expect reasonable degree of
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
performance on both exercises in addition to significant improvement throughout training
sessions. However, we expect a different degree of improvement across training regimens
and seek to determine the best training conditions between single, simultaneously or
consolidated training for dual-task improvement. To test these hypotheses, four groups
were used including different training regimens: isolated 3D-MOT task, dual-task 3DMOT (combined training), isolated 3D-MOT task then dual-task 3D-MOT (consolidation
training) and isolated decision-making task. All groups were evaluated on each task
(single-task 3D-MOT, dual-task 3D-MOT, single decision-making task) three times
during the training at sessions 1, 6 and 12 in order to quantify the benefits of each
training regimen across time.

Material and methods
Participants. Twenty-nine university badminton athletes (6 women; mean = 22.98 ± 2.77
(SD) years old; 10.37 ± 4.49 years of badminton practice; 8.27 ± 3.92 hours of badminton
workout per week) were recruited for the study. All participants were healthy and
reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision (i.e. visual acuity score of 6/6 or better
with both eyes in Snellen chart and stereoscopic acuity of 50 seconds of arc or better in
Frisby test). Screening surveys indicated that participants were free of visual,
neurological, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular and vestibular impairments. The
experimental protocol and related ethics issues were evaluated and approved by the ethics
committee of the Université de Montréal and were carried out in accordance with the
tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki (last modified, 2004). All subjects were given verbal
and written information on the study and gave their verbal and written informed consent
to participate.
Apparatus. The study was conducted using a fully immersive virtual environment (EON
IcubeTM) to give a life-sized representation of the action. The EON IcubeTM is a 7 × 10 ×
10 feet room that includes three rigid back projection surface walls (one frontal and two
laterals) and a reflective floor. Four high-resolution projectors were synchronized and the
image was updated in real-time to maintain the true viewing perspective of the observer.
The EON IcubeTM was under the computer control of an Intel Xeon E5530 (NVIDIA
Quadro FX 5800 graphic card) along with four Hewlett Packard Z800 workstations
generating a stereoscopic environment. All the tasks were perfomed in the 3D
environment and the stereoscopy was generated with CrystalEyes® 4 s (RealD) active
shutter glasses synchronized at 120 Hz. Participants were positioned at a distance of 1.2
meters from the frontal surface wall.
Experimental setup. The three-dimensional Multiple Object Tracking (3D-MOT) task
was working under the NeuroTracker™ system licenced by CogniSens Inc. (Montreal,
Canada). The CORE mode of the NeuroTracker™ system was used. During the exercise,
four of eight projected spheres had to be tracked within a 3D virtual volumetric cube
space with virtual light grey walls, subtending a visual angle of 46 degrees (Figure 1).
The spheres followed a linear trajectory in the 3D virtual space. Deviation occurred only
when the balls collided against each other or the walls. Each CORE, based on a staircase
procedure, lasted approximately 8 minutes. The staircase procedure consists of increasing
the speed if the subject correctly identified all the indexed targets or decreasing the speed
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
if at least one target was missed. After each correct response, the dependent variable
(speed of ball displacement) was increased by 0.05 log and decreased by the same
proportion after each incorrect response, resulting in a threshold criterion of 50%. Speed
thresholds were then evaluated using 1-up 1-down staircase procedure (Levitt 1971) with
twenty trials. CORE scores of participants corresponded to the speed threshold computed
through the mean of the speeds at the last four inversions. Each participant performed
three CORE in a session and completed the task while seated. Participant’s performance
corresponded to the mean of the three CORE speed thresholds.

Figure 1. Illustration of one trial during the 3D-MOT task. A) Presentation of randomly
positioned spheres in a virtual volumetric space. B) The 4 spheres to be tracked during
the trial are quickly highlighted in red. C) Removal of identification and movement of all
spheres with dynamic interactions. D) Observer's response by identifying the spheres.
Then a feedback is given to the observer. If the observer correctly identifies all spheres,
the task is repeated at a faster speed. If, on the other hand, the observer makes a mistake,
the task is repeated at a slower speed.

Our participants were badminton athletes. Therefore, the motor-response decisionmaking task was designed to echo their expertise and thus consisted of a birdie
interception task (Figure 2). This task consisted of intercepting the trajectory of an
incoming virtual birdie (virtual bird feathers length = 0.1 m; bird feathers radius = 0.07
m) with a real badminton racket, before it touched the ground. Two trajectories were
implemented, and the virtual birdie could finish its race to the left or to the right of the
participant (i.e. forced choice paradigm). These two trajectories were modeled on a real
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
drop shot trajectory that was recorded with a 12-camera 3D motion capture system
(Optitrack, NaturalPoint, Corvallis, OR). In each case, the birdie trajectory was initiated
in the upper central part of the screen (x= 0; y= 2 m and z= 6 m). The duration of the
presentation lasted 1 s and contained 60 frames. The inter-stimulus interval was 500 ms.
The position of the racket was monitored with the Microsoft Kinect (V2) technology:
while participants held a real racket, the racket string spatial coordinates were modeled
relative to the wrist joint position which was used as a reference point for the kinect. To
minimize the error rate due to mental misconception of virtual space, the string racket
width and radius were configured at 0.7 and 0.75 meters, respectively. To improve the
accuracy of interception point computation, the length of the arm, as well as the
lateralization of the subject, were taken into account. As it is often the case in real-life
badminton practice, the birdie trajectories were computed to force the subject to make
one step forward to intercept the birdie before it touched the ground. Participants were
instructed that they simply had to intercept the birdie without the need for a strike action.
Each trajectory (i.e. leftward or rightward) was randomly presented thirty times in each
of the three experimental blocks (a total of 180 trials). Participants were standing up
during the task and their performances were assessed through their success rate (in %)
and their response speed (difference in seconds between the appearance and the
interception of the birdie; i.e. RT).

Figure 2. Illustration of the Birdie Interception task. The task consists of intercepting the
trajectory of an incoming virtual birdie with a real badminton racket, before it touched
down. Two trajectories were possible: A) leftward or B) rightward from the subjects own
vertical reference. White dashed lines are used here as a visual aid and were not presented
during the experiment.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
Training regimen. One objective of the present experiment was to determine the best
training conditions for dual-task processing, improvement and learning. To address this
question, participants were randomly trained under one out of four training regimens. i)
Eight participants were engaged in the isolated 3D-MOT regimen (iMOT) which
consisted of 3D-MOT training in its original form (Faubert and Sidebottom 2012, Faubert
2013, Romeas, Guldner et al. 2016) and served as a reference group for the standard 3DMOT task. To test whether an additional task could impact the training, two groups were
created. ii) the first combined training group engaged eight participants in a simultaneous
dual-task training called combined (Combi) during which a combined motor task was
coupled with a 3D-MOT task. During each 8 s 3D-MOT trial, participants had to
simultaneously perform 3 birdie interceptions. iii) The second combined training group
involved eight participants in a training regimen that we called consolidation (Consol).
This training was designed with two different phases. The participants performed iMOT
during the first four training sessions (i.e. phase 1, consolidation of skills on the primary
task) while they performed the Combi training in the following 5 sessions (i.e. phase 2).
iv) Finally, five participants performed the birdie interception task training (iDM) and
served as a control group for the secondary task.
Protocol. Regardless of their regimen, participants were trained during 9 sessions lasting
30 min (phase 1 from T02 to T05 and phase 2 from T07 to T11) and performed 3
evaluation sessions (at T01, T06 and T12) lasting one hour and a half (Figure 3). Besides
the nature of the task, the experimental setup, display, duration as well as sessions
frequency (twice a week for six consecutive weeks) were identical between the four
training regimens. At T01, a short demonstration was given to the participants before
each one of the three tasks. In the single-task 3D-MOT condition (STMOT), participants
were asked to reach the highest possible score. In the single-task decision-making
condition (STDM), instructions were to be as accurate and as quick as possible without
prioritizing speed over accuracy and conversely. In the dual-task condition (DT),
instructions were to equally pay attention to both the 3D-MOT and the decision-making
exercise. During the evaluation sessions, all participants performed the STMOT, STDM and
DT conditions. Consequently, 6 performance measures were recorded at T01 (pretraining evaluation), T06 (mid-term evaluation) and T12 (post-training evaluation): speed
threshold in STMOT, decision accuracy and response speed in STDM as well as these same
three measures in DT condition. During the training sessions, participants were engaged
in their specific training.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training

Figure 3. Summary of the tasks and measures performed across the 12 sessions in each
of the four training regimen. Ph corresponds to phase, iMOT corresponds to isolated
Multiple Object Tracking, Combi to combined, Consol to consolidation, iDM to isolated
Decision-Making task, STMOT to single-task MOT, STDM to single-task decision-making
and DT to dual-task.

Statistical analyses. The objective was to test whether the combination between 3D-MOT
and a specific motor task (i.e. dual-task training) was disruptive or beneficial for the
training effectiveness and to assess the effectiveness of different training regimens across
time. For each statistical analysis, eta-squared values ( 2) were reported to provide
information about the magnitude of effects. For clarity reasons, only relevant results were
reported in the manuscript but a full description of the analyses’ outcome can be found in
Supplementary Material.
Six dependent variables were used including speed threshold in STMOT and DT, decision
accuracy and response speed in STDM and DT. We ensured that the variables were
normally distributed by using Shapiro-Wilk tests (p > 0.05) and by looking at asymmetry
and skewness. When the normality of distribution was ensured, analyses of variance
(ANOVA) were performed and Levene’s tests were used to assess the homogeneity of
variance (p > 0.05). Greenhouse-Geisser corrections were applied when sphericity was
violated (p < 0.05). Multiple comparisons using Bonferroni corrections were performed
to explore differences within each factor. Non-parametric tests were used when variables
were not normally distributed (see details below). Note that the accuracy and response
speed data from two participants (iMOT and Consol groups) were missing in session T01
due to technical errors.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
To test dual-task cost and training effectiveness on it, speed thresholds, accuracy and RT
from STMOT, STDM and DT were submitted to a 4 (Between; Groups: iMOT, Combi,
Consol, iDM) by 3 (Within; Sessions: T01, T06, T12) by 2 (Within; Task condition:
isolated, combined) ANOVA with repeated measures on the last two factors.
To analyze the training effectiveness, each of the 6 dependent variables was submitted to
a 4 (Between; Groups: iMOT, Combi, Consol, iDM) by 3 (Within; Sessions: T01, T06,
T12) ANOVA with repeated measures on the last factor.
To test training effectiveness across sessions, Student’s paired t-tests were used to
evaluate the impact of training across Sessions on the six dependent variables within each
training group. In addition, logarithmic regression functions were fitted on speed
thresholds to observe learning rates, in particular during the DT condition. Therefore, the
slope was used to compare learning performance on 3D-MOT during the first 7 sessions
of DT exposure between group Combi (i.e. S01-S07) and group Consol (i.e. S06-S12). A
non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test was employed. To control for a potential speedaccuracy tradeoff on the motor decision-making task, Pearson’s correlations were used to
explore the relationship between RT and accuracy in STDM and DT conditions at sessions
T01, T06 and T12. The test revealed no speed-accuracy tradeoff.
Finally, to test training effectiveness between groups, one-way ANOVAs with the
between-subject factor Groups were performed separately on each of the six dependent
variables in each condition and for each of the three evaluation sessions (i.e. T01, T06
and T12).

Results
Dual-task cost. There was a significant main effect of Task condition on speed thresholds
(F[1, 25] = 244.720, p < 0.001, 2 = 0.907) which demonstrates a change in performance
between the single and combined task (Figure 4). This dual-task cost decreased with time
as the analysis revealed a significant interaction between Sessions and Task condition
(F[2, 50] = 6.560, p = 0.003, 2 = 0.208). Multiple comparisons revealed that dual-task
cost was reduced between sessions T01 > T06 > T12 (all p < 0.017). There was a main
effect of Groups (F[1, 25] = 3.116, p = 0.044, 2 = 0.272) and multiple comparisons
showed a superior overall dual task cost in iDM compared to Consol group (p = 0.044).
Regarding the motor task, there was a significant main effect of Task condition on RT
(F[1, 23] = 25.044, p < 0.001, 2 = 0.521) but not on accuracy (F[1, 23] = 0.098, p =
0.758, 2 = 0.004). This effect demonstrates a change in RT performance with the single
motor task being executed faster than when combined with 3D-MOT. There was no
interaction between Sessions and Task condition (F[2, 46] = 0.292, p = 0.748, 2 =
0.013).

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training

Figure 4. Training effectiveness across groups and sessions on the A) 3D-MOT and B),
C) Decision-Making tasks (accuracy and reaction times, respectively). Circles and solid
lines represent the performances obtained in single condition whereas squares and dashed
lines correspond to performances recorded during the dual-task condition. Error bars
represent SEM.

Training effectiveness across Sessions and between Groups. There was a main effect of
Sessions on speed thresholds in STMOT (F[2, 50] = 82.231, p < 0.001, 2 = 0.767) and DT
(F[2, 50] = 86.721, p < 0.001, 2 = 0.776) and on accuracy in STDM (F[2, 48] = 6.298, p
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
= 0.009, 2 = 0.208) and DT (F[2, 48] = 8.110, p = 0.003, 2 = 0.253). These effects
indicate a general improvement in 3D-MOT performance and birdie interception
accuracy in single and dual-task across time. There was no main effect of Sessions on RT
in STDM (F[6, 48] = 0.515, p = 0.524, 2 = 0.021) or DT (F[6, 46] = 0.190, p = 0.759, 2
= 0.008). A significant difference between Groups was demonstrated in speed thresholds
during DT (F[3, 25] = 4.036, p = 0.018, 2 = 0.326) which indicated different 3D-MOT
performance between training regimens while performing the combined task. The
ANOVA revealed a significant interaction between Groups and Sessions factors on speed
thresholds in STMOT (F[6, 50] = 3.151, p = 0.011, 2 = 0.274) and DT (F[6, 50] = 5.368,
p < 0.001, 2 = 0.392) suggesting different 3D-MOT performance across time between
groups. There was no interaction on accuracy or RT. To clearly identify these effects,
post-hoc comparisons are outlined in the sub-sections to follow.
The iMOT, Combi and Consol groups significantly improved their speed thresholds in
STMOT and DT conditions between sessions T01 and T12 (all p < 0.05) and between T12
> T06 > T01 in both conditions for the Consol group only (see supplementary material
for statistical values). Importantly, the slope analysis revealed that learning rates were
significantly superior in the Consol compared to the Combi group during the DT task (U
= 4.00, p = 0.003; Figure 5). In the iDM group, there was a significant difference
between T12 > T01 in the STMOT condition which could most probably be attributed to a
practice effect on 3D-MOT due to task exposure during the three evaluation sessions
(T01, T06, T12). In fact, the first sessions of exposure to 3D-MOT are characteristic of a
greater improvement (e.g. Faubert 2013). The iDM group significantly improved in
accuracy during STDM between sessions T01 and T12 (p = 0.025; 25 % improvement).
There was also a significant improvement of about 8 % in accuracy in the Consol group
between sessions T06 and T12 (p = 0.026) in STDM. Similarly, the improvement in the
Combi group was also about 8 % but between sessions T01 and T12 (p = 0.051). There
was no significant difference in RT between sessions and in any of the groups and
conditions.
The one-way ANOVAs revealed a significant difference on speed thresholds between
Groups at session T12 in the STMOT (F[3, 28] = 3.600, p = 0.027, 2 = 0.302) and DT
(F[3, 28] = 10.667, p < 0.001, 2 = 0.561) conditions. Multiple comparisons
demonstrated that only the Consol group was superior to the iDM group in STMOT (p =
0.021) and DT conditions (p < 0.001). Combi (p = 0.002) and iMOT (p = 0.035) groups
were superior to iDM in DT condition. There was no significant difference between
Groups on accuracy and RT.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training

Figure 5. 3D-MOT curves of A) mean speed thresholds and B) normalized speed
thresholds across sessions. The fits shown are logarithmic regression functions and the R2
corresponds to the amount of variance explained by the fit. Error bars represent SEM.
Discussion
Firstly, the results of this experiment indicated an important dual-task cost caused by the
combination of 3D-MOT with a motor decision-making task. The additional task
generated an important decrease in 3D-MOT speed thresholds. The results also
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
demonstrated, however, that training reduced the difference between dual-task conditions
and single-task conditions on 3D-MOT performance such that the dual-task condition
began to converge toward the single-task condition, in particular in participants who
followed the consolidation training regimen (Consol group). There was no apparent
impact of dual-tasking on the motor task accuracy, but rather on RT, reflecting that the
workload generated by the combined paradigm did not alter the quality of the execution
and instead affected time execution.
Another important finding regarding the training methodology was that 3D-MOT
performance and birdie interception accuracy were improved following training. More
specifically, the consolidation training regimen seemed to give the best improvement
across time on 3D-MOT performance and also revealed faster improvement on the motor
decision-making task compared to the combined training. Importantly, the 3D-MOT
learning rate in a dual-task condition was superior following a training regimen including
a consolidation phase, rather than following simultaneous tasks’ combination. According
to the present results, consolidated training should be prioritized when combining 3DMOT with a motor task as previously experimented by Quevedo and colleagues
(Quevedo, Blázquez et al. 2015).
In terms of the potential implication for perceptual-cognitive training, the findings
revealed that the combined 3D-MOT methodology produced high challenge training
conditions that are also highly trainable. In addition, the results suggested that
consolidation training should be favoured when combining 3D-MOT with an additional
motor execution task. The combined 3D-MOT motor exercise represents an interesting
form of training by including a complex cognitive component to simple or more specific
physical exercises. It acts on the coupling between perception, cognition and action
which better reflects the reality of the sport environment. It would also be interesting to
explore if execution accuracy and processing speed can be better trained with other
execution movements such as when there is a more contextual judgement to make (i.e.
attacking) than only anticipating the reception of the birdie (i.e. defensive action). The
paradigm could be a suitable training program before the return to play in early season or
after an injury, when athletes begin to engage physically. Further research will be needed
to assess the transfer capability of this combined paradigm on sport performance.

Experiment 2
The dynamic environment surrounding us requires to integrate an important number of
visual information in order to make appropriate decisions. For example, navigating into a
crowd requires to spread our attention on the dynamic information to orientate our
actions and reach our goals; at the same time, it also requires us to focus on movements
from others to avoid collisions. In sports, it is necessary to be able to perceive a number
of elements in the dynamic scene and at the same time to pick up relevant information
(e.g. body langage from a direct opponent) to execute the most appropriate decision or
action. Thus, the second experiment intended to evaluate a dual-task paradigm built to
mimic the important perceptual-cognitive load imposed during the previous situations. A
life-sized combination of 3D-MOT with a embedded perceptual decision-making task
was used. The biological motion perception (BMP) technique was employed for the
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
perceptual exercise. Biological motion perception represents the capacity to recognize the
kinematic presentation of movements reduced to a few moving dots placed on the major
joints of the body (Johansson 1973). This representation allows human observers to
recognize complex actions spontaneously from various animations such as walking. The
paradigm allows to determine what the observer perceives solely on kinematics, while
other motion cues are eliminated (Sparrow and Sherman 2001). This task has been used
to highlight athlete expertise in sport science, has shown potential for the study of spatial
characteristics of perception related to sport action (Abernethy and Parker 1989, Ward,
Williams et al. 2002, Wright, Bishop et al. 2011) and has allowed researchers to assess
perception of sports action within a life-sized virtual environment using stereoscopic
displays (Bideau, Kulpa et al. 2010, Romeas and Faubert 2015). In the present study, a
virtual biological motion pattern was employed to assess users’ decision-making ability
based on specific kinematics while also spreading their attention on the dynamic scene to
visually track moving targets (3D-MOT task). Previous evidence has shown that
peforming two visual-spatial attention tasks (i.e visual tracking and visual search) that
share common resources is challenging, but not impossible, for the human brain
(Alvarez, Horowitz et al. 2005). In addition, it was found that interference is greater when
a visual search task (e.g. MOT) is combined with an additional visual task compared to
when combined with a task in a different sensory modality (e.g. auditory, tactile)
(Arrighi, Lunardi et al. 2011, Wahn and Konig 2016). This could suggest a difference in
the outcome of Experiment 2 (perceptual task) compared to Experiment 1 (motor task).
Similarly to Experiment 1, we expect an important dual-task cost generated by the
addition of the perceptual decision-making task. Based on previous evidence (Alvarez,
Horowitz et al. 2005, Arrighi, Lunardi et al. 2011) and Experiment 1 findings, we
anticipate a reasonable degree of performance on both tasks in addition to improvement
that could be altered by the perceptual nature of the BMP task. Like Experiment 1, the
second objective was to assess the impact of different training regimens on task
improvement. To test these hypotheses, the same four training regimens as in Experiment
1 were used. All groups were evaluated on each task (single-task 3D-MOT, dual-task 3DMOT, single decision-making task) at sessions 1, 6 and 12.

Material and methods
Participants. Twenty-six healthy young but non-athlete adults (8 women; 22.96 ± 2.9
years old; 5.46 ± 2.82 hours of weekly physical training of any sport) were recruited for
the study. The same screening survey precautions and ethical considerations as in
Experiment 1 were met.
Apparatus. The same immersive virtual environment was used as in Experiment 1.
Experimental setup. The same 3D-MOT task was used as in Experiment 1 (Figure 1).
The BMP task (Figure 6), consisted of the discrimination of the walking direction (right
or left) of a point-light walker (Romeas and Faubert 2015). The point-light walker
(Legault, Allard et al. 2013, Romeas and Faubert 2015) was a dynamic representation of
human forms and was made up of 15 black dots, which represented the head, upper and
lower trunk, shoulders, hips, elbows, wrists, knees, and ankles on a white background.
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
Each dot had a diameter of 0.1 m. The height of the point-light walker was 1.80 m
displayed at a virtual distance of 4 m from the observer. The presentation lasted for 1 s
and contained 30 frames. The inter-stimulus interval was between 500 and 1000 ms in a
random design. Point-light walkers were presented walking leftward or rightward (i.e.
forced choice paradigm). A constant stimuli procedure with random angles of
presentation across trials was used (−15, −4, −2, 0, 2, 4 and 15° from front-facing). All of
the angles were randomly presented twenty times in each of the three experimental
blocks and their order of presentation varied according to the constant stimuli procedure.
Participants performed the task while seated and their performance was assessed through
their decision accuracy (in %) and their response speed (difference in seconds between
the appearance of the point-light walker and the participants’ decision; i.e. reaction time;
RT). These two scores corresponded to the mean of the scores obtained with each of the
three angles (2, 4 and 15°).

Figure 6. Illustration of the Biological Motion Perception task. The task consists of
choosing whether an animated point-light walker is walking A) leftward or B) rightward
from the subjects own vertical reference. In short, the task is to determine whether the
walker’s predicted path will end up to the left or to the right of the subject’s own vertical
center of reference. Red and white arrows as well as connecting white lines between dots
are used here as a visual aid and were not presented during the experiment.

Training regimen. The same training regimens were used as in Experiment 1 (Figure 3).
i) Seven participants were engaged in the isolated 3D-MOT regimen (iMOT). ii) Seven
participants were engaged in a dual-task training called combined (Combi). The
combined task was a perceptual decision-making task (BMP). During each 8 s 3D-MOT
trial, participants had to simultaneously perform 3 decision-making trials. iii) Six
participants were involved in a training regimen that we called consolidation (Consol). iv)
Finally, six participants performed the isolated decision-making task training (iDM).
Protocol. The same protocol was used as in Experiment 1.
Statistical analyses. The same procedure was used as in Experiment 1.

Results
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
Dual-task cost. There was a significant main effect of Task condition on speed thresholds
(F[1, 22] = 289.635, p < 0.001, 2 = 0.929), on accuracy (F[1, 22] = 52.023, p < 0.001,
2
= 0.703) and on RT (F[1, 22] = 9.223, p = 0.006, 2 = 0.295) which demonstrated an
important change in performance on all variables between the single and combined task.
Training effectiveness across Sessions and between Groups. There was a main effect of
Sessions on speed thresholds in STMOT (F[2, 44] = 51.138, p < 0.001, 2 = 0.699) and DT
(F[2, 44] = 43.603, p < 0.001, 2 = 0.665), on accuracy in DT (F[2, 44] = 11.497, p <
0.001, 2 = 0.343) and on RT in STDM (F[2, 44] = 25.384, p < 0.001, 2 = 0.536) and DT
(F[2, 44] = 4.887, p = 0.012, 2 = 0.182). While speed thresholds and RT performance
were improved throughout sessions (all p < 0.017), pairwise comparisons performed on
accuracy in DT demonstrated a decrease in accuracy between sessions T01 > T12 (p =
0.002) which was attributed to a speed-accuracy tradeoff (Figure 7). In fact, there was a
speed-accuracy tradeoff on the perceptual decision-making task along the training in
STDM (rT01 = 0.571, p = 0.002, rT06 = 0.543, p = 0.004, rT12 = 0.659, p < 0.001) and DT
(rT06 = 0.468, p = 0.016, rT12 = 0.573, p = 0.002). There was no main effect of Groups.
However, the ANOVA revealed a significant interaction between Groups and Sessions
factors on speed thresholds in STMOT (F[6, 44] = 4.547, p = 0.001, 2 = 0.383) that was
almost significant in DT (F[6, 44] = 2.092, p = 0.073, 2 = 0.222) which suggested
differences in 3D-MOT performance across time between groups. The analysis also
demonstrated a trend between Groups and Sessions factors on RT in DT (F[6, 44] =
2.182, p = 0.063, 2 = 0.229). To clearly identify these effects, post-hoc comparisons are
outlined in the following sub-sections.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training

Figure 7. Training effectiveness across groups and sessions on the A) 3D-MOT and B),
C) Decision-Making tasks (accuracy and reaction times, respectively). Circles and solid
lines represent the performances obtained in single condition whereas squares and dashed
lines correspond to performances recorded during the dual-task condition. Error bars
represent SEM.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
Similarly to Experiment 1, iMOT, Combi and Consol groups significantly improved their
speed thresholds in STMOT and DT conditions between sessions T01 and T12 (all p <
0.05). However, in constrast to what was observed in Experiment 1, learning rates were
not different between Combi and Consol groups (U = 18.000, p = 0.731; Figure 8). There
was no substantial changes on speed thresholds in the iDM group. In addition, there was
a significant decrease in accuracy in the Combi group in DT between T01 > T12 (all p <
0.05) which was caused by a prioritization of response speed over response accuracy
(speed-accuracy tradeoff). In fact, RT diminished significantly in this condition between
T01 and T12 in Combi (t[6] = 2.900, p = 0.027, 2 = 0.584). There was no meaningful
effect of training on accuracy in STDM (all p > 0.05) in any group which suggest ceiling
effect in the participtants’ capacity to accurately perceive the biological motion pattern.
However, RT significantly decreased in all groups between T01 and T12 in STDM (all p <
0.05) which can be interpreted as a form of task improvement.
The one-way ANOVAs revealed only one significant difference between Groups on RT
at session T12 in DT (F[3, 25] = 3.167, p = 0.045, 2 = 0.302) but multiple comparisons
did not demonstrate any meaningful difference.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training

Figure 8. 3D-MOT curves of A) mean speed thresholds and B) normalized speed
thresholds across sessions. Combi refers to the results observed in non-atheltes
participants whereas CombiA refers to the results obtained in athletes. The fits shown are
logarithmic regression functions and the R2 corresponds to the amount of variance
explained by the fit. Error bars represent SEM.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
Discussion
Like in Experiment 1, an important dual-task cost was observed when combining 3DMOT with a decision-making task. However, the additional perceptual task was even
more impacted during this experiment as evidenced by a dual-task cost on both the
accuracy and RT of the BMP task. Contrary to Experiment 1, the training did not reduce
the differences between dual-task conditions and single-task conditions on 3D-MOT
performance. The results raise interesting questions regarding the allocation of attentional
resources when combining two tasks from the same sensory modality (e.g. visual).
Despite highly challenging conditions (dual-task cost), task performance was executed
beyond chance level and 3D-MOT as well as RT performance were generally improved
following training. These findings supports previous evidence by Alvarez and colleagues
(2005) showing that performing two visual-spatial tasks sharing common resources is
challenging but not out of reach (Alvarez, Horowitz et al. 2005). Importantly, the
perceptual decision-making task was prone to a speed-accuracy tradeoff (i.e. response
speed was improved while response accuracy declined) which could be interpreted as a
strategy to allocate more resources to the 3D-MOT task by performing the additional task
more quickly. Moreover, contrary to Experiment 1, there was no evidence that dual-task
training (combined or consolidated) offered higher dual-task performance,. Even the
learning curves on 3D-MOT performance in dual-task conditions did not differ between
the simultaneous (Combi) and consolidated (Consol) training regimens. The results
observed on dual-task cost and on training accuracy tend to support other findings
showing that performing two tasks with common sensory modalities (e.g. visual) leads to
an important interference on task performance (Arrighi, Lunardi et al. 2011, Wahn and
Konig 2016) and, now, considering the present results, on training effectiveness.
The nature of the additional task, which was purely perceptual in Experiment 2, might
have led to the present results. But the difference observed between Experiment 1 and 2
could also be attributed to the nature of the participants (athletes vs non-athletes). Indeed,
as athletes are more inclined to process multiple tasks at the same time (e.g. Chaddock,
Neider et al. 2011), they might be better than mere novices to execute the dual-task
paradigm as observed in Experiment 1. To test this hypothesis, we assessed whether the
difference observed between Experiments 1 and 2 was due to the nature of the additional
task (motor vs perceptual) or to presumed multiple tasks processing abilities. In this
regard, we performed a repeated measures ANOVA (Groups x Sessions) on the six
dependent variables using two groups. We compared Experiment 2 Combi group to
sixteen university-level athletes (mean = 20.88 ± 2.03 (SD) years old; 12.56 ± 3.95 years
of sport practice (soccer association and football); 12.75 ± 6.46 hours of workout per
week) who subsequently participated in the simultaneous training regimen (Combi group)
following exactly the same protocol and training conditions. Overall, we found no
significant difference on any variable (speed thresholds, accuracy, RT; Figure 8 and
supplementary material) between these two groups which supports the idea that using
combined tasks sharing common sensory modalities interferes strongly with task
performance and training, without regards to the athletic status of the participants.
Despite the interesting results raised by the present experiment, it is worth noting that the
methodology used involved some limitations. In fact, combining 3D-MOT and BMP was
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
influenced by a speed-accuracy tradeoff. Habituation to point-light pattern of movements
produced faster responses with participants becoming more confident with their choices.
And because no real-time feedback was given regarding the decision made, the chances
to make repetitive mistakes were higher. As interpreted earlier, the speed-accuracy
tradeoff could also result from a strategy to allocate more resources to perform the 3DMOT task in dual-task conditions. In the future, it would be necessary to add feedback to
allow the user to recognize when he is right or wrong. Another solution would be to
diversify the nature of the point-light patterns of movement (i.e. multiple sports-related
movements) to favor participants’ engagement to the task and potentially avoid ceiling
effects on accuracy. These advancements would eventually improve the task
methodology and consequently raise interest for this perceptual-cognitive training. In
turn, the paradigm could have very practical uses in cases where athletes are unable to
physically respond, acting as a form of observational learning and cognitive stimulation.

General discussion
The present study assessed the conception of a multitasking perceptual-cognitive training
exercise including 3D-MOT combined with decision-making tasks from different nature.
Four training regimens were tested during single and dual-task conditions throughout 3
evaluation sessions (T01, T06 and T12). Trained groups included the isolated 3D-MOT
task (iMOT), 3D-MOT simultaneously combined with a decision-making task (Combi),
3D-MOT combined with a decision-making task following a 3D-MOT consolidation
phase (Consol) and the isolated decision-making task (iDM). Importantly, the additional
decision-making task was either motor (Experiment 1, birdie interception) or perceptual
(Experiment 2, BMP).
The main findings of this study indicate that the combined perceptual-cognitive training
paradigm represents a high-level challenging environment, as illustrated by an important
interference (dual-task cost) on task performance under dual-task conditions. Importantly,
despite the difficulty inherent to the dual-task exercise, task performance was trainable
which supports the potential implication of this technique for perceptual-cognitive
training. Secondly, the four different training regimens (iMOT, Combi, Consol, iDM) did
not equally influence the performance exhibited in each condition (STMOT, STDM, DT)
with dual-task trained groups tending to show the best improvements. This was especially
true for speed threshold scores and particularly the consolidation training group (Consol)
when 3D-MOT was combined with a motor task (Experiment 1). However, when 3DMOT was combined with a perceptual task sharing common attentional resources,
consolidation and combined training groups did not exhibit different levels of
performance (Experiment 2).
The first objective of the study was to validate whether combining 3D-MOT with a
decision-making exercise could offer more challenging conditions while integrating
broader contextual information. The dual-task condition produced a significant reduction
in task performance in Experiment 1 and 2 which is consistent with most of the previous
studies using dual-task MOT, 3D-MOT or spatial visual tests (Alvarez, Horowitz et al.
2005, Allen, McGeorge et al. 2006, Zhang, Xuan et al. 2010, Thomas and Seiffert 2011,
Faubert and Sidebottom 2012, Quevedo, Blázquez et al. 2015, Lapierre, Cropper et al.
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
2017). For example, Thomas & Seiffert (2011) observed a decrease in MOT performance
between single and dual-task conditions (while walking) under high tracking load (≥ 3
targets). Likewise, Zhang and colleagues have concluded clear evidence that when a
MOT task and a visual working memory task are performed concurrently, both tasks are
disrupted as long as either task is sufficiently challenging to consume the resources
available (Zhang, Xuan et al. 2010, Lapierre, Cropper et al. 2017). Interestingly,
comparing Experiment 2 to Experiment 1 highlighted a greater dual-task cost when the
additional task shared similar sensory modalities with the primary task. Previously,
Arrighi and colleagues (2011) found that a MOT task selectively interfered with a visual
discrimination task sharing common attentional resources, compared to an auditory
discrimination task (Arrighi, Lunardi et al. 2011). In their review, Wahn and Konig
(2017) also supported that simultaneously performing a visual spatial attention task and
an object-based attention task recruits partially shared attentional resources which can
explain a superior interference compared to when tasks are from different sensory
modalities (Wahn and Konig 2017). Based on this evidence, it is suggested that the
perceptual nature of the combined task in Experiment 2 was responsible for the greater
interference compared to Experiment 1 (motor decision-making task). To our knowledge,
the present study is the first comparison of the simultaneous processing of both MOT and
BMP tasks. The BMP task is known to induce a selective activation of the brain,
especially in the superior temporal sulcus, a region that is part of the action observation
network (Oram and Perrett 1994, Vaina, Solomon et al. 2001, Ptito, Faubert et al. 2003).
On the other hand, the MOT task has been found to activate a certain number of higher
brain areas involved in attentional processes such as parietal and frontal regions of the
cortex as well as the middle temporal complex (Culham, Brandt et al. 1998, Howe,
Horowitz et al. 2009). Shared resources between these systems were potentially solicited
during the execution of the BMP and 3D-MOT tasks but further research, beyond the
scope of the present study, will be needed to firmly conclude this hypothesis.
Another interesting finding showed that although the virtual stimulation provided
throughout the dual-task paradigm was costly in terms of central attention, performance
and learning were not totally hampered in Experiment 1 and 2. Indeed, participant’s
speed thresholds, accuracy and RT were still producing acceptable levels of efficiency
under dual-task conditions, whether it was motor or perceptual, reflecting that the
exercices were processed beyond level of chance (mean accuracy thresholds always just
above a noticeable difference [> 50%] and response time to decision-making in
accordance with previous evidence ; e.g. Land and McLeod 2000, Romeas and Faubert
2015). For example, there is previous evidence where 3D-MOT combined with high
cognitive load conditions (i.e. flying a jet) could not be performed with such accuracy
(Hoke, Reuter et al. 2017). In addition, Alvarez and colleagues (2005) demonstrated that
while the decrease in performance during dual-tasking was attributed to a central
executive cost, two visual-spatial attentional tasks were not continuously relying on the
same cognitive resources (Alvarez, Horowitz et al. 2005). Interestingly, the authors
combined visual tracking (MOT) and visual search tasks. Their study suggested that it is
possible to search through and track spatially overlapping sets of stimuli although there
were significant dual-task costs which is congruent with Experiment 2. The present study
confirms that it is possible to visually track and search through overlapping virtual
elements in addition to taking a real-time decision in response to a specific cue.
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
Moreover, the results demonstrated that performance in the life-sized virtual perceptualcognitive paradigm is highly trainable. First of all, Experiment 1 tended to support the
benefits of dual-task training for task improvement. Indeed, dual-task training has shown
some evidence of transfer benefits over single-task training in more general domains
(Silsupadol, Shumway-Cook et al. 2009, Theill, Schumacher et al. 2013, DesjardinsCrepeau, Berryman et al. 2016). Importantly, Laufer (2008) demonstrated the importance
of using challenging cognitive tasks in dual-task training: their participants obtained
better postural control when the balance training was coupled with a highly demanding
cognitive task (arithmetic manipulation) compared to a cognitive task that required little
attention (e.g. forward counting; Laufer 2008). Moreover, skill retention was enhanced in
the group trained under conditions with greater attentional demands. Gabbett and
colleagues (2011) have investigated the effects of single-task and dual-task training on
the acquisition, retention, and transfer of skill (drawing and passing) in high performance
rugby league players (Gabbett, Wake et al. 2011). Dual-task training did not significantly
outperform single-task training, but improved the dual-task performance of the draw and
pass skill. In Experiment 1, although 3D-MOT task performance indicated a reliable
difference between dual-task and single-task after training, there was a decrease in the
magnitude of the difference after training when 3D-MOT was combined with a motor
task such that the dual-task condition began to converge toward the single-task condition.
It is suggested that the cortical processors involved in dual-task performance became
more adept at a process more specific to the dual-task condition, such as processing 3DMOT while making a decision (Erickson, Colcombe et al. 2007). Studies have also
shown a practice effect on dual-task performance, suggesting that dual-task performance
relies on attentional control strategies. This implies that training and learning an optimal
strategy could help improve dual-task performance (Bherer, Kramer et al. 2008). Other
evidence has demonstrated that reduction in dual-task costs require practice on the
combination of the two updating tasks, not just practice on an individual task (Oberauer
and Kliegl 2004). A fundamental objective of perceptual-cognitive training is the
reduction of the attentional resources required to produce a particular outcome. It is
possible that participants had learnt an optimal strategy throughout the motor combined
3D-MOT training to a point where the dual-task cost was decreased compared to
participants trained with single tasks.
On the other hand, results observed in Experiment 2 suggested that dual-task training do
not offer a meaningful advantage when both tasks are from the same sensory modality.
As described previously, performing two tasks with common sensory modalities (e.g.
visual) leads to an important interference on task performance (Arrighi, Lunardi et al.
2011, Wahn and Konig 2017). The results observed in Experiment 2 seem to support that
this type of combination impacts training effectiveness as well, compared to when the
two tasks are from different sensory modalities (Experiment 1).
The present findings also provide important insights regarding training regimens’
efficiency within the context of dual-task training. When combining 3D-MOT with a
motor decision-making task (Experiment 1), the consolidation training regimen gave the
best improvement across time on 3D-MOT performance and showed similar benefits as
the simultaneous training group (Combi) with less dual-task training time. More
importantly, 3D-MOT learning rate in dual-task conditions was superior in the Consol
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
group which first learnt how to process 3D-MOT in isolation (phase 1) before engaging
in the dual-task training (phase 2). These results raised the importance of consolidated
training before the engagement in simultaneous training for rapid performance
enhancement, especially if a variety of skills have to be mastered (Quevedo, Blázquez et
al. 2015). A few studies have tried to compare sequential and simultaneous trainings; for
a methodological example, see the ongoing work by Lee and colleagues (2016) in
patients with mild cognitive impairment (Lee, Wu et al. 2016). In the sport domain, there
is very few comparisons between the simultaneous and sequential approaches. Recently,
video-based training has been used to demonstrate that presenting tennis actions or shots
in the order they occur in the performance environment led to better performance in the
field-based transfer test compare to a non-sequential trained group (Broadbent, Ford et al.
2017). The authors explained that sequential structure of practice potentially improves
contextual information. The results of the present study suggest that consolidated training
might be more beneficial than simultaneous training when combining perceptualcognitive and motor exercises (i.e. birdie interception). In other words, initial
familiarization with the unpredictable dynamic environment is suggested to be an
important requirement for higher upcoming motor dual-tasking performance.
Finally, it has been recently proposed that multiple sources of information other than
simple visual kinematic cues picked-up from the direct opponent, play a significant role
in fast judgements (de Oliveira, Lobinger et al. 2014, Canal-Bruland and Mann 2015).
These sources of contextual factors are present inside the unpredictable dynamic sport
scenario and must be taken into account for better and faster decision making. The
training tool used in the present study seeks to approach broader ecological and
contextual situations by embedding a perception-action component (decision-making
task) in a purely perceptual-cognitive task (3D-MOT) that requires to process complex
and unpredictable dynamic visual scenes. For the first time, this paradigm proposes to
integrate components supported by both the sport specific and the cognitive component
approaches (Alves, Voss et al. 2013) during a perceptual-cognitive training. Moreover,
by testing different kinds of training conditions, this study provides important insights on
the requirements for building training regimens with a better ratio between time
investment and efficiency. In the future, the transfer effectiveness of this new perceptualcognitive training methodology needs to be put to the test to assess whether broader
contextual paradigms are producing superior outcomes for sports performance.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Stéphanie Ferland and Philippe Letendre-Joachim for
their great work with testing participants. We would also like to thank Satya Ortiz-Gagné
and Vadim Sutyushev for programming the tasks. We thank Robyn Lahiji and Jesse
Michaels for their help in editing the manuscript. Special thanks to the participants.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
References
Abernethy, B. and S. Parker (1989). Perceiving joint kinematics and segment interactions
as a basis for skilled anticipation in squash. Proceedings of the 7th World Congress in
Sport Psychology. C. K. Giam, K. K. Chook and K. C. The. Singapore, International
Society of Sport Psychology: 56-58.
Allen, R., P. McGeorge, D. G. Pearson and A. Milne (2006). "Multiple-target tracking: A
role for working memory?" Quarterly journal of experimental psychology 59(6): 11011116.
Alvarez, G. A., T. S. Horowitz, H. C. Arsenio, J. S. DiMase and J. M. Wolfe (2005). "Do
Multielement Visual Tracking and Visual Search Draw Continuously on the Same Visual
Attention Resources?" Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 31(4): 643-667.
Alves, H., M. W. Voss, W. R. Boot, A. Deslandes, V. Cossich, J. I. Salles and A. F.
Kramer (2013). "Perceptual-cognitive expertise in elite volleyball players." Frontiers in
Psychology 4: 36.
Arrighi, R., R. Lunardi and D. Burr (2011). "Vision and Audition Do Not Share
Attentional Resources in Sustained Tasks." Frontiers in Psychology 2.
Bherer, L., A. F. Kramer, M. S. Peterson, S. Colcombe, K. Erickson and E. Becic (2008).
"Transfer effects in task-set cost and dual-task cost after dual-task training in older and
younger adults: further evidence for cognitive plasticity in attentional control in late
adulthood." Experimental aging research 34(3): 188-219.
Bideau, B., R. Kulpa, N. Vignais, S. Brault, F. Multon and C. Craig (2010). "Using
virtual reality to analyze sports performance." IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications
30(2): 14-21.
Broadbent, D. P., J. Causer, A. M. Williams and P. R. Ford (2015). "Perceptual-cognitive
skill training and its transfer to expert performance in the field: future research
directions." European Journal of Sport Science 15(4): 322-331.
Broadbent, D. P., P. R. Ford, D. A. O'Hara, A. M. Williams and J. Causer (2017). "The
effect of a sequential structure of practice for the training of perceptual-cognitive skills in
tennis." PLoS One 12(3): e0174311.
Canal-Bruland, R. and D. L. Mann (2015). "Time to broaden the scope of research on
anticipatory behavior: a case for the role of probabilistic information." Frontiers in
Psychology 6: 1518.
Chaddock, L., M. B. Neider, M. W. Voss, J. G. Gaspar and A. F. Kramer (2011). "Do
athletes excel at everyday tasks?" Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 43(10):
1920-1926.
Culham, J. C., S. A. Brandt, P. Cavanagh, N. G. Kanwisher, A. M. Dale and R. B. Tootell
(1998). "Cortical fMRI activation produced by attentive tracking of moving targets."
Journal of Neurophysiology 80(5): 2657-2670.
de Oliveira, R. F., B. H. Lobinger and M. Raab (2014). "An adaptive toolbox approach to
the route to expertise in sport." Frontiers in Psychology 5: 709.
Desjardins-Crepeau, L., N. Berryman, S. A. Fraser, T. T. Vu, M. J. Kergoat, K. Z. Li, L.
Bosquet and L. Bherer (2016). "Effects of combined physical and cognitive training on
fitness and neuropsychological outcomes in healthy older adults." Clinical Interventions
in Aging 11: 1287-1299.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
Erickson, K. I., S. J. Colcombe, R. Wadhwa, L. Bherer, M. S. Peterson, P. E. Scalf, J. S.
Kim, M. Alvarado and A. F. Kramer (2007). "Training-induced functional activation
changes in dual-task processing: an FMRI study." Cerebral Cortex 17(1): 192-204.
Faubert, J. (2013). "Professional athletes have extraordinary skills for rapidly learning
complex and neutral dynamic visual scenes." Scientific reports 3: 1154.
Faubert, J. and L. Sidebottom (2012). "Perceptual-Cognitive Training of Athletes."
Journal of Clinical Sports Psychology(6): 85-102.
Gabbett, T., M. Wake and B. Abernethy (2011). "Use of dual-task methodology for skill
assessment and development: examples from rugby league." Journal of Sports Sciences
29(1): 7-18.
Harenberg, S., R. McCaffrey, M. Butz, D. Post, J. Howlett, K. D. Dorsch and K. Lyster
(2016). "Can Multiple Object Tracking Predict Laparoscopic Surgical Skills?" Journal of
Surgical Education.
Hoke, J., C. Reuter, T. Romeas, M. Montariol, T. Schnell and J. Faubert (2017).
Perceptual-cognitive and physiological assessment of training effectiveness. Proceedings
of the Interservice/ Industry Training, Simulation and Education Conference Orlando,
FL.
Howe, P. D., T. S. Horowitz, I. A. Morocz, J. Wolfe and M. S. Livingstone (2009).
"Using fMRI to distinguish components of the multiple object tracking task." Journal of
Vision 9(4): 10 11-11.
Johansson, G. (1973). "Visual perception of biological motion and a model for its
analysis." Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics 14(2): 201-211.
Land, M. F. and P. McLeod (2000). "From eye movements to actions: how batsmen hit
the ball." Nature Neuroscience 3(12): 1340-1345.
Lapierre, M. D., S. J. Cropper and P. D. L. Howe (2017). "Shared processing in multiple
object tracking and visual working memory in the absence of response order and task
order confounds." PLoS One 12(4): e0175736.
Laufer, Y. (2008). "Effect of cognitive demand during training on acquisition, retention
and transfer of a postural skill." Human Movement Science 27(1): 126-141.
Lee, Y. Y., C. Y. Wu, C. H. Teng, W. C. Hsu, K. C. Chang and P. Chen (2016).
"Evolving methods to combine cognitive and physical training for individuals with mild
cognitive impairment: study protocol for a randomized controlled study." Trials 17(1):
526.
Legault, I., R. Allard and J. Faubert (2013). "Healthy older observers show equivalent
perceptual-cognitive training benefits to young adults for multiple object tracking."
Frontiers in Psychology 4.
Legault, I. and J. Faubert (2012). "Perceptual-cognitive training improves biological
motion perception: evidence for transferability of training in healthy aging." Neuroreport
23(8): 469-473.
Levitt, H. (1971). "Transformed up-down methods in psychoacoustics." The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 49(2): Suppl 2:467+.
Mangine, G. T., J. R. Hoffman, A. J. Wells, A. M. Gonzalez, J. P. Rogowski, J. R.
Townsend, A. R. Jajtner, K. S. Beyer, J. D. Bohner, G. J. Pruna, M. S. Fragala and J. R.
Stout (2014). "Visual tracking speed is related to basketball-specific measures of
performance in NBA players." The Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research 28(9):
2406-2414.
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
Memmert, D. (2009). "Pay attention! A review of visual attentional expertise in sport."
International Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology 2(2): 119-138.
Michaels, J., R. Chaumillon, D. Nguyen-Tri, D. Watanabe, P. Hirsch, F. Bellavance, G.
Giraudet, D. Bernardin and J. Faubert (2017). "Driving simulator scenarios and measures
to faithfully evaluate risky driving behavior: A comparative study of different driver age
groups." PLoS One 12(10): e0185909.
Oberauer, K. and R. Kliegl (2004). "Simultaneous cognitive operations in working
memory after dual-task practice." Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 30(4): 689-707.
Oram, M. W. and D. I. Perrett (1994). "Responses of Anterior Superior Temporal
Polysensory (STPa) Neurons to “Biological Motion” Stimuli." Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience 6(2): 99-116.
Parsons, B., T. Magill, A. Boucher, M. Zhang, K. Zogbo, S. Berube, O. Scheffer, M.
Beauregard and J. Faubert (2016). "Enhancing Cognitive Function Using PerceptualCognitive Training." Clinical EEG and Neuroscience 47(1): 37-47.
Pothier, K., N. Benguigui, R. Kulpa and C. Chavoix (2015). "Multiple Object Tracking
While Walking: Similarities and Differences Between Young, Young-Old, and Old-Old
Adults." The journals of gerontology. Series B, Psychological sciences and social
sciences 70(6): 840-849.
Ptito, M., J. Faubert, A. Gjedde and R. Kupers (2003). "Separate neural pathways for
contour and biological-motion cues in motion-defined animal shapes." NeuroImage 19(2
Pt 1): 246-252.
Quevedo, L., A. P. Blázquez, J. Solé i Fortó and G. C. Torradeflot (2015). "Perceptualcognitive Training with the NeuroTracker 3D-MOT to Improve Performance in Three
Different Sports." Educació Física i Esports 119: 97-108.
Romeas, T. and J. Faubert (2015). "Soccer athletes are superior to non-athletes at
perceiving soccer-specific and non-sport specific human biological motion." Frontiers in
Psychology 6: 1343.
Romeas, T., A. Guldner and J. Faubert (2016). "3D-Multiple Object Tracking training
task improves passing decision-making accuracy in soccer players." Psychology of Sport
and Exercise 22: 1-9.
Silsupadol, P., A. Shumway-Cook, V. Lugade, P. van Donkelaar, L. S. Chou, U. Mayr
and M. H. Woollacott (2009). "Effects of single-task versus dual-task training on balance
performance in older adults: a double-blind, randomized controlled trial." Archives of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 90(3): 381-387.
Sparrow, W. A. and C. Sherman (2001). "Visual expertise in the perception of action."
Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews 29(3): 124-128.
Theill, N., V. Schumacher, R. Adelsberger, M. Martin and L. Jancke (2013). "Effects of
simultaneously performed cognitive and physical training in older adults." BMC
Neuroscience 14: 103.
Thomas, L. and A. Seiffert (2011). "How Many Objects are You Worth? Quantification
of the Self-Motion Load on Multiple Object Tracking." Frontiers in Psychology 2(245).
Vaina, L. M., J. Solomon, S. Chowdhury, P. Sinha and J. W. Belliveau (2001).
"Functional neuroanatomy of biological motion perception in humans." Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 98(20): 11656-11661.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/511337; this version posted January 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined perceptual-cognitive training
Vartanian, O., L. Coady and K. Blackler (2016). "3D multiple object tracking boosts
working memory span: Implications for cognitive training in military populations."
Military Psychology 28(5): 353-360.
Wahn, B. and P. Konig (2016). "Attentional Resource Allocation in Visuotactile
Processing Depends on the Task, But Optimal Visuotactile Integration Does Not Depend
on Attentional Resources." Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 10: 13.
Wahn, B. and P. Konig (2017). "Is Attentional Resource Allocation Across Sensory
Modalities Task-Dependent?" Advances in Cognitive Psychology 13(1): 83-96.
Ward, P., A. M. Williams and S. J. Bennett (2002). "Visual search and biological motion
perception in tennis." Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport 73(1): 107-112.
Wright, M. J., D. T. Bishop, R. C. Jackson and B. Abernethy (2011). "Cortical fMRI
activation to opponents' body kinematics in sport-related anticipation: expert-novice
differences with normal and point-light video." Neuroscience Letters 500(3): 216-221.
Zhang, H., Y. M. Xuan, X. L. Fu and Z. W. Pylyshyn (2010). "Do objects in working
memory compete with objects in perception?" Visual Cognition 18(4): 617-640.

29

