bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In situ MI RNA DELIVERY FROM A HYDROGEL PROMOTES
OSTEOGENESIS OF ENCAPSULATED MESENCHYMAL STROMAL
CELLS
A P REPRINT
James. Carthew
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Monash University, Melbourne
Surakshya. Shrestha
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Monash University, Melbourne
John. S. Forsythe
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Monash University, Melbourne

Ilze. Donderwinkel
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Monash University, Melbourne
Vinh. X. Truong
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Monash University, Melbourne
Jessica. E. Frith ∗
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Monash University, Melbourne

A BSTRACT
Hydrogels have many properties that emulate biological tissues and are therefore attractive candidates
for use in tissue engineering. In particular the encapsulation and subsequent differentiation of
mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) is a strategy that holds great promise for the repair and
regeneration of bone and cartilage. However, MSCs are well-known for their sensitivity to mechanical
cues, particularly substrate stiffness, and so the inherent softness of hydrogels is poorly matched
to the mechanical cues that drive efficient osteogenesis. This limits the success of bone tissue
engineering using MSCs encapsulated in a hydrogel. One approach to overcome this limitation
is to harness mechanotransductive signalling pathways and override the signals cells receive from
their environment. Previous reports have shown that the mechanosensitive miRNAs, miR-100-5p
and miR-143-3p can enhance MSC osteogenesis, but this required a complex multi-step procedure
to transfect, encapsulate and differentiate the cells. In this study, we develop and characterise a
facile system for in situ transfection of MSCs encapsulated within a light-crosslinkable gelatin-PEG
hydrogel. Comparing the influence of different transfection agents and hydrogel compositions, we
determine the factors affecting transfection agent release and MSC transfection, showing that it
is possible to transfect MSCs with miRNAs in situ. We then compare the efficacy of both pretransfection and in situ transfection on the osteogenic capacity of hydrogel-encapsulated MSCs,
demonstrating superior mineralisation and osteogenic gene expression for in situ transfected samples.
Our platform therefore demonstrates a simple, one-pot system for delivery of pro-osteogenic miRNAs
and in situ transfection that is able to enhance MSC osteogenic potential without the need of multi-step
transfection procedures, thus demonstrating significant promise for bone tissue engineering.
Keywords Mesenchymal Stromal Cells · Osteogenesis · Hydrogels · microRNAs · Transfections
∗

Jessica.Frith@monash.edu

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

1 Introduction
For many years, the application of mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) has been studied as a means to enhance
regeneration of bone in vivo, through either direct injection to the site of injury, or when seeded onto ceramic implants
for larger fracture areas [1, 2, 3, 4]. One drawback of these theraputic approaches is the inherant low cell viability
following stem cell transplantation, attributed to the host immune response, high shear forces associated with the
injection process and mechanical shear from the surrounding microenvironment. As a result, hydrogels have attracted
great interest as a way to protect cells during delivery and provide a favourable microenvironment to support osteogenesis thereafter. Through a combination of their compositional versatility and high degree of biocompatibility, many
hydrogel formulations demonstrate minimal cell mortality and functional bone regeneration both in vitro and in vivo
following cell encapsulation [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Their innate ability to take on the shape of complex defects makes them
uniquely suited for bone tissue engineering, however one critical drawback, particularly for MSC encapsulation is their
inherently soft nature. Due to their high water content, injectable hydrogels have a significantly lower modulus than that
of surrounding bone tissue. Taking into account the high degree of mechanosensitivity shown by MSCs, coupled with
extensive literature demonstrating the impact of substrate stiffness in directing stem cell lineage (with stiff substrates
(40 – 70 kPa) favouring osteogenic lineage and soft substrates (0.5 – 5 kPa) favouring adipogenic lineage) [10], the use
of these systems for bone regeneration is likely sub-optimal.
One strategy to improve the osteogenesis of encapsulated MSCs is to deliver drugs or biomolecules that act upon
mechanotransductive signalling mechanisms and over-ride the physical cues that the cells derive from the soft hydrogels.
In this manner it may be possible to artificially induce the MSCs to respond as if they were on a high-modulus,
pro-osteogenic substrate. Our previous work identified a panel of mechanosensitive microRNAs (miRNAs) and showed
that they could be used to modulate MSC osteogenesis and improve bone formation in MSCs exposed to a soft substrate
[11]. Other studies have since further demonstrated the osteoinductive nature of miRNAs [12, 13]. miRNAs are a class
of endogenous small, non-coding RNAs that positively or negatively regulate gene expression and cellular processes via
RNA interference [14, 15, 16]. By targeting mRNA transcripts post-translationally, they provoke either translational
repression or degradation, depending on the degree of sequence homology, and thus play critical roles in the regulation
of cell signalling pathways. The use of miRNAs to drive cell fate and enhance tissue regeneration is of great interest due
to a combination of their powerful effects on biological process, relative ease of delivery and inexpensive nature [17].
miRNAs are therefore of significant interest in tissue-engineering and hold significant promise to optimise regenerative
outcomes.
Our previous study showed that MSCs transfected with the pro-osteogenic miRNAs, miR-100-5p and miR-143-3p had
increased osteogenic differentiation potential and that this was mediated by modulation of mTOR signalling [11]. One
drawback was that this study relied upon the pre-transfection of MSCs with osteogenic miRNAs prior to encapsulation.
Although cells were successfully transfected, this multi-step procedure was a cumbersome process requiring repeated
cycles of media changes and manipulation during the transfection and subsequent encapsulation. To overcome this,
here we develop a system to facilitate in situ transfection of MSCs encapsulated in a hydrogel, significantly simplifying
the process to a one-step procedure that encapsulates both MSCs and miRNAs complexed with transfection agents, at
the moment of hydrogel crosslinking.
We have developed and characterised a facile platform in which a polyethylene glycol (PEG) / gelatin-norbornene
(GelNB-PEG) hydrogel, pro-osteogenic miRNAs and transfection agents are combined to enhance osteogenic differentiation of encapsulated MSCs in situ. Successful development of this system not only demonstrates the ability of
miRNAs to direct MSC fate irrespective of microenvironment, but also takes steps towards the future translation of
such systems for bone tissue engineering.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Synthesis of Poly(ethylene glycol) dithiol (PEGdiSH)
PEGdiSH synthesis was conducted in a one-step process. Briefly, 10 g PEG-2armOH (Mn = 2000 Da, 0.1 M, UK)
and 9.5526 g of mercaptopropioinic acid (0.09 M, USA) were dissolved in 100 mL toluene, and two drops of H2 SO4
(98 %) were added. The resulting solution was then heated to reflux at 120 ◦ C under Dean-Stark conditions for 20 h.
Toluene was subsequently evaporated off in vacuo, with the resulting oil dissolved in dichloromethane (100 mL) and
then washed in saturated NaHCO3 solution (50 mL). The organic phase was dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate
(MgSO4 ), filtered, and concentrated to ca. 5 mL. The polymer was then purified by precipitation into diethyl ether.
2.2 Synthesis of Gelatin Norbornene (GelNB)
GelNB was synthesised based on previously reported methods [18]. Briefly, 1.00 g of 5-norbornene-2-carboxylic acid
[7.20 mM] (Sigma, mixture of endo/exo) was dissolved in 20 mL dichloromethane, followed by addition of 1.12 g
N-hydroxysuccinimide [9.72 mM] and 1.79 g of N-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)-N’-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride
[9.36 mM] (Sigma). The resulting solution was mixed at room temperature (RT ◦ C) for 20 h.
The reaction mixture was then washed with 40 mL saturated NaHCO3 solution, twice with H2 O, and dried over
anhydrous magnesium sulfate (MgSO4 ). The dried solution was then evaporated in vacuo, yielding a white solid
product (1.45 g, ca. 86 %). Next, 1.00 g gelatin powder (Sigma, porcine skin Type A) was dissolved in 20 mL
N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)/H2 O (1:1 v/v) solution and stirred until completely dissolved. To this solution, the
above resultant (5-norbornene-2-carboxylic acid NHS, 59 mg, 0.25 mM) dissolved in DMF (5 mL) was added with an
additional 50 µL N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA) (Auspep, Australia). The resulting solution was left to stir at
ambient temperature for 8 h, followed by dialysis in excessive deionised H2 SO4 for 3 days in 3.5 kDa cut-off dialysis
tubing. The purified solution was filtered using a 0.2 µm syringe filter, and subsequently lyophilized.
2.3 Hydrogel Polymerisation
Polymers (GelNB and PEGdiSH) and lithium phenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate (LAP) photo-initiator were
dissolved in Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) (Life Technologies). A 200 µL mixture was prepared by
mixing the corresponding amounts of stock solutions and DPBS to deliver two final solutions of 1 % (w/v) PEGdiSH, and
0.03 % (w/v) LAP with either 10 % (w/v) or 4 % (w/v) GelNB. Following stabilisation for 2 min, photo-polymerisation
using an OmniCure S2000 (Lumen Dynamics) was performed for 10 min using a 400-500 nm filter at a calibrated light
intensity of 10 mW cm−2 . For MSC encapsulation studies, cell suspensions [2.5 million cells/mL] were created using
the GelNB solution prior to addition of PEGdiSH and LAP components. Gels were then polymerised as described, and
cultured at 37 ◦ C for experimental duration.
2.4 Rheological Analysis
Rheological analysis was performed using a parallel plate strain-controlled rheometer (Anton Paar Physica). A top plate
diameter of 25 mm was selected with a gap size of 0.5 mm, constant strain of 0.2 % and frequency of 1 Hz. Hydrogels
were produced as stated above, with the addition of a 24 h swelling step conducted in DMEM supplemented with 10 %
(v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Scientifix) at 37 ◦ C.
2.5 Swelling and Degradation Measurements
Hydrogel precursors and component parts were prepared as described previously. The resulting mixture of gel stock
solutions were pipetted into a 10 mm micro-well culture dish (ThermoFisher). For each sample, 200 µL droplets were
formed, with the macromer mass used in the precursor recorded as mp. Gels were swollen in excessive DPBS for 24 h
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

to reach equilibrium swelling, following which, gel mass was recorded as ms. Gels were subsequently vacuum-dried
with the dry mass being recorded as md. The swelling ratio was calculated as ms / md, the equilibrium water content (%)
was calculated as (ms - md) / ms x 100 %, and the gel fraction was determined as md / mp x 100 %. For the degradation
measurements, hydrogels were incubated in DPBS at 37 ◦ C, removed from solution and their mass recorded as mt every
day. The degradation was measured as the percentage of mt to the mass of as gelled hydrogel at day 0 (mt0) as (mt /
mt0) x 100 in triplicate.

2.6 Release Kinetics Analysis
To assess release kinetics of miRNAs from both 10 % and 4 % (w/v) GelNB-PEG hydrogels, 100 µL gels were
formed containing the appropriate GelNB/PEG/LAP concentrations and either 50 nM Block-iT Oligonucleotide (Life
Technologies) alone, or complexed with transfection agents. Gel mixtures were subsequently photo-polymerised and
submerged in 100 µL PBS. Every 24 h, 5 µL PBS was removed and analysed using a Nanodrop (DeNovix DS-11 FX)
to assess cumulative Block-iT oligonucleotide concentration in the supernatant.

2.7 Particle Size analysis
To determine the hydrodynamic size of DNA- (Block-iT fluorescent oligo) complexed transfection agents, each
transfection agent was dispersed with targeted DNA at the respective concentration to achieve an N:P ratio of 5 in PBS,
then subsequently incubated at RT◦ C for 30 min. Following which, the hydrodynamic size was assessed in triplicate
using dynamic laser scattering (DSL) with a Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS.

2.8 MSC Culture and Pre/Post Encapsulation miRNA Transfections
Human bone marrow derived MSCs (Lonza) were cultured in (DMEM containing D-glucose [1 g L−1 ] and sodium
pyruvate [110 mg L−1 ] (Life Technologies), supplemented with penicillinstreptomycin [100 U mL−1 ] (Life Technologies) and 10 % (v/v) FBS. Cells were incubated at 37 ◦ C with 5 % CO2 and passaged at 70 % confluency, reseeding was
performed at a density of 2,500 cells cm−2 . For our investigations, MSCs from 3 donors were used and all experiments
were performed using cells at passage 6.
For in situ transfections, PEG, GelNB and LAP solutions were prepared as described previously. Cells were detached
from culture dishes using TrypLE express (Life Technologies), resuspended into final hydrogel precursor solutions
at a density of 2.5 million cell mL−1 and mixed thoroughly. Hydrogel-cell mixtures were pipetted into 30 µL drops
on the bottom of 24-well culture dishes. Samples were then illuminated from above using visible light (400 – 500
nm, 10 mW cm−2 ) for 10 min, rinsed two times with 2 mL culture media, and maintained for the first 24 h. For basal
culture conditions in which differentiation is not conducted, cells were maintained under culture conditions described
above. For osteogenic induction, culture media was supplemented with 50 µM ascorbate-2-phosphate, 100 ng/mL
dexamethasone and 10 mM -glycerophosphate 24 h after encapsulation. Media changes were performed every 4 days.
For miRNA transfections, human mercury LNAT M miRNA mimics for miR-100-5p, miR-143-3p and mimic negative
controls were used at concentrations of 10 nM, 25 nM and 25 nM respectively (supplementary Table 2). Transfections
using polyethylenimine (PEI) (mw 4 kDa and 40 kDa (Sigma)) were performed using an N:P ratio of five. Lipofectamine
RNA iMAX (Life Technologies) transfections were conducted as per the manufacturers protocol. For both in situ and
pre-culture transfections, cells were serum-starved in 0.05 % FBS for 24 h prior to transfection. Pre-transfected cells
were then incubated in transfection agents for a further 24 h prior to encapsulation. For in situ transfection conditions,
all transfection reagents were combined with the GelNB/PEG/Cell suspension prior to photo-polymerisation.
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

2.9 MSC Viability Screening
MSC viability was assessed using a Live/Dead assay (Life Technologies) and CellTiter 96 proliferation assay kits (MTS)
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Both assays were conducted at time points of 1, 3 and 7 days post-transfection.
Live/Dead staining was imaged using a Nikon Eclipse TS2 inverted microscope (Nikon). CellTiter 96 proliferation
assays were read using a Multiskan spectrum plate reader, using the SkanIT RE programme (version 2.4.2).
2.10 Flow cytometry Analysis
All flow cytometry analysis within this study was performed using a FACs Calibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences).
For 2D cultured experiments, cells were detached from the culture surface using TrypLE express (Life Technologies).
For encapsulated scenarios, cell-laden hydrogels were incubated in Trypsin-EDTA (0.25 %) for 30 min at 37 ◦ C until
visible hydrogel degradation was observed, centrifuged at 1300 rpm for three min and resuspended in 1 mL [3 %] BSA
in PBS (w/v) prior to analysis.
2.11 Quantitative real-time RT-PCR
To extract total RNA from encapsulated conditions, cell-laden hydrogels were incubated in Trypsin-EDTA (0.25 %) for
30 min at 37 ◦ C until visible hydrogel degradation was observed and centrifuged at 1300 rpm for three min. Cells were
subsequently washed three times in PBS, resuspended in 200 µL QIAzol Lysis Reagent. Total RNA was extracted using
the Qiagen RNeasy mini kit with on-column DNase treatment (Cat #74104) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Per condition 110 ng RNA was used for cDNA synthesis using Superscript VILO first strand synthesis master mix for
qRT-PCR (Life Technologies) per manufacturer’s instructions in a total volume of 20 µL. Reverse transcription was
performed in the T100 Thermal Cycler using the following cycling conditions: 10 min at 25 ◦ C, 60 min at 42 ◦ C and
5 min at 85 ◦ C. Quantitative PCR reactions were set-up in a total volume of 10 µL with 1x ABI Fast SYBR Green
Mastermix and 0.2 µM forward and reverse primers. The primer sequences are listed in supplementary Table 1. A
CFX96 Real-Time System (Bio-Rad) was used to run the samples with fast cycling parameters of 20 s at 95 ◦ C, 3 s at
95 ◦ C and 30 s at 60 ◦ C, which was repeated for 40 cycles and followed by a melt curve. Data was analysed by the
2−∆∆ Ct method using RPS27a as a reference gene.
2.12 Staining and quantitation of mineral deposition
Osteogenic differentiation was quantified using xylenol orange (Sigma) and OsteoImage (Lonza) staining assays to
detect mineral deposition. Quantitation was performed by normalising fluorescence intensity/unit area to cell number as
determined by nuclear staining. To ensure systematic and non-biased analysis of the data sets, excitation wavelengths
and powers were kept consistent between samples, with image acquisition conducted in identical regions.
For OsteoImage mineralization assays which detect hydroxyapatite deposition, samples were processed as per the
manufacturer instructions. Briefly, cells were rinsed twice with PBS, fixed for 15 min in 4 % PFA diluted in PBS and
stained with OsteoImage staining reagent [1:100] for 45 min. Cells were further washed thrice in PBS, permeabilized
in PBS + 0.5 % Triton X-100 (Sigma) for 10 min, then incubated in blocking solution (PBS + 3 % BSA (Sigma))
containing Actin Readyprobe 555 (Life Technologies) for 30 min. Cells were subsequently washed in PBS five times,
and imaged using a Nikon Eclipse Ts2 (Nikon) microscope.
For xylenol orange assays which detect calcium deposition, samples were washed with PBS and incubated in PBS
containing Hoechst 33342 [1:1000 dilution] (Life Technologies) for 20 min. Samples were then rinsed thrice in PBS,
followed by incubation in xylenol orange working solution (20 µM xylenol orange in dH2 O) for 30 min. Samples
were observed using a Nikon Eclipse Ts2 (Nikon) microscope. Mineral content stained with xylenol orange emits a
red fluorescence which was then quantified using ImageJ to calculate corrected total cell fluorescence (CTCF) using
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

the intensity density function. Background fluorescence was then subtracted from each data set, following which total
fluorescence observed was divided by total cell number to provide a value representing mineral deposition per cell.
2.13 Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was conducted using GraphPad Prism 7 software, with at least three replicates across three
independent MSC donors for each data point. Cell viability, gene expression and mineralisation measurements are
displayed as the mean ± standard deviation, with one-way ANOVA and subsequent Tukey pairwise comparisons used
to characterise statistical differences unless otherwise stated. Resulting p values of p ≤ 0.05 were deemed significant
(*p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.005).

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

3 Results
3.1 Hydrogel characterisation and MSC encapsulation
A hydrogel system using thiol-ene photoclick reactions to couple norbornene-conjugated gelatin (GelNB) and PEGdithiol (PEGdiSH) was selected as a base for our system. Previous data indicates high cell viability following
encapsulation, together with the ability of these hydrogels to support MSC differentiation [18]. To further avoid the
damaging effects of prolonged UV exposure, polymerisation was conducted outside of the UV range at 400-500 nm
wavelengths, correlating to the tail end of the LAP activation spectrum. This optimised system has a high proportion of
gelatin, which in turn facilitates cell-substrate interactions via integrin binding [19], thus making it highly suitable for
our investigation.
By modulating GelNB concentrations, we were able to establish two hydrogels of distinct moduli, being either 4 % or
10 % (w/v) GelNB combined with 1 % (w/v) PEG-dithiol and 0.03 % (w/v) LAP (Fig. 1a), thus providing a versatile
platform to assess roles of mechanical properties on miRNA delivery. Rheological characteristics of both compositions
were assessed post-swelling to determine mechanical properties of the hydrogel present during prolonged incubation in
cell culture medium. The 10 % GelNB compositions had G’ values of 680 ± 15 Pa, whereas 4 % GelNB hydrogels
had a lower G’ value of 120 ± 20 Pa (Fig. 1b). Observations of swelling ratio revealed significant increases for 10
% GelNB hydrogels compared to those of 4 % counterparts, presenting values of 22.6 % ± 0.5 and 17.1 % ± 0.8
respectively (Fig. 1c). We also performed degradation studies to determine the suitability of the hydrogels to be used for
the extended timeframe (weeks) required for MSC osteogenesis. The 4 % GelNB compositions began degrading after
15 days in culture, whereas the 10 % GelNB compositions were stable for up to 18 days before signs of degradation
became evident (Fig. 1c).
To assess MSC viability, Live/Dead staining was performed at 24 h and 7 day timepoints. For both 4 % and 10 %
GelNB compositions, high levels of cell viability were observed, with 92-94 % viability for 24 h cultures, and 94-95 %
viability for 7 day cultures respectively (Fig. 1d). Good interaction of the cells with the hydrogel matrix are supported
by observed changes in cell morphology, from spherical at 24 h to elongated phenotypes at 7 day. These findings not
only suggest that a high proportion of the cells are viable both after initial encapsulation and extended culture, but that
the cells can interact with the hydrogel matrix to adhere and spread.
3.2 Transfection of MSCs with miRNAs promotes osteogenesis in 2D
Having determined that the GelNB-PEG hydrogels could successfully support prolonged MSC culture, we next aimed
to identify a suitable agent for miRNA transfection that had both high levels of efficiency and cell viability. The
transfection agents tested were polyethylenimine (PEI) of two molecular weights (4 kDa and 40 kDa), previously
demonstrated to facilitate cellular uptake of bound DNA through endocytosis as a result of charge interactions [20]. As
a control, the commercially available Lipofectamine RNA iMAX was used. Although not clinically relevant, RNA
iMAX has been extensively used as the gold-standard for miRNA and siRNA delivery and has previously shown to
work well in MSCs [11].
Initial screening monitoring the cellular uptake of a fluorescently-tagged oligonucleotide sequence (Block-iT), revealed
a high transfection efficiency for all agents, ranging from 97 % (RNA iMAX) to 77 % (4 kDa PEI) (Fig. 2a). Following
successful transfection of MSC monolayer cultures, the transfection agents were screened for effects on both cellular
viability and proliferation (Fig. 2b and Fig. 2c). Live/Dead staining showed no significant differences in MSC viability
upon treatment with RNA iMAX or PEI at any timepoint. Furthermore, proliferation studies indicated no detrimental
effects from any transfection agent, showing no significant difference in cell numbers across 24 h, 72 h or 7 days
post-transfection.
We next aimed to validate the pro-osteogenic effects of the miRNA mimics miR-100-5p and miR-143-3p, which
we have previously demonstrated to enhance the osteogenic potential of MSCs in 3D cultures [11]. This time, 2D
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

Figure 1: Characterisation of GelNB-PEG hydrogels. a. Structural composition of PEG-GelNB gels, and associated inversion
test following photo-polymerisation under 400-500 nm wavelength light. b. Rheological characterisation of 10 % and 4 % (w/v)
GelNB compositions post-swelling, showing storage (G’) and loss (G”) moduli. Data is presented as mean ± SD taken across three
independent repeats, n = 12. c. Swelling and degradation characteristics of 10 % and 4 % (w/v) GelNB compositions incubated in
cell culture media + FBS [10 %] at 37 ◦ C. d. Representative Live/Dead (green/red) staining images of MSCs encapsulated in 10 %
and 4 % (w/v) GelNB hydrogels under culture conditions. Arrows depict elongated cells. Tabulated values represent percentage of
live cells from across three independent repeats (n ≥ 300 per condition). Scale bar, 50 µm.

monolayer cultures were transfected using RNA iMAX, then cultured in osteogenic medium for 21 days, following
which xylenol orange (for calcium) and OsteoImage (for hydroxyapatite) staining were used to determine the degree
of mineralisation. As expected, MSCs cultured in basal medium did not form any mineral, whilst those cultured
in the presence of osteogenic medium showed mineralisation to varying extents (Fig. 2d). MSCs transfected with
miR-100-5p and miR-143-3p individually displayed increased mineral deposition compared to those transfected with
a scrambled control miRNA. However, it was the samples transfected with both miR-100-5p and miR-143-3p that
showed the highest coverage of mineralisation and most intense staining. Quantitative analysis (Fig. 2e and Sup Fig. 1)
revealed these differences to be statistically significant, with a four-fold and three-fold increase in mineral deposition for
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

Figure 2: Transfection efficiency and miRNA effect on osteogenesis in 2D MSC cultures. a. Flow cytometry analysis and
corresponding fluorescence staining demonstrate transfection agents ability to transport fluorescently tagged oligonucleotide
sequences into MSCs following 24 h culture. Data presents percentage of positive cells within the total population together with
observed mean fluorescence intensity (MFI). Fluorescence depicts the fluorescein tag from oligonucleotide sequences (green). Scale
bar, 50 µm. b. and c. denote Live/Dead and MTS assay analysis of cellular viability and proliferation respectively across 1-,
3- and 7-day periods following 24 h agent incubation. All data is presented as mean ± SD for three independent MSC donors.
Samples were analysed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc testing. d. Representative osteoImage fluorescence staining
(green) counterstained with actin (red) depicting mineral deposition across miRNA supplemented MSCs cultured under osteogenic
conditions. Scale bar, 50 µm. e. Quantification of mineral deposition per cell following either miR-100-5p, miR-143-3p or a
combination of both miRNA mimics. Data is presented as mean ± SD taken across three independent repeats, n = 12. Samples were
analysed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc testing. Statistically different samples are denoted by *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.005

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

individual miR-143 and miR-100 respectively. Mineralisation in samples treated with a combination of miR-100 and
miR-143 was increased six-fold compared to scrambled controls. Together these data confirmed that this combination
of miRNAs can be used to significantly enhance osteogenic differentiation of MSCs.
3.3 In situ transfection of MSCs encapsulated in gelatin-PEG hydrogels
We next incorporated miRNA:transfection agent complexes into the GelNB-PEG hydrogels and investigated both
the release rate of these complexes and their ability to deliver miRNAs to encapsulated MSCs. Comparing both 10
% and 4 % GelNB compositions, transfection agents were incorporated directly into each hydrogel mixture prior
to photo-polymerisation. The concentration of a fluorescently-tagged oligonucleotide (Block-iT) in the surrounding
medium was measured over 7 days to evaluate release kinetics. For each gel composition, both Block-iT alone and
transfection agent:Block-iT complexes were gradually released, rather than presenting a burst release response, with full
release taking approximately 7 days (Fig. 3a - 3d). However, the release was consistently faster from the 4 % GelNB

Figure 3: Kinetics of oligonucleotide and transfection agent complex release from 4 % and 10 % (w/v) GelNB hydrogels.
Release kinetics of a. Uncomplexed oligonucleotide, b. 4 kDa PEI, c. 40 kDa PEI or d. RNA iMAX agents across 10 % or 4 %
(w/v) GelNB hydrogels both individually and whilst bound to fluorescent oligonucleotides. Data is presented as mean ≤ SD for
three independent repeats. Across each time point, comparisons between 10 % and 4 % GelNB compositions were analysed by
t-test to discern statistical significance. e. Particle size analysis of chosen transfection agents either alone, or bound to fluorescent
oligonucleotides. Tabulated data is presented as mean ± SD for three independent repeats, n = 24. Statistically different samples are
denoted by *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.005
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

compositions compared to 10 % GelNB hydrogels, irrespective of the transfection agent. This is best exemplified under
RNA iMAX-complexed conditions, in which half of the total oligonucleotide release from the 4 % GelNB hydrogels
was observed at Day 4, whereas for the 10 % GelNB composition this value was not surpassed until Day 7.
To further probe these observations, hydrodynamic particle size analysis was performed on both empty and Block-iTbound transfection agents (Fig. 3e). Interestingly, we observed consistent particle size increases for each transfection
agent following Block-iT complexing (97 ± 19 d. nm), with the largest hydrodynamic particle size observed for
complexed RNA iMAX (342 ± 25 d. nm), followed by 40 kDa PEI (243 ± 45 d. nm) and 4 kDa PEI (142 ± 49 d.
nm) respectively. Comparing these data to the transfection agent release kinetics (Fig. 3a - 3d and Sup fig. 2), it is
clear that the larger particles had slower release from their respective hydrogel compositions than smaller particles.
For example, 40 kDa PEI and RNA iMAX complexed with Block-iT have the largest hydrodynamic radius and the
least amount released from 10 % GelNB gels after 2 days (21 ng/ µL and 18 ng/µL respectively), whereas unbound
oligonucleotide had the smallest hydrodynamic radius and a much greater amount released by day 2 (72 ng/µL). These
findings indicate that transfection agent release is influenced by hydrogel composition and suggests that it may in future
be possible to control miRNA delivery rate by modulating both hydrogel properties and transfection agent particle size.
We next examined whether it was possible to transfect encapsulated MSCs in situ from miRNA:transfection agent
complexes incorporated within GelNB-PEG hydrogels. Transfection agent:Block-iT complexes and MSCs were
incorporated into 10 % GelNB hydrogels and transfection efficiency determined after 72 h using immunofluorescence
and flow cytometry to identify fluorescein-positive cells. The 10 % GelNB system was chosen due to its slower miRNA
release compared to that of 4 % compositions, which we predicted would be more beneficial under extended culture
conditions based on previous reports [21, 22]. MSCs were successfully transfected by all types of transfection agent.
RNA iMAX presented the highest efficiency of 42 %, compared to 12 % and 18 % for the 4 kDa and 40 kDa PEIs

Figure 4: In situ transfection efficiency of MSCs encapsulated in GelNB-PEG hydrogels. Flow cytometry analysis and
corresponding fluorescence staining observing chosen transfection agents ability to transport fluorescently tagged oligonucleotide
sequences into MSCs in situ following 72 h culture. Data presents percentage of positive cells within the total population together
with observed mean fluorescence intensity (MFI). Fluorescence depicts the fluorescein tag from the oligonucleotide sequence (green)
and actin (red). Scale bar, 50 µm.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

respectively (Fig. 4). A comparison of these data shows that the transfection efficiencies were significantly lower than
corresponding 2D transfections (Fig. 2), with each system displaying between 40 % - 60 % reduced overall efficiency.
However, as both 2D and 3D experiments were conducted 72 h post encapsulation, where transfection complexes were
incompletely released from the 3D scenario, we believe the decreased efficiency levels in 3D may partly be attributed to
a lower amount of miRNA:transfection agent complexes being available to the cell at this point in time.
3.4 MSC encapsulation in miRNA loaded hydrogels increases osteogenic potential.
To develop a simple one-pot, pro-osteogenic hydrogel system, we next tested the impact of delivering miR-100 and miR143 directly to MSCs encapsulated in GelNB-PEG hydrogels. A comparison was made between in situ transfections
using the different transfection agents, and also to MSCs that had been transfected 24 h prior to encapsulation (pretransfected) using mineralisation as a marker of osteogenesis. For both pre-transfected and in situ transfected MSCs, an
increase in mineral deposition was observed for all agents delivering miR-100 and miR-143, as compared to scrambled

Figure 5: Comparison of mineralisation in pre-transfected vs. in situ transfected MSCs. a. Representative calcium staining
using xylenol orange (red) across encapsulated MSCs either transfected prior to encapsulation or in situ. Staining depicts miR-100-5p
and miR-143-3p combined transfection conditions using each chosen agent. Scale bar, 50 µm. b. c. and d. denote levels of calcium
deposition per cell using 4 kDa PEI, 40 kDa PEI and RNA iMAX agents respectively following 21 d culture under osteogenic
conditions. All data is presented as mean ± SD for three independent MSC donors, n = 60. Samples were analysed using unpaired
t-tests and Welch’s corrections. Statistically different samples are denoted by *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.005

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

miRNA controls (Fig.5). Notably, for the in situ transfected samples, particularly intense mineral deposition was
observed on the periphery of the hydrogel, irrespective of transfection agent used.
Interestingly, further quantification revealed in situ transfections produced substantially more mineral than their
respective pre-transfected condition in all but one combination (4 kDa PEI: miR-143-3p) (Fig. 5b – 5d). For 4 kDa PEI
transfection agents, in situ transfections outperformed pre-transfected samples by 1.2-fold and 1.3-fold for miR-100
and miR-100/miR-143 respectively. For both 40 kDa PEI and RNA iMAX agents, the effect was even greater with
mineralisation levels 1.5 – 2.2 times higher than their pre-transfected counterparts for all miRNAs tested.
To extend these findings, we analysed the expression of osteogenic marker genes under the different conditions (Fig. 6).
Alkaline phosphatase expression was not significantly changed by pre-transfection of miR-100 or miR-143, but levels
in the in situ transfected MSCs were significantly elevated, as compared both to MSCs transfected with a scrambled
control miRNA and also to the equivalent pre-transfected cells (Fig. 6a). Similarly, whilst Col1a1 upregulation was only
observed in RNA iMAX pre-transfections, all transfection agents caused upregulation of Col1a1 when delivered in situ
(Fig. 6b). No significant differences were observed in the expression of osteopontin between transfection methods (Fig.
6c).
We have previously demonstrated that mTOR is a target of miR-100 and involved in the osteogenic effects of miR-100
via downregulation of mTOR [11]. Thus, whilst no significant differences were observed between the transfection

Figure 6: in situ transfection of encapsulated MSCs using combined miR-100-5p and miR-143-3p enhances osteogenic gene
activity and decreases mTOR expression. a. b. c. and d. qPCR determination of the relative expression of osteogenic genes in
MSCs treated with combined miR-100-5p and miR-143-3p mimics coupled to chosen transfection agents. All data is presented as
mean ± SD for three independent MSC donors, n = 9. Samples were analysed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc testing.
Statistically different samples are denoted by *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.005

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

agents or between pre- and in situ- transfected cells, levels of mTOR transcript were significantly downregulated in all
samples transfected with miR-100 and miR-143, further confirming a role for mTOR in their regulation of osteogenesis
(Fig. 6d).

4 Discussion
Our increasing understanding of mechanotransduction and its impact upon MSC fate provides enormous opportunity to
more precisely guide MSC activities and differentiation. In particular, specific modulation of mechanotransductive
signalling can be used to overcome limitations in the physical cues provided by biomaterials in tissue-engineering.
One such example is the use of hydrogels for bone tissue-engineering. Hydrogels possess many properties that make
them attractive for bone tissue engineering but are limited by the fact that their inherent softness does not provide
the mechanical cues that promote osteogenesis. Here we have used mechanosensitive miRNAs known to enhance
MSC osteogenesis to overcome this limitation of soft hydrogels and improve bone formation by MSCs in a GelNBPEG hydrogel. miRNAs are attractive candidates for such an application due to their powerful regulatory effect on
gene expression [16, 23]. We have previously demonstrated that miR-100-5p and miR-143-3p can promote MSC
osteogenesis, but the future applicability of this approach was limited by the complexity of the system which required
multiple stages of manipulation to transfect and then encapsulate the cells. In recent years, a handful of studies have
probed the use of in situ hydrogel transfections for therapeutic application ranging from siRNA delivery in vitro to
miRNA delivery in vivo [21, 24, 25, 26, 6, 27]. Interestingly however, these studies are limited to the use of either a
single transfection agent or a limited range in mechanical properties for the base hydrogels. Here, we have developed
a facile system that directly delivers miRNAs to encapsulated MSCs in situ using a range of transfection agents and
shown that not only can this promote osteogenesis in a manner similar to pre-transfection, but that osteogenesis is
actually enhanced.
As a base material for our system, we selected norbornene-conjugated gelatin (GelNB) and PEG-dithiol (PEGdiSH)
to create our GelNB-PEG platform, which has previously been shown to support MSC viability, adhesion and
differentiation [18, 28]. To further probe the effect of changing mechanical properties upon miRNA release and
transfection rates, we modulated the weight percentage of GelNB within each hydrogel to create hydrogels of differing
storage modulus. Interestingly, the values of storage modulus we obtained were lower than those previously reported
[18] but we attribute this to the fact that our rheological measurements were obtained post-swelling in order to more
accurately define the conditions presented to the encapsulated cells. This is in contrast to much of the field which
conducts these measurements during the gelation process to monitor photo-polymerisation directly. Our degradation
studies showed degradation within approximately 16 – 20 days for both 4 % and 10 % (w/v) GelNB compositions
respectively. We attribute this relatively rapid degradation to hydrolysis of the ester groups within the thiolated PEG
network [29, 30]. Nonetheless, the longevity of the hydrogels was sufficient for MSC differentiation and could therefore
be used in our study. It is possible to slow the rate of degradation by removing the ester bond [28], however tissueengineering aims to provide a scaffold to support new tissue formation with the goal of ultimately replacing the implant
with endogenous tissue. For this reason, some degradation of the hydrogel is advantageous and could be modulated in
the future by altering the ratio of ester and non-ester bonds to achieve a desired degradation rate.
We selected PEI as the transfection agent for our system due to both its ease of use and demonstrated ability to facilitate
cellular uptake of bound DNA through endocytosis as a result of charge interactions [20]. We tested two distinct
molecular weights (4 kDa and 40 kDa) due to the documented trade-off between transfection efficiency and agent
toxicity, in which larger PEI polymers tend to display both the highest degree of efficiency and the highest degree
of toxicity [31]. The commercially available, but not clinically relevant, RNA iMAX was used a control due to its
well-documented efficacy and widespread use. Findings revealed no significant variation in transfection efficiency,
metabolic activity or cell viability between each transfection agent in 2D transfections (Fig. 2a, 2b and 2c), suggesting
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

that not only were the chosen agents able to deliver required oligonucleotide sequences, but were doing so with minimal
impact to cellular function.
Our studies on the release rate of the transfection agents showed two clear trends. Firstly, release was more rapid from
the 4 % GelNB compositions than the 10 % GelNB hydrogels. Secondly, release rate was correlated with the size of the
complexes, as determined by particle size analysis. We attribute the faster release from the 4 % GelNB hydrogels to the
lower cross-link density when compared to that of 10 % GelNB hydrogels. We hypothesise that the resulting decrease
in mesh size would enable increased mobility of particles situated within the gels, allowing for faster diffusion out of
the system. This premise can also be used to explain the differing release rate of particles of varying sizes as there
was a general trend in that larger particles were released more slowly than smaller ones. These data suggest that by
modulation of both transfection agent size and hydrogel composition, it may be possible to control transfection agent
release speeds in the future, however further investigation is required to probe the potential influence of alternate factors
such as charge-charge interactions between transfection complexes and the gelatin network.
Although consistent particle size increases were observed for 4 kDa PEI and 40 kDa PEI transfection agents following
Block-iT coupling, the particle size increase for RNA iMAX agents were shown to exceed that of Block-iT addition
alone. Similar observations have previously been reported by Ikonen et al, who suggested that as N/P ratios approach a
zero zeta potential for transfection agent-DNA complexes (N/P 2.4 in this instance), polymer/DNA complexes begin to
aggregate [32]. We believe that for our scenario, this exaggerated increase for RNA iMAX may represent the N/P ratios
at which oligo/agent complexes migrate towards a neutral charge, and thus aggregate more readily with neighbouring
particles.
Although it was possible to successfully transfect encapsulated MSCs directly from the hydrogel, a comparison of 2D
and 3D transfections showed that rates were significantly reduced in the 3D system (Fig. 4). One reason for the lower
efficiency may be that the in situ transfection tests were conducted after 72 h culture which, when compared to the
timescale of transfection agent release (Fig. 3) is at the point when we observe approximately 20 %, 40 % and 50 %
oligonucleotide release for RNA iMAX, 4 kDa PEI and 40 kDa PEI agents respectively. However, the final impact
upon osteogenesis suggests that the influence on MSC fate is significant and actually enhanced for in situ transfection.
This confirms successful delivery of the miRNAs and may indicate that sustained contact with transfection agents over
a prolonged period of time is better than a short, high-concentration treatment, as in the 2D methodology. However,
further studies would be required to fully determine the impact of transfection agent contact on transfection rates and
subsequent changes in target gene expression.
miR-100-5p and miR143-3p have been shown to increase mineralisation in 3D (via pre-transfected cells), but this
phenomenon has never been tested in 2D or in situ transfections. Our results validate this combination of miRNAs,
in particular confirming dual transfection of both candidates as a particularly powerful way to increase osteogenesis.
Although both miR-100 and miR-143 converge upon the mTOR signalling network, the boost observed when combining
the miRNAs may be because these have distinct mRNA targets, with miR-100 targeting mTOR itself and miR-143
targeting RICTOR and LARP [11, 33, 34, 35]. Regulation of osteogenesis via the mTOR pathway in this study was
further validated by the reduced mTOR transcript level in all of the transfected MSC populations (Fig. 6d). When
coupled with evidence suggesting direct modulation of mTOR is able to regulate alkaline phosphatase activity after
only 24 h induction [36], we suggest that as our select miRNAs target mTOR signalling, our findings may be a result of
alternate alkaline phosphatase modulation than that of osteogenic differentiation alone, however further investigation
will be needed to validate this.
Following the optimisation of each individual component, we proceeded to validate the ability of our combined in situ
transfection platform to promote osteogenic potential of MSCs. The utility of miR-100 and miR-143 was again
validated by their ability to significantly enhance mineralisation under all conditions tested, with the exception of 4 kDa
PEI:miR-143-3p (Fig 5). This observation may be attributed to 4 kDa PEI transfections having the lowest efficiency
and therefore sub-optimal effects on osteogenesis (Fig. 4).

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

Unexpectedly, the in situ transfections consistently outperformed the pre-transfected samples, both in terms of osteogenic
gene expression and mineralisation. This suggests that the in situ transfection of miRNAs may not only be a simpler
system to use but also a more effective one. The mechanism behind this is unclear, but one possible explanation is that
increasing the duration of exposure of MSCs to the transfection agents may lead to improved outcomes. Support for this
theory comes from data presented by Zhang et al, in which sustained release of miR-21 over a 2 week period enhanced
target gene modulation to that of bulk released scenarios [37]. Assessment of gene regulation further supported that
through in situ transfection, successful modulation of pro-osteogenic genes was observed (Fig 6). Although comparable
increases in Col1A1 expression between pre- and in situ transfection conditions are present (Fig. 6b), we did observe
variation for 40 kDa PEI agents, revealing a significant increase in gene activity for in situ transfection, which we
attribute to the decreased diffusion rates observed for in situ release. We suggest that these decreased diffusion rates
may increase contact time between miRNA loaded agents and MSCs, resulting in increased activation of Col1A1 to that
of pre-transfected conditions which were subject to only a 24 h contact time.

5 Conclusion
We have developed and tested a facile system for in situ miRNA transfection and demonstrated its utility to promote
osteogenesis of MSCs in a soft hydrogel. The addition of miR-100-5p and miR-143-3p, when complexed with PEI for
transfection, provides a simple, yet effective platform to maintain a gradual release of target miRNAs to encapsulated
cells. In situ transfection was more effective than encapsulation of pre-transfected MSCs, despite a lower apparent
transfection efficiency at 72 h. Our data also suggest that there is scope to further tailor the release rate and consequently
the timing or efficiency of in situ transfections by modifying base hydrogel formulation and/or transfection agent. We
believe that our strategy, which combines modulators of mechanotransduction with a simple in situ transfection system,
provides a promising means to improve bone formation by MSCs in hydrogels, but may also hold future utility in
tissue-engineering across a much broader range of cell and tissue types.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

References
[1] W. J. Ennis, A. Sui, and A. Bartholomew, “Stem Cells and Healing: Impact on Inflammation,” Advances in Wound
Care, vol. 2, p. 369, sep 2013.
[2] M. A. Laflamme, K. Y. Chen, A. V. Naumova, V. Muskheli, J. A. Fugate, S. K. Dupras, H. Reinecke, C. Xu,
M. Hassanipour, S. Police, C. O’Sullivan, L. Collins, Y. Chen, E. Minami, E. A. Gill, S. Ueno, C. Yuan, J. Gold,
and C. E. Murry, “Cardiomyocytes derived from human embryonic stem cells in pro-survival factors enhance
function of infarcted rat hearts,” Nature Biotechnology, vol. 25, pp. 1015–1024, sep 2007.
[3] S. P. Bruder, N. Jaiswal, N. S. Ricalton, J. D. Mosca, K. H. Kraus, and S. Kadiyala, “Mesenchymal stem cells in
osteobiology and applied bone regeneration.,” Clinical orthopaedics and related research, pp. S247–56, oct 1998.
[4] S. P. Bruder, A. A. Kurth, M. Shea, W. C. Hayes, N. Jaiswal, and S. Kadiyala, “Bone Regeneration by Implantation
of Purified, Culture-Expanded Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells,” tech. rep., 1998.
[5] A. Parameswaran-Thankam, Q. Al-Anbaky, Z. Al-karakooly, A. B. RanguMagar, B. P. Chhetri, N. Ali, and
A. Ghosh, “Fabrication and characterization of hydroxypropyl guar-poly (vinyl alcohol)-nano hydroxyapatite
composite hydrogels for bone tissue engineering,” Journal of Biomaterials Science, Polymer Edition, vol. 29,
pp. 2083–2105, nov 2018.
[6] M. K. Nguyen, O. Jeon, P. N. Dang, C. T. Huynh, D. Varghai, H. Riazi, A. McMillan, S. Herberg, and E. Alsberg,
“RNA interfering molecule delivery from in situ forming biodegradable hydrogels for enhancement of bone
formation in rat calvarial bone defects,” Acta Biomaterialia, vol. 75, pp. 105–114, jul 2018.
[7] G. C. Ingavle, M. Gionet-Gonzales, C. E. Vorwald, L. K. Bohannon, K. Clark, L. D. Galuppo, and J. K. Leach,
“Injectable mineralized microsphere-loaded composite hydrogels for bone repair in a sheep bone defect model,”
Biomaterials, vol. 197, pp. 119–128, mar 2019.
[8] J. A. Burdick and K. S. Anseth, “Photoencapsulation of osteoblasts in injectable RGD-modified PEG hydrogels
for bone tissue engineering,” Biomaterials, vol. 23, pp. 4315–4323, nov 2002.
[9] M. Orth, M. Altmeyer, C. Scheuer, B. Braun, J. Holstein, D. Eglin, M. D’Este, T. Histing, M. Laschke, T. Pohlemann, and M. Menger, “Effects of locally applied adipose tissue-derived microvascular fragments by thermoresponsive hydrogel on bone healing,” Acta Biomaterialia, vol. 77, pp. 201–211, sep 2018.
[10] A. J. Engler, S. Sen, H. L. Sweeney, and D. E. Discher, “Matrix Elasticity Directs Stem Cell Lineage Specification,”
Cell, vol. 126, pp. 677–689, aug 2006.
[11] J. E. Frith, G. D. Kusuma, J. Carthew, F. Li, N. Cloonan, G. A. Gomez, and J. J. Cooper-White, “Mechanicallysensitive miRNAs bias human mesenchymal stem cell fate via mTOR signalling,” Nature Communications, vol. 9,
p. 257, dec 2018.
[12] B. Jia, Z. Zhang, X. Qiu, H. Chu, X. Sun, X. Zheng, J. Zhao, and Q. Li, “Analysis of the miRNA and mRNA
involved in osteogenesis of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells,” Experimental and Therapeutic Medicine,
vol. 16, pp. 1111–1120, jun 2018.
[13] F. Wei, S. Yang, Q. Guo, X. Zhang, D. Ren, T. Lv, and X. Xu, “MicroRNA-21 regulates Osteogenic Differentiation
of Periodontal Ligament Stem Cells by targeting Smad5,” Scientific Reports, vol. 7, p. 16608, dec 2017.
[14] D. P. Bartel, “MicroRNAs: Genomics, Biogenesis, Mechanism, and Function,” Cell, vol. 116, pp. 281–297, jan
2004.
[15] D. P. Bartel, “MicroRNAs: Target Recognition and Regulatory Functions,” Cell, vol. 136, pp. 215–233, jan 2009.
[16] V. Ambros, “microRNAs: Tiny Regulators with Great Potential,” Cell, vol. 107, pp. 823–826, dec 2001.
[17] J. E. Frith, E. R. Porrello, and J. J. Cooper-White, “Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine Concise
Review: New Frontiers in MicroRNA-Based Tissue Regeneration,”
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

[18] F. Li, V. X. Truong, H. Thissen, J. E. Frith, and J. S. Forsythe, “Microfluidic Encapsulation of Human Mesenchymal
Stem Cells for Articular Cartilage Tissue Regeneration,” 2017.
[19] N. Davidenko, C. F. Schuster, D. V. Bax, R. W. Farndale, S. Hamaia, S. M. Best, and R. E. Cameron, “Evaluation
of cell binding to collagen and gelatin: a study of the effect of 2D and 3D architecture and surface chemistry.,”
Journal of materials science. Materials in medicine, vol. 27, p. 148, oct 2016.
[20] P. A. Longo, J. M. Kavran, M.-S. Kim, and D. J. Leahy, “Transient mammalian cell transfection with polyethylenimine (PEI).,” Methods in enzymology, vol. 529, pp. 227–40, 2013.
[21] G. Wu, C. Feng, J. Quan, Z. Wang, W. Wei, S. Zang, S. Kang, G. Hui, X. Chen, and Q. Wang, “In situ controlled
release of stromal cell-derived factor-1α and antimiR-138 for on-demand cranial bone regeneration,” Carbohydrate
Polymers, vol. 182, pp. 215–224, feb 2018.
[22] L. L. Wang, Y. Liu, J. J. Chung, T. Wang, A. C. Gaffey, M. Lu, C. A. Cavanaugh, S. Zhou, R. Kanade,
P. Atluri, E. E. Morrisey, and J. A. Burdick, “Sustained miRNA delivery from an injectable hydrogel promotes
cardiomyocyte proliferation and functional regeneration after ischaemic injury,” Nature Biomedical Engineering,
vol. 1, pp. 983–992, dec 2017.
[23] J. A. Vidigal and A. Ventura, “The biological functions of miRNAs: lessons from in vivo studies.,” Trends in cell
biology, vol. 25, pp. 137–47, mar 2015.
[24] M. K. Nguyen, O. Jeon, M. D. Krebs, D. Schapira, and E. Alsberg, “Sustained localized presentation of RNA
interfering molecules from in situ forming hydrogels to guide stem cell osteogenic differentiation,” Biomaterials,
vol. 35, pp. 6278–6286, aug 2014.
[25] C. T. Huynh, Z. Zheng, M. K. Nguyen, A. McMillan, G. Yesilbag Tonga, V. M. Rotello, and E. Alsberg,
“Cytocompatible Catalyst-Free Photodegradable Hydrogels for Light-Mediated RNA Release To Induce hMSC
Osteogenesis,” ACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering, vol. 3, pp. 2011–2023, sep 2017.
[26] S. Gojgini, T. Tokatlian, and T. Segura, “Utilizing Cell–Matrix Interactions To Modulate Gene Transfer to Stem
Cells Inside Hyaluronic Acid Hydrogels,” Molecular Pharmaceutics, vol. 8, pp. 1582–1591, oct 2011.
[27] M. K. Nguyen, O. Jeon, P. N. Dang, C. T. Huynh, D. Varghai, H. Riazi, A. McMillan, S. Herberg, and E. Alsberg,
“RNA interfering molecule delivery from in situ forming biodegradable hydrogels for enhancement of bone
formation in rat calvarial bone defects,” Acta Biomaterialia, vol. 75, pp. 105–114, jul 2018.
[28] F. Li, V. X. Truong, P. Fisch, C. Levinson, V. Glattauer, M. Zenobi-Wong, H. Thissen, J. S. Forsythe, and J. E.
Frith, “Cartilage tissue formation through assembly of microgels containing mesenchymal stem cells,” Acta
Biomaterialia, vol. 77, pp. 48–62, sep 2018.
[29] V. Truong, I. Blakey, and A. K. Whittaker, “Hydrophilic and Amphiphilic Polyethylene Glycol-Based Hydrogels
with Tunable Degradability Prepared by "Click" Chemistry,” 2012.
[30] V. X. Truong, I. A. Barker, M. Tan, L. Mespouille, P. Dubois, and A. P. Dove, “Preparation of in situ-forming
poly(5-methyl-5-allyloxycarbonyl-1,3-dioxan-2-one)-poly(ethylene glycol) hydrogels with tuneable swelling,
mechanical strength and degradability,” J. Mater. Chem. B, vol. 1, pp. 221–229, dec 2013.
[31] K. Kunath, A. von Harpe, D. Fischer, H. Petersen, U. Bickel, K. Voigt, and T. Kissel, “Low-molecular-weight
polyethylenimine as a non-viral vector for DNA delivery: comparison of physicochemical properties, transfection
efficiency and in vivo distribution with high-molecular-weight polyethylenimine.,” Journal of controlled release :
official journal of the Controlled Release Society, vol. 89, pp. 113–25, apr 2003.
[32] M. Ikonen, L. Murtomäki, K. Kontturi, M. Murtomäki, and K. Ky, “Publication II Controlled complexation of
plasmid DNA with cationic polymers: Effect of surfactant on the complexation and stability of the complexes,”
Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, vol. 66, pp. 77–83, 2008.
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

[33] S. Mu, B. Kang, W. Zeng, Y. Sun, and F. Yang, “MicroRNA-143-3p inhibits hyperplastic scar formation by
targeting connective tissue growth factor CTGF/CCN2 via the Akt/mTOR pathway,” Molecular and Cellular
Biochemistry, vol. 416, pp. 99–108, may 2016.
[34] C. Li, Y. Gao, K. Zhang, J. Chen, S. Han, B. Feng, R. Wang, and L. Chen, “Multiple Roles of MicroRNA-100 in
Human Cancer and its Therapeutic Potential,” Cellular Physiology and Biochemistry, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 2143–2159,
2015.
[35] J. Sun, Z. Chen, X. Tan, F. Zhou, F. Tan, Y. Gao, N. Sun, X. Xu, K. Shao, and J. He, “MicroRNA-99a/100
promotes apoptosis by targeting mTOR in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma,” Medical Oncology,
vol. 30, p. 411, mar 2013.
[36] Y. Wang, X.-D. Yi, and C.-D. Li, “Suppression of mTOR signaling pathway promotes bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cells differentiation into osteoblast in degenerative scoliosis: in vivo and in vitro,” Molecular Biology Reports,
vol. 44, pp. 129–137, feb 2017.
[37] X. Zhang, Y. Sun, J. Liu, Z. Yi, F. Gao, Q. Liu, and Y. Chen, “<i>In situ</i> forming hydrogels with longlasting miR-21 enhances the therapeutic potential of MSC by sustaining stimulation of target gene,” Journal of
Biomaterials Science, Polymer Edition, vol. 28, pp. 1639–1650, oct 2017.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

6 Supplementary Information

Supplementary Figure 1: microRNA addition stimulates increased calcium deposition per cell. Comparative calcium deposition staining of 2D cultured MSCs transfected with screened microRNAs using RNA iMAX. Images depict nuclei (blue), and
calcium (red), enabling quantification of mineral/cell to be calculated. Scale bar, 10 µm.

Supplementary Figure 2: Release kinetics of oligo:transfection agent complexes from 4 % and 10 % GelNB hydrogels.
Daily observation of oligonucleotide release from 10 % and 4 % (w/v) GelNB hydrogel compositions between chosen transfection
agents. Daily data is presented as mean ± SD from three independent repeats, n = 9.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

Supplementary Figure 3: Mineral deposition by in situ transfection of MSCs encapsulated in 10 % (w/v) GelNB hydrogels
together with a miR-100-5p, miR-143-3p. a. and b. Depict calcium deposition (red) and nuclear staining (blue) for MSCs either
pre-transfected prior to encapsulation or transfected in situ following 21 days culture under osteogenic conditions. Representative
images for each chosen transfection agent/miRNA condition are displayed. Scale bar, 50 µm.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/712042; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P REPRINT - J ULY 23, 2019

Supplementary Figure 4: in situ transfection of encapsulated MSCs using combined miR-100-5p and miR-143-3p enhances
osteogenic gene activity and targets mTOR expression. Individual donor qPCR data depicting relative expression of osteogenic
genes in MSCs treated with combined miR-100-5p and miR-143-3p mimics coupled to chosen transfection agents. All data is
presented as mean ± SD, n = 3.

Supplementary Table 1: qPCR forward and reverse primer sequences used in this study. GAPDH: glyceraldehyde-3phosphate dehydrogenase. RPS27a: ribosomal protein S27a. AlkPhos: alkaline phosphatase. COL1A1: collagen type I alpha 1
chain. OP: osteopontin. mTOR: mammalian target of rapamycin.

Supplementary Table 2: Exiqon miRNA mimics used in this study.

22

