bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558619; this version posted February 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cellular heterogeneity results from indirect effects under metabolic tradeoffs
Aina Ollé-Vila1,2∗ and Ricard Solé1,2,3†
1

2

ICREA-Complex Systems Lab, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona
Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-UPF), Psg Maritim Barceloneta, 37, 08003 Barcelona and
3
Santa Fe Institute, 399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe NM 87501, USA

The emergence of multicellularity requires the coexistence of diverse cellular populations displaying cooperative relationships. This enables long-term persistence of cellular consortia, particularly
under environmental constraints that challenge cell survival. Toxic environments are known to
trigger the formation of multicellular consortia capable of dealing with waste while promoting cell
diversity as a way to overcome selection barriers. In this context, recent theoretical studies suggest
that an environment containing both resources and toxic waste can promote the emergence of complex, spatially distributed proto-organisms exhibiting division of labor and higher-scale features beyond the cell-cell pairwise interactions. Some previous non-spatial models suggest that the presence
of a growth inhibitor can trigger the coexistence of competitive species in an antibiotic-resistance
context. In this paper we further explore this idea using both mathematical and computational
models taking the most fundamental features of the proto-organisms interactions. It is shown that
this resource-waste environmental context, in which both species are lethally affected by the toxic
waste and metabolic tradeoffs are present, favours the maintenance of diverse populations. A spatial, stochastic extension confirms our basic results. The evolutionary and ecological implications of
these results are outlined.
I.

INTRODUCTION

Multicellularity has evolved independently at least 25
times in our planet[1–3]. The rise of multicellular systems provided the fabric for further evolutionary events
and additional layers of complexity. It became a crucial
step towards the rise of complex ecosystems and provided
novel opportunities for new niches. It was also a first step
towards complex organisms with diverse tissues and organs as well as sensors and actuators. In a different (but
deeply related) context, most biotransformations that occur in nature are carried out by microbial consortia with
different species playing different tasks and often associated in some kind of spatial arrangement (Fig. 1a). In
both cases, multicellular assemblies arise as a novel way
to deal with environmental sources of stress.
One particular instance that has been widespread is
the need of dealing with toxic waste, as it can deeply
affect the growth potential of cell populations and even
determine their decline and extinction. As a result, specialised mechanisms of degradation or neutralisation have
evolved multiple times (refs). Not surprisingly, important evolutionary transitions in our past Biosphere involved dealing with threshold concentrations of toxic or
damaging chemicals or radiation levels[4]. Thriving in
such selective environments, whether associated physical
factors, substrate heterogeneity, shortening of essential
toxins or antibiotics, pervades multiple behavioural and
self-organising patterns that require the maintenance of
a stable multicellular consortium[5–9]. Likewise, certain
tradeoffs are also important evolutionary drivers, as it

∗ aina.olle@upf.edu
† ricard.sole@upf.edu

has been shown for the trade-off between rate and yield
of ATP production[10, 11]. In this case, opposite strategies are selected depending on the environmental context,
with cooperation and competition having a critical role
in the evolutionary outcome.
Models for the origins of MC require a minimal set
of assumptions capable of capturing the essential mechanisms required for the maintenance of cell diversity.
Such coexistence should be a consequence of cooperative interactions enhancing diversity while providing resilience in front of environmental fluctuations. In a recent
paper[12], it was shown that complex proto-organismal
(PRO) structures can emerge in a resource-waste environment, as shown in Fig. 1b. In this spatial model,
two basic cell types were introduced, linked through a
stochastic switching mechanism. One type was able to
use resources and replicate, whereas the other was able
to process waste at the expense of a reduced replicative
potential. Both cell types where affected by the toxic
waste through direct cell mortality. The model also incorporated evolutionary dynamics and cell-cell adhesion
mediated by an energy minimisation rule that plays a
relevant role in a broad range of morphogenetic phenomena [13] and references therein. Despite the lack of a gene
regulatory network supporting a true developmental program, the model was able to generate complex, spatially
self-organised patterns far beyond a simple clustered, heterogeneous mixture of cells.
What is the fundamental origin of these protoorganisms? What pervades the strong interdependence
between cell types? Previous studies on the dynamics of bacterial populations in a chemostat under the
presence of antibiotics[14–16] showed that stable coexistence can be achieved under the presence of external
inhibitors (mediated by plasmids). Similarly, studies by
Eshel Ben-Jacob and co-workers has shown that com-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558619; this version posted February 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2

a

µR

c

b

R

R

µT

-

-

1

S1

-

2

+

T

T

+
+

S2

1

2

FIG. 1: Multicellular structures in a resource-waste environment. In many different scenarios, microbial biofilms (a)
are formed as a way to protect bacterial communities from selective barriers. They typically involve heterogeneous consortia
with division of labour. In a different, butt related context, complex proto-organismal structures have been obtained (b) in an
evolutionary spatial model of cell populations with two basic types (white and black squares, respectively) in a medium (gray
sites) including both diffusing nutrients and toxins. The cells evolve specific adhesion patterns that sustain complex, repeatable
structures (see Duran-Nebreda et al.[12] for details). A mean field model (c) aims at capturing the most fundamental features
of the PRO model in order to understand the origins of such complex structures. The non-direct interaction (gray bottom
arrow) builds up a positive link which has a critical role in maintaining cellular heterogeneity.

plex cooperative behavioral patterns (including spatial
patterns) emerge out of cooperative responses to environmental stress [17, 18]. These studies reveal the power
of self-engineering associated to antibiotic resistance[19].
Here we present a mean field model capturing the most
relevant features of the spatial PRO model in order to understand the possible key features predating the observed
proto-organisms. We find the necessary conditions for the
heterogeneous population to exist under the studied scenario, which involve a set of asymmetries and positive
correlations allowing us to provide novel insights into the
field of toxic-mediated complexity

II.

RESOURCE-TOXIN-CONSUMERS MODEL

As described by the diagram of Fig. 1c, our two cell
populations exploit the resource R as consumers while
both are damaged by the toxic waste T . Since the original inspiration of the model[12] involves closely related
cell types, several parameters are taken equal, although
as a first approximation we do not link the two cell populations through any developmental nor mutual switching
mechanism. However, trade-offs impose some asymmetries. Two types of cells are considered. The first (S1 )
replicates at a given rate under the presence of R and
is lethally affected by the presence of T . On the other
hand, the second (S2 ) can degrade the toxic component
T while showing a reduced replication potential. Such
trade-off would result from the energy investment associated to T degradation, which necessarily implies that
the S2 species will be less efficient in replicating. Importantly, this toxic degrading species also experiences the
lethal inhibition from toxic waste.
The full set of equations defining our mean field model

are now:
dT
dt
dR
dt
dS1
dt
dS2
dt

= µT − δT T − εS2 T

(1)

= µR − δR R − η(S1 + S2 )R

(2)

= ρRS1 − γ1 T S1 − δ1 S1

(3)

= ρ(1 − ε)RS2 − γ2 T S2 − δ2 S2

(4)

where µT,R are the influx rates for toxic T and resources
R, respectively, δ1,2 are the cell mortality rates, ρ is the
basal cell replication efficiency, ε is the efficiency of toxic
degradation by S2 , which is reflected in a lower efficiency
for replication as a trade-off (ρ(1 − ε)), η is the rate of
resource degradation by both species and γ1,2 are the
mortality rates due to toxic for each species.
The previous set of equations has four relevant fixed
points (T ∗ , R∗ , S1∗ , S2∗ ), namely the full extinction point,
P1 = (+, +, 0, 0)
the coexistence point with both consumers present,
P2 = (+, +, +, +)
and two single-survivor fixed points, namely:,
P3 = (+, +, +, 0)

P4 = (+, +, 0, +)

(see S-V SM for the full expressions). Below (and in S-V
and S-VI SM) we study the stability of these points and
determine the parametric conditions associated to each.
The model shares some commonalities with the classical one resource-two consumer (1R2C) model[20], where
the Competitive Exclusion Principle[21] rules out the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558619; this version posted February 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

3
possibility of coexisting species. However, the presence
of a toxic in the medium changes this scenario, creating
an indirect positive effect from S2 to S1 (grey line in Fig.
1c), which rescues the coexistence scenario. We will show
how this indirect positive link, the direct cell mortality
through toxic endured by both cells and the metabolic
tradeoff of species S2 impose certain constraints in the
form of asymmetries and positive correlations that must
hold in order to rescue the coexistence scenario.

III.
A.

RESULTS

Mean field model

The stability analysis of the subsystems RT S1 and
RT S2 is properly presented in S-I, II, III SM leading
to a proper intuition to further study the complete system. As the stability analysis of the mean field model
is nearly intractable, in order to assess the stability of
the presented system we have made use of qualitative
stability analysis tools[22–26] (see S-VI SM). These allow us to show that there are some conditions which do
not guarantee the stability of our particular system for
any parameter values (see also S-VI SM for more details).
This fact requires a deeper analysis of the system and below we present the conditions that need to hold for our
system to be stable. The first is the need of an asymmetry in the toxic sensitivity values γ1/2 (see Fig. 2). The
second demonstrates the critical role of two of the system
links which build up an indirect positive relation: these
two links need to hold a positive correlation so that coexistence is possible (see Fig. 3a,b). Moreover, our system
displays a metabolic tradeoff regulated by ε, and this is
also constraining the system’s behaviour in enabling its
full viability (see Fig. 3c). These conditions are fully
developed below.

Toxic sensitivity asymmetry must hold to observe S1 and S2
coexistence

Although the model involves eleven parameters, just
some have been found to be critical in order to understand its behaviour. The parameters determining the
influx of R and T (µR and µT , respectively) have been
found significant to find regions of the parameter space
where coexistence or survival of either of the species is
possible (see Fig. 2). Importantly, from an evolutionary perspective, it is quite reasonable to conjecture that
the resource and toxic waste levels could be of critical
importance for such a system to emerge. Notice that,
in general terms, the balance between µR and µT is crucial to determine the coexistence conditions of the species
S1 /S2 . Similarly, the impact of the toxic on each species,
weighted by γ1 and γ2 , provides the other major influence.

When γ1 /γ2 = 1, the impact of the toxic is symmetric:
it reduces fitness in the same way for both strains. As
shown below, the asymmetry between them will be the
most relevant trait.
It is important to note that other parameters remain
fixed and that a collapse of parameters can be made (see
S-VII) without affecting the qualitative behaviour of the
system. Resource R and toxic T degradation rates (δR
and δT ) can be collapsed into δ, while cell mortality rates
(δ1 and δ2 ) can also be collapsed into a second parameter
δS . This notation will be used for the next derivations.
In Fig. 2 we summarise the main results of our analysis. Three particular conditions determine what we observe: [1]. γ1 /γ2 ≤ 1, [2.] γ1 /γ2 > 1 and [3]. γ1 /γ2  1.
The asymmetry in these parameters (γ1 > γ2 ) is needed
in order to find coexistence in the system. For γ1 ≤ γ2 ,
coexistence is not possible even if other system’s parameters are changed. The linear boundary separating the
presence of cells from its extinction can be easily derived
in the latter case. Since S2 = 0, assuming that R and T
achieve equilibrium much more rapidly than S1 , and thus
dR/dt ≈ 0 and dT /dt ≈ 0, we have T ≈ µT /δ and also
R ≈ µR /(δ+ηS1 ) = R(S1 ) we can write a single-equation
model for S1 :
dS1
= ρR(S1 )S1 − ΩS1 − δS S1
dt

(5)

where we define Ω = γ1 µT /δ and R(S1 ) = µR /(δ + ηS1 ),
respectively. We can see that growth will occur only if
dS1 /dt > 0 or, in other words, if
ρR(S1 ) − Ω − δS > 0

(6)

which leads, after some algebra, to the threshold condition between µT and µR :
µR > φ1 µT + φ2

(7)

where φ1,2 are combinations of parameters, i. e. φ1 =
γ1 /ρ and φ2 = δδS /ρ (see S-II SM for a more detailed
analysis). This limit case thus predicts that the input of
resources needs to be larger than the one associated to
the toxic influx following a simple linear relation (consistently with the phase diagrams at left in Fig. 2). On the
other hand, the larger the negative effect of T (as given
by γ1 ) the more difficult for S1 to survive, as expected.
The critical threshold defined by the previous condition is also an estimate of the envelope of the parameter
space where populations are expected to be found. The
two other columns in the same figure indicate that if γ1
is larger than γ2 coexistence is achieved.
The original 4-equations model can be reduced, as we
did before, to a two-dimensional system (showing the
same behaviour as the 4D counterpart, see Fig. S2 and
S3). Once again we assume that the dynamics of both R
and T is faster than the ones associated to both S1 and
S2 (see S-IV SM). A system of equations is then obtained,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558619; this version posted February 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

4

FIG. 2: Parameter space of the system under different conditions of γ1 /γ2 (each column) as a function of µT and
µR . This means that the Toxic substance needs to have a more harmful effect on species S1 in order that the presence of species
S2 , which is able to process this Toxic substance, increases the fitness of the whole system allowing the coexistence of the two
species. We observe how the relative value of these two parameters is determining the absence or presence of coexistence and
regions of S1 and S2 survival. In the second and third rows we observe the value of the fixed point of S1 and S2 , respectively,
using different gradients for the different regions of the parameter space shown in the first row. The values for R and T in
the fixed points for these regions can be found at the Supplementary Material. For γ1 /γ2 ≤ 1, γ1 = γ2 = 0.1, for γ1 /γ2 > 1,
γ1 = 0.17 and γ2 = 0.1 and for γ1 /γ2  1, γ1 = 0.3 and γ2 = 0.1. The rest of the parameters used (all shared in the three
parameter spaces) are: ρ = 0.3, ε = 0.3, η = 0.1, δR = δT = 0.1, δ1 = δ2 = 0.1.

namely

Here the two functions ϕk are given by:
µR
δ + η(S1 + S2 )
µT
ϕ2 (S2 ) =
δ + εS2

ϕ1 (S1 , S2 ) =
dS1
= ρϕ1 (S1 , S2 )S1 − γ1 ϕ2 (S2 )S1 − δS S1
(8)
dt
dS2
= ρ(1 − ε)ϕ1 (S1 , S2 )S2 − γ2 ϕ2 (S2 )S2 − δS S2 (9)
dt

(10)
(11)

The two strains will be present provided that the two
derivatives are dSk /dt > 0. This leads to two inequalities

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558619; this version posted February 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

5

FIG. 3: Positive correlation between the parameters regulating the indirect positive effect from species S2
to S1 . a) Parameter space of the system as a function of ε and γ1 showing the different fixed points the system reaches. b)
System scheme depicting the links of interest that follow a positive correlation. c) Density of species S1 and S2 (red and blue,
respectively) for three conditions of γ1 (depicted also in a)) along the different values of ε that allows to observe the effect of
the metabolic tradeoff parameter ε to the species’ fitness. The parameter space shown (ε vs. γ1 ) corresponds to the following
constants: µR = µT = 0.5, γ2 = 0.1, δ1 = δ2 = 0.1, ρ = 0.3, η = 0.1, δR = δT = 0.1.

that need to be simultaneously satisfied, namely:
ρϕ1 (S1 , S2 ) − γ1 ϕ2 (S2 ) − δS > 0
ρ(1 − ε)ϕ1 (S1 , S2 ) − γ2 ϕ2 (S2 ) − δS > 0

(12)
(13)

By dividing the two previous equations, it is easy to
see that the following inequality is needed, namely we
require:
ρεϕ1 > (γ1 − γ2 )ϕ2

(14)

and, provided that δS is small enough compared with
S1,2 the following condition for coexistence condition is
found:


γ1 − γ2
µR >
ηµT
(15)
ρε2
Which gives again a linear dependency that will hold only
if asymmetry (with γ1 > γ2 ) is present. For the special
case where γ1  γ2 we can actually neglect γ2 and write
  
η
γ1
µR >
µT
(16)
ρ
ε2
Another important feature that can be extracted from
Fig. 2 is that the higher γ1 is with respect to γ2 , the parameter space area with S1 survival vanishes and an area
with S2 survival appears. The position of these particular areas is also of importance: S1 can survive on its own

as long as µT remains low enough once its mortality rate
due to toxic (γ1 ) is already slightly higher than γ2 . On
the other hand, the area with S2 survival appears on the
right of the coexistence region: in this region, µT is considerably high and S1 has high sensitivity to T , thus only
S2 survives. Finally, despite this is not specially relevant
for the problem concerning us, not only the relative relation between γ1 and γ2 is relevant, but also their actual
values. The higher γ2 is, the higher the difference with
respect to γ1 must be in order to find coexistence of the
species.

Positive correlation of indirect positive link parameter values

Along with the necessary coexistence condition γ1 >
γ2 , there is an extra condition to be fulfilled. We have
found that the indirect positive relation between S1 and
S2 (see Fig. 3) has a major role regulating the viability
of the full system. This link has been depicted in Fig.
1c, formed by the toxic waste degradation by the species
S2 (−εT S2 ) and the mortality induced to the species S1
by the toxic waste T (−γ1 T S1 ).
In the inequality of eqn. 16 we have isolated as a factor in the right hand side of the equation the term γ1 /ε2
that contains the inhibition γ1 of T on S1 as a proportional term along with ε, which acts here as an inverse

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558619; this version posted February 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

6

FIG. 4: Parameter space for the discrete stochastic model under different conditions of γ1 /γ2 (each column) as
a function of µT and µR . We observe how the results observed for the numerical simulations in Fig. 2 are qualitatively
recovered, while some changes in the steady state are achieved with this stochastic counterpart in some regions of the parameter
space. For γ1 /γ2 ≤ 1, γ1 = γ2 = 0.1, for γ1 /γ2 > 1, γ1 = 0.17 and γ2 = 0.1 and for γ1 /γ2  1, γ1 = 0.3 and γ2 = 0.1

square. Since ε is bounded between zero and one, its
effects are stronger. This implies that relatively high
values of epsilon must be counterbalanced by relatively
lower (in comparison) values of γ1 in order that the inequality holds, keeping a nonlinear proportionality relationship. Therefore, the inequality 16 predicts in fact a
positive correlation between these two parameters, which
thus strongly influence the indirect positive effect.
The critical boundary separating coexistence from extinction in the (γ1 , ε) space will scale as:
 
ρ 2
γ1 ∼
ε
(17)
η
which of course only provides an (estimated) lower bound
and predicts a nonlinear growth of γ1 with .
In Fig. 3a we can observe the actual relation between
ε and γ1 that allows the coexistence of the species. A biological interpretation of this observation could be that,
out of the region delimited by ε and γ1 ,the strength between toxic waste degradation by S2 and the mortality
induced by T to S1 becomes too unbalanced, so that the
indirect positive effect from S2 to S1 is too weak to actually sustain the survival of both species. We can also
check in Fig. S11 how the positive relation between ε and
γ1 prevails for various combinations of µR and µT values.
Notice that if ε/γ1  1, then S2 is unable to survive anymore due to its poor reproduction capacity (recall that
the growth of S2 is regulated by ρ(1 − ε)RS2 ), and we
find an area of the parameter space of S1 survival. On
the other hand, if ε/γ1  1, then the mortality induced
by the toxic waste to S1 is too high for it to survive, and
at the same time S2 has a much better reproduction capacity due to lower values of ε, so we find a region of the
parameter space of S2 survival.
Fig. 3c provides more insights in what is actually
occurring to the species densities across this parameter
space. We can observe that either S1 and S2 have an
optimal value of ε regarding its fitness. The value for S2
is located around 0.2, while the one for S1 is obviously

dependent on γ1 but also, importantly, on the fitness of
S2 associated to ε. Once ε keeps increasing and S2 degrades toxic with more efficiency and at the same time
looses reproduction potential, S1 is able to survive and
reach a peak of fitness at a concrete value of ε.
With this result we complete the explanation given
above on the conditions for coexistence to be possible:
coexistence is possible as long as γ1 > γ2 and, importantly, the values of γ1 and ε are confined into the region
where the indirect positive interaction is strong enough
to sustain it. Regarding the effect of other parameter
values to the system’s behaviour, we have found that an
asymmetry in cell mortality rates can lead to a subcritical
Hopf bifurcation (see Fig. S12), but the qualitative behaviour of the system is maintained. Any other change in
parameter values does not change the conclusions reached
in this paper.
B.

Discrete Stochastic model

The mean field model is validated through the introduction of an spatial counterpart, where stochasticity is
present, confirming the robustness of the species coexistence result under the scenario studied in this paper.
In order to introduce noise in our model, we have implemented a discrete stochastic version of the mean field
model in a 100x100 lattice. The rules are directly derived from the system of equations defined above, now
considered to be discrete:
N˙T = µT − δT NT − εNS2 NT
N˙R = µR − δR NR − η(NS1 + NS2 )NR
N˙S = ρNR NS − γ1 NT NS − δ1 NS

(18)

N˙S2 = ρ(1 − ε)NR NS2 − γ2 NT NS2 − δ2 NS2

(21)

1

1

1

1

(19)
(20)

Each position (i, j) in the lattice contains discrete values of NT , NR , NS1 and NS2 (reactants), and they will

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558619; this version posted February 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

7
react locally with the reactants located in the same position (i, j). In this model there are up to three different
types of reactions, depending on how many elements interact: [1]. influx of a certain element (just NR and
NT ), [2]. one-species reaction proportional to a certain
parameter value and [3]. two-species reaction when two
elements interact also proportional to a particular rate.
For a detailed description of the model rules see S-X SM
and Fig. S13a.
The model includes random movement of NS1 and NS2
to its Moore neighbourhood of a given percentage of cell
quantities (%move ), as sketched in Fig. S13b, but does
not consider discrete diffusion of R and T molecules.
The same parameters studied in the mean field model
have been explored in the spatial counterpart, as can be
observed in Fig. 4 (see Fig. S14 to check the actual levels
of S1 and S2 under the conditions tested). The qualitative maintenance of the results obtained by the mean field
model can be observed, as well as some changes in the
steady state achieved with this stochastic counterpart.
Namely, the state of species coexistence can be found in
regions where it was precluded in the mean field model:
either when γ1 < γ2 and when γ1 /γ2 > 1, where before,
under a critical value of µT , only the survival of S1 was
observed. This could be explained as a direct influence
of the stochasticity now present in the simulations, due
to each of the reactions aforementioned, the presence of
the spatial dimension and the movement of the species
S1 and S2 on it. In addition, the positive correlation between ε and γ1 is also confirmed in this stochastic version
of the mean field model (see Fig. S15).
The levels of R, T , S1 and S2 rapidly reach a stable
mean value, around which each value of the four system
dimensions in every position of the lattice (i, j) oscillates
(see Fig. S16 for a sample of the temporal evolution of
the mean values ± SD of each dimension).

IV.

DISCUSSION

In this paper we explore the persistence of stable heterogeneous cell assemblies under the presence of an environmental challenge as defined by a toxic waste. To
this goal we consider a simple mathematical model (and
its stochastic counterpart) where two cell populations exploit available resources while being constrained by the
lethal effects of the toxic. This situation can be relevant in different contexts, from evolutionary dynamics
of multicellularity to the maintenance of diverse populations under heterogeneous physiological conditions (as
it occurs with biofilms[27]). Given that the production
of metabolites inevitably leads to some kind of inhibitory
signals, it is relevant to consider how a diverse population
can persist.
In our system, one population is capable of removing
the toxic waste at the expense of a reduced reproductive potential under a metabolic tradeoff. This scenario
is related to early studies of competition in microbial

communities [14–16] where a related problem was addressed in the context of antibiotic resistance. But in
those models the toxic inhibitory species was considered
to be resistent to it while no metabolic tradeoffs where
present. These are important features of a recent theoretical work where the emergence of complex, spatially
distributed ”proto-organisms” (PRO) exhibiting division
of labor and higher-scale features occurs[12], now taken
into account in the presented mean field model. Beyond
the differences with the original PRO model, we take the
most fundamental features of it in order to understand
the possible key features predating the observed complex
PRO.
Our analysis provides robust predictions regarding the
conditions for stability. As a consequence of the interaction network resulting from our set of rules, well-defined
domains of persistent mixed species is found. A theoretical characterisation is provided for the continuous,
well-mixed model, while a discrete spatial model is also
analysed to test the robustness of the observed phases.
Under this scenario, we also show that an asymmetry between their sensitivities to toxic must exist. In particular
the sensitivity to toxic for the toxic-degrading species S2
must be lower than the wild type species S1 . In an evolutionary context, this implies that the mutation into a new
species capable of degrading a certain toxic waste should
display a lower sensitivity to it (compared to the wild
type species) in order to allow coexistence. Importantly,
this conclusion holds when stochasticity is at play.
On the other hand, we show how the indirect positive
relation from the toxic degrading species to the wild type
species (which could be classified as a commensalist relationship) is critical for the existence of cell heterogeneity.
A positive correlation between the parameters regulating
the strength of the two links conforming the indirect positive relation must hold in order to observe species coexistence. Again, the spatial stochastic model confirms the
robustness of this result. It is plausible that this kind of
relationship between two related species through a toxic
species could be potentially selected in an evolutionary
context where an increase in complexity in the form of
cell heterogeneity is selected for. Moreover, the presence
of a metabolic tradeoff for the toxic-degrading species
could further constrains the viability of both species in
this evolutionary context, as it has been shown in the
paper.
In conclusion, we provide a detailed analysis of a new
scenario of toxic-mediated cell heterogeneity with potential for synthetic purposes. With the aim of studying the
origins of multicellularity, a theoretical framework has
been recently proposed[28], where the use of synthetic
multicellularity as a tool to explore the possible in terms
of Ecology, Evolution and Development was presented.
In this paper we use the ecological dimension to study a
potential system that could predate the further evolution
of cells into complex multicellular structures. Our results
could be of potential use for synthetic biologists aiming
to design a system where two cells coexist having a com-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558619; this version posted February 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

8
mensalist relationship. This basic system could then be
synthetically evolved (studying the proposed Evolution
dimension) to explore possible paths to generate stable
multicellular aggregates probably underlying mutualistic
relationships. These potential (both theoretical and experimental) extensions will require further investigation.

the Generalitat de Catalunya and the European Social
Fund. RS received funding from the Botı́n Foundation
by Banco Santander through its Santander Universities
Global Division, a MINECO grant FIS2015-67616 fellowship and from the Santa Fe Institute.

Data Accessibility

The results have been generated through the widely
known Runge Kutta numerical method (see SXI SM)
while the Discrete Stochastic model can be easily reproduced with the information given in the paper (section
III-B in main text and S10 in SM).

Authors’ contributions

RS conceived the idea and design of this work, analysed and interpreted results and wrote the article. AOV
helped in the design of the work, developed the code, performed the experiments, analysed and interpreted results
and wrote the article.

Research ethics

This statement does not apply to this manuscript.

Animal ethics

Competing interests

There are no competing interests in this work.
Acknowledgments

This statement does not apply to this manuscript.

Permission to carry out fieldwork

This statement does not apply to this manuscript.

The authors thank the members of the Complex Systems Lab for useful discussions. Special thanks to Rosa
Martı́nez-Corral and Jordi Piñero for our discussions and
their valuable suggestions and to G. Taro for her inspiring
ideas.

Funding
V.

AOV received funding from Universities and Research
Secretariat of the Ministry of Business and Knowledge of

[1] Bonner JT. 2009 First signals: the evolution of multicellular development. Princeton University Press.
[2] Trillo I, Nedelcu A. 2015 Evolutionary Transitions to
Multicellular Life: Principles and Mechanisms (Advances
in Marine Genomics). .
[3] Knoll AH. 2011 The multiple origins of complex multicellularity. Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences
39, 217–239.
[4] Lenton T, Watson A, Watson AJ. 2011 Revolutions that
made the Earth. Oxford University Press.
[5] Shapiro JA. 1998 Thinking about bacterial populations
as multicellular organisms. Annual Reviews in Microbiology 52, 81–104.
[6] Jefferson KK. 2004 What drives bacteria to produce a
biofilm?. FEMS Microbiology Letters 236, 163–173.
[7] Banin E, Vasil ML, Greenberg EP. 2005 Iron and Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm formation. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 102, 11076–11081.
[8] Xavier JB. 2011 Social interaction in synthetic and natu-

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

REFERENCES

ral microbial communities. Molecular Systems Biology 7,
483.
Finkelshtein A, Roth D, Jacob EB, Ingham CJ. 2015 Bacterial swarms recruit cargo bacteria to pave the way in
toxic environments. MBio 6, e00074–15.
Pfeiffer T, Schuster S, Bonhoeffer S. 2001 Cooperation
and competition in the evolution of ATP-producing pathways. Science 292, 504–507.
Pfeiffer T, Bonhoeffer S. 2003 An evolutionary scenario
for the transition to undifferentiated multicellularity.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100,
1095–1098.
Duran-Nebreda S, Bonforti A, Montanez R, Valverde S,
Solé R. 2016 Emergence of proto-organisms from bistable
stochastic differentiation and adhesion. Journal of The
Royal Society Interface 13, 20160108.
Ollé-Vila A, Duran-Nebreda S, Conde-Pueyo N, Montanez R, Solé R. 2016 A morphospace for synthetic organs
and organoids: the possible and the actual. Integrative

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558619; this version posted February 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

9
Biology 8, 485–503.
[14] Lenski RE, Hattingh SE. 1986 Coexistence of two competitors on one resource and one inhibitor: a chemostat
model based on bacteria and antibiotics. Journal of Theoretical Biology 122, 83–93.
[15] Hsu SB, Waltman P. 1992 Analysis of a model of two
competitors in a chemostat with an external inhibitor.
SIAM journal on applied mathematics 52, 528–540.
[16] Hsu SB, Waltman P. 2004 A survey of mathematical
models of competition with an inhibitor. Mathematical
Biosciences 187, 53–91.
[17] Ben-Jacob E, Cohen I, Golding I, Gutnick DL, Tcherpakov M, Helbing D, Ron IG. 2000 Bacterial cooperative
organization under antibiotic stress. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 282, 247–282.
[18] Ben-Jacob E. 2003 Bacterial self–organization: co–
enhancement of complexification and adaptability in a
dynamic environment. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences 361, 1283–1312.
[19] Ben-Jacob E, Levine H. 2005 Self-engineering capabilities
of bacteria. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 3,
197–214.

[20] Murdoch WW, Briggs CJ, Nisbet RM. 2003 Consumerresource dynamics vol. 36. Princeton University Press.
[21] Hardin G. 1960 The competitive exclusion principle. Science 131, 1292–1297.
[22] Edelstein-Keshet L. 1988 Mathematical models in biology
vol. 46. Siam.
[23] Levins R. 1974 Discussion paper: the qualitative analysis
of partially specified systems. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 231, 123–138.
[24] Levins R. 1975 Evolution in communities near equilibrium. Ecology and evolution of communities pp. 16–50.
[25] May RM. 1973 Qualitative stability in model ecosystems.
Ecology 54, 638–641.
[26] May RM. 2001 Stability and complexity in model ecosystems vol. 6. Princeton university press.
[27] Flemming HC, Wingender J, Szewzyk U, Steinberg P,
Rice SA, Kjelleberg S. 2016 Biofilms: an emergent form
of bacterial life. Nature Reviews Microbiology 14, 563.
[28] Solé R, Ollé-Vila A, Vidiella B, Duran-Nebreda S, CondePueyo N. 2018 The road to synthetic multicellularity.
Current Opinion in Systems Biology.

