bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Johannes Nemeth1, Gregory S. Olson1,3, Alissa Rothchild1, Ana Jahn1, Dat Mai1, Fergal Duffy1,
Jared Delahaye1, Sanjay Srivatsan2,3, Courtney Plumlee1, Kevin Urdahl1, Elizabeth Gold1, Alan
Diercks*1, Alan Aderem*1
1

Seattle Children’s Research Institute, 307 Westlake Ave N #500, Seattle, WA 98109, USA

2

Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

3

Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA

98195, USA

*contributed equally

Latent

Mycobacterium

tuberculosis

infection

provides

protection for the host by changing the activation state of the
innate immune system

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
An efficacious vaccine against adult tuberculosis (TB) remains elusive. Progress is hampered by an
incomplete understanding of the immune mechanisms that protect against infection with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the causative agent of TB1. Over 90% of people who become
infected with Mtb mount an immune response that contains the bacteria indefinitely, leading to a
state known as “latent TB infection” (LTBI)2. A significant body of epidemiologic evidence indicates
that LTBI protects against active TB after re-exposure, offering an intriguing avenue to identifying
protective mechanisms3,4. We show that in a mouse model, LTBI is highly protective against
infection with Mtb for up to 100 days following aerosol challenge. LTBI mice are also protected
against heterologous bacterial challenge (Listeria monocytogenes) and disseminated melanoma
suggesting that protection is in part mediated by alterations in the activation state of the innate
immune system. Protection is associated with elevated activation of alveolar macrophages (AM), the
first cells that respond to inhaled Mtb, and accelerated recruitment of Mtb-specific T cells to the lung
parenchyma upon aerosol challenge. Systems approaches, including transcriptome analysis of both
naïve and infected AMs, as well as ex vivo functional assays, demonstrate that LTBI reconfigures
the response of tissue resident AMs.. Furthermore, we demonstrate that both LTBI mice and latently
infected humans show similar alterations in the relative proportions of circulating innate immune
cells, suggesting that the same cellular changes observed in the LTBI mouse model are also
occurring in humans. Therefore, we argue that under certain circumstances, LTBI could be beneficial
to the host by providing protection against subsequent Mtb exposure.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
The failure to identify mechanisms or correlates of protection against TB has hampered the
development of vaccines or host-directed therapies to combat the world-wide disease burden which
is estimated to be 10.4 million cases and 1.8 million deaths annually5. The immune mechanisms that
protect against TB are evidently quite powerful: Due to the extraordinarily high prevalence of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) (some estimates suggest that at least 25% of the world’s
population has been exposed2) TB ranks as the deadliest infectious disease world-wide. However,
the vast majority (~90%) of individuals with an intact immune system are able to contain and control
the infection for their lifetimes with no clinical symptoms leading to a state known as “latent TB
infection” 2.

LTBI is clinically defined as the presence of an Mtb-specific adaptive immune response in the
absence of signs and symptoms of disease. It is widely believed that the clinical definition
encompasses a variety of disease states, often referred to as the “spectrum of TB disease”,
including bacterial clearance, persistence of live bacteria contained by the immune system, and subclinical disease6,7. It is clear that humans may harbor viable Mtb in a variety of tissues for decades
without developing symptoms8-11. In both humans12 and non-human primates13, the lymphatic
system plays key roles in the spectrum of disease by providing a reservoir for latent Mtb8,14 and
coordinating subsequent immune responses.

Both historical cohort studies and contemporary epidemiological studies demonstrate that LTBI is
protective against re-infection3,15. The phenomenon of a low-grade infection protecting against
subsequent infections with the same pathogen has led to the development of almost all live vaccines
currently in use, including those based on bacteria (BCG) or experimental vaccines against parasites
(Leishmania)16. Likewise, continuous exposure to Plasmodium falciparum, the causative agent of
malaria, and maintenance of low-grade parasitemia provides protection against high-density
parasitemia and death in adults17. This phenomenon is often referred to as “concomitant immunity”18
or, in the case of malaria, “premunition”17. Despite the strong evidence that LTBI confers protection
against reinfection, the underlying mechanisms have not been defined, in part due to the lack of a
suitable animal model.

Recent studies in mice have shown that intradermally injected Mtb are asymptomatically contained
in the draining lymph node for an extended period of time and have used this approach to model
LTBI in humans with the goal of understanding failure of containment arising from immune
suppression19,20. Because the LTBI mouse model shares many features of latent TB in humans, we
hypothesize that it reflects at least a portion of the disease spectrum. Here, we demonstrate that

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

LTBI in mice confers significant protection against subsequent aerosol challenge, in part, by altering
the innate immune response to Mtb.

Results

Intradermal Mtb-infection of mice recapitulates key aspects of human LTBI and is contained
for up to 1 year.
To establish the model of LTBI, we infected mice intradermally in the ear with 10,000 CFU of a
commonly used virulent strain of Mtb, H37Rv19. Within 5 days the bacteria trafficked to the ipsilateral
superficial cervical lymph nodes which, when extracted, were visibly enlarged. The bacterial burden
in the draining lymph node was relatively stable for at least one year (Figure 1A) with minimal
dissemination to the spleen and no dissemination to the lung (Figure S1). Approximately 75% of all
spleens investigated were uninfected. If Mtb was detectable, the bacterial load was less than 1000
CFU per spleen (data not shown). We measured the circulating levels of 39 cytokines (including key
inflammatory mediators such as IL-6 and TNF, (see Table S1) and found that none were significantly
altered the first 6 weeks following the establishment of LTBI.

In humans, LTBI is clinically defined by the presence of an Mtb-specific T cell response in the
absence of active disease. In LTBI mice, Mtb-specific T cells were detectable in the circulation from
day 10 onward without recruitment to the lung parenchyma (Figure 1B). Furthermore, for at least one
year, the mice displayed no overt systemic symptoms (e.g. weight loss or changes in coat or
behavior) nor any local symptoms (including visible inflammation or irritation).

To assess more broadly whether LTBI changes the relative proportions of circulating immune cells,
we performed whole blood RNA sequencing on LTBI mice and controls and applied a previously
published transcriptome deconvolution approach based on a published deconvolution matrix21,22.
The most pronounced differences were increased frequencies of M1 macrophage type cells and
monocytes in LTBI mice (Figure 1C). Flow-cytometry analysis of peripheral blood showed subtly but
significantly elevated expression of MHC II on CD11b+Ly6Clow cells – the “tissue resident
macrophages” in the blood compartment23 - from LTBI mice compared to controls (Figure 1D). To
assess whether LTBI in humans is associated with changes in circulatory cellularity, we applied the
same deconvolution approach to previously published whole blood transcriptome data from
uninfected and latently infected humans24. In concordance with the mouse data, individuals with
LTBI (n = 69) had on average a greater proportion M1 polarized macrophage type cells in the
circulation than uninfected individuals (n = 117) (Figure 1E, S2). Across all samples, the estimated

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

frequencies of M1 and M2 macrophage type cells in humans were inversely correlated with each
other (Figure S3).

Taken together, these data indicate that intradermal Mtb-infection of mice recapitulates many key
aspects of LTBI in humans, including circulating Mtb-specific T cells in the absence of disease
symptoms or elevated levels of pro-inflammatory mediators in peripheral blood. Furthermore, LTBI in
mice induces a skewing towards more M1 macrophages in the circulation that we also observed
(and to our knowledge has not been previously described) in latently infected humans.

Latently infected mice are strongly protected against aerosol challenge with Mtb and
heterologous challenges
To test the hypothesis that LTBI is protective against aerosol infection, we infected mice with 50-100
CFU of Mtb H37Rv 8-10 weeks after the establishment of LTBI and measured bacterial burden in
the lung and spleen at 14, 42, and 100 days after challenge. At each of these time points, the
bacterial burden in both tissues was significantly lower in LTBI mice compared to controls (Figure
2A). We obtained similar results when mice were challenged 10 to 14 days after establishment of
LTBI (Figure S4): LTBI mice had on average 18.4-fold (CI: 10.6-26.3) fewer bacteria in the lung as
compared to controls measured 6 weeks after aerosol challenge across 6 independent experiments
with a total of 60 mice. This level of protection exceeds that of intradermal inoculation with BCG
which induces 10-fold protection at day 42 that wanes by day 100 and has minimal impact on
bacterial burden within the first two weeks (Figure S5).

Several lines of evidence suggest that human TB typically arises from infection with as few as 1-3
bacteria11,12. We therefore examined the protective effect of LTBI against an “ultra-low dose” (ULD)
infection of 1-3 CFU per mouse (see

25

). At this dose, mice exhibit a wide range of outcomes,

especially at later times, with bacterial burdens in the lung ranging over 4 orders of magnitude
(Figure 2B). Furthermore, because most mice are infected with a single bacterium, the degree of
dissemination can be inferred by measuring spread to the contralateral lobe. Consistent with the 50100 CFU infections, LTBI mice challenged with 1-3 CFU showed substantially lower bacterial
burdens and reduced dissemination in the lung compared to controls for more than 100 days
following aerosol challenge (Figure 2C). These data demonstrate that LTBI mice are strongly
protected against aerosol challenge with Mtb from as early as day 10 until at least 100 days
following infection. To our knowledge, the early and sustained protective efficacy of LTBI is among
the most profound that has been documented in the C57BL/6 mouse model.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Both adaptive and innate immune responses are required for control of Mtb. We reasoned that if the
protective phenotype of the LTBI mice is fully explained by the presence of Mtb specific T cells
(Figure 1B), these mice should be equally susceptible to other immune challenges that do not share
specific antigens with Mtb. To test this, we challenged LTBI and control mice intravenously with 105
CFU of Listeria monocytogenes, another intracellular bacterial pathogen. LTBI mice were
significantly protected, displaying a greater than 10-fold reduction in bacterial burden in the spleen
48 hours following infection (Figure 2D). To confirm and extend these results, we inoculated LTBI
and control mice with a non-bacterial immune challenge: a model of metastatic melanoma. Ten days
following i.v. injection with melanoma cells, LTBI mice had approximately 10-fold fewer melanoma
metastases in the lungs than controls (Figure 2E).

The protective phenotype of latent mice is associated with modest tissue inflammation at
baseline and an accelerated immune response
These data suggest that the protective phenotype induced by LTBI is mediated by immune
mechanisms beyond Mtb-specific T cells. We hypothesized that LTBI modulates the innate immune
system at baseline and in response to subsequent challenge leading to more efficient control of
bacterial growth.

Prior to aerosol infection
Although LTBI did not induce elevated levels of cytokines in peripheral blood, we hypothesized that it
might drive low-level, chronic immune activation in specific tissues. Therefore, we measured
cytokine levels in the lungs and spleens of LTBI and control mice prior to aerosol challenge. During
the first 6 weeks after establishment of LTBI, the levels of 7 cytokines and chemokines (of 39
assayed) were significantly elevated in the lungs of LTBI mice compared to controls and 5 were
elevated in the spleen (Figure 3A). The most pronounced changes were increased levels of CCL3,
CCL4, and CCL5 in the lung and IFNG and CCL4 in the spleen (Figure 3A). Relative levels of the
detectable cytokines correlated well across tissues (supplemental Figure S6). We did not detect
altered concentrations of classic inflammatory cytokines such as IL6 and TNF in any compartment
tested. These results suggest that the localized, contained Mtb infection induces a mild and selective
increase in local tissue inflammation.

After subsequent challenge
We first assessed the overall responsiveness of myeloid cell populations in the lung by isolating
CD11b+ cells from LTBI and control mice and stimulating them for 6 hours with TLR-agonists.
Myeloid cells from LTBI mice were more responsive to all stimuli tested as measured by TNF-α

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

secretion (Figure 3B). The myeloid populations in the lung of LTBI and control mice were not
significantly different (Figure S7).

Next, we investigated the immune response after aerosol Mtb infection by both histology of fixed
lung sections and flow cytometry of single cells. In contrast to control mice, which had essentially no
histologically detectable response to aerosol Mtb-challenge (100 CFU) at day 14 following infection,
LTBI mice exhibited well-formed pulmonary lesions that remained stable for at least 100 days
(Figure 3C). By day 42, control mice showed significantly more lesions and pulmonary hemorrhages
than LTBI mice and this damage continued to progress through day 100 (Figure 3C, Table S2).

To identify the myeloid cells involved in the early response we observed histologically, we measured
the recruitment of immune cells to the lung by flow cytometry at early timepoints (days 10-14) after
aerosol infection. The magnitude of recruitment to the lung parenchyma of both interstitial
macrophages and Mtb-specific T cells, was higher at this early timepoint in LTBI mice compared to
controls (Figure 3D-E). In addition, alveolar macrophages (AMs) from LTBI mice were more highly
activated as measured by MHCII expression following aerosol challenge (Figure 3F).

These results suggest that a key feature of LTBI is an accelerated, early immune response that
reduces the time during which Mtb is able to replicate unchallenged. Furthermore, LTBI mice are
able to maintain a protective response with minimal progression of immune pathology for a
prolonged period of time.

Heterologous challenges
We hypothesized that heterologous challenges would also be associated with increased myeloid
activation. To test this, we infected mice intravenously with 107 GFP-expressing Listeria
monocytogenes and measured the activation state of splenic macrophages after 2 hours. In
concordance with our hypothesis, infected splenic macrophages from LTBI mice upregulated MHCII
more strongly than macrophages from controls, suggesting that they were able to respond more
robustly to the bacteria (Figure 3G). In addition, we evaluated tissue sections from the lung of LTBI
or control mice challenged with i.v. melanoma. Strikingly, histiocytic and lymphocytic infiltrates were
detectable in the lungs of 3 out of 5 LTBI mice and absent in control mice (Figure 3H, Table S3).

Latent Mtb infection alters the response of alveolar macrophages to aerosol Mtb challenge
Since the protective phenotype in LTBI mice is strongly associated with early recruitment of
inflammatory cells to the site of infection (Figure 3) and there is evidence of low-level tissue
inflammation prior to challenge (Figure 3A), we hypothesized that LTBI affects the activation status

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and initial response of AMs (the lung resident macrophage and the first cells to be infected with
Mtb16).

Prior to aerosol infection
While the total number of CD45+ cells and the fractions of both myeloid and T cells in the lung were
unaffected by LTBI (Figure S7), we consistently measured elevated expression of MHCII and FcγRI
on AMs (Figure 4A), suggesting that their activation state was altered by continuous exposure to
low-level inflammation (Figure 3A). Expression of CD11c was unaffected by LTBI (Figure 4A). To
investigate these cells at a more global level, we performed RNA sequencing on AMs isolated from
LTBI and control mice. Interestingly, this RNA-seq analysis demonstrated that the transcriptomes of
AMs from control and LTBI mice did not differ significantly prior to aerosol challenge (Figure 4B).

Following aerosol infection
To assess the immediate response of AMs to infection with Mtb, we challenged mice with a high
dose (~3000 CFU) of mEmerald-expressing bacteria. In concordance with previous studies, at 24
hours following infection the bacteria were predominantly contained within AMs24,25. LTBI had no
impact on the proportions of cell-types infected (Figure S8). In other studies (currently submitted),
we have shown that MTB-infected AMs display a highly delayed pro-inflammatory reponse over the
first 10 days of infection26. RNA-seq analysis of AMs isolated from control and latent animals 24
hours after aerosol challenge demonstrated a dramatically altered response to Mtb-infection in AMs
from LTBI mice compared to controls (Figure 4C,D). Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)27 of
genes differentially expressed following infection showed that, in contrast to AMs from control mice,
AMs from LTBI mice upregulated transcripts associated with inflammation, the Interferon-γ pathway
and the IL-6 JAK-STAT pathways (Figure 4E,F).

The bacterial burden in LTBI mice at 10 days following high-dose (~3000 CFU) aerosol infection,
was approximately 3-fold lower than in control mice (Figure S9). The majority of bacteria were in
AMs (Figure 4G) and significantly fewer AMs were infected in LTBI mice (Figure 4G). AMs isolated
by BAL from LTBI mice were better able to control Mtb infection ex vivo compared to controls
suggesting that the enhanced response of AMs from LTBI mice is at least in part cell-intrinsic.
(Figure 4H).

Numerous recent studies have suggested that prior or ongoing infection can alter the capacity of
innate immune cells to respond to subsequent encounters with pathogens, a phenomenon that has
been termed “trained immunity” and has been shown in some cases to be reflected in epigenetic

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

modifications28. Therefore, we used ATAC-seq to measure genome-wide changes in chromatin
accessibility induced by LTBI. Surprisingly, we observed only modest changes in chromatin
accessibility that did not correlate with differentially expressed genes, suggesting that this
mechanism cannot account for the enhanced response of AMs to infection (Figure S10).

Taken together, these data suggest that changes in the local, inflammatory environment reprograms
the transcriptional responses of AMs and allows for improved control of subsequent aerosol
challenges.

The protective phenotype of LTBI mice is diminished by antibiotic therapy
In the absence of long-lasting epigenetic changes, we hypothesized that the protective effect of LTBI
results in part from the continuous exposure of innate cells to low-level cytokines secreted by
immune cells containing the bacteria and thus would be diminished by antibiotic treatment.
Therefore, we treated LTBI mice and controls for 6 weeks with Isoniazid and Rifampicin prior to
aerosol challenge and assessed the impact on bacterial burden. Treatment efficacy was confirmed
by culture of lymph node, spleen, and lung lysates from a dedicated set of mice (n = 2-3, two
independent experiments, data not shown). Antibiotic treatment significantly diminished the ability of
LTBI mice to contain bacterial growth in the lung over the first 6 weeks (Figure 5A). At 10 days
following aerosol challenge, treated LTBI mice had lower numbers of Mtb-specific T cells in the
circulation and in the lung parenchyma compared to untreated LTBI mice (Figure 5B). 5B In addition,
treatment significantly reduced the expansion of Mtb-specific T cells in response to infection (Figure
S11). These data suggest that the protective phenotype induced by LTBI is dependent on live
bacteria.

Discussion
In this study, we have demonstrated that latent infection with virulent Mtb protects mice against
subsequent aerosol challenge and that a large component of this protection arises from elevated
activation of the innate immune system. Our data suggest that low-level inflammation within the lung
enables resident AMs to respond more robustly to infection with Mtb. The increased innate immune
response in LTBI mice also confers significant protection against heterologous challenges as diverse
as Listeria monocytogenes and metastatic melanoma.

The mouse remains the premier small animal model for immunological research due to the extensive
availability of molecular reagents, a large body of historical data, and relatively low cost. Much of our
current understanding of TB immunology had its origins in the mouse model before subsequent
validation in humans, e.g., the critical roles for CD4 T cells29, IFNG30,31, IL-1232, and TNF30.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Furthermore, the mouse continues to play an essential role in the development of new TB vaccine
strategies33. The protective effect of LTBI manifests as a reduced bacterial burden as early as 10
days following aerosol challenge that is maintained for at least 3 months after challenge. To our
knowledge, this protection is as rapidly acting and durable as any that has been demonstrated in the
mouse. Therefore, we argue that the LTBI mouse model offers an important opportunity to identify
and dissect mechanisms of protection against TB.

Enhanced innate immune responses resulting from prior exposure to pathogens, a phenomenon
termed “trained immunity”, is often reflected in epigenetic and transcriptional changes in
macrophages and has been shown to be important for protection against Mtb in a model of high
dose i.v. BCG vaccination34. The protective effect of i.v. BCG depends on the presence of bacteria in
the bone marrow, affects the development of myeloid derived macrophages, and is transferrable via
macrophages in the absence of live BCG34. In the LTBI model presented here, we detect profound
changes in the responsiveness of tissue resident AMs, a long-lived cell type derived from fetal
monocytes35. Furthermore, in the LTBI model, protection depends on live mycobacteria presumably
via the continuous interaction between pathogen and host.

Tissue resident AMs from naïve mice have been reported to be niches for Mtb growth, in contrast to
myeloid derived macrophages which are better able to control bacterial replication36. Mtb-infected
AMs from LTBI mice upregulate many of the inflammatory and interferon pathways that are activated
in myeloid-derived macrophages but not in Mtb-infected AMs from control mice (Figure 4E and

19

).

Thus, LTBI reprograms tissue resident AMs, the cells first infected by inhaled Mtb, to a more
bactericidal phenotype that is typically associated with recruited macrophages.

Several mouse models demonstrate that infection or inoculation with live vaccines (including latent
Herpes virus infection, BCG vaccination, and exposure to typical mouse pathogens) confers
substantial protection against heterologous challenges by altering the activation state of the innate
immune system37-39. Although the potential role in humans of LTBI-mediated heterologous protection
has not been rigorously assessed, beneficial heterologous effects of BCG vaccination have been
reported: overall mortality of newborns is reduced by more than would be expected from the
protection afforded by BCG against TB alone40. Both local administration of BCG as well as BCG
vaccination restrain melanoma development in humans41,42. BCG-vaccination of mice has been
reported to enhance the cytotoxic capacity of isolated macrophages against melanoma cells in
vitro43. Furthermore, skewing of macrophages from M2 to M1 has been associated with control of
melanoma in vivo13,14.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Antibiotic treatment of LTBI mice reduced the numbers of Mtb-specific T cells in the circulation and
in the lung parenchyma following aerosol challenge. Surprisingly, treatment also eliminated specific
T cell expansion. We hypothesize that eliminating the ongoing contained infection also eliminated
the elevated activation of the innate immune system resulting from LTBI and thereby reduced
appropriate instruction of the adaptive response. However, more detailed studies are required to
elucidate the contributions of memory T cells and reprogrammed macrophages to the protective
effect of LTBI.

Preventative antibiotic treatment of patients diagnosed with latent TB is regarded as a cornerstone of
TB control. However, preventive therapy is only effective in the first two years after infection and fails
to reduce TB incidence if applied without risk-stratification4,44. Counterintuitively, recent
epidemiological data suggest that individuals who have been treated for active TB are more
susceptible to re-infection and progress more rapidly following re-infection, suggesting that clearing
latent infection with preventive therapy might be counterproductive in a high transmission setting15,45.
This phenomenon has been observed for malaria: treatment of low-grade Plasmodium falciparum
parasitemia and subsequent loss of natural immunity can lead to hyper-mortality in epidemic
regions46. In both cases, the protective mechanisms that are undermined by treatment are
incompletely understood. A detailed examination of antibiotic treatment in the LTBI mouse model, in
conjunction with human studies, may help to uncover these mechanisms and ultimately inform
improved clinical treatment of TB in high-incidence settings.

Methods
Mice
C57BL/6 were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory. All mice were housed and bred under
specific pathogen free conditions at the Center for Infectious Disease Research. All experimental
protocols involving animals were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of
the Center for Infectious Disease Research.

Tissue Culture
Alveolar macrophages were cultured in complete RPMI [cRPMI; plus 10%(vol/vol) FBS, 2 mM lglutamine, penicillin, and streptomycin] for 24 hours after isolation by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL).
In vitro infections were performed in cRPMI without antibiotics in biological triplicate (cells from
independent mice). The bacterial load at day 5 was determined by plating serial dilutions of cells
lysed in 1% Triton-X and diluted in 0.1% Tween-80 PBS.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Establishment of LTBI via intradermal infection of the ear, aerosol Infections, and
enumeration of bacterial load
Intradermal infections to establish were performed as described previously19 with the following
modifications: 10,000 CFU of Mtb (H37Rv) in logarithmic phase growth in 10 μL PBS were injected
intradermally into mice anaesthetized with Ketamine using a 10μl Hamilton Syringe. In some
experiments, MTB Erdman strain was used with same results. For aerosol infections, a frozen stock
of Kanamycin-resistant Mtb H37Rv was diluted and used to infect mice in an aerosol infection
chamber (Glas-Col). For high dose mEmerald infections, a deposition of 3000-5000 CFU was
targeted. For Ultra low dose infections, a deposition of 1-3 CFU was targeted accepting a rate of
approximately 30% uninfected animals. Bacterial load in the lungs was determined by plating serial
dilutions from homogenized lungs. MTB was plated on Kanamycin-containing plates and antibioticfree plates to distinguish the origin of the infection (intradermal versus aerosol infection).

Heterologous challenges
For experiments with bacterial burden as the endpoint, 105 Listeria monocytogenes were injected i.v.
and CFU in the spleen measured 48 hours later. For experiments with an early response as
endpoint, mice were infected with 107 Listeria monocytogenes and sacrificed 2 hours after i.v.
infection. The B16-F10 (ATCC® CRL-6475™) melanoma cell line was purchased from ATCC and
expanded according to the supplier’s instructions. For the melanoma challenges, 105 melanoma
cells per mouse were injected i.v. After 10 days, mice were sacrificed, lungs were extracted and
bleached in Fekete’s solution following a published protocol

47

, and the metastases were counted by

an investigator blinded to the identity of each mouse.

Cell Isolation, Analysis, and Sorting
For i.v. labeling, PE labeled CD45.2 was injected i.v. 10 minutes prior to harvest. Single-cell
suspensions of lung cells were prepared by Liberase Blendzyme 3 (Roche) digestion of perfused
lungs as previously described48. Cells from spleens were prepared as previously described (Spleen
digestion protocol, Miltenyi Biotec). Fc-receptors were blocked with anti-CD16/32 (clone 2.4G2).
Cells were suspended in 1×PBS (pH 7.4) containing 2.5% FBS and stained at saturating conditions
with antibodies against various epitopes (see Table S4). Samples were fixed in 2% (vol/vol)
paraformaldehyde and analyzed using a LSRII flow cytometer (BD) and FlowJo software (Tree Star,
Inc.). Previously published gating strategies were followed49,50. In some experiments, alveolar
macrophages were isolated from suspensions of lung cells using a BD Aria II cell sorter. Gating
strategies are presented in Supplemental Figure 12 (T cells), Supplemental Figure 13 (Circulating

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

monocytes), Supplemental Figure 14 (Spleen myeloid cells), and Supplemental Figure 15 (Lung
myeloid cells).
CD11b+ cell enrichment and ex vivo stimulation
Single cell suspensions prepared as described above from pooled lungs and spleens were positively
enriched for CD11b+ using magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec). The cells were re-stimulated with TLRagonists (LPS 10 ng/mL, PAM3 300 ng/mL, R848 100 ng/mL) and supernatants were collected 6
hours after re-stimulation and assayed by ELISA for TNF-α.

Measurement of total protein
Cytokines were measured by the Cytokine & Chemokine 36-plex Mouse ProcartaPlex panel (with a
Leptin assay added) and IFN alpha/IFN beta 2-Plex Mouse ProcartaPlex Panel (for a total of 39
analytes) using a Luminex Bio-Plex 200 analyzer per manufacturer instructions. Total protein levels
were normalized using a commercial BCA assay from Thermo Scientific.

Detection of Mtb-Specific T Cells
For direct detection of Mtb-specific cells, APC-labeled MHC class II tetramers (I-Ab) containing the
immunodominant epitope of the ESAT-6 protein of Mtb (ESAT-64–17:I-Ab) were made in house.
Pacific Blue-labeled MHC class I tetramers containing the stimulatory residues of the TB10.4 protein
of Mtb (TB10.4 4–11:Kb) were obtained from the National Institutes of Health Tetramer Core Facility.
Tetramer staining on single-cell preparations was carried out as described previously51.

Immunohistochemistry
Tissue sections were formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded. H&E Staining was carried out using
standard protocols. An independent, board-certified pathologist reviewed and scored the tissue
sections, blinded to their experimental group membership.

RNAseq
RNA isolation was performed using TRIzol (Invitrogen), two sequential chloroform extractions,
Glycoblue carrier (Thermo Fisher), isopropanol precipitation, and washes with 75% ethanol. RNA
was quantified with the Bioanalyzer RNA 6000 Pico Kit (Agilent). cDNA libraries for alveolar
macrophages were constructed and amplified using the SMARTer Stranded Total RNA-Seq Kit v2 Pico Input Mammalian (Clontech) per the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA for whole-blood was
prepared using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA kit (Illumina, CA, USA). Libraries were amplified and
then sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq (2 x 75, paired-end). Stranded paired-end reads of length

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

76 were preprocessed: For the Pico Input prep, the first three nucleotides of R2 (v2 kit) were
removed as described in the SMARTer Stranded Total RNA-Seq Kit - Pico Input Mammalian User
Manual (v2: 063017); Read ends consisting of 50 or more of the same nucleotide were removed.
The remaining read pairs were aligned to the mouse genome (mm10) + Mtb H37Rv genome using
the GSNAP aligner (v. 2016-08-24) allowing for novel splicing. Concordantly mapping read pairs
(average 10-20 million / sample) that aligned uniquely were assigned to exons using the subRead (v.
1.4.6.p4) program and gene definitions from Ensembl Mus_Musculus GRCm38.78 coding and noncoding

genes.

Differential

expression

was

calculated

using

the

edgeR

package

from

bioconductor.org. False discovery rate was computed with the Benjamini-Hochberg algorithm. Raw
and processed data are deposited in GEO (GSE126355).

ATACseq
The ATAC-seq protocol developed by with modifications for PFA fixed cells as described by Chen et
al. (2016) was used52. Libraries were sequenced on a NextSeq 500 (Illumina) using a 150 (pairedend 2x76bp) cycle mid-output kit. Unique sequence read pairs were aligned to the combined Mus
musculus (mm10) and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (H37Rv) genomes using the GSNAP aligner
53,54

(v. 2016-08-24) after stripping off adapter sequences in a pairwise manner. Only pairs that

aligned uniquely and concordantly to non-mitochondrial mouse chromosomes were retained. Start
and end positions of the sequences were adjusted to extend 4 and 5 base pairs respectively to
account for transposase adapter insertion (see Buenrostro et al. (2013)55). Peak calling was
performed with MACS2 (2.1.0)

56

using the start and end locations of the pairs to define fragment

lengths. “Blacklisted” regions of known artificially high signal as defined by the ENCODE project
were filtered out of peak regions (https://sites.google.com/site/anshulkundaje/projects/blacklists)
Bigwig

files

for

each

biological

group

were

generated

by

running

57

.

56

MACS2

(https://github.com/taoliu/MACS) peak calling on combined alignments from all samples in the group
and outputting a normalized bedgraph file followed by file conversion using the bedGraphToBigWig
program (genome.ucsc.edu). The R package DiffBind58was used to define consensus peak regions
across samples and assign counts. Differential peak counts and significance were computed using
the R package edgeR59,60. Raw and processed data are deposited in GEO (GSE126355).

Whole blood transcriptome deconvolution analysis
Computational deconvolution of cell type proportion from whole-blood gene expression data was
performed as previously described61. This approach used the assumption that whole-blood gene
expression can be modelled as a mixture of gene abundances attributable to each individual cell
type in the sample. Using a basis matrix containing a representative expression profile for each
relevant cell type, cell proportions were estimated by fitting a model of the form:

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.


where E represents the whole-blood gene expression of a sample, M, the representative basis
matrix, and p, the proportion of each cell type in the basis matrix, which will be estimable from the
model coefficients when fit error is minimized. For human samples, the immunoStates matrix
(Valliana et al) basis matrix was selected. This matrix has been explicitly designed to be
transferrable across technology platforms, and has been successfully applied previously to
deconvolute human whole-blood gene expression in an LTBI cohort21. For mouse samples, the
ImmuCC basis matrix was used22.
Cell deconvolution was performed by fitting linear models (R: lm() function) to each Z-score
normalized sample expression, as a function of the Z-score normalized basis matrix. Cell proportions
were then directly estimated as the linear model coefficients, scaled to sum to 1. Mouse data are
deposited in GEO (GSE126355); human data were obtained from24.

Statistical Analysis
Significance was determined using an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test unless otherwise
specified.

Data Availability
Raw and processed RNA-seq and ATAC-seq data are deposited in GEO (GSE126355) (Figure 1A,
Figure 4, Supplemental Figure 2, Supplemental Figure 10). Data for Figure 1E and Supplemental
Figure 2 was obtained from GEO (GSE19491, GSE19444, GSE19443, GSE19442, GSE19439,
GSE19435).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the staff from Center for Infectious Disease Research for animal care; and Dr. Piper
Treuting and Brian Johnson, University of Washington Immunohistochemistry core, for histological
services. We acknowledge the NIH Tetramer Core Facility (Contract HHSN272201300006C) for
provision of tetramers. We thank Martina Sanlorenzo and Igor Vujic for help with the melanoma
model. Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (Grant numbers U19AI135976, U19AI100627, and R01AI032972). JN was
supported by Swiss National Foundation (SNF) grant #P300PB_164742.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure legends

Figure 1: LTBI mice have an altered inflammatory milieu. A: Mice were inoculated intradermally
in the ear and bacterial burden in the superficial cervical lymph nodes measured at the indicated
time points by CFU assay. (1 representative experiment of 3 experiments, n = 3-6 mice/timepoint).
B: LTBI was established as described in (A) and the relative proportions of CD3+CD8+TB10.4tetramer-positive cells in the vasculature (CD45.2+) and parenchyma (CD45.2-) determined 42 days
after inoculation by flow cytometry. Data are representative of 2 experiments with n = 4-5
mice/experiment. Statistical significance was determined by Student’s t-test. Error bars represent the
mean with SD. C: LTBI was established as in (A) and whole-blood transcriptomes measured by
RNA-seq in LTBI and control mice. The relative proportions of circulating M0, M1, and M2
macrophage type cells at day 42 following inoculation were determined by deconvolution analysis
(See Methods) (4 mice/condition). Differences in proportions between control and LTBI mice with
FDR < 0.05 are marked with “*”. D: LTBI was established as in (A) and expression of MHCII on Ly6c
negative NK1.1-TCR-CD11c-Ly6G-CD11b+ monocytes in LTBI and control mice (5 mice/group),
representative result of 2 independent experiments. E: Relative proportions of circulating M0, M1,
and M2 macrophage type cells inferred by deconvolution analysis of whole-blood RNA-seq
measurements on uninfected humans (n=117) or humans with LTBI (n=69). Error bars represent the
SD. Significance was determined by t-Test with the Benjamini and Hochberg correction for multiple
testing * FDR < 0.05, ** FDR < 0.001.

Figure 2: Latent TB infection provides sustained protection against aerosol challenge and
heterologous challenges
A: 8 weeks after the establishment of LTBI, latent and control mice were challenged with 50-100
CFU of Kanamycin-resistant H37Rv via aerosol. Bacterial burdens in the lungs and spleen were
measured by CFU at days 14, 42 and 100 following aerosol infection using plates containing
Kanamycin. Plot shows representative data from one of two independent experiments (n = 4-5
mice/group/time-point). Significance was assessed by Student’s t-Test. Error bars represent the
mean with SD; **p < 0.01, **** p < 0.0001.
B: Naïve and LTBI mice (20/group) were infected with an average of 1 CFU of Mtb H37Rv via
aerosol. Bacterial burdens on the left and right lobes of the lung were measured by CFU.
Representative data from one of two independent experiments are presented. Uninfected mice were
omitted in this graph. Statistical significance was determined using the Mann-Whitney test. Error
bars represent the mean with SD. * p < 0.05, *** p < 0.001. C: Fractions of naïve and LTBI mice with
detectable bacteria in one or two lobes of the lung in the experiment described in B. D: LTBI and
control mice were challenged i.v. with 105 CFU of Listeria monocytogenes and bacterial burden in

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the spleen measured 48 hours following infection by CFU. Representative data from one of two
independent experiments with 4-5 mice/condition. E: LTBI and control mice were challenged i.v. with
1x106 B16-F10 melanoma cells. Disease burden was quantified by counting the number of
metastases (right panel: black spots) visible in the lung 10 days following challenge. Representative
data of three replicate experiments with 4-5 mice/condition/time point. Significance was assessed by
Student’s t-Test. Error bars represent the mean with SD; *p < 0.05.

Figure 3: The protective phenotype in latent TB is associated with elevated tissue
inflammation and an early immune response
A: Tissues were isolated from mice at 10 or 42 days following the establishment of LTBI or from
naïve mice. Absolute levels of cytokines and chemokines significantly altered by LTBI during at least
one time point in the lung or spleen (of 39 assayed) are plotted. Cytokine/chemokine amounts were
normalized to total protein (n = 5 mice/time-point). A multiple t-test approach with FDR based
correction was used to test for significance (p < 0.05). B: CD11b+ cells isolated from the lungs of
LTBI or control mice were stimulated for 6 hours with the indicated TLR agonists and secreted TNFα measured by ELISA (LPS 10 ng/mL, PAM3 300 ng/mL, R848 100 ng/mL). Representative data
from 3 independent experiments with cells from 3-5 mice pooled per timepoint. Error bars represent
the mean with SD. C: H&E stained lung sections from control and LTBI mice at the indicated timepoints following aerosol challenge. Regions of infiltration by immune cells (filled arrow heads) and
intrapulmonary hemorrhages (open arrow heads) are indicated. The corresponding quantitative
pathology assessments are presented in Table S2. Representative images from 5 mice/group/timepoint

are

displayed

at

2x.

D:

Representative

cytometry

plot

showing

i.v.

labeled,

CD11b+CD11c+CD64+Siglec-F- interstitial macrophages (IM) being recruited to the parenchyma.
Latent mice show significantly higher absolute and relative numbers of IM at day 14 as compared to
controls (n = 5, Error bars represent the mean with SD). Representative experiment from two
independent experiments. E: Representative cytometry plot showing i.v. labeled CD3+CD8+TB10.4+
cells being recruited into the parenchyma. t-Tests was used for testing of significance. Error bars
represent the mean with SD.* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.001. F: Expression of MHCII on alveolar
macrophages (CD11bintCD11c+CD64+Siglec-F+) from control and LTBI mice isolated from the lung
by BAL at 10 days following aerosol challenge. Data are representative of two independent
experiments with 5 mice/condition. G: MHCII expression on infected splenic macrophages 2 hours
after i.v. challenge with GFP-expressing Listeria monocytogenes. Representative of two independent
experiments with 4-5 mice/condition. H: Representative H&E staining of a section from LTBI mice
challenged with melanoma showing histiocytic accumulation (arrow heads).

Figure 4: Alveolar macrophages are rewired by LTBI

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A: Flow cytometry analysis of alveolar macrophages from control and LTBI mice. (Left panel) Live,
CD11bintCD11c+CD64+Siglec-F+ were gated on Cd11b and Siglec F to define AMs. (Right panels)
Expression of the indicated markers on AMs quantified by MFI. Significance was determined by
Student’s t-Test; * p < 0.05. Error bars represent the mean and SEM. (Data pooled from 4
independent experiments with 3-5 mice/experiment). B: AMs from LTBI mice and controls were
isolated by FACS and the transcriptome assessed by RNA sequencing. Red dots represent
transcripts that were significantly differentially expressed between conditions (|log2(fold-change)| > 1
and FDR < 0.05). Each point represents the average of 3 biological replicates. C: Infected AMs from
LTBI mice and controls were isolated by FACS 24 hours after aerosol challenge with ~3000 CFU
mEmerald-expressing Mtb. Red dots represent transcripts that were significantly differentially
expressed between conditions (log2(fold-change) > 1 and FDR < 0.05). Each dot represents the
average of two biological replicates, each of which consists of BAL pooled from 10 mice. D: (left
panel) Transcripts differentially regulated (as defined in C) in AMs from naïve mice compared to AMs
from LTBI mice. Transcripts responding to infection are color-coded by whether they are differentially
expressed in: blue = LTBI only, black = control only, red = both conditions. (right panel) VENN
diagram showing the number of differentially expressed transcripts in each group. E: Enrichment
scores for the 10 most enriched pathways defined by GSEA of transcripts altered by Mtb infection at
24 hours in AMs from control (right panel) and LTBI (left panel) mice are shown. F: Heatmap
showing the fold changes of unique, significantly enriched leading edge genes from the GSEA. Key
transcripts are highlighted on the right. G: Control and LTBI mice were infected with ~3000 CFU of
mEmerald-expressing Mtb and the distribution of infected cell types determined by flow cytometry at
10 days following challenge. (left panel) Flow cytometry plot showing mEmerald infected cells (red)
overlaid on plots gated on AM and PMNs. Quantification of (middle panel) the fraction of Mtb in
various cell types and (right panel) the fraction of AMs infected. Representative data for one of three
replicate experiments (n=4-5 mice/condition/experiment) are shown. Significance was determined by
Student’s t-Test; * p < 0.05. Error bars represent the mean and SD. H: AMs from LTBI mice and
controls were harvested by bronchioalveolar lavage and infected with H37Rv ex vivo at an MOI of 1
in triplicates. Bacterial burden was measured by CFU 5 days following infection. One out of two
representative experiments, n = 4-5 mice/condition/time point. t-Tests was used for testing of
significance. * p < 0.05. Error bars represent the mean with SD.
Figure 5: Treatment of latent infection reduces the protective effect of LTBI. A: Bacterial load in
lungs and spleen 6 weeks after aerosol challenge with 100 CFU Mtb H37Rv for the indicated
conditions. “LTBI, treated” and “Control” mice received INH/RIF for 6 weeks prior to aerosol
challenge. Representative data from one of two independent experiments with 4-5 mice/condition. B:
Representative flow cytometry plot showing recruitment of i.v. labeled CD3+CD8+TB10.4+ cells to the
parenchyma in control mice, LTBI mice, and treated LTBI mice 10 days after aerosol challenge.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental figure legends
Supplementary Figure 1: Summary of infected tissues in the LTBI model
Mice were inoculated intradermally in the ear and bacterial burden in the superficial cervical lymph
nodes measured 10 days, 42 days, and 1 year by CFU assay. Plots depict the fraction of mice with
detectable CFUs of Mtb in spleen across all timepoints (4-5 mice/timepoint).

Supplementary Figure 2: Deconvolution analysis of whole-blood RNA-seq measurements in
mice and humans
Left panel: Deconvolution analysis of whole-blood RNA-seq measurements to estimate changes in
the proportions of circulating immune cell subsets 42 days following establishment of LTBI. (See
Methods) (4 mice/condition) Right panel: Deconvolution analysis of whole-blood RNA-seq
measurements on 69 individuals with LTBI and 117 uninfected individuals. Error bars represent the
SD. Significance was determined by t-Test with the Benjamini and Hochberg correction for multiple
testing (FDR). * FDR < 0.05.

Supplementary Figure 3: Proportions of M1 and M2 macrophages in humans
Proportions of M1 and M2 macrophages in uninfected individuals (n=117, grey) and individuals with
LTBI (n=69, blue) as determined by deconvolution analysis of whole blood RNA-seq measurements.

Supplementary Figure 4: Protective effect of LTBI assessed at 6 weeks following aerosol
challenge.
LTBI was established as described in the main text and mice challenged with 100-200 CFU of Mtb
H37Rv via aerosol after 10-14 days (“Early”, 2 replicates) or after 8-10 weeks (“Late”, 4 replicates).
Bacterial burden in the lung was measured by CFU assay. LTBI mice had on average 18.4-fold (CI:
10.6-26.3) fewer bacteria in the lung as compared to controls. All experiments were significant with p
< 0.05. t-Tests was used for testing significance. Error bars represent SEM.

Supplementary Figure 5: Protective efficacy of BCG Pasteur
Mice were immunized intradermally with 1x106 CFU BCG Pasteur and challenged with 100 CFU Mtb
H37Rv after 2 months. Bacterial burden in the lung was measured by CFU assay at days 10, 42,
and 100 following aerosol challenge (n = 4-5 mice/group/time-point).

Supplementary Figure 6: Correlation between cytokines levels in lungs and spleens of LTBI
mice

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

LTBI was established as described in the main text and the abundances of selected cytokines and
chemokines in the lungs and spleen measured by multiplexed immunoassay at day 42 following
inoculation. Plot depicts the levels of analytes detected in both tissues. Each point represents the
average of 5 biological replicates.

Supplementary Figure 7: Proportions of immune cells in the lungs of naive and LTBI mice.
LTBI was established as described in the main text. At 8 weeks the absolute number of CD45+ cells
in whole-lung homogenates was measured by flow cytometry using counting beads (left panel). The
relative proportions of various immune cell populations were measured by flow cytometry (right
panel). Representative data are shown for 1 of 2 independent experiments with 4-5 mice/condition. tTests was used for testing significance. Error bars represent SD.

Supplementary Figure 8: Distribution of Mtb infection across pulmonary immune cells.
Flow panels show mEmerald+ MTB infected AMs gated on CD11c+CD64+SiglecF+CD45+CD11bint
cells 24h after high dose infection. LTBI and control mice were infected with ~2000-4000 CFU of
mEmerald-expressing Mtb via aerosol and infected cell types in BAL fluid were assessed at 24 hours
by flow cytometry. Error bars represent SD.

Supplementary Figure 9: Bacterial burden in the lung following high-dose aerosol challenge.
Control and LTBI mice were infected with ~2000-4000 CFU of Mtb and bacterial burden in the lung
measured by CFU assay 10 days following challenge. Representative data from 1 of 2 independent
experiments with 4-5 mice/condition. Significance was assessed by Student’s t-Test. Error bars
represent the mean with SD; * p < 0.05.

Supplementary Figure 10: ATAC-seq on AM from naïve/latent mice at baseline.
Alveolar macrophages from LTBI and control mice (n=3/condition) were isolated from BAL fluid by
FACS and ATACseq was performed following a published protocol52. Plot depicts FDR vs. difference
in chromatin accessibility between control and LTBI for 45,458 genomic regions (See Methods). Red
dots repreent promotor regions (See Methods).

Supplementary Figure 11: T cells from treated LTBI mice fail to expand upon infection.
The fraction of CD3+CD8+TB10.4+ T cells in whole lung homogenates prior to challenge and at 10
days following challenge was determined by flow cytometry. Significance was assessed by Student’s
t-Test. Error bars represent the mean with SD; * p < 0.05.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Contributions
JN, AD, EG, KU and AA designed the experiments. JN, AJ, DM, GSO, AR, CP, JD did the animal
work. AD, EG and FD analyzed the RNAseq data and performed the computational analysis. SS
performed the ATAQseq experiment. JN, GSO, AD and EG wrote the manuscript. All authors
reviewed and/or provided feedback on the manuscript.

Conflict of interest
All authors: none reported.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References

1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Davenne, T. & McShane, H. Why don’t we have an effective tuberculosis vaccine yet? Expert
Review of Vaccines 15, 1009–1013 (2016).
Houben, R. M. G. J. & Dodd, P. J. The Global Burden of Latent Tuberculosis Infection: A Reestimation Using Mathematical Modelling. PLoS Med. 13, e1002152–13 (2016).
Andrews, J. R. et al. Risk of Progression to Active Tuberculosis Following Reinfection With
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Clinical Infectious Diseases 54, 784–791 (2012).
Esmail, H., Barry, C. E., Young, D. B. & Wilkinson, R. J. The ongoing challenge of latent
tuberculosis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 369,
20130437–20130437 (2014).
Kyu, H. H. et al. Global, regional, and national burden of tuberculosis, 1990–2016: results
from the Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors 2016 Study. Lancet Infect Dis
18, 1329–1349 (2018).
Esmail, H., Barry, C. E. & Wilkinson, R. J. Understanding latent tuberculosis: the key to
improved diagnostic and novel treatment strategies. Drug Discov. Today 17, 514–521 (2012).
Barry, C. E. et al. The spectrum of latent tuberculosis: rethinking the biology and intervention
strategies. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 7, 845–855 (2009).
Wang, C. Y. An Experimental Study of latent tuberculosis. Lancet 188, 417–419 (1916).
Lillebaek, T. et al. Molecular Evidence of Endogenous Reactivation of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis after 33 Years of Latent Infection. J. Infect. Dis. 185, 401–404 (2002).
Neyrolles, O. et al. Is Adipose Tissue a Place for Mycobacterium tuberculosis Persistence?
PLoS ONE 1, e43 (2006).
Hernández-Pando, R. et al. Persistence of DNA from Mycobacterium tuberculosis in
superficially normal lung tissue during latent infection. Lancet 356, 2133–2138 (2000).
Behr, M. A. & Waters, W. R. Is tuberculosis a lymphatic disease with a pulmonary portal?
Lancet Infect Dis 14, 250–255 (2014).
Ganchua, S. K. C. et al. Lymph nodes are sites of prolonged bacterial persistence during
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in macaques. PLoS Pathog. 14, e1007337 (2018).
Osler, S. W. The Principles and practice of medicine. (1903).
Blaser, N. et al. Tuberculosis in Cape Town: An age-structured transmission model.
Epidemics 14, 54–61 (2016).
Saljoughian, N., Taheri, T. & Rafati, S. Live Vaccination Tactics: Possible Approaches for
Controlling Visceral Leishmaniasis. Frontiers in Immunology 5, 345–11 (2014).
Doolan, D. L., Dobano, C. & Baird, J. K. Acquired Immunity to Malaria. Clin. Microbiol. Rev.
22, 13–36 (2009).
Brown, S. P. & Grenfell, B. T. An unlikely partnership: parasites, concomitant immunity and
host defence. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 268,
2543–2549 (2001).
Kupz, A., Zedler, U., Stäber, M. & Kaufmann, S. H. E. A Mouse Model of Latent Tuberculosis
Infection to Study Intervention Strategies to Prevent Reactivation. PLoS ONE 11, e0158849
(2016).
Tornack, J. et al. Human and Mouse Hematopoietic Stem Cells Are a Depot for Dormant
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. PLoS ONE 12, e0169119–18 (2017).
Chowdhury, R. R. et al. A multi-cohort study of the immune factors associated with M.
tuberculosis infection outcomes. Nature 560, 1–23 (2018).
Chen, Z. et al. Inference of immune cell composition on the expression profiles of mouse
tissue. Scientific Reports 7, 40508 (2017).
Haldar, M. & Murphy, K. M. Origin, development, and homeostasis of tissue-resident
macrophages. Immunological Reviews 262, 25–35 (2014).
Berry, M. P. R. et al. An interferon-inducible neutrophil-driven blood transcriptional signature
in human tuberculosis. Nature 466, 973–977 (2010).

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

33.
34.
35.
36.

37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.

Gern, B., Plumlee, C., Gerner, M. & Urdahl, K. Investigating Immune Correlates of Protection
to Tuberculosis Using an Ultra-Low Dose Infection in a Mouse Model. Open Forum Infectious
Diseases 4, S47–S48 (2017).
Rothchild, A. C. et al. Alveolar macrophages up-regulate a non-classical innate response to
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in vivo. bioRxiv 1–49 (2019). doi:10.1101/520791
Subramanian, A. et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach for
interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. PNAS 102, 15545–15550 (2005).
Netea, M. G. Training innate immunity: the changing concept of immunological memory in
innate host defence. Eur. J. Clin. Invest. 43, 881–884 (2013).
Orme, I. M. Characteristics and specificity of acquired immunologic memory to
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. J. Immunol. 1–6 (2001).
Flynn, J. L. An essential role for interferon gamma in resistance to Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection. Journal of Experimental Medicine 178, 2249–2254 (1993).
Cooper, A. M. et al. Disseminated Tuberculosis in Interferon-g Gene-disrupted Mice. Journal
of Experimental Medicine 178, 2243–2247 (1993).
Cooper, A. M., Magram, J., Ferrante, J. & Orme, I. M. Interleukin 12 (IL-12) is crucial to the
development of protective immunity in mice intravenously infected with mycobacterium
tuberculosis. Journal of Experimental Medicine 186, 39–45 (1997).
Aagaard, C. et al. A multistage tuberculosis vaccine that confers efficient protection before
and after exposure. Nat. Med. 17, 189–194 (2011).
Kaufmann, E. et al. BCG Educates Hematopoietic Stem Cells to Generate Protective Innate
Immunity against Tuberculosis. Cell 172, 176–182.e19 (2018).
Guilliams, M. et al. Alveolar macrophages develop from fetal monocytes that differentiate into
long-lived cells in the first week of life via GM-CSF. J Exp Med 210, 1977–1992 (2013).
Huang, L., Nazarova, E. V., Tan, S., Liu, Y. & Russell, D. G. Growth of Mycobacterium
tuberculosisin vivo segregates with host macrophage metabolism and ontogeny. J Exp Med
215, 1135–1152 (2018).
Mackaness, G. B. The influence of immunologically committed lymphoid cells on macrophage
activity in vivo. Journal of Experimental Medicine 129, 973–992 (1969).
Barton, E. S. et al. Herpesvirus latency confers symbiotic protection from bacterial infection.
Nature 447, 326–329 (2007).
Beura, L. K. et al. Normalizing the environment recapitulates adult human immune traits in
laboratory mice. Nature 532, 512–516 (2016).
Higgins, J. P. T. et al. Association of BCG, DTP, and measles containing vaccines with
childhood mortality: systematic review. BMJ i5170–13 (2016). doi:10.1136/bmj.i5170
Krone, B., Kölmel, K. F., Henz, B. M. & Grange, J. M. Protection against melanoma by
vaccination with Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) and/or vaccinia: an epidemiology-based
hypothesis on the nature of a melanoma risk factor and its immunological control. European
Journal of Cancer 41, 104–117 (2005).
Faries, M. B. Intralesional Immunotherapy for Metastatic Melanoma: The Oldest and Newest
Treatment in Oncology. Crit Rev Oncog 21, 65–73 (2016).
Georgoudaki, A.-M. et al. Reprogramming Tumor-Associated Macrophages by Antibody
Targeting Inhibits Cancer Progression and Metastasis. CellReports 15, 2000–2011 (2016).
Churchyard, G. J. et al. A Trial of Mass Isoniazid Preventive Therapy for Tuberculosis
Control. N. Engl. J. Med. 370, 301–310 (2014).
Verver, S. et al. Rate of reinfection tuberculosis after successful treatment is higher than rate
of new tuberculosis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 171, 1430–1435 (2005).
Curtis, C. Restoration of malaria control in the madagascar highlands by DDT spraying. Am.
J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 1–1 (2003).
Overwijk, W. W. & Restifo, N. P. B16 as a Mouse Model for Human Melanoma. 185, 453–33
(John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2001).

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

48.

49.
50.

51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

Rothchild, A. C. et al. MiR-155–regulated molecular network orchestrates cell fate in the
innate and adaptive immune response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis. PNAS 113, E6172–
E6181 (2016).
Rose, S., Misharin, A. & Perlman, H. A novel Ly6C/Ly6G-based strategy to analyze the
mouse splenic myeloid compartment. 81A, 343–350 (2011).
Misharin, A. V., Morales-Nebreda, L., Mutlu, G. M., Budinger, G. R. S. & Perlman, H. Flow
Cytometric Analysis of Macrophages and Dendritic Cell Subsets in the Mouse Lung.
American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology 49, 503–510 (2013).
Moguche, A. O. et al. ICOS and Bcl6-dependent pathways maintain a CD4 T cell population
with memory-like properties during tuberculosis. J Exp Med 212, 715–728 (2015).
Chen, X. et al. ATAC-see reveals the accessible genome by transposase-mediated imaging
and sequencing. Nat. Methods 13, 1013–1020 (2016).
Wu, T. D. & Watanabe, C. K. GMAP: a genomic mapping and alignment program for mRNA
and EST sequences. Bioinformatics 21, 1859–1875 (2005).
Wu, T. D. & Nacu, S. Fast and SNP-tolerant detection of complex variants and splicing in
short reads. Bioinformatics 26, 873–881 (2010).
Buenrostro, J. D., Wu, B., Chang, H. Y. & Greenleaf, W. J. ATAC-seq: A Method for Assaying
Chromatin Accessibility Genome-Wide. 11, 21.29.1–21.29.9 (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2001).
Zhang, Y. et al. Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome Biology 1–9 (2015).
doi:10.1186/gb-2008-9-9-r137)
Consortium, T. E. P. et al. An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human
genome. Nature 488, 57–74 (2012).
Stark, R. & Brown, G. DiffBind: Differential binding analysis of ChIP- Seq peak data. 1–34
(2018).
Ross-Innes, C. S. et al. Differential oestrogen receptor binding is associated with clinical
outcome in breast cancer. Nature 481, 389–393 (2012).
McCarthy, D. J., Chen, Y. & Smyth, G. K. Differential expression analysis of multifactor RNASeq experiments with respect to biological variation. Nucl. Acids Res. 40, 4288–4297 (2012).
Vallania, F. et al. Leveraging heterogeneity across multiple datasets increases cell-mixture
deconvolution accuracy and reduces biological and technical biases. Nat Commun 9, S279
(2018).

24

CD45.2 i.v. PE

104

1000
100

200

300

400

10

102
0

102
0

0 10

5

0 10

2

3

4

10
10
<Pacific Blue-A>: TB104

10

5

1
0

gated on
NK1.1-TCR-CD11cLy6G-CD11b+
5

10

4

10

3

80

60

*
SSC-A

40

M2

10

2

0

0

0.04

0.06

Ly6c APC

0.08

Estimated proportion

LTBI
Healthy

M0
M1

**

M2

*
0.02

0.03

Estimated Proportion

3

10
10
<APC-A>: Ly6c

4

10

5

20

0
0 102

103

MHC-II FITC

104

105

60

*

Control
LTBI

40
20
0

C
D
80

10

80
100

II

M1

0.01

10

M
H
C

LTBI
control

0.00

4

2

on

D
M0

E

3

10
10
<Pacific Blue-A>: TB104

3

C

C

0.02

2

TB10.4 pacific blue

Day

0.00

3

ol

100

3

vasculature
parenchyma

4

tr

0

104

% of Ly6c low Monocytes

10

10

*

5

B

10000

10

LT

10

LTBI
5

I

naive
5

% of total T cells

B

100000

Counts

A

CFU, Lymphnode

A

L

Fig 1.

Fig. 2

D

Day 100

Control
Total = 10

2 lobes
1 lobe

LTBI

108
107
106

10

l

LT

B

I

l
ro

ht

rig

I,

B

LT

C

on

tr

ol

,r

ig

ft

ht

t
ef

le

,l

I,

ol

B

tr
on
C

LT

ht
ig

,r

ol

Control

*

100

1

104

nt

Total = 10

CFU (log)
C

109

E

B

on
C

**

1010

105
Total = 11

tr

100

LT

80

Day

2 lobes
1 lobe

Total = 12

60

ht

t

40

ro

Day 42

20

ft

0

Day

C

10
ef

100

10
le

80

nt

60

co

40

# of lung metastases

20

co

0

1000
100

I,

101

10000

100

,l

101

1000

ol

102

*

100000

10000

tr

102

*

1000000

rig

104
103

103

*

100000

I,

**

Day 100
***

on

104

****

I

105

105

B

**

1000000

B

****

Control
LTBI

LT

**

CFU

CFU

106

106

Day 42

CFU (log)

107

B

Spleen

LT

Lung

CFU, Listeria

A

LTBI

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Siglec F pacific blue

Fig. 4
A
10

***

10000

*

10000

5

3

102

CD64, MFI

10

MHC II, MFI

4
10
bioRxiv
preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019.
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
1000
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1000

0

4
2

0

Tnfaip2
−4

2

472

60 190

0

FDR < 0.05
both groups
LTBI only
Control only

−2
−4
−4

−2

0

2

4

CONTROL

Stat1
Stat3

LTBI

FDR < 0.05
FDR < 0.01

0

1

2

3 -2

-1

0

1

2

3

3

4

10

5

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

102

10

4

10

5

tr

3

on

10

C

2

CD11b
PerCPCy5.5
0 10

50

*

2500000

*

2000000

Control
LTBI

1500000
1000000
500000
0

0

ol

0

Control
LTBI

PM
ot
N
he
rc
el
ls

10

LTBI

10

*

A
M

4

3

I

5

10

10

B

10

2

2.0

% of intracellular MTB
different cell types

0 10

100

LT

2

0

% of AM infected

10

*

CFU

2.5

104

IL6

H

Normalized Enrichment Score

Control
3

Jak2

CONTROL

5

10

Jak1

4

LTBI

-2 -1

10

0

LTBI:log2(infected/uninfected)

4

Interferon Alpha Resp.
Interferon Gamma Resp.
Inflammatory Resp.
Complement
IL6 / JAK /STAT3 Sig.
Xenobiotic Metabolism
Kras Signaling Up
Reactive Oxygen Species
Allograft Rejection
Heme Metabolism
Angiogenesis
TNFa Signaling via NFkB

Siglec F pacific blue

G

TR
O
L
LT
B
I

2

Control: log2(infected/uninfected)

E

C

4

0

4

log2(LTBI/control)
LTBI: log2(infected/uninfected)

D

−4

6

O
N

6

F

C

-log10(FDR)

-log10(FDR)

C

B

ol
tr
on
C

B

I

10

100

LT

5

ol

10

tr

4

on

10

I

3

B

10

LT

0

CD11b PerCP Cy5.5

0

100

0 1 2 3 4 5

Day

Fig. 5

A

Lung

Spleen

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/561126; this version posted February 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

****

*

106

*

CFU

CFU

107

106

ns

105

104

105

d

I

te
tr

ea

LT

on
C

ea

I,

tr

B

I,

LT

B
LT

B

B

tr

d
te

B
LT

C

on

tr

I

ol

ol

103

Control

LTBI

LTBI, treated

10

5

10

5

104

10

4

10

4

103

10

3

103

102
0

102
0

102
0

CD45.2 i.v. PE

105

0 10

2

10

3

10

4

5

5
4
3
2
1

0 102

103

104

105

*

0.3
0.2

Control

0.1

LTBI
LTBI, treated
Pa
re
nc
hy
m
a

0.0

Va
sc
ul
at
ur
e

% of MTB specific CD8+ T cells

TB10.4 pacific blue

10

0 102

103

104

105

