bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CNS Glycosylphosphatidylinositol Deficiency Results in Delayed White Matter Development,
Ataxia, and Premature Death in a Novel Mouse Model
1,2

1,2,3,4,5

Marshall Lukacs , Rolf W. Stottmann
1
2

Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children’s Medical Center, Cincinnati, 45229, United States

Medical Scientist Training Program, Cincinnati Children’s Medical Center, Cincinnati, 45229, United
States
3

Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Medical Center, Cincinnati, 45229, United
States

4
5

Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, 45229, United States
Shriner’s Hospital for Children - Cincinnati, 45229, Cincinnati, OH

Corresponding author:
Rolf.stottmann@cchmc.org
Telephone: 513-636-7136
Fax: 513-636-4373

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
The Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor is a

post-translational modification added to

approximately 150 different proteins to facilitate proper membrane anchoring and trafficking to lipid rafts.
Biosynthesis and remodeling of the GPI anchor requires the activity of over twenty distinct genes. Defects
in the biosynthesis of GPI anchors in humans leads to Inherited Glycosylphosphatidylinositol Deficiency
(IGD). IGD patients display a wide range of phenotypes though the central nervous system (CNS)
appears to be the most commonly affected tissue. A full understanding of the etiology of these
phenotypes has been hampered by the lack of animal models due to embryonic lethality of GPI
biosynthesis gene null mutants. Here we model IGD by genetically ablating GPI production in the CNS
with a conditional mouse allele of phosphatidylinositol glycan anchor biosynthesis, class A (Piga) and
Nestin-Cre. We find that the mutants do not have structural brain defects but do not survive past weaning.
The mutants show progressive decline with severe ataxia consistent with defects in cerebellar
development. We show the mutants have reduced myelination and defective Purkinje cell development.
Surprisingly we found Piga was expressed in a fairly restricted pattern in the early postnatal brain
consistent with the defects we observed in our model. Thus, we have generated a novel mouse model of
the neurological defects of IGD which demonstrates a critical role for GPI biosynthesis in cerebellar and
white matter development.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Inherited Glycosylphosphatidylinositol Deficiency (IGD) is defined by a deficiency of the cell surface
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor [1, 2]. The GPI anchor is a glycolipid added post-translationally
to nearly 150 proteins and is required for membrane anchoring and lipid raft trafficking of these proteins
[1, 3]. Over twenty genes are required for the biosynthesis and remodeling of the GPI anchor in the
endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. IGD patients display a wide array of phenotypes including
neural, craniofacial, cardiac, renal, hepatic, ophthalmologic, skeletal, dental, dermatologic, and
sensorineural defects [1, 2, 4]. This wide array of phenotypes highlights the broad requirement for GPI
biosynthesis and remodeling in the development of many organ systems.
A recent review of IGD patients found that the most commonly affected organ system, regardless of the
mutated gene in the GPI biosynthesis pathway, is the central nervous system (CNS) [2]. These CNS
phenotypes include structural CNS deficits including microcephaly, hypoplastic corpus callosum,
hypoplastic cerebellum, white matter immaturity, and cortical atrophy. Clinical findings related to these
structural deficits include epilepsy, developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, hyperreflexia,
chorea, ataxia, and behavioral abnormalities with variable penetrance [2, 5-7]. Electroencephalogram
imaging reveals abnormal electrical activity including hypsarrhythmia indicative of abnormal brain
development in nearly all patients [2, 8, 9]. Often the epilepsy is intractable and severely impairs quality of
life. Some reports have shown Vitamin B6 is beneficial in treating IGD-related epilepsy. It has been
hypothesized the benefit of Vitamin B6 is related to the defects in GPI-anchored tissue nonspecific
alkaline phosphatase which dephosphorylates B6 thereby allowing

it to pass the membrane and

participate in in γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) synthesis [10, 11]. However, it is unclear if all patients
respond to Vitamin B6 supplementation and no rigorous study has tested this hypothesis, at least in part
due to a relative lack of mouse models of IGD. Little is known about the requirement for GPI biosynthesis
in the CNS or the mechanisms that lead to these clinical phenotypes. Therapy is currently limited to
symptomatic treatment and most patients will die before age 5 by cardiac arrest, aspiration pneumonia, or
central respiratory failure [12]. Thus, there is a clear need to understand the pathophysiology that results
from GPI deficiency in the CNS.
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The initiation of GPI biosynthesis requires the Phosphatidylinositol Glycan Anchor Biosynthesis Class A
(PIGA) protein, a component of the phosphatidylinositol N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase complex. This
complex

generates

N-acetylglucosamine-phosphatidylinositol

(GlcNac-PI)

by

transferring

N-

acetylglucosamine (GlcNac) from UDP-GlcNac to phosphatidylinositol (PI). GlcNac-PI is the first
precursor in the biosynthesis of the GPI anchor and deletion of Piga completely abolishes GPI
biosynthesis [1, 3]. Patients with germline mutations in PIGA develop a form of IGD termed Multiple
Congenital Anomalies-Hypotonia-Seizures Syndrome 2 (MCAHS2: OMIM 300868) [13]. A recent review
of 10 MCAHS2 patients found all had seizures, abnormal EEG findings, developmental delay and
intellectual disability. 8/10 patients had hypotonia and 5/10 had hyperreflexia, cerebellar hypoplasia, and
cortical atrophy [12]. 7/10 patients developed white matter defects including thin corpus callosum and
white matter immaturity. Thus, PIGA deficiency serves as a representative model to study the broad
requirement for GPI biosynthesis in CNS development.
Other groups have taken a genetic approach to ablate GPI biosynthesis in specific mouse tissues by
combining a conditional allele of Piga with flanking loxP sites (Pigaflox) with tissue specific Cre
recombinase transgenics. Recently, we used this conditional allele to delete Piga in the developing
mouse neural crest cells with Wnt1-Cre. This deletion resulted in cleft lip and cleft palate as well as
hypoplasia of the craniofacial skeleton highlighting a critical role for GPI biosynthesis in neural crest cell
survival [14]. Others have used this approach to reveal an important role for GPI biosynthesis in skin,
limb, blood and craniofacial development [15-17]. However, germline knockout of Piga using CMV-Cre
resulted in embryonic lethality with neural tube defect, edema, and cleft lip/palate precluding the analysis
of any postnatal neurological phenotype [18]. To overcome this, we sought to conditionally ablate GPI
biosynthesis after the closure of the neural tube, at embryonic day E9.5 in mouse. To completely abolish
CNS GPI biosynthesis at this stage, we chose to use Nestin-Cre to drive deletion of Piga broadly in the
central and peripheral nervous system starting at E11.5 [19]. As Piga resides on the X-chromosome, we
flox/Y

generated Piga

, Nes-Cre+ hemizygous conditional knockout males (hemizygous cKO) with complete

deletion of Piga in the Nestin lineage and Pigaflox/WT, Nes-Cre mosaic cKO females (mosaic cKO)
containing one conditional allele of Piga and one wild-type Piga allele. Due to random X inactivation,
these females develop a mosaic cKO of Piga in the Nestin lineage. Both hemizygous cKO and mosaic
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cKO animals survived to postnatal stages and developed some of the CNS phenotypes observed in IGD
patients including white matter immaturity, gait imbalance, motor incoordination, and early death. Our
conditional knockout approach allowed us to investigate the requirement for GPI biosynthesis for the first
time in vivo in the mammalian CNS. This model may also be used to test novel IGD therapeutic
interventions in the future.
Results
Piga is expressed broadly in the CNS with enrichment in the corpus callosum and Purkinje cells.
We initially sought to determine the expression of Piga in the embryonic and postnatal mouse brain.
Published and publicly available single cell RNA sequencing data sets are now a robust tool to query
gene expression. Zhang and colleagues performed one such experiment in the P7 mouse cortex and
found Piga is broadly expressed in a variety of neural cell types, but with a clear enrichment in astrocytes
and newly formed and myelinating oligodendrocytes [20] (Fig. 1A). We further explored Piga expression
with immunofluorescence in the postnatal CNS with a commercially available polyclonal αPIGA antibody.
We found PIGA protein is enriched in the corpus callosum and cortical periventricular areas at P0 (Fig. 1
B,C). At P10, higher expression was maintained in the periventricular areas and PIGA expression was
evident in the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum at this stage (Fig. 1D,E). Further examination revealed
clear immunoreactivity in both the cytoplasm and dendrites of the Purkinje cell (Fig. 1E). We concluded
from these data that PIGA shows increased expression at P0 in developing white matter areas such as
the corpus callosum, consistent with the P7 RNA-Seq data with highest expression in myelinating
oligodendrocytes. Once the mature morphology of the cerebellum is established at P10, PIGA is strongly
expressed in the Purkinje cells, the sole output of all motor coordination in the cerebellar cortex.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1. Piga expression in the CNS. Data in A is replotted directly from [20] (brainrnaseq.org). P0
PIGA (Green) expression in the corpus callosum (CC) and periventricular areas (B,C). P10 PIGA
expression in the cerebellar Purkinje cells D,E). PIGA is shown as green NeuN as a neuronal marker is
in red, DAPI counterstain is blue. Fb; forebrain, Mb; Midbrain, BA1;Branchial Arch 1, MNP; Medial Nasal
Process, Lb; Limb bud, Oligo.: Oligodendrocyte, OPC: Oligodendrocyte Progenitor Cell. (Scale bars =
500 μm in B,D, 100 μm C,E)

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Deletion of Piga in the Nestin-Cre lineage results in CNS GPI deficiency
As very few studies have focused on the role of glycosylation in neural development, we aimed to first
take a broad approach and delete GPI biosynthesis in the entire CNS/PNS. We hypothesized this would
illuminate the critical requirement for GPI biosynthesis in neural development beyond neurulation. We are
unable to study the effect of GPI biosynthesis at later neurogenesis stages in the germline Piga null mice
because these mutants develop neural tube defects or die very early in development [18].
<tm1>

We obtained the conditional Piga allele, (B6.129-Piga

) which has been used in several studies to

delete Piga with Cre/lox technology [14, 16, 18]. Upon Cre recombination, the final exon of the conditional
Piga is deleted and GPI biosynthesis is severely disrupted indicating the allele efficiently abolishes Piga
Kln/J

function [14, 16, 18]. We crossed these mice to Nestin-Cre mice (B6.Cg-Tg(Nes-cre)1

). This Nestin-

Cre allele has been shown to mediate loxP excision at E11.5 in the forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain, and
spinal cord and maintain expression in neural stem cells throughout development [19, 21, 22]. Therefore,
targeting by this Nestin-Cre transgene is broad and includes neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes.
Piga is located on the X chromosome in mouse and human resulting in different degrees of Piga deletion
flox

in male versus female progeny from Piga

crosses with Nestin-Cre. Males with one copy of Pigaflox/Y;

Nestin-Cre+/- are termed hemizygous conditional knockout (hemizygous cKO) males and should lack all
Piga expression in the Nestin lineage. Females used in this study are mosaic cKOs with the genotype
Pigaflox/X; Nestin Cre+/- carrying one floxed allele and one wild-type allele of Piga. We chose to continue
our behavioral studies with mosaic cKO females because they survive significantly longer than
hemizygous cKO males and develop phenotypes similar to those observed in IGD patients including
ataxia, decreased lifespan, and neurological decline.
Mice were analyzed from E16.5-postnatal stages. To confirm the Nestin-Cre transgenic was ablating Piga
in the CNS, we performed PCR with three primers spanning the targeted region to differentiate between
wild-type, floxed (Piga flox) and recombined (Piga del)_alleles (Fig. 2A,B). We found Nestin-Cre targeted
Piga in multiple CNS tissues in Piga hemizygous cKO mice as evidenced by the Piga deleted PCR
product in hemizygous cKO males. Tissues demonstrating Piga deletion included the cortex, cerebellum,
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

subcortical structures including the thalamus, hypothalamus, midbrain, pons, and medulla (Fig. 2B, lane
2-4). However, Piga excision was not noted in genomic DNA from the tail of the same animal, indicating
that the targeting was specific and consistent with previous reports using the Nestin-Cre (Fig. 2B, lane 1).
We did observe some remaining Piga flox PCR products in the CNS tissues indicating that the Cre did not
target absolutely every cell in these tissues. We suspect this Piga DNA may be derived from non-neural
tissues such as blood vessels, blood, and microglia which are not targeted by Nestin-Cre. We conclude
our conditional approach targets Piga for deletion in the CNS.
It is known that mothers with one mutant allele of Piga display skewing of X inactivation to silence the
affected X chromosome carrying the mutant allele [12]. Thus, we were concerned skewing toward the
wild-type X chromosome would result in residual PIGA expression higher than the expected 50% of wildtype in mosaic cKOs. To confirm the PIGA protein was reduced in the brain of Piga mosaic cKO females,
we performed western blotting for PIGA in subcortical lysate including the thalamus, basal ganglia, pons,
midbrain, and medulla. Western blotting showed a reduction of PIGA protein compared to wild-type
littermate controls of approximately 50-75% when normalized to tubulin loading control (Fig.2 C-D). These
data confirm PIGA protein reduction in the brain of the mosaic cKO mice.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. Deletion of Piga in the Nestin-Cre lineage results in CNS GPI deficiency. Genotyping
strategy for identifying Piga flox (primers1 and 2 generate a 350bp product), Piga deleted (del) (primers 1
and 3 generate a 600bp product) (A). PCR of tail and various CNS structures of Piga hemizygous cKO
male mouse (B). Western blot of PIGA (Green) in subcortical tissues from WT and Piga Mosaic cKO
female littermates, and Tubulin loading control (Red) (C). Quantification of PIGA/tubulin signal from
Western blot of N=6 WT and N=3 Mosaic cKO subcortical lysates (D). CB= cerebellum,
Subcort=subcortical tissues.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CNS GPI deficiency results in decreased survival and weight, but does not grossly affect the
structure of the brain
We hypothesized GPI deficiency in the CNS lineage would result in structural defects of the brain
including cerebellar hypoplasia, dilated lateral ventricles, and microcephaly as has been observed in a
subset of IGD patients [13]. To our surprise, we found no significant structural defects in the cortex of
Piga mosaic cKO mice at birth (Fig. 3A,B) or up to weaning stages (Fig. 3C,D). We observed mild
hypoplasia of the cerebellum in Piga mosaic cKO mice as evidenced by H&E staining (Fig. 3E, F). We
observed that both the Piga mosaic cKO females and the Piga hemizygous cKO males gained less
weight than their WT littermates and were easily identifiable by this phenotype (Fig. 3G). By P7, all
mosaic cKO mutants were approximately half the weight of their WT littermates. We also noticed mutants
died postnatally with the oldest mutant only surviving to P23 (Fig. 3H). Piga hemizygous cKO males that
lack all GPI biosynthesis in the CNS die on average twice as quickly as the mosaic cKO females
suggesting a gene dosage effect (Fig. 3H). We hypothesize that the genetic mosaicism in females allows
for residual expression of Piga allowing longer survive than hemizygous cKO males.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3. CNS GPI deficiency results in cerebellar hypoplasia, decreased weight gain, and
decreased survival. Coronal H&E section of WT and Mosaic cKO cortex at E18.5 (A,B). Gross whole
brain of WT and Mosaic cKO at P22 (C,D). H&E section of the cerebellar hemisphere in WT and Mosaic
cKO (E,F). Average weight of WT and Mosaic cKO mice from P0 to P15 (G). Survival curve of WT
(black), Mosaic cKO (Red), and Hemizygous cKO (Blue) mice (H). All paired images shown at same
magnification.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CNS GPI deficiency results in neurological decline and ataxia.
While the cause of death in mutants remains unclear, all mosaic cKO mice developed progressive ataxia,
tremor, and a hindlimb clasping phenotype. Moribund mutants were unable to walk but moved their
forelimbs and hindlimbs spontaneously while laying on their side in the host cage. Moribund mutants were
euthanized at this stage.
Between P10 and P19, we observed a progressive hindlimb clasping phenotype that worsened over time
in the mosaic cKO mutants. In the tail suspension test, we scored the hindlimb clasping phenotype
according to standard protocols and noted a statistically significantly lower score in the mutants indicating
a neurological phenotype (p<0.0001, Fig. 4A-C). Hindlimb clasping is common to many models of
neurological disease with a wide variety of underlying pathophysiologies in the brain and spinal cord [23].
Given this preliminary indication of neurological disease in postnatal mosaic cKO animals, we sought to
test other aspects of neurodevelopment, including developmental landmarks such as reflexes. First, we
performed the Righting Reflex test which tests the ability of the mouse to right itself into a prone position
after being placed in a supine position. Mosaic cKOs were severely impaired in their ability to right
themselves as measured by the latency to right themselves (p<0.0001; Fig. 4D). These data indicate the
mutants are defective at either the labryinthe reflex, limb coordination and/or strength as they actively, but
unsuccessfully, attempt to right themselves. To test their strength, we performed the forelimb wire hang
test in which the mice are suspended on a wire by their forelimbs over a padded surface and measured
their latency to fall. Interestingly, we found the mosaic cKOs were able to hang onto the wire statistically
longer than their WT littermates, p=0.0019, Fig. 4E). These data indicate the function of the skeletal
muscle system and strength is not impaired in the mutant forelimbs. As the mosaic cKOs show deficits in
surface righting, but not the forelimb wire hang, we suspected mutants developed defective limb
coordination, ataxia.
Over time, the mutants developed ataxia and a persistent tremor (SFig.1). The signs of this are first
noticeable at approximately P12 and progressively worsen until approximately P20 when the mutants
became moribund. To quantify and further study the ataxia phenotype, we performed rotarod testing. The
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

rotarod assays motor coordination and balance by challenging the mice to maintain their balance on a
rotating rod that increases in speed of rotation gradually. We found the mosaic cKOs performed poorly,
with significantly decreased travel and latency to fall compared to wild-type littermates at P12 and P15
(ANOVA p=0.0001 for distance traveled and p<0.0001 for latency to fall; Fig. 4F, G). The early lethality of
the hemizygous cKO males precluded rotarod analysis. Taken together, all these data from behavioral
testing indicate the mosaic cKOs displayed defective motor coordination and balance.

Figure 4. CNS GPI deficiency results in hindlimb clasping, ataxia, and tremor. Hindlimb clasping
score of wild-type and mosaic cKO littermates at P16 (A). Images of wild-type and mosaic cKO littermates
with mosaic cKO displaying hindlimb clasping (B,C). Surface righting reflex test in wild-type and mosaic
cKO littermates (D). Forelimb Wire Hang test in wild-type and mosaic cKO littermates (E). Rotarod testing
of wild-type and mosaic cKO littermates at P12 and P15, distance travelled (F) and latency to fall (G).
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CNS GPI deficiency delays white matter development
Recent reviews of neural GPI-anchored proteins (GPI-Aps) highlighted the diverse importance of GPIAPs in many neural processes including axon outgrowth, regeneration, synapse formation, neuron cell
adhesion, and oligodendrocyte development [24, 25]. We reasoned that failure to properly present one or
more specific GPI-APs on the cell membrane may be a cause of the phenotypes observed in the mosaic
cKOs. Therefore, we reviewed the phenotypes of mouse knockouts for neural GPI-AP genes in the
Mouse Genome Informatics resource. Of the GPI-AP knockout mouse models, our Piga mosaic cKO
-/-/mutants most resemble the phenotype observed in the contactin 1 mouse [26, 27]. Contactin 1 mice

weigh significantly less than their wild-type littermates, develop progressive ataxia, and die at
approximately P19. Colakoglu et. al. showed contactin 1 is critical for oligodendrocyte development and
mutants lack proper CNS myelination and display defects in cerebellum microorginization [26]. Indeed,
multiple mutants in myelin development display an ataxic, tremor, and early death phenotype. Given the
phenotypic similarity between contactin 1-/- mice and Piga mosaic cKOs we sought to determine the
degree of myelination in Piga mosaic cKO mutants.
We performed immunohistochemistry for Myelin Basic Protein (MBP) in wild-type and mosaic cKO
mutants at P19 (n=4 for each). We found 3 out of 4 mutants examined showed reduced MBP staining
compared to controls indicating that myelination is defective in the mosaic cKO mutants (Fig. 5A-D). We
concluded developmental myelination is impaired in Piga mosaic cKO mutants. This phenotype has been
observed in multiple IGD patients and may be partially responsible for the tremor and early death we
observe in the Piga mosaic cKO mutants.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5. CNS GPI deficiency delays white matter development. Immunohistochemistry of αMBP in
wild-type (A, C) and mosaic cKO mice (N=3/4 mutants delayed; B, D). CB= cerebellum, CC=corpus
callosum, MB=midbrain, Md=medulla, Ps=pons, Th=thalamus. CNS GPI deficiency impairs Purkinje cell
arborization. Purkinje cell (αCalbindin Green) and granule cell (αNeuN Red) immunofluorescence in wildtype and mosaic cKO mice (A, B). Representative images from N= 4/4 Mosaic cKO. (Scale bars = 100
μm. All paired images shown at same magnification.)

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CNS GPI deficiency impairs Purkinje cell dendritic arborization
The ataxia we observed in the Piga mosaic cKOs suggested a defect in proper cerebellar function as this
is a major center for coordination of motor movement. Defects in either granule cell development or
Purkinje cell development can lead to ataxic phenotypes [28-30]. Granule cells are the major excitatory
input to Purkinje cells and Purkinje cells are the major inhibitory output to the deep cerebellar nuclei.
Given the expression pattern of Piga in the postnatal brain, we hypothesized defects in the Purkinje cell
layer were responsible for the ataxic phenotype in Piga mosaic cKO mice. To assess defects in cerebellar
development, we performed immunofluorescence for NeuN to highlight the inner granular layer and
Calbindin staining to examine the morphology of the Purkinje cells. The granule cell layer of the
cerebellum did not appear to be affected, but the Purkinje cell layer showed marked defects in Purkinje
cell dendritic arborization in the molecular layer (n=4/4 mutants examined). We found the dendritic tree to
be consistently less elaborated and branched in the Piga mosaic cKO mice compared to wild-type
littermates (Fig. 5E,F).

To obtain a broader and unbiased understanding of the differences between the wild-type and Piga
mosaic cKO cerebella, we performed RNA-seq on bulk right cerebellar hemispheres in 3 wild-type and 3
Piga mosaic cKO littermates at P20. Differential gene expression analysis identified 176 upregulated
genes (Log2Fold Change ≥1, Padjusted <0.05), 67 down regulated (Log2Fold Change ≤1, Padjusted <0.05) and
17,370 genes that showed no statistical expression difference in the Piga mosaic cKO cerebella
compared to wildtype controls (Fig. 6A). Of note, the three most highly expressed genes included Myelin
protein zero, Tyrosine hydroxylase, and Perlipin 4 (Fig. 6B). Gene Ontology (GO) analysis identified an
enrichment for pathways including neuropeptide signaling, iron transport, response to hypoxia, and
circadian rhythm for the upregulated genes in the Piga mosaic cKO mutant (Fig. 6C).

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6. RNA-Seq analysis. (A) Volcano plot of differentially expressed genes from RNA sequencing of
wild-type and Piga mosaic cKO right cerebellar hemisphere at P20, blue = downregulated genes and red
= upregulated genes. (B) Top 20 upregulated and downregulated genes (C). GO analysis of upregulated
genes in the Piga mosaic cKO cerebella.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Discussion
In this work we investigated the role of GPI biosynthesis in the developing CNS as it is the most affected
organ system in patients with pathogenic variants in GPI biosynthesis genes [31]. We found the initiating
enzyme required for GPI biosynthesis, Piga, is highly expressed in the developing corpus callosum,
periventricular areas of the CNS, and Purkinje cells. We then deleted Piga in the CNS/PNS using a
flox

conditional approach with Piga

mice and Nestin-Cre to determine the requirement for GPI biosynthesis

in this lineage. We found these mutants do not develop structural defects of the brain as we initially
hypothesized. Instead, they developed severe ataxia, tremor, fail to thrive, and died prematurely. As this
phenotype resembled other mouse mutants with defects in myelination and IGD patients develop defects
in developmental myelination, we sought to determine the degree of myelination in the mutants. We found
by αMBP staining mosaic cKO mutants have severe defects in developmental myelination compared to
wild-type littermates confirming a requirement for GPI biosynthesis in myelination. We also found severe
defects in motor coordination and striking defects in Purkinje cell arborization in the mosaic cKO
cerebellum. Similar ataxic phenotypes and reduced lifespan have been observed in other models of CDG
including the genetic reductions of Pmm2, Cog7, and Atp6ap2 in Drosophila models demonstrating that
motor coordination critically requires normal glycosylation through phylogeny [32]. We found gene
expression was significantly different in mosaic cKO mice compared to controls with an overexpression of
tyrosine hydroxylase, a marker of premature cerebellar development. These data illuminate a novel role
for the GPI anchor posttranslational modification in the mouse CNS and provides mechanistic insight into
the pathophysiology of IGD.
We were interested to find the expression pattern of Piga in the postnatal CNS suggested a role for GPI
biosynthesis in white matter development. Piga was strongly expressed in the corpus callosum a highly
myelinated structure. Myelination is critical to protect axons, increase conduction velocity along the axon,
and allow communication between neurons in the CNS especially for motor coordination and learning.
Classic models of hypomyelination such as the rumpshaker and quaker mouse mutants display similar
phenotypes as those observed in the mosaic Piga cKO mice including truncal ataxia, tremor, and early
death [33]. The germline mutants of GPI-anchored contactin family members display a very similar
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

phenotype to that observed in the Piga mosaic cKO mice including ataxia, tremor, small body size, and
premature death around P20 [26, 27]. Recently, it was shown that contactin 1 is expressed in
oligodendrocytes and is critical for normal myelination [26]. We hypothesize deficiency in the GPIanchoring of CONTACTIN 1 contributes to the hypomyelination phenotype we observe in the Piga mosaic
cKO mice. While CONTACTIN1 is a promising candidate, there are several other GPI-APs in the CNS
that regulate many related functions including synaptic plasticity, axon outgrowth, and regeneration [24].
We hypothesize that the phenotype observed in the Piga mosaic cKO mice highlights the critical early
requirements for GPI biosynthesis in the postnatal brain. Indeed, the mosaic cKO mice are moribund by
P21 consistent with the lethality seen in a variety of hypomyelination mutants. In contrast, the hemizygous
cKO males die even before myelination has really begun, around P10, arguing that GPI biosynthesis is
critical for other CNS functions earlier in development. However, we were unable to identify the cause of
death in the hemizygous cKO mice and this function of GPI biosynthesis remains unclear.
The most common phenotypes observed in all IGD patients are intellectual disability/developmental
delay, and epilepsy. We noticed several episodes of mutants flailing their hindlimbs and forelimbs while
on their backs after they fell due to their ataxic gait. They then experienced a sustained period of rigid
paralysis with limbs outstretched followed by a short period of inactivity (data not shown). These events
may be consistent with a seizure but the early lethality in our mutants precludes a rigorous analysis of the
“seizure phenotype” in the mutants by EEG monitoring. These phenotypes are consistent with the
“severe” presentation of Piga deficiency in which patients die earlier, display severely delayed myelination
with thin corpus callosum compared to more “mild” forms of Piga deficiency [12, 34]. Further research
with a less severe model of GPI biosynthesis deficiency may prove as a better model to study the seizure
phenotype as observed in IGD patients. Knock-in of patient variants with the “moderate phenotype” by
CRISPR-Cas9 technology, or Piga deletion with more restricted Cre transgenes may achieve a more
moderate defect in GPI biosynthesis and provide a longer-lived model of IGD with the seizure phenotype.
It has been known for decades that somatic mutations in Piga in the hematopoietic lineage result in a
hemolytic anemia called Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria (PNH). PNH red blood cells (RBCs) are
missing two critical negative regulators of the complement cascade, the GPI-APs CD55 and CD59.
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Without GPI biosynthesis, RBCs become the target of aberrant complement activation leading to life
threatening hemolytic anemia. Recent research has shown a clinically available complement inhibitor can
almost completely halt the PNH disease process [35, 36]. Others have hypothesized the GPI-APs
CD59/CD55 may also be critical to protect neurons from complement in the CNS. Indeed, one group
derived neurons from Piga deficient patient induced pluripotent stem cells and showed that these neurons
are more susceptible to complement-mediated lysis in culture [37]. We identified a mild enrichment for
immune activation genes in the Piga mosaic cKO cerebellum but they were not among the top hits from
GO. The most

upregulated genes in mosaic cKO mutants include myelin protein zero, tyrosine

hydroxylase, and perilipin 4. MYELIN PROTEIN ZERO is the major constituent of peripheral myelin in the
peripheral nervous system and it is unclear why this gene was overexpressed in our samples. PERILIPIN
4 coats intracellular lipid droplets. Perilipin 4 overexpression in the mutants may suggest there is storage
of lipid droplets in the cells of the mutant. Perhaps defects in GPI biosynthesis result in an accumulation
of lipid precursors leading to lipid droplet inclusions in cells.
The strongest signal from our RNA-seq experiment by adjusted P-value was tyrosine hydroxylase (Th).
Interestingly, though Purkinje cells are not dopaminergic, it has been shown that wildtype Purkinje cells
go through a short phase of Th expression during development which decreases by P19. In a variety of
ataxic mutants including the pogo, Lrp5/6, β-catenin cKO, and dilute mutants, Purkinje cells abnormally
retain Th expression to later postnatal stages [38-41]. This retained Th expression is thought to mark a
delay in Purkinje cell maturation, though the exact role of Th in this process is unclear.
Our RNA sequencing results also suggest a role for hypoxia in the pathology of the cerebellar defect
observed in the Piga Mosaic cKO mice. Hypoxia has been shown to delay the maturation of the
cerebellum. How GPI deficiency could result in hypoxia remains unclear. Alterations in lipid metabolism
due to the blockade in GPI biosynthesis could allow accumulation of lipid precursors including
phosphatidylinositol (PI). If PI were to accumulate then subsequent peroxidation may lead to the
generation of reactive oxygen species and a resulting hypoxic response. This remains to be tested.
Alternatively, vasculature development may be impaired in the Piga mosaic cKO cerebellum leading to

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

regional hypoxia. Further evaluation of vascular development of the Piga mosaic cKO would help define
this defect.
We propose that our conditional knockout model may serve as an excellent model for preclinical trials of
drugs for IGD as the phenotype is robust, quantifiable, and the mosaic cKO survives long enough
postnatally to be treated with experimental compounds. The degree of myelination as measured by
immunohistochemistry and ataxia as tested with the rotarod serve as convenient end points to examine in
experimental settings of preclinical drug trials. A synthetic intermediate of GlcNac-PI would be one
promising candidate to test in this model as this intermediate would provide the necessary precursor for
GPI biosynthesis missing in Piga mutants and possibly rescue GPI expression and the phenotype.

Materials and Methods
Animal Husbandry
All animals were maintained through a protocol approved by the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical
Center IACUC committee (IACUC2016-0098). Mice were housed in a vivarium with a 12-h light cycle with
flox

food and water ad libitum. Piga

(B6.129-Pigatm1, #RBRC06211) mice were were previously generated
flox

by Taroh Kinoshita and Junji Takeda and obtained from RIKEN [18]. Mice were genotyped for the Piga

allele using Riken’s three primer protocol. B6.Cg-Tg(Nes-cre)1Kln/J Nestin-Cre mice (Jackson labs
#003771) were genotyped using Jackson lab recommended general Cre genotyping. Progeny of the
Pigaflox x Nestin-Cre mice were sacrificed when they became moribund (immobile) at approximately P20.
Primers used for genotyping are available in Table S1.
In Situ Hybridization
Whole E11.5 embryos were fixed overnight in 4% PFA at 4°C and dehydrated through a methanol series.
Samples were treated with 4.5μg/mL Proteinase K for 7-13 minutes at room temperature, post-fixed in 4%
PFA/0.2% glutaraldehyde and blocked with hybridization buffer prior to hybridization overnight with DIGlabeled in situ probes at 65°C with constant agitation. The samples were washed and incubated with an
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

anti-DIG antibody (Roche #11093274910) o/n at 4°C. Embryos were washed and incubated with BM
Purple (Roche #11442074001) from 4 hours at room temperature to o/n at 4°C .
Piga plasmid was obtained from Origene (Rockville, MD, #MR222212).

Antisense probes were

generated from PCR products containing T3 overhangs. A Piga antisense probe was generated from 910
base pair PCR product. Primers are listed in Table S1.

The PCR products were purified, in vitro

transcription was performed with digoxigenin-labeled dUTP (Roche #11277073910), and the probe was
purified with the MEGAclear Transcription Clean-up kit (Thermo #AM1908) per the manufacturer’s
instructions. For sense probes, the plasmids were cut with XhoI restriction enzyme after the coding
sequence and T7 RNA polymerase was used for in vitro transcription.
PCR analysis of specific brain regions
Mice were euthanized and tissues were immediately dissected from a variety of brain regions including
the cortex, cerebellum, and subcortical areas. Tail biopsies were taken as controls. Tissue was lysed in
50mM sodium hydroxide and boiled on a hot plate for fifteen minutes. The samples were then neutralized
o
with 1M Tris and centrifuged. PCR analysis was performed with 60 C annealing temperature and 34
o
cycles of amplification for Piga flox allele genotyping and a program with 64 C annealing temperature with

34 cycles of amplification for Cre genotyping. Primers are available in Table S1.
Histology
Brains were dissected and fixed in 10% formalin for 24-48 hours, washed in 70% ethanol, and paraffin
embedded by the CCHMC Pathology Core. Brains were sectioned by microtome at 10-20 μm and stained
with hematoxylin & eosin using standard methods.
Weight
Mice used for weight test were weighed individually every day using a standard metric balance from P1 to
P21.
Tail Suspension Test

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

P15-P18 mice were held by the tail for ten seconds in the air and their hindlimb posture was observed.
The mice were given a score from 0-4. 4 indicates the normal hindlimb separation in which they are
widely spread when suspended by the tail. Score of 3 means the hindlimbs are more vertical though they
barely touch. Score of 2 means the hindlimbs are close and often touching, and 1 indicates profound
weakness in which both hindlimbs are almost always clasped together. Score of 0 is given only if the
hindlimbs are clasped for the entire ten seconds the mouse is suspended [42].
Righting Reflex
P7-8 mice were placed supine and the time to flip over onto their abdomens was measured in seconds
and recorded as a latency to right themselves to a prone position [42]. Three trials were performed
consecutively and each trial time was plotted.
Forelimb Wire Hang
Mice were placed on a thin wire suspended by their forelimbs over a padded drop zone. The pups were
placed on the wire such that the experimenter could observe their grip on the wire. The pups were then
released and the time before they fell off the wire was measured in seconds and recorded as a latency to
fall [42]. Three trials were performed in sequence and each trial latency to fall was plotted.
Rotarod
Rotarod was performed by the CCHMC Animal Behavior Core [43]. Researchers were blinded to the
genotypes of the animals tested. Rotarod apparatus (San Diego Instruments) was used with SDI software
with the 4 to 40 RPM (revolutions per minute) protocol for mice. The apparatus has four chambers and
four mice were tested at the same time. The photobeam sensor detects and records the time and
distance each mouse travels before falling from the rod. The test was allowed to run for 360 seconds. The
test starts at 4RPM for 30 seconds and increases to 16RPM for 110 seconds, then 28RPM for 110
seconds, and finally 40RPM for 110 seconds. The latency to fall in seconds and distance traveled was
recorded automatically and the mice were allowed to rest for 15 minutes before each successive trial.
Four trials were performed sequentially on each mouse.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded brain tissue harvested from
P19 animals. Briefly, tissue was sectioned at 10-20μm, sections were blocked for one hour at room
temperature in 4% normal goat serum in PBST, and incubated in primary antibody (1:500 chicken antimouse Myelin Basic Protein antibody, Aves Inc, #MBP) overnight at 4°C. The next day, slides were
washed in PBS, and incubated in 1:500 biotinylated goat anti-chicken antibody (Aves Inc, #B-1005) for
one hour at room temperature. The slides were washed and incubated in ABC mix (Vectastain ABC HRP
Kit, #PK-4000) for 1 hour at room temperature. The slides were washed and developed in 0.5 mg/mL
DAB (Sigma) activated with 30% hydrogen peroxide. Slides were incubated in DAB for approximately 5
minutes, washed in PBS, sealed with Cytoseal, and imaged by light microscopy.
Immunofluorescence
P0-P23 mice were euthanized with isoflurane and cervical dislocation and their brains were
microdissected in PBS. They were fixed in 4% PFA o/n, equilibrated in 30% sucrose o/n, cryo-embedded
in OCT, and sectioned from 10-20μM with cryostat. Antigen retrieval was performed with citrate retrieval
o
buffer, blocked in 4% normal goat serum, incubated in primary antibodies o/n at 4 C: rabbit anti-PIGA

(Proteintech #13679-1-AP, 1:200), mouse anti-NeuN (Millipore #MAB377, 1:1,000), Rat anti-CD68
(Biorad #MCA1957T, 1:1,000), rabbit anti-Calbindin (abcam #ab25085, 1:4,000), and Rat anti-Mylein
Basic Protein (Aves #MBP, 1:500). Sections were incubated with Alexafluor 488-congugated goat antirabbit (Thermo #A11008, 1:1,000) and Alexafluor 594 conjugated goat anti-mouse (Thermo #A11008,
1:1,000) secondary antibodies and counterstained with DAPI. Sections were imaged on Nikon C2
confocal 703 microscope.
Western Immunoblotting
Brains were microdissected and the cortex and cerebellum were isolated. Subcortical tissue was lysed in
800μL RIPA buffer+ Protease inhibitor. Lysate protein concentration was determined by BCA assay and
electrophoresis was performed on a 10% Tris-glycine gel. Protein was transferred to a PVDF membrane,
blocked in Odyssey blocking buffer and incubated o/n at 4°C with Rabbit anti-PIGA (Proteintech #1367924

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1-AP, 1:1,000) and Mouse anti-Tubulin (Sigma #T6199, 1:1,000) antibodies. Membranes were washed
and incubated for 1 hour in goat anti-rabbit IRDye 800CW (LICOR # 926-32211, 1:15,000)and goat antimouse IRDye 680Rd (LICOR, #926-68070, 1:15,000) antibodies and visualized on a LICOR Odyssey
imaging system. Relative protein concentration was determined by normalizing PIGA signal to Tubulin
signal in Image Studio Lite Ver 5.2.
RNA Sequencing
3 WT and 3 mosaic cKO cerebella were bisected along the midline of the cerebellar vermis and the right
half was snap frozen on dry ice. RNA was isolated and pooled samples of each genotype were used for
paired end bulk RNA sequencing (BGI Americas, Cambridge, MA). mRNA molecules were purified from
total RNA using oligo(dT) attached magnetic beads. mRNA molecules were fragmented into small pieces
using fragmentation reagent and first strand cDNA was generated using

random

hexamer primed

reverse transcription, followed by a second strand cDNA synthesis. The synthesized cDNA was subjected
to end repair and 3’ adenylated. Adapters were ligated to the ends of these 3’ adenylated cDNA
fragments. PCR was used to amplify the cDNA fragments with adapters from previous step. PCR
products were purified with Ampure XP Beads (AGENCOURT) and dissolved in EB solution. Library was
validated on the Agilent Technologies 2100 bioanalyzer. The double stranded PCR products were heat
denatured and circularized by the splint oligo sequence. The single strand circle DNA (ssCir-DNA) were
formatted as the final library. The library was amplified with phi29 to make the DNA nanoball (DNB) which
had more than 300 copies of one molecule. The DNBs were load into the patterned nanoarray and single
end 50(pair end 100/150) bases reads were generated in the way of combinatorial Probe Anchor
Synthesis (cPAS). Analysis was performed by BGI RNA Sequencing services which includes a
proprietary analysis pipeline.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using Graphpad Prism (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Survival
analysis was performed with a log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test. Rotarod analysis was performed with a oneway ANOVA followed by unpaired t-tests. All other tests were unpaired t-tests.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Funding
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [grant number R01NS085023 to R.W.S].

Conflict of Interest Statement
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References

1.

Kinoshita, T.,

Biosynthesis and deficiencies of glycosylphosphatidylinositol. Proc Jpn Acad Ser B

Phys Biol Sci, 2014.

90(4): p. 130-43.

2.

Bellai-Dussault, K., et al.,

3.

Kinoshita, T.,

4.

Clinical variability in inherited glycosylphosphatidylinositol deficiency

disorders. Clinical Genetics, 2019. 95(1): p. 112-121.
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) Anchors: Biochemistry and Cell Biology:
Introduction to a Thematic Review Series. Journal of Lipid Research, 2016. 57(1): p. 4-5.
Freeze, H.H., Understanding Human Glycosylation Disorders: Biochemistry Leads the Charge.
Journal of Biological Chemistry, 2013.

5.

6.

288(10): p. 6936-6945.

Characterization of glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis defects by clinical
features, flow cytometry, and automated image analysis. Genome Medicine, 2018. 10.
Knaus, A., et al., Rare Noncoding Mutations Extend the Mutational Spectrum in the PGAP3
Subtype of Hyperphosphatasia with Mental Retardation Syndrome. Human Mutation, 2016.

Knaus, A., et al.,

37(8): p. 737-744.

Analysis of exome data for 4293 trios suggests GPI-anchor biogenesis
defects are a rare cause of developmental disorders. European Journal of Human Genetics, 2017.

7.

Pagnamenta, A.T., et al.,

8.

Nguyen, T.T.M., et al.,

25(6): p. 669-679.

Mutations in PIGS, Encoding a GPI Transamidase, Cause a Neurological
Syndrome Ranging from Fetal Akinesia to Epileptic Encephalopathy. American Journal of Human

Genetics, 2018.

103(4): p. 602-611.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A Novel Germline PIGA Mutation in Ferro-Cerebro-Cutaneous Syndrome: A
Neurodegenerative X-Linked Epileptic Encephalopathy With Systemic Iron-Overload. American

9.

Swoboda, K.J., et al.,

10.

Kuki, I., et al.,

11.

Thompson, M.D., et al.,

Journal of Medical Genetics Part A, 2014.

164(1): p. 17-28.

Vitamin B-6-Responsive Epilepsy Due to Inherited Gpi Deficiency. Neurology, 2013.

81(16): p. 1467-1469.

12.

Hyperphosphatasia with neurologic deficit: A pyridoxine-responsive
seizure disorder? Pediatric Neurology, 2006. 34(4): p. 303-307.
Tarailo-Graovac, M., et al., The genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of PIGA deficiency. Orphanet
Journal of Rare Diseases, 2015.

13.

10.

The Phenotype of a Germline Mutation in PIGA: The Gene Somatically
Mutated in Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria. American Journal of Human Genetics, 2012.
Johnston, J.J., et al.,

90(2): p. 295-300.

14.

15.

16.

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis and remodeling are required for
neural tube closure, heart development, and cranial neural crest cell survival. Elife, 2019. 8.
Ahrens, M.J., et al., Convergent extension movements in growth plate chondrocytes require gpianchored cell surface proteins. Development, 2009. 136(20): p. 3463-3474.
Tarutani, M., et al., Tissue-specific knockout of the mouse Pig-a gene reveals important roles for
GPI-anchored proteins in skin development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
Lukacs, M., et al.,

the United States of America, 1997.
17.

94(14): p. 7400-7405.

Phenotypic and functional characterization of a mouse model of targeted Piga deletion in hematopoietic cells. Haematologica-the Hematology Journal, 2010. 95(2): p. 214-

Visconte, V., et al.,

223.
18.

19.

20.

Nozaki, M., et al., Developmental abnormalities of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchor-deficient
embryos revealed by Cre/IoxP system. Laboratory Investigation, 1999. 79(3): p. 293-299.
Tronche, F., et al., Disruption of the glucocorticoid receptor gene in the nervous system results in
reduced anxiety. Nature Genetics, 1999. 23(1): p. 99-103.
Zhang, Y., et al., An RNA-Sequencing Transcriptome and Splicing Database of Glia, Neurons, and
Vascular Cells of the Cerebral Cortex (vol 35, pg 11929, 2014). Journal of Neuroscience, 2015.

35(2): p. 864-866.

21.

22.

23.

Behavioral phenotyping of Nestin-Cre mice: Implications for genetic mouse
Models of psychiatric disorders. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 2014. 55: p. 87-95.
Graus-Porta, D., et al., beta 1-class integrins regulate the development of laminae and folia in
the cerebral and cerebellar cortex. Neuron, 2001. 31(3): p. 367-379.
Lalonde, R. and C. Strazielle, Brain regions and genes affecting limb-clasping responses. Brain

Giusti, S.A., et al.,

Research Reviews, 2011.

67(1-2): p. 252-259.

25.

Neural Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-Anchored Proteins in Synaptic
Specification. Trends in Cell Biology, 2017. 27(12): p. 931-945.
Freeze, H.H., et al., Neurological Aspects of Human Glycosylation Disorders. Annual Review of

26.

Colakoglu, G., et al.,

27.

Berglund, E.O., et al.,

24.

Um, J.W. and J. Ko,

Neuroscience, Vol 38, 2015.

38: p. 105-+.

Contactin-1 regulates myelination and nodal/paranodal domain
organization in the central nervous system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 2014.

28.

111(3): p. E394-E403.

Ataxia and abnormal cerebellar microorganization in mice with ablated
contactin gene expression. Neuron, 1999. 24(3): p. 739-750.
Cendelin, J., From mice to men: lessons from mutant ataxic mice. Cerebellum Ataxias, 2014. 1: p.
4.

29.

Wang, J.Y., et al.,

Sun1 deficiency leads to cerebellar ataxia in mice. Disease Models &

Mechanisms, 2015.

8(8): p. 957-+.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

30.

Becker, E.B.E., et al., A point mutation in TRPC3 causes abnormal Purkinje cell development and
cerebellar ataxia in moonwalker mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 2009.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

Bellai-Dussault, K., et al.,

106(16): p. 6706-6711.

Clinical variability in inherited glycosylphosphatidylinositol deficiency

disorders. Clin Genet, 2018.
Modeling Congenital Disorders of N-Linked Glycoprotein Glycosylation in
Drosophila melanogaster. Frontiers in Genetics, 2018. 9.
Duncan, I.D. and A.B. Radcliff, Inherited and acquired disorders of myelin: The underlying myelin
pathology. Exp Neurol, 2016. 283(Pt B): p. 452-75.
Kato, M., et al., PIGA mutations cause early-onset epileptic encephalopathies and distinctive
features. Neurology, 2014. 82(18): p. 1587-96.
Kinoshita, T., Molecular genetics, biochemistry, and biology of PNH. Rinsho Ketsueki, 2017.
Frappaolo, A., et al.,

58(4): p. 353-362.

36.

37.

The complement inhibitor eculizumab in paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. New England Journal of Medicine, 2006. 355(12): p. 1233-1243.
Yuan, X., et al., A hypomorphic PIGA gene mutation causes severe defects in neuron development
and susceptibility to complement-mediated toxicity in a human iPSC model. Plos One, 2017.

Hillmen, P., et al.,

12(4).

38.

Ectopic expression of tyrosine hydroxylase in Zebrin II
immunoreactive Purkinje cells in the cerebellum of the ataxic mutant mouse, pogo. Brain Res

Jeong, Y.G., M.K. Kim, and R. Hawkes,

Dev Brain Res, 2001.
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

129(2): p. 201-9.

Lrp5/6 are required for cerebellar development and for suppressing TH
expression in Purkinje cells via beta-catenin. Mol Brain, 2016. 9: p. 7.
Sawada, K., et al., Abnormal expression of tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity in Purkinje cells
precedes the onset of ataxia in dilute-lethal mice. Brain Res, 1999. 844(1-2): p. 188-91.
Sawada, K., et al., Abnormal expression of tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity in cerebellar
cortex of ataxic mutant mice. Brain Res, 1999. 829(1-2): p. 107-12.
Feather-Schussler, D.N. and T.S. Ferguson, A Battery of Motor Tests in a Neonatal Mouse Model
of Cerebral Palsy. Jove-Journal of Visualized Experiments, 2016(117).
McAuliffe, J.J., et al., Desflurane, Isoflurane, and Sevoflurane Provide Limited Neuroprotection
against Neonatal Hypoxia-Ischemia in a Delayed Preconditioning Paradigm. Anesthesiology,

Huang, Y., et al.,

2009.

111(3): p. 533-546.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/763490; this version posted September 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table S1. PCR Primers

29
9

