bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Multi-colour DNA-qPAINT reveals how Csk nanoclusters regulate T-cell receptor signalling
Sabrina Simoncelli1, Juliette Griffié1, David J. Williamson1, Jack Bibby2, Cara Bray3, Rose
Zamoyska3, Andrew P. Cope2 and Dylan M. Owen 1,4*
1

Department of Physics and Randall Centre for Cell and Molecular Biophysics, Faculty of

Life Sciences and Medicine, King’s College London, London SE1 1UL, U.K
2

Centre for Inflammation Biology and Cancer Immunology, School of Immunology and

Microbial Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King’s College, London, London
SE1 1UL, U.K.
3

Institute of Immunology and Infection Research, Centre for Immunity, Infection and

Evolution, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3FL, U.K.
4

Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, Department of Mathematics and Centre for

Membrane Proteins and Receptors, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K.

Correspondence to d.owen@bham.ac.uk and s.simoncelli@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
Phosphorylation of the negative regulatory element of the tyrosine kinase Lck by Csk downmodulates T-cell receptor induced signalling. Being constitutively active, Csk spatial
organization is responsible for regulating this signalling interaction. Here, we used
stoichiometrically accurate, multiplexed, single-molecule super-resolution microscopy
(DNA-qPAINT) to image the nanoscale spatial architecture of Csk and two binding partners
implicated in its membrane association – PAG and TRAF3. Combined with a newly
developed co-clustering analysis framework, we provide a powerful resource for dissecting
signalling pathways regulated by spatio-temporal organisation. We found that Csk forms
nanoscale clusters proximal to the plasma membrane that are lost post-stimulation and rerecruited at later time points. Unexpectedly, these clusters do not directly co-localise with
PAG at the membrane, but instead provide a ready pool of monomers to down-regulate
signalling. By generating CRISPR/Cas9 knock-out T-cells, our data also identify that protein
tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22) is essential for Csk nanocluster rerecruitment and for maintenance of the synaptic PAG population.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Protein clustering at the nanoscale appears integral to determine the fate of T-cell
receptor (TCR) early activation.1 Since clusters are small, they have been extensively studied
by single-molecule localization microscopy (SMLM), such as PALM2 (photoactivated
localisation microscopy) and STORM3 (stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy).
Previous studies have shown that following TCR engagement, the number and/or density of
cell surface receptors (T-cell receptors4, integrins5), activating kinases (e.g. Lck6, ZAP-707)
and adaptor proteins (e.g. LAT4,8) clusters generally increases. However, due to the
difficulties in quantifying exact protein copy number in SMLM data, different imaging
modalities identify diverse protein cluster configurations, ranging from dimers/trimers to
larger ‘islands’ and aggregates, opening questions about data interpretation.9
Dissecting the role of nanoscale clustering in TCR signalling, therefore, requires to
use super-resolution imaging techniques that allows accurate quantification of protein copy
number.9,10 In this regard, DNA-PAINT (a variation of point accumulation for imaging in
nanoscale topography)11, which is a robust SMLM technique that relies on the binding
kinetics between two single-stranded DNAs (‘imager’ and ‘docking’ strands), has recently
shown impressive advances in quantifying individual molecular targets on synthetic samples
that simulate bio-molecular nano-clusters (qPAINT).12 This is possible because unlike other
SMLM quantification methods, DNA-qPAINT is independent from the dye’s complex
photophysics.13 Furthermore, DNA-qPAINT enables multi-colour imaging by sequential
washout and exchange of imager strands which is not possible with more traditional
SMLM.14
Csk is the most potent inhibitor of Lck, the primary tyrosine kinase to propagate
signalling in T-cells.15 Lck adopts an active conformation through the autophosphorylation of
Tyr394, whereas phosphorylation of its Tyr505 residue by Csk promotes its closed, inactive
conformation.16 Csk exerts a tonic inhibition of membrane-associated Lck in resting T-cells,
which appears to set the threshold for TCR activation.17,18 Therefore, for efficient TCR
signalling to occur, Csk must translocate away from the membrane-proximal signalling zone
to the cytosol.19 However, the Lck activation phase only last for minutes before Csk is rerecruited back to the membrane to down-modulate TCR signalling.19 Because Csk is
constitutively active in T-cells, its relative spatial localization is believed to be critical for
regulating TCR signalling. Being a cytosolic protein that lacks any anchor for membrane
association, Csk relies on its interaction with transmembrane proteins to achieve this spatial

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

translocation.20 In fact, several reports have shown that PAG (phosphoprotein associated
with glycolipid-enriched microdomains) phosphorylation at Tyr317 controls Csk association
and dissociation from lipid rafts at the plasma membrane.21 Conversely, TRAF3 (Tumor
necrosis factor Receptor Associated Factor), has recently been suggested to act as a
chaperone that promotes Csk translocation to the cytoplasm following TCR engagement.22
Whereas a large number of studies underline the importance of Csk translocation from the
membrane to the cytosol for TCR activation, the underlying mechanism of Csk regulatory
duty is still unclear.
Here, we coupled DNA-qPAINT with state-of-the art Bayesian-based cluster analysis
approaches to convert raw single-molecule localization data sets to stoichiometrically
accurate multi-channel nanoscale protein distribution maps. We use this approach to dissect
the functional implications of Csk nano-clustering and spatial organization. We use DNAqPAINT to quantitatively characterize the nanoscale architecture of Csk, PAG and TRAF3 in
resting T-cells and the T-cell immunological synapse. Our data provides new evidence
describing, at the single molecule level, how Csk regulates Lck activity, addressing precisely
how PAG and TRAF3 are involved. We find that the dynamic nanoscale organization of Csk
is indeed a key regulatory element in TCR-induced signal activation and termination, and that
it does not involve the formation of 3-component Csk, PAG and TRAF3 complexes. We also
show that the absence of Csk’s most relevant binding partner, protein tyrosine phosphatase
non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22),23 aberrates Csk nano-architecture with consequences for
downstream signalling. This work therefore provides a new technology platform for the
precise dissection of signalling pathways and new insights into the interplay of kinases and
phosphatases in balancing T-cell activation, with implications for understanding immune
responses and autoimmune disease.

Results

Super-resolution imaging of Csk, PAG and TRAF3 nano-architecture in T-cells using
DNA-qPAINT
To characterize the processes whereby Csk down-regulates T-cell receptor (TCR)
signalling, we examined the nanoscale organization of Csk, PAG and TRAF3 at different
time points in wild-type (WT) Jurkat T-cells proximal to the plasma membrane using
DNA-qPAINT, under total internal reflection excitation (Fig. 1). DNA-qPAINT11 employs
the transient binding of short fluorescently labeled oligonucleotides (‘imager’ strands) to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

complementary single-stranded DNA targets (‘docking’ strands) chemically coupled to
antibodies (Fig. 1a, Supplementary Fig. 1a). While bound, the imager strand can be imaged
and localized with nanometer precision. Through sequential imaging of different imager
strand sequences targeting different docking strands and their antibodies, DNA-qPAINT
overcomes the limitations of other SMLM techniques for multi-colour imaging. To label the
proteins for DNA-PAINT imaging, we used monoclonal antibodies conjugated with
unique ssDNA docking strand sequences (Supplementary Method 1). We sequentially
imaged with the complementary imager strands, each fluorescently labeled with
ATTO655, and reconstructed the single-molecule localization maps of each protein (Fig.
1c-e, top).
We developed a sophisticated cluster analysis pipeline that allows conversion of
DNA-PAINT single-molecule localizations maps (Fig. 1c-e, middle) into absolute protein
copy numbers maps (Fig. 1c-e, bottom). In DNA-PAINT, a DNA-coupled antibody is
localized a predictable number of times rendering a cluster of localizations around the true
position of the protein (Fig. 1b). Using a custom-designed nanoscale DNA-origami
platform we calibrated, for each experimental imaging condition, the expected number of
localizations per molecular target to be 52 ± 6, and showed that the localization-target
relationship is linear over 20 molecular targets with a counting error lower than 10%
(Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary Note 1). Non-specific binding events are
detected as non-clustered localizations. Thus, after identifying the clusters of singlemolecule localizations using a well-established model-based Bayesian cluster analysis
method24,25 (colored outlined points in Fig. 1c-e, middle), we used k-means clustering to
partition the localizations in each detected cluster into their corresponding protein
positions (Fig. 1b-e, bottom; Supplementary Fig. 1e). Overall, this approach allows
acquisition of a multi-colour stoichiometrically accurate map of protein positions with
nanometer spatial precision.

Nano-clusters of Csk, but monomers of PAG are recruited to the plasma membrane to
down-modulate signalling
Using the quantitative approach described above, we reconstructed the distribution of
Csk in T-cells on poly-L-lysine (‘control’) and on anti-CD3/anti-CD28 (‘activated’) coated
surfaces for either 2 or 8 min (Fig. 2a). To statistically quantify the observed spatial
organization, we performed a second stage of Bayesian-based cluster analysis on thirty 2 x 2
µm protein maps regions of interest (ROIs) from ten different Jurkat T-cells (Fig. 2a and 2b).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

This analysis allowed us to quantify the total number of Csk proteins, the number and size of
Csk clusters, and the number of Csk proteins per cluster. The analysis showed that half of the
total number of Csk proteins are lost from the plasma membrane-proximal region
following TCR engagement (17 ± 3 Csk proteins/µm2 compared with 31 ± 5 Csk
proteins/µm2 in resting cells). At later time points, there is a re-recruitment of Csk back to
the membrane, even over-shooting the original, resting protein density (43 ± 7 Csk
proteins/µm2). The total Csk protein population is composed of two distinct pools: (i) unclustered Csk proteins, defined as ‘Csk monomers’, or (ii) Csk proteins organized into
clusters containing 9 ± 6 Csk proteins per cluster (Supplementary Fig. 2).
Based on this, we therefore assessed the differences between the two pools of Csk
proteins (monomers or clusters) during TCR signalling. Immediately after T-cell receptor
stimulation, there is a 54% decrease in the number of Csk clusters (0.8 ± 0.5 clusters/µm2)
with respect to control conditions (1.6 ± 0.9 clusters/µm2) (Fib 2b). In late synapses, the
number of Csk clusters increases dramatically (3.0 ± 0.7 clusters/µm2). Conversely, the
number of Csk monomers does not change substantially between resting (15 ± 4
proteins/µm2), early (11 ± 2 proteins/µm2) and late T-cells synapses (17 ± 4 proteins/µm2).
Altogether, these data indicate that the early loss of membrane-proximal Csk and its rerecruitment at late times is dominated by the translocation of the clustered Csk pool, rather
than the monomeric population.
Since the translocation of Csk is thought to be mediated by PAG and TRAF3, we
then characterized the nanoscale organization of these proteins under the same conditions
(Fig. 2c-f).20,22 We observed that concomitant with Csk late recruitment, the total number
of PAG proteins proximal to the TCR signalosome almost doubles following 8 min of
TCR stimulation (from 9 ± 6 to 16 ± 6 PAG proteins/µm2) (Fig. 2c and 2d). However, in
contrast to the phenomena observed for Csk, PAG is predominantly recruited to the
immune synapse as monomers and not as multi-protein assemblies, characterized by a 70%
increase in the number of monomers with respect to control conditions. In contrast,
clustered PAG was unperturbed post-stimulation, with the number of PAG proteins per
cluster and size of PAG clusters remaining unchanged (Supplementary Fig. 3). On the
other hand, we found that the overall amount of TRAF3 and its clustering behavior did not
significantly change after CD3/CD28 stimulation (Fig. 2e-f and Supplementary Fig. 4).

Monomeric, not clustered PAG mediates Csk nano-cluster translocation

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Many receptors and signalling molecules co-localize into micro- and nano-scale
domains during T-cell activation.1 We therefore combined multi-colour, stoichiometric
super-resolution localization microscopy with Bayesian-based clustering and new colocalization analysis tools to describe the formation of mixed signalling complexes of Csk,
PAG and TRAF3 in T-cells.
We first generated three-colour protein maps by assigning a unique pseudo-colour to each
species and by aligning and combining each individual colour image using gold nanoparticles
as fiducial markers (Fig. 3a, top). Bayesian cluster analysis was performed on the color-coded
combined protein maps of thirty ROIs from ten different Jurkat T-cells. Besides retrieving the
typical cluster characteristics parameters, we also obtained the information related to the
protein composition of each cluster (Fig. 3a, bottom) and plotted it in ternary composition
diagrams (Fig. 3b). Every point on the ternary plot represents a different composition of the
three components: Csk (red), TRAF3 (green) and PAG (blue). Specifically, we assigned to
each cluster a colour code the correlates to the percentage of each protein in the cluster (Fig.
3b) and depicted four circles that correspond to the four possible cluster combinations: (i)
Csk-TRAF3; (ii) Csk-PAG; (iii) PAG-TRAF3 and (iv) Csk-TRAF3-PAG. The colour and
position of each of these circles relates to the most prominent composition of each cluster
combination and the size represents the percentage of that cluster combination in relationship
to the others.
Ternary graphs for Csk-TRAF3-PAG indicate that both Csk co-clusters with TRAF3 and
PAG proteins to a greater extent than any of the other protein combinations (iii and iv), with
PAG-TRAF3 co-clusters only contributing to a minority of mixed protein clusters. To
quantify the amount of co-clustering which could be the result of coincidental colocalisation, we shuffled the individual thirty ROIs of Csk, PAG and TRAF3 protein maps
in each condition and created new merged maps of Csk, PAG and TRAF3 from randomly
selected ROIs. We then analyzed the shuffled maps using the same pipeline as described
above (Supplementary Fig. 5a). The number of mixed clusters were then counted in each ROI
for the different experimental conditions and compared to the corresponding shuffled data
(Fig. 3c, exp: experimental vs. rnd: random).
This controlled assessment allowed us to conclude that even the detected Csk-PAG or
PAG-TRAF3 cluster combinations do not show any additional, specific co-clustering
above that expected for the random case. This indicates that the Csk-PAG interaction does
not involve the pool of clustered PAG at the plasma membrane. This is in keeping with our
finding that only the monomeric pool of PAG changes following TCR activation. With

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

regards to TRAF3, we did not observe any significant evidence to infer that TRAF3 clusters
mediate Csk nano-cluster translocation from the membrane to the cytosol, as there was no
significant TRAF3-Csk co-clustering detected.

PTPN22 is required for the re-recruit Csk to late synapses
Csk is known to be one of the main interaction partners of PTPN22, a key downregulator of TCR signalling that can dephosphorylate Lck on its active residue, Tyr394.26
PTPN22 and Csk form a complex that is thought to enable synergistic inhibition of TCR
signalling.26–28 Other reports, however, suggest that the PTPN22-Csk complex limits PTPN22
function by either restraining its localization to the cytoplasm29 or promoting the
phosphorylation of an inhibitory residue on PTPN22.30 Here, we exploit the high sensitivity
of DNA-qPAINT combined with our cluster and co-cluster analysis pipeline to enable, for the
first time, a detailed study of how the loss of PTPN22 affects Csk regulatory function.
Recently, we demonstrated the first example of an isogenic human T-cell line that
lacks PTPN22 generated using CRISPR gene editing.31 We confirmed by western blotting the
complete suppression of PTPN22 expression, whilst maintaining constant expression levels
of PTPN22 known interactors Lck, Zap-70 and Csk, as well as, PAG and TRAF3 (Fig. 4a).31
PTPN22 KO Jurkat T-cells exhibit, in response to TCR stimulation, increased ERK
phosphorylation (Fig. 4b) and IL-2 expression levels.31 As expected, we do not detect
phosphorylation differences in upstream signalling molecules such as Lck and ZAP70
between the WT and PTPN22 KO cells (Supplementary Fig. 6).
In contrast to whole-cell level results (Fig. 4a), using DNA-qPAINT, we observed a
46% increase in the total amount of Csk at the membrane with respect to wild-type (WT)
cells (Fig. 4c and 4d). This increase is mainly dictated by the higher number of Csk clusters
in PTPN22 KO cells (2.5 ± 1.0 Csk clusters/µm2) with respect to WT cells (1.6 ± 0.9 Csk
clusters/µm2), with almost no increase from the monomeric pool of Csk (15 ± 4 Csk
proteins/µm2 in WT vs. 18 ± 4 Csk proteins/µm2 in PTPN22 KO) (P values for WT vs KO
comparisons are <0.0001 and 0.0410, respectively). As was the case for the WT cells,
following TCR stimulation, these Csk clusters are lost, however, the reduction is somewhat
less when compared to WT cells (54% reduction in WT vs. 35% in PTPN22 KO). Most
interestingly, the absence of PTPN22 leads to a marked failure to recruit Csk clusters back to
the plasma membrane during late synapses. In fact, in the KO condition, the number of Csk
clusters at late synapses is 20% lower (2.0 ± 1.0 Csk clusters/µm2) even than in resting cells
(2.5 ± 1.0 Csk clusters/µm2). Furthermore, there are no significant differences (P-value >

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

0.9999) between the number of clusters detected at early and late synapses; a high contrast to
the behavior observed in the WT cells where the number of Csk clusters quadrupled between
early and late activation (P-value < 0.0001). Finally, it is worth noting that the clusters
characteristics of Csk – i.e. number of proteins per cluster and cluster size – in PTPN22 KO
cells are very similar to those in WT cells (Supplementary Fig. 2). Taken together, this data
indicates that PTPN22 regulates the relative levels of Csk clusters proximal to the plasma
membrane by controlling the amount of Csk clusters that migrate there from the cytosol
during late synapses.

PAG late recruitment is also disrupted in the absence of PTPN22
We also examined the effect of PTPN22 deficiency on the nanoscale organization of
PAG and TRAF3. Like Csk, PAG in PTPN22 KO cells, showed a marked different
behavior in comparison to WT cells. PAG density and clustering before and after TCR
stimulation showed no significant differences in the absence of PTPN22 (Fig. 4e and 4f).
However, it did display higher basal levels (15 ± 7 PAG proteins/µm2) throughout the
entire time-course used in this study, even though PAG expression levels at the whole cell
level were equivalent for both WT and PTPN22 KO cells (Fig. 4a). With respect to
TRAF3 (Fig. 4g and 4h), total TRAF3 at the plasma membrane is higher in PTPN22 KO
cells compared to WT (15 ± 4 vs. 12 ± 4 TRAF3 proteins/µm2) (P-value = 0.0149). Again,
these results contrast with whole cell biochemical experiments (Fig. 4a) were we did not
observe any difference for TRAF3 expression level between WT and PTPN22 KO cells.
Absence of PTPN22 therefore causes a failure to re-recruit Csk at late time points, failure to
recruit PAG and an over-abundance of TRAF3 at the plasma membrane. To assess the
existence of mixed Csk, PAG and TRAF3 clusters in PTPN22 KO cells we used the same
pipeline as described above. Unlike for WT cells, we found that the detection of Csk and
TRAF3 mixed clusters in resting cells is significant (P-value = 0.0335), and that they
separate immediately after activation (Supplementary Fig. 7).

Discussion
Translocation of Csk to the plasma membrane by transmembrane adaptor proteins,
such as PAG, is a critical step towards Src kinase inactivation of the T-cell signalling
pathway through phosphorylation of the Lck inhibitory tyrosine site. In resting T-cells, PAG
is constitutively phosphorylated at Tyr317 enabling binding of Csk through its SH2 domain.32
Upon T-cell stimulation, however, PAG becomes dephosphorylated allowing Csk to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

translocate to the cytoplasm, and as such it alleviates Csk inhibition on active Lck. Csk late
re-recruitment back to the plasma membrane is also associated with PAG rephosphorylation.19,32 Here we found that Csk exists in clusters proximal to the plasma
membrane and that it is those clusters which briefly leave the TCR signalosome following
early (2 min) TCR stimulation to later (8 min) return to restore its regulatory function. The
translocation of Csk clusters to the cytosol enhances the efficacy of downstream signalling by
freeing Lck from Csk’s inhibitory action. The re-recruitment of the cytosolic Csk to the
membrane is therefore crucial to its function.33 The transmembrane adaptor PAG has been
long proposed to mediate membrane recruitment of Csk via its SH2 domain.32 Our data
shows that whilst no significant mixed Csk-PAG clusters exist, the density of both molecules
increases at the immune-synapse area during late signalling, with the number of PAG
monomers almost doubling. While Csk clusters are not directly associated with PAG, they
instead might provide a readily accessible pool of Csk proteins close to the plasma
membrane, available for PAG interaction.
We quantified that Csk clusters contain 9 ± 6 Csk proteins; with cluster radius
ranging from 18 to 32 nm. This range of cluster parameters agrees very well with other
signalling molecules such as TCR (7–30 TCRs per cluster; 35-70 nm cluster radius)4 or CD59
(3-9 CD59 per cluster)34 as determined by TEM or single-molecule tracking experiments,
respectively. Furthermore, they are in line with computational and systems biology
approaches which have revealed that cluster size in the range of ∼ 5–10 molecules allows for
higher signal fidelity.35
We also investigated the role of PTPN22 in Csk clustering dynamics. PTPN22, a key
down-regulator of TCR signalling that can dephosphorylate Lck in its active Tyr394 residue, is
a phosphatase of interest due to a missense mutation (R620W) that has been linked to more
than 16 autoimmune diseases in human, including type I diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis and
systemic lupus erythematosus.23,36 The C1858T single-nucleotide polymorphism in PTPN22
disrupts its interaction site with Csk.37 However, the functional outcomes associated with
PTPN22-Csk impaired association remained unclear since both gain- and loss-of phosphatase
function has been reported for the PTPN22-R620W variant in humans.38–40 By isolating the
effect of PTPN22 from the inherent complications in analyzing human data (i.e. genetic and
environmental variables of distinct individuals), we found that absence of PTPN22 leads to
increased ERK phosphorylation and IL-2 expression, which is in keeping with the loss-offunction results observed for the PTPN22 knock-out (KO)41 and the orthologous R619W
allelic variant in mouse T-cells.42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We detected that in the PTPN22 KO cells there is a marked failure to recruit Csk
and PAG back during late synapses as well as failure to lose Csk following early TCR
engagement. PTPN22 is therefore required to maintain membrane proximal Csk clusters.
Quantitative proteomics experiments as well as co-immunoprecipitation results reveal that
the PTPN22-Csk association is constitutive; it decreases following TCR stimulation,
reaching a maximum after ~ 10 min of TCR stimulation. 30,43 This might indicate that Csk
clustering deregulation in PTPN22 KO cells is linked to the loss of Csk-PTPN22
interaction. For example, Veillette et al. 44 indicated that PTPN22 and Dok adaptors
cooperate with PAG to recruit Csk to the plasma membrane to interact with different Src
kinases, so that it is possible that PTPN22 might bring Csk to the tyrosine-phosphorylated
ITAMs and ZAP-70. In contrast to the results observed in WT cells, we also detected that
lack of PTPN22 leads to a modest formation of mixed Csk and TRAF3 clusters in resting Tcells and that there is a slight increase in TRAF3 total expression levels which events out to
WT levels following TCR engagement. It is possible that in the absence of PTPN22, TRAF3,
which would be otherwise bound to PTPN22 and Csk enhancing their interaction in the
cytoplasm,22 are now only interacting with Csk leading to increased co-localisation.
In conclusion, we propose a model (Fig. 5) in which Csk nano-clusters are central to
increase the effective avidity to membrane-associated proteins, where Csk can exert its
inhibitory function on Src family kinases. In this view, Csk clusters provide both, an instant
pool of Csk monomers, and also a quick means to exclude Csk proteins from the TCR
signalosome to account for proper activation. By excluding Csk nano-clusters from the
membrane proximal area, the activation kinase cascade can be sensitive to changes in the
localization of only a few ligands. Our model is consistent with experimental evidence from
other groups showing that a modest decrease in Csk levels are sufficient to increase Lck
phosphorylation on its activating residue, Tyr394.45 Consistently, by comparing the results in
WT and PTPN22 KO cells, we also identified that even only small changes in the total
number of Csk molecules, which would be difficult to detect with current biochemical
methods, is enough to provoke increase in functional readouts such as IL2 and Erk
phosphorylation levels. Overall, our results also illustrate the power of DNA-qPAINT when
combined with the latest statistical cluster and co-cluster analysis frameworks for dissecting
complex signalling pathways which are regulated by nanoscale spatio-temporal organisation.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figures

Figure 1. Exchange DNA-PAINT imaging of Csk, PAG and TRAF3 in WT Jurkat Tcells (a) Schematic representation of exchange DNA-qPAINT imaging. Sequential imaging
and washing steps are performed until all target proteins are imaged. Super-resolved
information is then reconstructed, drift-corrected and aligned to form multiplexed data stacks.
(b) In DNA-qPAINT, the number of sites can be calculated using the binding kinetic
information between fluorescently labeled ‘imager’ strands and their complementary
‘docking’ strands attached to the target antibodies. Using k-means function it is then possible

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

to recover the most likely distribution of sites from the single-molecule localizations
distribution. (c-e) DNA-PAINT single-molecule (SM) localization maps (top) of WT Jurkat
T-cells supported on poly-L-lysine (PLL) coated glass before they were fixed, permeabilized,
and stained with mouse anti-Csk, -PAG and -TRAF3 antibodies each carrying a unique 11 nt
single-stranded DNA (docking strand). Images were acquired by sequential imaging with
each of the complementary DNA strands labeled with ATTO655 (imager strand) under totalinternal reflection illumination. Single-molecule localization distributions (points) were
analyzed with a cluster analysis algorithm based on Ripley’s K function, Bayesian statistics
and topographical prominence to identify cluster points (red, blue or green outlined) in 4 µm2
region maps (center, boxed region). Cluster points were converted into the most likely
descriptor of Csk (c), PAG (d) and TRAF3 (e) protein maps (bottom) using the
proportionally factor between single-molecule localizations and docking sites and a k-means
clustering algorithm (Supplementary Figure 1). Scale bars represent 2 µm (top) and 200 nm
(center and bottom).

Figure 2. Csk and PAG are recruited back in masse to the membrane during late
synapses. Csk (a), PAG (c) or TRAF3 (e) protein maps reconstructed from the localization
maps of WT Jurkat T-cells supported on PLL (top) or anti-CD3/anti-CD28 coated glass for
either 2 min (center) or 8 min (bottom). For each condition, Csk, PAG or TRAF3 protein
maps distributions were analyzed using a Bayesian-based cluster analysis algorithm to
identify cluster points (red, blue or green outlined) and extract their properties (proteins per

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

clusters, cluster size, percentage of clustered proteins). Selected descriptors from the cluster
analysis of Csk (b), PAG (d) and TRAF3 (f) protein maps representing total number of
proteins (top), number of non-clustered proteins (centre) and number of clusters (bottom) per
4 µm2 for non-activated (PLL) and activated conditions (2 or 8 min, anti-CD3/anti-CD28).
Bars represent means ± SD (b and f, top & centre) or medians ± interquartile range (b and f,
bottom and d). Turkey’s ordinary one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (b and f, top &
centre) or Kruskal-Wallis (b and f, bottom and d) multiple comparisons tests, **** P<
0.0001; *** P< 0.0005; ** P< 0.005; ns, not significant. Data are from three independent
experiments and represents thirty, 4 µm2 regions, obtained from 10-15 cells per condition.
Scale bars represent 200 nm.

Figure 3. Csk, PAG and TRAF3 mixed protein cluster analysis. (a) Exchange DNAPAINT single-molecule localization maps (top) of WT Jurkat T-cells supported on poly-Llysine (PLL) coated glass before they were fixed, permeabilized, and stained with mouse
anti-Csk (red), -PAG (blue) and -TRAF3 (green) antibodies each carrying a unique 11 nt
single-stranded DNAs. Three pseudo-color protein map distributions (points) were analyzed

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

with a Bayesian-based cluster analysis algorithm to identify mixed protein cluster points
(grey outlined) in 4 µm2 region maps (center, boxed region). The composition of each of the
identified cluster was calculated (bottom) and results (b) for WT Jurkat T-cells supported on
PLL (top) or anti-CD3/anti-CD28 coated glass for either 2 min (center) or 8 min (bottom)
were plotted in ternary diagrams. Each point in the ternary plot represents a mixed cluster; the
position and color of the point decodes its protein composition. The four main cluster
combinations (i.e Csk-PAG; Csk-TRAF3; PAG-TRAF3 and Csk-PAG-TRAF3) are
represented by a transparent circle positioned in the most likely cluster composition for that
combination, and with the size representing the contribution of that cluster combination type
with respect to all the found mixed clusters. (c) To evaluate the significance of the detected
merged clusters, numbers of identified mixed clusters for Csk-TRAF3 (top), Csk-PAG
(center) and PAG-TRAF3 (bottom) in experimental data is and TRAF3 at non-stimulated
and stimulated conditions (rnd). Bars represent medians ± interquartile range. KruskalWallis multiple comparisons nonparametric test; *** P< 0.0005; * P< 0.05; ns, not
significant. Data are from three independent experiments and represents thirty, 4 µm2 regions,
obtained from 10-15 cells per condition. Scale bar in a represents 200 nm.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Csk and PAG recruitment at late synapses is impaired in PTPN22 KO T-cells.
(a) WT and PTPN22 KO T-cells were lysed and analyzed by Western blotting against the
indicated proteins. GAPDH was used as loading control. Protein abundance relative to
GAPDH in non-stimulated cells was determined. Bars represent means ± SD of three
experiments. Turkey’s ordinary one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA): **P = 0.0029; ns,
not significant. (b) WT (grey) and PTPN22 KO (white) T-cells were supported on PLL or
anti-CD3/anti-CD28 coated glass for either 2 min or 8 min before undergoing flow
cytometric analysis of Erk phosphorylation. The values represent the percentage of cells that
are pErk positive. Data are representative of 3 independent experiments. Csk (c), PAG (e)
and TRAF3 (g) protein maps reconstructed from the DNA-PAINT localization maps of
PTPN22 KO Jurkat T-cells supported on PLL (top) or anti-CD3/anti-CD28 coated glass for
either 2 min (center) or 8 min (bottom). DNA-PAINT imaging and protein maps
reconstruction was performed using the same pipeline as described in caption Figure 1. For
each condition, protein maps distributions were analyzed using a Bayesian-based cluster
analysis algorithm to identify cluster points (red or blue outlined) and extract their properties
(proteins per clusters, cluster size, percentage of clustered proteins). Scale bars represent 200
nm. Selected descriptors from the cluster analysis of Csk (d), PAG (f) and TRAF3 (h) protein

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

maps representing total number of proteins (top), number of non-clustered proteins (center)
and number of clusters (bottom) per 4 µm2 for non-activated (PLL) and activated conditions
(2 or 8 min, anti-CD3/anti-CD28). Bars represent means ± SD (d and h, top & centre) or
medians ± interquartile range (d and h, bottom and f). Turkey’s ordinary one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) (d and h, top & centre) or Kruskal-Wallis (d and h, bottom and f)
multiple comparisons tests, **** P< 0.0001; ** P< 0.005; * P< 0.05; ns, not significant. Data
are from three independent experiments and represents thirty, 4 µm2 regions, obtained from
10-15 cells per condition.

Figure 5. Csk clusters proximal to the plasma membrane deliver Csk monomers to
down-regulate signalling in a PTPN22 dependent manner. (a) Csk exerts a tonic
inhibitory control of TCR signalling by promoting the closed and inactive conformation of
Src-family kinases such as Lck, via phosphorylation of its regulatory sites (top panel).
Immediately after T-cell activation, Csk clusters move away from the plasma membrane,
which leads to the activation of Lck and initiation of the TCR phosphorylation cascade
(middle panel). However, to curtail prolonged T-cell activation, Csk clusters are recruited
back in masse to the plasma membrane to deliver Csk monomers to late recruited PAG

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(bottom panel). TRAF3 clusters are, on the other hand, not involved in the translocation of
Csk clusters from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasm and vice-versa. (b) Csk and
PTPN22 form a complex that modulates the inhibitory function of both proteins in TCR
signalling. Loss of PTPN22, leads to impaired Csk clustering dynamics with augmented Csk
and PAG expression levels close to the TCR signalosome. Late recruitment of Csk clusters to
the plasma membrane is impaired and PAG appears constitutively recruited in PTPN22 KO
cells (bottom panel). As a consequence, TCR signalling is augmented and sustained for
longer compared to WT T-cells.

Methods
Antibodies
Rabbit monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies against PTPN22 (D6D1H) and pLck (Tyr505)
were from Cell Signaling Technology and mouse monoclonal antibody against ZAP-70
(29/ZAP70 Kinase) was from BD Biosciences. Mouse monoclonal antibodies against Csk (E3); Cbp/PAG (G-8); TRAF3 (G-6) were from Santa Cruz, Biotechnology and its conjugation
to DNA-PAINT docking strands (Supplementary Table 1) was performed using
maleimidePEG2-succinimidyl ester coupling reaction according to a published protocol11 as
described in Supplementary Method 1. All DNA reagents were from biomers.net GmbH.
Secondary anti-rabbit and anti-mouse-HRP antibodies were from Dako.

Cell lines, media
TCR−/− Jurkat cells were obtained from Hans Stauss, University College London and
maintained in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI-1640, Gibco) medium supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Serotec) and 5 mM L-glutamine and cultured at 37C,
5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. Retroviral transduction of TCR constructs was performed
as described46 and one clone with high expression for a pTax peptide (LLFGYPVYV, derived
human T-lymphotropic virus type 1) was selected as the parent line for the Crispr/Cas
mediated PTPN22 deletion. PTPN22 KO Jurkat clone was produced by transfecting the
selected parent line with plasmids containing Cas9, sgRNA sequences targeting PTPTN22
Exon 1, and a GFP reporter as described in elsewhere.31 Western blot and PTPN22 Exon 1
region sequencing confirmed the deletion of PTPN22 protein in the KO cell line. The
PTPN22 wild-type (WT) cell line was obtained by transfecting the same parent cell line using
only the GFP reporter construct.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Western blotting
WT and PTPN22 KO T-cells were harvested, washed in PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer (Cell
Signaling Technology) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Biolegend). Lysates were added to
Laemmli sample buffer (Bio-Rad) with 10% 2-mercaptoethanol, resolved on SDS-PAGE gels
and transferred to Immobilon-P polyvinylidene difluoride membranes and blocked with 5%
BSA in TBST. After incubation with the corresponding primary and secondary antibodies
diluted in 5% BSA in TBST, proteins were visualized by SuperSignal chemiluminescent
reaction (Pierce Biotechnology) in a ChemiDoc station (Bio-Rad).

Phospho flow cytometry
1.5 million WT and PTPN22 KO T-cells per condition were added to a 24-well plate, coated
with plate-bound PLL or anti-CD3 (2μg/ml) plus anti-CD28 (5μg/ml). Plates were briefly
spun (3 seconds at 300xg) to ensure cells were on the plate bottom, and then placed in the
incubator for the indicated time. Cells were fixed with 3% paraformaldehyde, washed, and
stained with antigen presenting cells conjugated anti-ERK1/2 pThr202/Thy204 (Biolegend,
clone 6B8B69) overnight at 4°C in FOXP3 perm buffer (Biolegend). T-cells were analyzed
with a BD LSRFortessa or FACSCanto II (BD Biosciences), and analysis conducted using
FlowJo V.10.1 software (Tree Star Inc.).

Immunofluorescence staining
Six-channel glass-bottomed microscopy chambers (µ-Slide VI 0.5, ibidi) were coated
overnight at 4ºC with 50 µL of anti-CD3 (8 µg/ml, clone OKT3, Cambridge Bioscience) and
anti-CD28 (20 µg/ml, clone CD28.2, BD Bioscience) or for 10 min at room temperature with
0.01% poly-L-lysine (PLL), washed three times in PBS and left in Hank’s balanced salt
solution (HBBS) before use. T-cells were resuspended at 3x106 cells/mL in HBBS and
immediately added to the coated glass chambers. Following 2 or 8 min of incubation at 37ºC,
the cells were pH shift-fixed for 90 min with a 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and 0.2%
glutaraldehyde solution in PEM buffer (80 mM Pipes dipotassium salt, supplemented with 2
mM MgCl2 and 5 mM EGTA, pH 6.8) at 25ºC. Following permeabilization for 10 min at
25ºC with 0.01% lysolecithin, samples were treated with 20 mM NH4Cl for 10 min at room
temperature to quench autofluorescence. The chambers were then block with 5% bovine
serum albumin (BSA) for 2 hours and incubated with 0.1 µM DNA-conjugated primary
antibodies in 5% BSA in PBS at 4ºC overnight. Cells were fixed again with a 2% PFA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

solution in PBS for 5 min at 25ºC, followed by 3x washes with PBS. 100 nm gold
nanoparticles (BBI solutions) were added as fiducial markers for drift correction by
incubating the sample for 5 min in a 1:2 solution of nanoparticles in PBS and washed 3×
washes with PBS, and 3× with PAINT buffer (1x PBS supplemented with 500 mM NaCl).
Samples were then used immediately for DNA-PAINT imaging.

Imaging conditions
Exchange DNA-PAINT imaging was performed on a Nikon N-STORM microscope equipped
with a 100× 1.49 numerical aperture oil immersion TIRF objective and a Perfect Focus
System. Samples were imaged under TIRF illumination with a 647 nm laser line (~ 2
kW/cm²) that was coupled into the microscope objective using a quad band set for TIRF
(Chroma 89902-ET-405/488/561/647 nm). Fluorescence light was imaged on an EMCCD
camera (iXon DU-897U, Andor Technologies) with a final pixel size of 160 nm in the focal
plane. For fluid exchange we connected the ibidi µ-Slide VI 0.5 chamber with a silicon
tubing (Silicon Tubing 0.5 mm ID, ibidi) via a suitable adapter (Elbow Luer Connector Male,
ibidi). Each imaging acquisition step was performed by adding the corresponding 5 nM Atto
655-labelled DNA imager strand in PAINT buffer to the sample (Supplementary Table 1,
biomers.net GmbH) followed by a 5 min washing step (corresponding to 10 mL of PAINT
buffer). Before the next imager strand solution was introduced, we monitored the camera
readout to ensure complete exchange of imager solutions. Sequential imaging and washing
steps were performed until all three target proteins (Csk, PAG and TRAF3) were imaged. We
acquired, for each imaging step, sequences of 10,000 frames at 10 Hz acquisition rate with an
electron multiplier gain of 50 and pre-amp gain profile 1.

Reconstruction of proteins maps and data analysis
x,y localizations coordinates from the raw fluorescent DNA-PAINT imaging experiments
were obtained using the ‘Localize’ module of Picasso software. 11 Localizations with
uncertainties greater than 15 nm were removed. Drift correction and multi-colour data
alignment was performed using a combination of redundant cross-correlation and fiducial
markers approach with the ‘Render’ module of Picasso. Super-resolution image rendering
was done by plotting each localization as a Gaussian probably function with standard
deviation equal to its localization precision.
To convert the list of x,y localizations into a list of x,y molecular coordinates we further
processed the data using a combination of Bayesian-based cluster analysis algorithms, k-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

means clustering and the prior knowledge of the expected number of single-molecule
localizations per docking strand (see Supplementary Note 1). First, we randomly selected
thirty non-overlapping 2 µm × 2 µm regions of interest (ROIs) for the analysis of each timecourse point experiment (before and following 2- and 8-min TCR stimulation), with a
maximum of three ROIs per cell.24,25 To avoid suboptimal clustering results; ROIs were
selected such that they do not intersect with cell boundaries. To identify sets of localizations
arising from a real docking strand target, we analyzed the data using a robust cluster analysis
technique based on Ripley’s K function, Bayesian statistics and topographical prominence.
Analysis parameters (prior settings) were choose as default (see Supplementary Table 2) as
they genuinely represented the experimental localization-based data sets: (i) cluster-analysis
in micron-sized regions; (ii) 20 - 80% of the localizations are in clusters; (iii) radius of the
cluster into the 10-500 nm region. Non-cluster points and points attributed to a cluster with
fewer than 26 localizations were discarded because they are likely to correspond to noise.
This cut-off value was chosen as it is the largest value that gives a cumulative probability of 1
of getting cluster of points with more than that number of localizations (i.e. P (n ≥ 26) = 1,
where n is the number of localizations)). For this consideration we assumed that single
molecule localizations are distributed as a Poisson process and we experimentally calibrated
that a single docking strand yields, on average, ~ 52 localizations (see Supplementary Note 1
and Supplementary Fig. 1). To recover the most accurate descriptors (x,y molecular
coordinates) for the distribution of proteins underlaying the detected distribution of clustered
localizations, we implemented a k-means clustering strategy in MATLAB (see
Supplementary Fig. 1e). The k-means algorithm simply partitions a number of observations
(i.e. x,y localization coordinates per cluster) into k sets; returning as a result each set center
(i.e. x,y molecular coordinates). The value k, calculated for each detected cluster of
localizations, was estimated to be the ratio between the number of localizations within a
cluster and the expected number of localizations per docking strand (see Supplementary Fig.
1c).
To quantify the level and size scale of proteins clustering, we further analyzed the generated
x,y molecular coordinates with the topographical prominence Ripley’s K based Bayesian
model47 because it is more robust to detect small multimeric clusters, as it is the case for the
observed proteins maps, compared to the originally published Bayesian model script
version.24 This was possible by choosing priors that increase the typical detectability limit of
clusters (around six points per cluster). Where, non-clustered points correspond to
monomeric, dimeric or trimeric proteins. Particularly, we defined the priors as having 80% of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the points in clusters and we chose a wider radial distribution towards smaller radius values
(Supplementary Table 3). This last step it necessary because using k-means clustering
partitions the data so as to minimize the distances within the sets, and as such, protein cluster
sizes will be underestimated.

Mixed protein cluster analysis
To assess the existence of mixed protein clusters, we merged the stack of generated pseudocolour molecular localizations coordinates (Csk, PAG and TRAF3) into a single x,y
coordinate list keeping the identity of the pseudo-colour for each point (merged dataset).
Bayesian-based cluster analysis was performed on the merged dataset similar to the onecolour data set as described above; using priors that are bias towards the detection of small
mixed protein clusters (Supplementary Table 3). Output data provided both, a label that
assigned whether a point was or not in a clustered, with the identity of that cluster, and an
extra label identifying the corresponding pseudo-colour of each point. This information
permitted allocating to each detected cluster its corresponding protein percentage
composition, similar to an RGB code (R = Csk, G = TRAF3 and B = PAG). Mixed protein
clusters were considered as such, only when, there were at least two molecular units of each
cluster combination type (i.e. RG, RB, GB, RGB) in the cluster. Otherwise, the cluster was
assigned as pure in the component with higher percentage. To ease graphical representation,
each detected mixed protein cluster was depicted as a point in a ternary plot, with the position
of the point given by the composition of the three proteins in the cluster. We placed a pure
cluster of G (TRAF3) at (x,y) = (0,0); of B (PAG) at (1,0) and of Csk at (1/2;√3/2). Resulting
in the position of any RGB cluster combination being (x,y) = (1/2 * (2B+R)/(R+G+B), √3/2 *
R/(R+G+B)). The color of each point in the ternary plot also represents its RGB cluster
composition. We depicted a circle for each of the main cluster combinations (i.e. RG, RB,
GB, RGB) with its position being the most likely cluster composition for that combination,
and with the size representing the contribution of that cluster combination type with respect
to all the found mixed clusters. To evaluate the significance of the detected merged clusters,
we compared them with an artificial merged dataset obtained by randomly mixing the same
experimental individual single-colour protein maps and analyzed them using the same
pipeline as described above.

Statistical analysis

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 6.0 software (GraphPad). The distributions
of data points and their variance were determined, and parametric or non-parametric test were
utilized as appropriate. Comparison between two groups were evaluated using an unpaired,
two-tailed, Mann-Whitney U test or Student’s t test for normally distributed data. Groups of
three or more were compared using the rank-based nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis H test or
Tukey’s ordinary one-way ANOVA multiple comparison test for normally distributed data.
Differences were considered to be statistically significantly different when P < 0.05 for
rejecting the null hypothesis.

Data availability.
The data sets generated and analyzed in this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the BBSRC grant BB/R007365/1 and Versus Arthritis grant
20525. S.S. acknowledges financial support from the Human Frontier Science Program
Organization through a postdoctoral fellowship.

Author contributions
S.S prepared the DNA-coupled primary antibodies, performed the Exchange-PAINT imaging
experiments, developed relevant analysis code, analyzed data and wrote the manuscript. J.G.
developed clustering and co-clustering analysis code. D.J.W. generated samples. J.B.
performed the Western blotting and the flow-cytometry experiments. C.B. generated the
Crispr/Cas mediated PTPN22 deletion, while R.Z. supervised the PTPN22 KO Jurkat T-cell
construction. D.O. and A.C. conceived the idea and supervised the research. All authors
provided feedback on the manuscript.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
1.

Sherman, E., Barr, V. & Samelson, L. E. Super-resolution characterization of TCRdependent signaling clusters. Immunol. Rev. (2013). doi:10.1111/imr.12010

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

2.

Betzig, E. et al. Imaging intracellular fluorescent proteins at nanometer resolution.
Science 313, 1642–1645 (2006).

3.

Rust, M. J., Bates, M. & Zhuang, X. Sub-diffraction-limit imaging by stochastic
optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM). Nat. Methods 3, 793–795 (2006).

4.

Lillemeier, B. F. et al. TCR and Lat are expressed on separate protein islands on T cell
membranes and concatenate during activation. Nat. Immunol. 11, 90–96 (2010).

5.

Van Zanten, T. S. et al. Hotspots of GPI-anchored proteins and integrin nanoclusters
function as nucleation sites for cell adhesion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. (2009).
doi:10.1073/pnas.0905217106

6.

Rossy, J., Owen, D. M., Williamson, D. J., Yang, Z. & Gaus, K. Conformational states
of the kinase Lck regulate clustering in early T cell signaling. Nat. Immunol. 14, 82–9
(2013).

7.

Katz, Z. B., Novotná, L., Blount, A. & Lillemeier, B. F. A cycle of Zap70 kinase
activation and release from the TCR amplifies and disperses antigenic stimuli. Nat.
Immunol. (2017). doi:10.1038/ni.3631

8.

Williamson, D. J. et al. Pre-existing clusters of the adaptor Lat do not participate in
early T cell signaling events. Nat. Immunol. 12, 655–662 (2011).

9.

Feher, K., Halstead, J. M., Goyette, J. & Gaus, K. Can single molecule localization
microscopy detect nanoclusters in T cells? Current Opinion in Chemical Biology
(2019). doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2019.05.019

10.

Rossboth, B. et al. TCRs are randomly distributed on the plasma membrane of resting
antigen-experienced T cells. Nat. Immunol. (2018). doi:10.1038/s41590-018-0162-7

11.

Schnitzbauer, J., Strauss, M. T., Schlichthaerle, T., Schueder, F. & Jungmann, R.
Super-resolution microscopy with DNA-PAINT. Nat. Protoc. 12, 1198–1228 (2017).

12.

Dai, M., Jungmann, R. & Yin, P. Optical imaging of individual biomolecules in
densely packed clusters. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 798–807 (2016).

13.

Jungmann, R. et al. Quantitative super-resolution imaging with qPAINT. Nat. Methods
(2016). doi:10.1038/nmeth.3804

14.

Jungmann, R. et al. Multiplexed 3D cellular super-resolution imaging with DNAPAINT and Exchange-PAINT. Nat. Methods 11, 313–318 (2014).

15.

Bergman, M. et al. The human p50csk tyrosine kinase phosphorylates p56lck at Tyr505 and down regulates its catalytic activity. EMBO J. 11, 2919–2924 (1992).

16.

Dobenecker, M.-W., Schmedt, C., Okada, M. & Tarakhovsky, A. The Ubiquitously
Expressed Csk Adaptor Protein Cbp Is Dispensable for Embryogenesis and T-Cell

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Development and Function. Mol. Cell. Biol. (2005). doi:10.1128/mcb.25.23.1053310542.2005
17.

Nada, S. et al. Constitutive activation of Src family kinases in mouse embryos that
lack Csk. Cell (1993). doi:10.1016/0092-8674(93)90642-4

18.

Schmedt, C. et al. Csk controls antigen receptor-mediated development and selection
of T- lineage cells. Nature (1998). doi:10.1038/29802

19.

Torgersen, K. M. et al. Release from Tonic Inhibition of T Cell Activation through
Transient Displacement of C-terminal Src Kinase (Csk) from Lipid Rafts. J. Biol.
Chem. (2001). doi:10.1074/jbc.C100014200

20.

Kawabuchi, M. et al. Transmembrane phosphoprotein Cbp regulates the activities of
Src-family tyrosine kinases. Nature 404, 999–1003 (2000).

21.

Hrdinka, M. & Horejsi, V. PAG - a multipurpose transmembrane adaptor protein.
Oncogene 33, 1–12 (2013).

22.

Wallis, A. M. et al. TRAF3 enhances TCR signaling by regulating the inhibitors Csk
and PTPN22. Sci. Rep. (2017). doi:10.1038/s41598-017-02280-4

23.

Stanford, S. M. & Bottini, N. PTPN22: The archetypal non-HLA autoimmunity gene.
Nature Reviews Rheumatology (2014). doi:10.1038/nrrheum.2014.109

24.

Rubin-Delanchy, P. et al. Bayesian cluster identification in single-molecule
localization microscopy data. Nat. Methods 12, (2015).

25.

Griffié, J. et al. 3D Bayesian cluster analysis of super-resolution data reveals LAT
recruitment to the T cell synapse. Sci. Rep. (2017). doi:10.1038/s41598-017-04450-w

26.

Cloutier, J. F. & Veillette, a. Cooperative inhibition of T-cell antigen receptor
signaling by a complex between a kinase and a phosphatase. J. Exp. Med. 189, 111–21
(1999).

27.

Gjörloff-Wingren, a, Saxena, M., Williams, S., Hammi, D. & Mustelin, T.
Characterization of TCR-induced receptor-proximal signaling events negatively
regulated by the protein tyrosine phosphatase PEP. Eur. J. Immunol. 29, 3845–54
(1999).

28.

Veillette, A., Rhee, I., Souza, C. M. & Davidson, D. PEST family phosphatases in
immunity, autoimmunity, and autoinflammatory disorders. Immunol. Rev. 228, 312–
324 (2009).

29.

Vang, T. et al. LYP inhibits T-cell activation when dissociated from CSK. Nat. Chem.
Biol. 8, 437–446 (2012).

30.

de la Puerta, M. L. et al. The Autoimmunity Risk Variant LYP-W620 Cooperates with

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

CSK in the Regulation of TCR Signaling. PLoS One 8, 1–11 (2013).
31.

Bray, C. et al. Crispr/Cas mediated deletion of PTPN22 in Jurkat T cells enhances
TCR signaling and production of IL-2. Front. Immunol. (2018).
doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.02595

32.

Brdička, T. et al. Phosphoprotein associated with glycosphingolipid-enriched
microdomains (PAG), a novel ubiquitously expressed transmembrane adaptor protein,
binds the protein tyrosine kinase Csk and is involved in regulation of T cell activation.
J. Exp. Med. (2000). doi:10.1084/jem.191.9.1591

33.

Otáhal, P., Pata, S., Angelisová, P., Hořejší, V. & BrdiČka, T. The effects of
membrane compartmentalization of csk on TCR signaling. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res. (2011). doi:10.1016/j.bbamcr.2010.12.003

34.

Suzuki, K. G. N., Fujiwara, T. K., Edidin, M. & Kusumi, A. Dynamic recruitment of
phospholipase Cγ at transiently immobilized GPI-anchored receptor clusters induces
IP3-Ca2+ signaling: Single-molecule tracking study 2. J. Cell Biol. (2007).
doi:10.1083/jcb.200609175

35.

Roob, E., Trendel, N., Rein Ten Wolde, P. & Mugler, A. Cooperative Clustering
Digitizes Biochemical Signaling and Enhances its Fidelity. Biophys. J. (2016).
doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2016.02.031

36.

Siminovitch, K. A. PTPN22 and autoimmune disease. Nature Genetics (2004).
doi:10.1038/ng1204-1248

37.

Bottini, N. et al. A functional variant of lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase is associated
with type I diabetes. Nat. Genet. (2004). doi:10.1038/ng1323

38.

Vang, T. et al. Autoimmune-associated lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase is a gain-offunction variant. Nat. Genet. (2005). doi:10.1038/ng1673

39.

Vang, T., Nielsen, J. & Burn, G. L. A switch-variant model integrates the functions of
an autoimmune variant of the phosphatase PTPN22. Science Signaling (2018).
doi:10.1126/scisignal.aat0936

40.

Zikherman, J. et al. PTPN22 Deficiency Cooperates with the CD45 E613R Allele to
Break Tolerance on a Non-Autoimmune Background . J. Immunol. (2009).
doi:10.4049/jimmunol.0803317

41.

Hasegawa, K. et al. PEST Domain-Enriched Tyrosine Phosphatase (PEP) Regulation
of Effector/Memory T Cells. Science (80-. ). (2004). doi:10.1126/science.1092138

42.

Zhang, J. et al. The autoimmune diseaseg-associated PTPN22 variant promotes
calpain-mediated Lyp/Pep degradation associated with lymphocyte and dendritic cell

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/857516; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

hyperresponsiveness. Nat. Genet. (2011). doi:10.1038/ng.904
43.

Voisinne, G. et al. Quantitative interactomics in primary T cells unveils TCR signal
diversification extent and dynamics. Nat. Immunol. (2019). doi:10.1038/s41590-0190489-8

44.

Davidson, D. et al. The Csk-Associated Adaptor PAG Inhibits Effector T Cell
Activation in Cooperation with Phosphatase PTPN22 and Dok Adaptors. Cell Rep.
(2016). doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2016.11.035

45.

Manz, B. N. et al. Small molecule inhibition of Csk alters affinity recognition by T
cells. Elife (2015). doi:10.7554/eLife.08088

46.

Thomas, S. et al. Human T cells expressing affinity-matured TCR display accelerated
responses but fail to recognize low density of MHC-peptide antigen. Blood (2011).
doi:10.1182/blood-2010-12-326736

47.

Griffié, J. et al. Dynamic Bayesian Cluster Analysis of Live-Cell Single Molecule
Localization Microscopy Datasets. Small Methods (2018).
doi:10.1002/smtd.201800008

