bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Title:
Glyoxal Does Not Preserve Cellular Proteins as Accurately as PFA: A Microscopical
Survey of Epitopes
Ferda Topal Celikkan1
Ceren Mungan2
Merve Sucu2
Fatma Uysal1
Selda Kahveci1
Serhat Hayme3
Nilay Kuscu4
Sinan Ozkavukcu1,5
Ciler Celik-Ozenci4
Alp Can1,6
Authors’ Affiliations
Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Laboratory
for Stem Cells and Reproductive Cell Biology, Ankara, 06410, Turkey.
2
Ankara University Biotechnology Institute, Ankara, 06560, Turkey.
3
Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Ankara, 06410, Turkey.
4
Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Antalya,
07070, Turkey.
5
Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Centre for
Assisted Reproduction, Ankara, 06590, Turkey.
6
Corresponding Author
1

Running Title: PFA Favours Glyoxal in Preserving Cellular Targets
Word Count: 6352; Character Count: 35.627 (including Abstract, Introduction, Results,
Materials and Methods, Discussion, Acknowledgment)
Keywords: aldehyde fixative/embryo/fixation/glyoxal/paraformaldehyde/spermatozoa

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Chemical fixation is one of the most critical steps to retaining cellular targets as naturally as
possible. Recent developments in microscopy allow sophisticated detection and measuring
techniques with which spatio-temporal molecular alterations is conceivable. Here, we document
the fixation competence of glyoxal (Gly), a less-toxic dialdehyde molecule, and
paraformaldehyde (PFA) side-by-side (with or without Triton-X 100 permealization) in live- and
fixed-cell preparations including human stem cells, spermatozoa, mouse oocytes/embryos using
super-resolution microscopy. Although Gly seemed to act faster than PFA, catastrophic
consequences were found not acceptable, especially in oocytes and embryos. Due to cell lysate
and immunocytochemistry surveys, it was obvious that PFA is superior to Gly in retaining
cellular proteins in situ with little/no background staining. In many samples, PFA revealed more
reliable and consistent results regarding the protein quantity and cellular localization
corresponding to previously defined patterns in the literature. Although the use of Gly is
beneficial as indicated by previous reports, we concluded that it does not meet the requirement
for proper fixation, at least for the tested cell types and proteins.
Introduction
Fixation is a fundamental and initial step in histochemical and cytochemical investigations,
mainly aiming at preserving tissues, cells, and cellular components from autolytic deterioration.
Microscopic structures can subsequently be observed in situ after suitable cell/tissue
preparations and labelling procedures. For this purpose, a number of chemical fixatives have
been used since the nineteenth century (Howat & Wilson, 2014). First introduced in 1893,
formaldehyde (FA), as a member of aldehyde fixatives, in the form of a water-based, diluted
solution of 1:10 has been the most commonly-used chemical fixative, and it is found in many
fixative cocktails (Marcon, Bressenot et al., 2009). Paraformaldehyde (PFA), the polymerized
form of FA, is generally favoured over FA because PFA crosslinks amino groups without altering
the tertiary structure of proteins, thereby cellular epitopes remain relatively well-preserved in a
successful labelling protocol with specific antibodies (Fujiwara, 1980, Leyton-Puig, Kedziora et
al., 2016, Robinson & Snyder, 2004). PFA fixation has been widely adopted to preserve cell
morphology for immunolabeling where the final concentration of PFA in the fixative solution is
around 3-4% (Kim, Kim et al., 2017). Nonetheless, PFA has also been associated with various
problems, ranging from loss of antigenicity to changes in morphology during fixation.
Glyoxal (Gly), the smallest dialdehyde reagent with a structural formula that resembles two
formaldehyde molecules bonded back-to-back, has also been tested as a fixative since the early
1960s (Sabatini, Bensch et al., 1963), albeit in fewer studies. Due to a better safety profile,
faster reaction rate, and selective control over crosslinking, Gly is considered to retain
immunoreactivity and decreases the need for antigen retrieval (Dapson, 2007). With suitable
catalysts or other reaction accelerators, Gly forms two-carbon adducts with nearly all end
groups in proteins and carbohydrates, leaving most of them unimpaired for subsequent
immunohistochemical (IHC) demonstration. Due to the previously reported disadvantages of
PFA, Gly has recently been suggested superior to PFA as being less toxic, and preserves cells
better as investigated using super-resolution microscopy (Richter, Revelo et al., 2018). There
are also a number of reports comparing the staining and IHC labelling results between Gly- and
FA-fixed tissues. PreFer, a commercial form of Gly, was found to be unsuitable because of poor
preservation of tissue morphology (Atkins, Reiffen et al., 2004); Compared with FA, Gly was
found better at preserving the cell membranes and nuclear chromatin in paraffin-embedded
tissue sections (Dapson R. W., 2006); Oestrogen receptor staining with antigen retrieval was
found significantly weaker in the Gly-fixed specimens than in FA-fixed specimens (Umlas &
Tulecke, 2004). No significant differences were reported between FA and Gly fixation in
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

histomorphometry (Wang, Lee et al., 2011); IHC and Western blot (WB) (Paavilainen,
Edvinsson et al., 2010), and fluorescence in situ hybridization (Bussolati, Annaratone et al.,
2017) assays.
Besides fixation, many samples require a detergent extraction step for exposing antigenic sites
to antibodies. As such, using a non-ionic detergent such as Triton X-100 (TX) may be an
essential step for improving the penetration of the antibody. TX effectively solubilizes complexes
such as biologic membranes, and it apparently does not inhibit the antigen-antibody reaction
(Dimitriadis, 1979). However, it is not appropriate for membrane-associated antigens because it
destroys lipids among membranous proteins. TX may be added to fixation solutions, thus
simultaneously performing fixation and extraction actions. Alternatively, in many settings, TX
extraction is applied following cell fixation in daily use.
In this study, we aimed to assess whether Gly could provide a successful and consistent cell
fixation in favour of PFA in various cell preparations and types such as cultured human
stromal/stem cells, human spermatozoa smears, isolated mouse granulosa-enclosed or naked
oocytes and embryos, all of which were analysed during (live-cell imaging) and after fixation
using a wide-range of antibodies raised against diverse cellular proteins. The study groups were
designed to test the PFA (3.5%) and Gly (3%) alone, as well as with the addition of TX (0.1%).
Additionally, TX (0.1%) application was also performed after the samples were fixed.
In short, PFA was found to be more consistent and potent as a fixative compared with Gly in
many circumstances. Here, we present the relatively poor fixation capacity of Gly, proven by a
series of quantitative and qualitative data, some of which were obtained using super-resolution
microscopy. The overall results seemed quite different from previously published data.
Interestingly, however, PFA alone with no addition of TX displayed a significant cytoplasmic loss
by generating membrane blebs during fixation. In this article, we also demonstrated novel in situ
remodelling of some proteins, such as the ACRBP in human spermatozoa, which have not been
presented in previous literature.

Results
1) Live-cell Imaging of mEmbryos and hUC-MSCs
Freshly-isolated mouse embryos (mEmbryos) and cultured human umbilical cord-derived
mesenchymal stem cell (hUC-MSC) monolayers in glass-bottomed Petri dishes were
microscopically examined using a laser-illuminated differential interference contrast (DIC)
imaging to observe the cell dynamics during fixation. Prior to fixation, live samples in culture
media were recorded in a time-lapse manner for 15-25 min (Fig 1 and Extended View
Content). Subsequently, the same samples were directly taken to fixation simply by
replacement of the culture media with the fixative solution. As seen in Fig 1, Extended View
Content and Table 3, a series of significant changes were noted during the fixation interval (20
min for mEmbryos or 15 min for hUC-MSCs) followed by a 5-min TX incubation.

2) Effectiveness of PFA vs. Gly in Whole Cell Lysates
The protein cross-linking capacity of the two different fixative (PFA and Gly) were tested by
evaluating the intensity of unfixed total protein bands per lane (Fig 2A and Fig 3A). To compare
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the efficiency of fixation, the bands that survived fixation were summed and expressed as the
percentage (%) of an unfixed control. Thirty-seven per cent of proteins in human spermatozoa
(hSpermatozoa) specimens remained unfixed with PFA, and 62% of proteins were found
unfixed by Gly (Fig 2A1). Fixation of hUC-MSC lysates revealed more consistent results
because PFA was not able to fix only 20% of proteins, and Gly was not able to fix 55% of
proteins (Fig 2A2). We then tested the degree of fixation of PFA and Gly for three major
cytoskeletal proteins (β-actin, vimentin and α/β-tubulin), all of which have low molecular weights
(42, 57 and 50 kDa, respectively), after they were labelled with fluorescent markers. In
hSpermatozoa, 0% of β-actin was unfixed with PFA, and 60% was unfixed with Gly (Fig 2B and
B1); 16% of vimentin was unfixed with PFA, and 50% was unfixed with Gly (Fig 2C and C1); 8%
of αβ-tubulin was unfixed with PFA, and 43% was unfixed with Gly (Fig 2D and D1). In hUCMSCs, 17% of β-actin was unfixed with PFA, and 52% was unfixed with Gly (Fig 2B and B2);
9% of vimentin was unfixed with PFA, and 54% was unfixed with Gly (Fig 2C and C2); 0.4% of
α/β-tubulin was unfixed with PFA, and 77% was unfixed with Gly (Fig 2D and D2). The fixed
protein ratios are summarized in Table 4.
As measured above, the fixation capacity of PFA and Gly was also assessed in mouse oocyte
(mOocyte)/granulosa cell lysates through the evaluation of total WB Coomassie-blue stained
and β-actin-labelled bands. Seventeen per cent of total protein remained unfixed in PFA,
whereas 30% of proteins were found unfixed with Gly (Fig 3A and A1); 0% of β-actin was
unfixed with PFA, and 50% was found unfixed with Gly (Fig 3B and B1).
3) Qualitative and Quantitative Evaluation of Protein Labelling
Live-cell mitochondrial staining
MitotrackerTM labelling of living cells revealed fine identification of numerous mitochondria as
punctate or rod-like patterns distributed throughout the entire cytoplasm of hUC-MSCs (Fig
4).
Following live-cell MitotrackerTM labelling, cells were taken into fixative cocktails after a brief
wash. PFA fixation alone provided smaller numbers and lesser mitochondrial staining
showing a dull appearance within the cytoplasm (Fig 4). In the PFA/TX group, almost no
staining was observed. In contrast, significantly brighter and clearer signals were detected in
the PFA+TX group. Gly fixation alone revealed high intensity and clear signals coming from
mitochondria but higher background staining as well. Like in the PFA/TX groups, Gly/TX
fixation provided no mitochondrial staining. In the Gly+TX group, no mitochondrial staining
was observed but there was a relatively stronger background.
Live MitotrackerTM-labelled highly motile hSpermatozoa gave positive signals restricted to
their neck regions (arrows in Fig 4). No background or non-specific staining was observed in
any of the fixatives. The brightest signals were detected in PFA alone group. The rest of the
fixatives presented slightly dimmer signal intensity. TX addition to fixative did not enhance
the signal intensity.

Nuclear proteins and DNA markers
The fluorescent signal intensity and patterns of selected nuclear proteins (CENP-A,
nucleostemin and lamin A/C), some of which are specific to stem/progenitor cells (i.e.
nucleostemin), were tested after six different fixation cocktails in hUC-MSCs. We also
examined the well-known DNA markers (Hoechst 33342 and 7-AAD) in the tiny
hSpermatozoa nuclei after they were fixed with the fixatives. All results are summarized in
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig 5. PFA alone or with TX groups revealed fine nucleoplasmic dots, which seemed to
correspond to centromeric nucleosome protein in interphase cells labelled by CENP-A
antibody (Fig 5). PFA alone exhibited slightly higher non-specific background staining,
whereas the PFA/TX and PFA+TX groups showed more specific, similar patterns and signal
intensity levels. The Gly alone group also displayed punctate staining confined to the
nucleus; however, a stronger cytoplasmic and nucleoplasmic background was also noted. In
Gly/TX, and more commonly in the Gly+TX groups, nuclear/nucleolar nonspecific staining of
irregular foci were noted (Fig 5, arrowheads). In the Gly+TX group, a significantly smaller
number of CENP-A loci were labelled with an intense cytoplasmic background where falsepositive results in signal intensity measurements were also noted.
Nucleostemin, a multilocular nucleolar protein, which was previously illustrated in hUCMSCs (Oktar, Yildirim et al., 2011) were clearly and strongly labelled in PFA alone or
PFA+TX groups in hUC-MSCs (Fig 5). A significantly weaker staining was noted in the
PFA/TX group. Gly alone or Gly/TX groups revealed very weak signals compared with the
PFA groups, whereas the Gly+TX group displayed stronger and more specific nucleostemin
signals compared with the other two Gly groups.
Lamin A/C, a complex inner nuclear membrane intermediate filament protein exhibited a
fairly homogenous pattern that was restricted to nuclei after hUC-MSCs were fixed with six
fixatives (Fig 5). TX addition either to PFA or Gly showed stronger signals that were finely
confined to nuclear membrane, whereas Gly alone group exhibited an extremely devastated
lamin A/C pattern.
Finally, DNA dyes such as Hoechst 33342 and 7-AAD were examined in hSpermatozoa
smears. Both dyes were restricted to the sperm nucleus in the head region, showing varying
intensities between the fixatives. In Hoechst 33342 staining (Fig 5), the Gly alone group
exhibited the weakest signalling intensity. 7-AAD (Fig 5) also displayed consistency in signal
intensity; a remarkably higher signal level was noted in the Gly+TX group.
Cell-specific markers
In this section, we first demonstrate the qualitative and quantitative protein fixation results of
six fixatives on various cell-specific markers tested in hUC-MSCs and hSpermatozoa. NCadherin, a cell adhesion molecule found primarily on the cell surface of mesenchymal
cells, was selected to test the fixation capability of the fixatives, and CD73, a plasma
membrane glycoprotein specific to various cell types including mesenchymal stem cells. All
PFA formulations regardless of TX addition, the Gly alone and Gly+TX groups, exhibited
fine, granular staining on the cell membrane without any preferential localization (Fig 6). NCadherin signals were detected as fine string-like patterns along the plasma membranes
(Fig 6) and were clearly visualized in the PFA alone, PFA+TX, and Gly+TX groups. The
remaining fixatives were unable to retain the N-Cadherin proteins. Interestingly, CD73
signals only in Gly/TX group were consistently detected both on the plasma membrane and
in the cytoplasm, which may be due to the translocation of the CD73 epitopes due to the TX
incubation (Fig 6).
Secondly, we tested the fixation potential of six fixatives on some cytoskeletal proteins
(vimentin, pericentrin, and α/β-tubulin). Vimentin, an abundant intermediate filament protein,
exclusively expressed in mesenchyme-originated cells, were best retained when cells were
fixed with either PFA or Gly with the addition of TX (Fig 7). When TX was applied after
fixation (PFA+TX and Gly+TX groups), the signal intensity became weak. The lowest signal

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

was detected in the PFA alone and Gly alone groups. None of the fixatives caused any
background noise or non-specific staining.
The staining of pericentrin, which is a conserved protein of the pericentriolar material, an
integral component of the centrosome, was exclusively confined to two adjacent
juxtanuclear foci (Fig 7) and best preserved in the PFA+TX and Gly+TX groups; the lowest
signal intensity was measured in the Gly alone group.
As the final cytoskeletal element, microtubules composed of α- and β-tubulin were fixed with
six fixatives. The results dramatically favoured PFA-containing fixatives (Fig 7). No
significant difference was noted among the PFA-containing fixative groups. Gly-containing
fixatives revealed very faint microtubule arrays (Gly alone and Gly/TX groups), and no
filamentous array was noted in Gly+TX group.
Spermatozoa-specific proteins such as ACRBP, IZUMO1, and DNMT3A were examined
after six fixation cocktails in hSpermatozoa (Fig 8). The staining pattern of ACRBP, a
functional acrosin binding protein that is bound to proacrosin for the packaging and
condensation of the acrosin zymogen in the acrosomal matrix, were mainly detected in the
acrosomal cap region and mid-piece of spermatozoa. The strongest signal was noted in
PFA/TX, Gly and Gly/TX groups, whereas the relatively weakest signal was detected in the
PFA alone group.
IZUMO1, a sperm-egg fusion protein 1 that binds to its egg receptor counterpart, Juno, to
facilitate recognition and fusion of the gametes, was examined after six different fixation
cocktails in hSpermatozoa (Fig 8). The localization of IZUMO1 was found quite diverse from
the acrosomal cap region to the mid-piece and neck. Signal intensity was noted as highest
in the PFA group, and the weakest signal was detected in the Gly/TX group.
The signals coming from DNMT3A, an enzyme that catalyses the transfer of methyl groups
to specific CpG structures in DNA, a process called DNA methylation, was strictly confined
to the mid-piece (Fig 8). The highest signal intensity was noticed in the PFA group, and the
weakest was noted in the PFA-TX group.
4. Surface Topology
hUC-MSCs
F-actin filaments, known as stress fibres in cultured cells, are commonly labelled with Factin-specific mushroom toxins such as phallotoxins. Thus, we wanted to examine whether
any signalling intensity and localization difference existed due to the different fixatives in
extremely flat hUC-MSC monolayers. Fine fixation is essential for the preservation of those
tiny cellular processes because cells possess wide lamellipodia and microspikes. PFA
exhibited finer fixation as evidenced by the preservation of F-actin-labelled microspikes (Fig
9) compared with Gly, with which no microspikes were preserved.
mOocytes
During fixation procedures with different fixatives, we were interested to note the dramatic
difference between PFA and Gly fixatives regarding the morphology of naked mOocytes and
cumulus enclosed oocytes. After fixing them with either PFA or Gly and then labelling with
FITC-conjugated phalloidin toxins, consecutive optical sections obtained using confocal
microscope allowed us to visualize those cells as three-dimensional (3D) image stacks. DIC
images simply presented the size difference between two fixatives (Fig 9); Gly-fixed cells
were significantly smaller than PFA-fixed ones. As clearly presented in Fig 1 and the
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary movie (Gly-mEmbryos.wmv), ZP was heavily affected by Gly fixation,
whereas it was intact in the PFA group. Surface rendering of image stacks showed a
dramatic difference because the plasma membranes of mOocytes (oolemma) were found
damaged (Fig 9).
Discussion
Gly, which was first presented in 1943 by Wicks and Suntzeff, was proposed to be more
efficient than 10% formalin (3.7% FA solution) and was reported to be less harmful by inhalation
than FA (Sabatini et al., 1963, Wicks & Suntzeff, 1943). Thus, replacing Gly with FA in the
chemical fixation of cells and tissues may be reasonable. However, studies comparing the
fixation efficiency of FA with Gly in the preservation of different cellular targets (membrane
receptors, cytoplasmic and nuclear targets), as well as the general morphology in tissue
sections presented that FA was superior to Gly because Gly frequently resulted in significantly
weaker and/or nonspecific staining (Atkins et al., 2004, Titford & Horenstein, 2005, Umlas &
Tulecke, 2004).
The use of Gly as a fixative in the literature is rather old and rare compared with the other
aldehyde fixatives. From the time when the fixation efficacy of PFA was recognized as better for
electron microscopy in the 1970s (Smit, Meijer et al., 1974) and then for immunocytochemistry
(ICC) in the 1980s, it has become the most commonly used aldehyde fixative, especially in
precise microscopic observations in cell and molecular biology. In this study, we wanted to
compare those two aldehyde fixatives side-by-side using super-resolution confocal microscopy
to determine whether Gly, as a historic and lesser-known compound, has any superior capacity
for fixation over cellular proteins. Very recently, Richter et al. published a comprehensive and
well-designed data series pertaining to Gly vs. PFA fixation and concluded that 51 cellular
targets were better preserved after Gly fixation (Richter et al., 2018). This led us to test Gly for
our samples, most of which are related to male and female reproductive organs, early
embryonic and adult stem cells. Our overall comparison of PFA and Gly results are summarized
in Table 5, where positive and negative outcomes are designated as green and red colours,
respectively.
In the study by Richter et al., the final pH of Gly was determined as 5 after they obtained similar
results at pH 4 and 5 for most of their experiments. Therefore, we adopted Gly at pH 5 for all
sets of our experiments. They calculated the proportion of the proteins that remained unfixed in
brain lysates and found that 40% and 20% of proteins were unfixed with PFA and Gly,
respectively. In contrast, as summarized in Table 4, we found that significantly more proteins
remained unfixed after Gly fixation. Interestingly, Gly very consistently resulted in higher band
intensities than those in PFA ones in hSpermatozoa, hUC-MSCs and mOocyte lysates where
fixed proteins either no longer ran into the gel or formed smears only. More specifically, the
fixation efficiency of PFA favoured Gly because β-actin, vimentin, and α/β-tubulin proteins were
retained with greater proportions after PFA. In addition to the degree of β-actin preservation, we
also demonstrated the lack of F-actin-decorated microspikes in Gly-fixed stem cells and surface
disruptions in F-actin-labelled oocyte cortex as rendered using high-resolution consecutive
fluorescent images. In contrast to our findings, different laboratories that contributed to Richter
et al.'s study reported that a relatively higher ratio of β-actin, α- and β-tubulin, and F-actin was
preserved with Gly. Nevertheless, they reported that a higher vimentin ratio was retained with
PFA based on their ICC staining.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Live-cell imaging of embryos during fixation revealed that Gly caused thinning and then rupture
of ZP, and dissociation of blastomeres, whereas tiny infrequent membrane blebs were noted in
somatic cells. PFA, on the other hand, maintained the blastocyst morphology as intact as
possible while generating the formation of large cytoplasmic blebs in somatic cells. Gly with TX
showed similar findings in embryos while maintaining the cytoplasmic and membrane structures
in somatic cells. TX application after fixation revealed no further change either in embryos or
somatic cells. Based on our live-hUC-MSC videos during fixation, we agree with the statement
proposed by Richter et al.,(Richter et al., 2018) that a higher speed of membrane penetration
and the sudden interruption of vesicle trafficking was seen with Gly. In contrast to PFA, which
resulted in the formation of large membrane blebs and continued almost during the entire
fixation period, Gly displayed a very fast and relatively intact vesicle preservation with very few
tiny blebs during fixation. However, Gly caused a significant decrease in the size of embryos
and oocytes, as demonstrated in Fig 1 and Fig 9. Although some of the above features may
seem advantageous to Gly, the catastrophic changes in the embryo caused by Gly were not
acceptable. We assume that Gly-originated perturbations may be due to its acidic nature, which
arises from its fast oxidation, and therefore leads to the formation of strong acids, mainly
glyoxylic acid (Zhang, Zhao et al., 2013).
In situ labelling of diverse proteins using ICC after PFA or Gly fixation did not exhibit results
superior to Gly. Briefly, Gly caused a higher number of unstained epitopes, a stronger
background, and nonspecific staining. Gly was occasionally found better than PFA in terms of
fluorescence signal intensity.
The comparison of PFA with Gly in fixing some of the spermatozoa-specific proteins in humans
such as IZUMO1 and ACRBP was first documented in this article. Consistent with its functional
role, IZUMO1 was previously reported to localize in the acrosome, mid-piece, and neck regions
when fixed with 3% PFA (Cakar, Cetinkaya et al., 2016). In this study, those precise
localizations were confirmed, mostly with the PFA-fixed groups. The Gly-fixed groups displayed
relatively weak or no staining. ACRBP in human spermatozoa has not been previously reported
in the literature. In mice, ACRBP was restricted to the acrosomal region (Kanemori, Koga et al.,
2016), although we consistently detected it both in the acrosomal region and the mid-piece. No
significant localization or signal intensity difference was noted between the PFA and Gly groups.
Likewise, DNMA3A enzyme was found localized to the mid-piece, as published previously in a
single study by Marques et al. (Marques, Joao Pinho et al., 2011). Although PFA-fixed DNMT3A
epitopes showed the greatest intensity, the results of all PFA and Gly-fixed samples confirmed
the cellular localization published in their study.
All cross-linking reagents (all aldehyde group fixatives) form intermolecular bridges, normally
through free amino groups, thus creating a network of linked antigens. Cross-linkers preserve
cell structure better than organic solvents, but may reduce the antigenicity of some cell
components, and require the addition of a permeabilisation step to allow access of the antibody
to the specimen (Ramos-Vara & Miller, 2014). Non-ionic detergents such as TX are widely used
to permeabilise and solubilise membrane proteins in a gentler manner, allowing the solubilised
proteins to retain a native subunit structure and enzymatic activity (Bhairi S. M., 2001). Nonionic detergents are considered non-denaturating because they break lipid-lipid and lipidprotein, but not protein-protein interactions (Fonfría V.L., 2011); As such, they are considered
for use in the isolation of membrane proteins in cell and molecular biologic applications (Bhairi
S. M., 2001). Due to our TX-containing fixative results, some protein labels were
partially/completely lost (i.e. Mitotracker, CD73, N-Cadherin and DNMT3A), whereas the
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

intensity of some labels was enhanced (i.e. CENP-A, lamin A/C, nucleostemin, DNA stains,
ACRBP, and vimentin).
Conclusively, the superiority of PFA over Gly was clear, at least for certain cell types and
proteins as we have presented here. However, no single type of fixative cocktail and protocol
seems to fit to all types of samples and proteins. Thus, it is still noteworthy to suggest that the
proper fixative (with or without TX addition) formulae and fixation procedures should be carefully
determined through a series of well-designed comparative experiments to optimize protein
preservation as naturally as possible.

Materials and Methods
Preparation of PFA Stock (10%) and Working (3.5%) Solutions
Stock PFA (10%, w/v) solution was prepared by adding 100 mg PFA (95% powder) (Merck,
Germany) to 650 mL double distilled water (ddH2O), then heated to 60°C using a magnetic
heater/stirrer. Fifty microliters of 1 N NaOH was added to dissolve the PFA completely. After
removing from the heater, the suspension was finalized to 1000 mL using ddH2O; the pH was
brought to 7.2 using 1 N HCl. Stock PFA solution was filtered and cooled down to 4°C for
storage. Immediately before use, to prepare 3.5% PFA working solution, stock PFA solution was
mixed with ddH2O in 1:1.85 ratio (pH= 7.2-7.3).
Preparation of Gly Working (3%) Solution
For preparing a 1000 mL 3% Gly working solution, 197.25 mL absolute ethanol (Merck,
Germany), 79.50 mL 40% Gly (v/v) (Merck, Germany), and 7.5 mL glacial acetic acid (Merck,
Germany) were added to 709.75 mL ddH2O. The solution was vortexed and 1N NaOH
(approximately 6.20 mL 1N NaOH) were added until pH=5 has been reached. The clear solution
was stored at 4°C and used within few days with no precipitation.
Experimental Groups
The fixation potency of 3.5% PFA and 3% Gly solutions were tested in hUC-MSCs,
hSpermatozoa, mOocytes and mEmbryos with or without 0.1% Triton X-100 detergent (TX).
The experiment groups and fixation protocol are summarized in Table 1.
Collection and Preparation of Human Cells and Mouse Oocytes/Embryos
Fresh umbilical cords (n=3) were obtained from full-term female infants after caesarean section
succeeding the acquisition of informed consent from the mother (Local Ethics Committee, IRB
approval number 18-578-12, 2012). The details of obtaining and culture of hUC-MSCs can be
found elsewhere (Can & Balci, 2011). Briefly, umbilical cord pieces were chopped into
approximately 0.5-mm3 tissue explants. Following the lag phase, sprouting hUC-MSCs cells
were expanded in 75-cm2 tissue culture flasks (Corning; 430641, USA) in DMEM- Ham’s F12
media (Biochrom T481-01, Germany) at 37°C 5% CO2 until passage 4 (P4) cells reached 9095% confluence. At the final stage, confluent cells were removed from flasks using TrypsinEDTA (0.05/0.02%) (Biochrom, Germany) and then transferred onto poly-L-lysine–coated
(0.01%) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) glass coverslips (5000 cells/cm2) and left for at least 48 hr before
fixation. Prior to fixation, the procedure cells were washed twice with Dulbecco’s PBS (D-PBS).
Ejaculates were obtained from undisclosed healthy donors (n=4) by masturbation after 3 days of
abstinence. The experiment protocol was approved by the IRB (Local Ethics Committee
approval number: 05-298-18, 12.05.2018). Informed consent was obtained from all subjects and
that the experiments conformed to the principles set out in the WMA Decleration of Helsinki.
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The details of preparation of hSpermazoa can be found elsewhere (Sati & Huszar, 2013).
Briefly, following liquefaction, semen samples were washed in sperm wash medium
(SpermRinse™, Vitrolife, Sweden) and the spermatozoa were pelleted by centrifugation at 800
g for 20 min at room temperature (RT). Following centrifugation, the pellet was resuspended in
sperm wash medium and adjusted to a final concentration of 1x107 sperm/mL. The sperm slides
were prepared as follows: phosphate- buffered sucrose (PB-Sucrose) pools [22.5 g sucrose
(Merck, Germany) dissolved in 500 mL ddH2O containing 20 mL 0.5 M sodium phosphate buffer
(Merck, Germany), pH: 7] were made by adding 2 or 3 drops onto each 5% poly-L-lysine–
coated glass slides; then 2–5 μL of the sperm suspension were pipetted into the PB-Sucrose
pool. The slides were incubated overnight (o/n) in a humidified chamber at 4°C, allowing the
spermatozoa to settle and attach to the surface of the poly-L-lysine–coated slides. The following
day, the spermatozoa were fixed with the fixation solutions for 15 min.
Oocytes and embryos were obtained from BALB/c female mice (n=8) at 4-6 weeks. The
experimental protocol was approved by the IRB (approval number 792/20-18.10.27). The
experimental protocol was approved by the Animal Care and Usage Committee (Protocol no:
B.30.2.AKD.0.05.07.00/30). All mice were hosted with free access to food and water and kept in
a 12 hr-light/dark cycle. The germinal vesicle (GV)-, meiosis-I (MI)-stage oocytes and
zygote/blastocyst-stage embryos (n=275) were obtained from mice primed with 5 IU (0.1
mL/animal) pregnant mare's serum gonadotropin (PMSG) (Intervet, UK). The details of the
collection of mOocytes can be found elsewhere (Can, Semiz et al., 2003). For embryo
collection, mice were further injected with 5 IU (0.1 mL/animal) human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Twenty hours after PMSG injection, the mice were killed and then
the ovaries were punctured with a 23-gauge needle in G-MOPS medium (Vitrolife, Sweden).
GV-stage oocytes were collected using a mouth-controlled pipette under a dissecting
microscope (Nikon, Japan). hCG-induced female mice were mated overnight with mature male
mice at a rate of 1 female:1 male. Upon confirming a vaginal plug, zygote-blastocyst stage
embryos were collected in the following days from the oviducts/uterus.
Live-cell Imaging
hUC-MSCs (1x105 cells/cm2) were plated onto glass-bottomed 35-mm Petri dishes (World
Precision Instruments, USA) in complete medium (DMEM/HAM’s F12 + 10% FBS) (Merck,
Germany), whereas live mEmbryos were cumulated in a 50 µL drops containing GMOPS
covered with Ovoil™ (Vitrolife, Sweden) in glass-bottomed 35-mm Petri dishes. Live hUC-MSCs
and mEmbryos were viewed using live-cell imaging microscopy (controlled temp, CO2 and
humidity) before and during the fixation period. Scoping time (min), temperature (°C) and image
acquisition interval (sec) were aligned according to the cell type and fixation groups (Table 2).
All movies were recorded in a time-lapse manner for 15/20 min with 5 or 8-second intervals
using differential interference microscopy (DIC) configured on a Zeiss LSM-880 confocal system
(Zeiss, Germany) equipped with a Zeiss Axio Observer inverted microscope. A 633 nm red laser
line (5 mW) was used as a light source. At the objective plane (Zeiss 20x plan apo/NA 0.8), the
laser power was measured 1.97 mW. The laser power was set to 1.2% during image acquisition
to keep the excitation energy as low as possible to avoid any photo damage/toxicity; therefore,
the cells and embryos were scanned with 0.023 mW (23 µW). Scanning parameters were set in
order to achieve pixel dwell time between 0.40-0.50 microsecond.
Western Blotting
Total protein, β-actin, vimentin, and α/β-tubulin quantities in unfixed and fixed hUC-MSCs, and
hSpermatozoa and mOocytes/granulosa cells were determined using Western blotting. hUC10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MSCs and hSpermatozoa were fixed for 15 min, and mOocytes were fixed for 20 min at RT.
Fixed and non-fixed cells were dissolved in lysis buffer [1% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 1.0
mM sodium ortho-vanadate, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4] supplemented with 1x protease inhibitor
cocktail (Amresco, USA). The protein concentration was measured using the BCA method. Fifty
micrograms of protein from each group was separated on 10% Tris-HCl gel using protein
electrophoresis (BioRad, USA). The gels were stained in Coomassie brilliant blue overnight
(o/n). In the following day, they were de-stained in a 50% methanol, 40% ddH2O, and 10%
acetic acid mixture for 3-4 hr. The stained gels were scanned and analyzed as described below.
To determine the levels of the aforementioned proteins, 50 µg of cell extract from each group
was separated on 10% Tris-HCl gel and then electrotransferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride
(PVDF) membrane (Roche, UK) o/n at +4oC. Then, the membrane was blocked with 5% (w/v)
bovine serum albumin (BSA) prepared in TBS-T (20 mM Tris/HCl and 150 mM NaCl plus 0.05%
Tween-20 at pH 7.4) at RT for 1 hr. Membranes were incubated with primary antibodies specific
to β-actin (Abcam; ab8226) vimentin (Sigma; V6630) or α/β-tubulin (Sigma; T9026, T4026)
[1:1000 in 5% (w/v) BSA containing TBS-T] for 2 hr at RT. Following a triple- wash in TBS-T for
15 min each, membranes were incubated with goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit secondary
antibody (800 nm) (1:2000 in TBS-T) (Licor Biosciences, USA) at RT for 1 hr on a shaker. The
SDS–PAGE gels in Fig 2 and Fig 3 were analysed by measuring the overall lane intensity that
was left after fixation and compared with the non‐ fixed sample. Protein band intensities were
measured using a Li-Cor Odyssey CLx infrared detection system (LICOR Biosciences, USA)
following the manufacturer’s guidelines. Relative band intensities were measured and analysed
using ImageJ v.3.91 software.
Live-Cell Mitochondrial Staining
Live hSpermatozoa in sperm wash medium were incubated with 1 mM MitoTrackerTM (Molecular
Probes; M7512, USA) for 45 min at 37°C. hSpermatozoa were then washed twice with PBS and
fixed with six different fixative cocktails for 15 min at RT. In PFA+TX and Gly+TX groups, 0.1%
TX was applied for 5 min at RT following fixation and washing. After the final incubation step,
the hSpermatozoa suspension was subjected to centrifugation for 15 min at 800 g, the cell pellet
was washed with PBS, and then 50 µL mounting medium (MM) (1:1 glycerol/PBS and 0.002%
NaN3) was added onto the cell pellet. Finally, a drop of labelled hSpermatozoa was gently laid
down onto a glass slide and then covered with a glass coverslip.
Nuclear Markers
Fixed hUC-MSCs were incubated with antibodies against nuclear proteins such as CENP-A
(1:100 in PBS; o/n at 4°C + 2 hr at 37°C) (Abcam; ab45694, USA), lamin A/C (1:100 in PBS;
following blocking with NGS, 2 hr at 37°C) (Abcam; ab108595, USA), or nucleostemin (1:250 in
PBS; 2 hr at 37°C) (Chemicon International; MAB4311, USA). FITC- conjugated anti-rabbit IgG
(Abcam; ab6717, USA) was used as a secondary antibody. For nuclear DNA labelling in
hSpermatozoa, 7-AAD was used (1:100 in PBS) (Sigma; 9400) for 15 min at RT followed by
mounting with MM or Hoechst 33342 (1:1000 in glycerol/PBS) (Invitrogen; LSH3570) in MM.
Cell-specific Markers
Fixed hUC-MSCs with six different fixative cocktails were immunostained with cell-specific
markers such as N-cadherin or CD73 as follows; N-Cadherin [1:100 in PBS; o/n at 4 °C + 2 hr at
37°C] (Sigma; C3865, USA), CD73 (1:100 in PBS; 2 hr at 37°C) (Abcam; ab54217, USA).
Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) conjugated anti-mouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch; 115095-166, USA) was used as a secondary antibody.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fixed hSpermatozoa slides prewashed in PBS were initially blocked with normal goat serum
(NGS) for 1 hr at RT. Then slides were incubated with antibodies specific to acrosin binding
protein (ACRPB) (1:100 in PBS) (Sigma; HPA039081, USA), IZUMO1 (1:100 in PBS) (Sigma;
HPA038104, USA) or DNMT3A (DNA cytosine-5-methyltransferase 3A protein) (1:200 in PBS)
(Abcam; ab23565, USA) at 4°C o/n. Following incubation, the sections were washed three times
in PBS for 5 min each, and incubated with FITC-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody
(1:100 in PBS) (Abcam; ab6717, USA) for 1 hr at 37°C. Slides were then washed in PBS for 5
min, and covered with MM.
Cytoskeletal Markers
Fixed hUC-MSCs were incubated with antibodies against some cytoskeletal proteins such as
vimentin (1:50 in PBS; o/n at 4°C + 2 hr at 37°C) (Sigma; V6630, USA), pericentrin (1:1000 in
PBS; 2 hr at 37°C) (Abcam; ab4448, USA) or α/β-tubulin (1:1 mixture) (1:100 in PBS; 2 hr at
37°C) (Sigma; T9026, T4026, USA). FITC-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (Jackson
ImmunoResearch; 115-095-166, USA) was used as a secondary antibody for anti-vimentin and
anti-α/β-tubulin antibodies and FITC-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Abcam; ab6717, USA) for antipericentrin. The slides were covered with MM. Fixed hUC-MSCs and mOocytes were incubated
with fluorescein phalloidin (ThermoFisher Scientific; F432, USA) (35 mg/mL in PBS for 60 min)
for F-actin staining. All staining steps for mOocytes were performed using micro-well trays
(Thermo Scientific, USA). Then, they were gently transferred onto glass-bottomed 35-mm Petri
dishes in a 100 µL drop of PBS-based mounting medium containing 1µg/mL Hoechst 33342
(Invitrogen; LSH3570) for DNA labelling. The top was covered with paraffin oil. Mouse oocytes
have a diameter of around 100 µm (including zona pellucida; ZP); therefore, this type of
preparation enabled us to visualise the oocyte surface and the inner structures as naturally as
possible.

Fixed-cell Imaging with Super-Resolution Confocal Microscopy
All fluorescently-tagged specimens were examined and imaged using a Zeiss LSM-880 Airy
Scan system (Zeiss, Germany). Multiple laser lines (405, 488, 543 and 633 nm) were used
according to the fluorescent probes. All laser and scanning parameters were set identically for
each protein using a reference histogram; 20x (dry) 40x (water), and 63x (oil) immersion
objectives, and gallium-arsenide phosphide or airyscan detectors were used to detect signals.
Pixel resolution for 2-D and 3-D images were set automatically and aligned identically for all
image acquisitions. For 3-D surface topology assessment of GV- MI-stage oocytes, 3D module
of Zen Desk software (v2.3) was used to analyse the app. 100 µm-thick image stacks.
Quantification and Analysis of Fluorescent Signals
Ten sample images were obtained from each label (protein). The varying signal intensities were
analysed using Zen Blue v2.3 histogram tool to calculate the corrected total cell fluorescence
[CTCF= Integrated density – (area of selected cell) × (mean fluorescence of background
readings)] (Coskun & Can, 2015). The total image area was used to calculate the CTCF value
for N-Cadherin, CD73, CENP-A, lamin A/C, nucleostemin, pericentrin, vimentin, and α/β-tubulin.
For sperm-specific markers and MitoTrackerTM, CTCF calculations were implemented on
100x100 pixel areas, which solely covered the sperm head and neck regions. For nuclear
markers (Hoechst 33342 and 7-AAD), mean grey scale values (0-255) from a 1.5-µm-diameter
circle area in the nuclear region was used to compare signal intensities between the different
fixation groups.
Statistical Analysis
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

All statistical analyses were performed using the IBM SPSS for Windows v20.0 software
package (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was used to assess the
assumption of normality. For non-normally distributed continuous variables, differences between
groups were tested using the Kruskal-Wallis test. Continuous variables that did not have normal
distribution are expressed as median (minimum-maximum). A two-sided p value<0.05 was
considered as statistically significant. Data are reported as mean±standard deviation (SD). Sum,
average and SD calculations were performed using MS Excel (Microsoft Corp, Seattle, USA).
Significance tests were performed using SPSS 10.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Data were
analysed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Student’s t-test when values were
normally distributed; otherwise, the Mann–Whitney U test was applied. Differences between the
experimental and control groups were regarded as statistically significant when p<0.05.

Acknowledgements
This study was financially supported by The Scientific and Technological Research
Council, and University Research Fund (17A0230001).

FTC
CM
MS
FU
SK
SH
NK
SO
CCO
AC

Experiments
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

✓

Author contributions
Data Collection
Data Analysis
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

✓

✓

Manuscript Writing
✓

✓
✓
✓

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

References
Atkins D, Reiffen KA, Tegtmeier CL, Winther H, Bonato MS, Storkel S (2004)
Immunohistochemical detection of EGFR in paraffin-embedded tumor tissues: variation in
staining intensity due to choice of fixative and storage time of tissue sections. J Histochem
Cytochem 52: 893-901
Bhairi S. M. MC, Ibryamova S., LaFavor T. (2001) Detergents: A guide to the properties and
uses of detergents in biological systems. Calbiochem-Novabiochem Corporation, San Diego,
CA
Bussolati G, Annaratone L, Berrino E, Miglio U, Panero M, Cupo M, Gugliotta P, Venesio T,
Sapino A, Marchio C (2017) Acid-free glyoxal as a substitute of formalin for structural and
molecular preservation in tissue samples. PLoS One 12: e0182965

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cakar Z, Cetinkaya B, Aras D, Koca B, Ozkavukcu S, Kaplanoglu I, Can A, Cinar O (2016)
Does combining magnetic-activated cell sorting with density gradient or swim-up improve sperm
selection? J Assist Reprod Genet 33: 1059-65
Can A, Balci D (2011) Isolation, culture, and characterization of human umbilical cord stromaderived mesenchymal stem cells. Methods Mol Biol 698: 51-62
Can A, Semiz O, Cinar O (2003) Centrosome and microtubule dynamics during early stages of
meiosis in mouse oocytes. Mol Hum Reprod 9: 749-56
Coskun H, Can A (2015) The assessment of the in vivo to in vitro cellular transition of human
umbilical cord multipotent stromal cells. Placenta 36: 232-9
Dapson R. W. FAT, Wolfe D. (2006) Glyoxal Fixation and Its Relationship to
Immunohistochemistry. Journal of Histotechnology 29: 66-76
Dapson RW (2007) Glyoxal fixation: how it works and why it only occasionally needs antigen
retrieval. Biotech Histochem 82: 161-6
Dimitriadis GJ (1979) Effect of detergents on antibody-antigen interaction. Anal Biochem 98:
445-51
Fonfría V.L. MAP, Padrós E., Lazarova T. (2011) Solubilization, Purification, and
Characterization of Integral Membrane Proteins.
Fujiwara K (1980) Techniques for localizing contractile proteins with fluorescent antibodies. Curr
Top Dev Biol 14: 271-96
Howat WJ, Wilson BA (2014) Tissue fixation and the effect of molecular fixatives on
downstream staining procedures. Methods 70: 12-9
Kanemori Y, Koga Y, Sudo M, Kang W, Kashiwabara S, Ikawa M, Hasuwa H, Nagashima K,
Ishikawa Y, Ogonuki N, Ogura A, Baba T (2016) Biogenesis of sperm acrosome is regulated by
pre-mRNA alternative splicing of Acrbp in the mouse. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113: E3696-705
Kim SO, Kim J, Okajima T, Cho NJ (2017) Mechanical properties of paraformaldehyde-treated
individual cells investigated by atomic force microscopy and scanning ion conductance
microscopy. Nano Converg 4: 5
Leyton-Puig D, Kedziora KM, Isogai T, van den Broek B, Jalink K, Innocenti M (2016) PFA
fixation enables artifact-free super-resolution imaging of the actin cytoskeleton and associated
proteins. Biol Open 5: 1001-9
Marcon N, Bressenot A, Montagne K, Bastien C, Champigneulle J, Monhoven N, Albuisson E,
Plenat F (2009) [Glyoxal: a possible polyvalent substitute for formaldehyde in pathology?]. Ann
Pathol 29: 460-7
Marques CJ, Joao Pinho M, Carvalho F, Bieche I, Barros A, Sousa M (2011) DNA methylation
imprinting marks and DNA methyltransferase expression in human spermatogenic cell stages.
Epigenetics 6: 1354-61

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Oktar PA, Yildirim S, Balci D, Can A (2011) Continual expression throughout the cell cycle and
downregulation upon adipogenic differentiation makes nucleostemin a vital human MSC
proliferation marker. Stem Cell Rev 7: 413-24
Paavilainen L, Edvinsson A, Asplund A, Hober S, Kampf C, Ponten F, Wester K (2010) The
impact of tissue fixatives on morphology and antibody-based protein profiling in tissues and
cells. J Histochem Cytochem 58: 237-46
Ramos-Vara JA, Miller MA (2014) When tissue antigens and antibodies get along: revisiting the
technical aspects of immunohistochemistry--the red, brown, and blue technique. Vet Pathol 51:
42-87
Richter KN, Revelo NH, Seitz KJ, Helm MS, Sarkar D, Saleeb RS, D'Este E, Eberle J, Wagner
E, Vogl C, Lazaro DF, Richter F, Coy-Vergara J, Coceano G, Boyden ES, Duncan RR, Hell SW,
Lauterbach MA, Lehnart SE, Moser T et al. (2018) Glyoxal as an alternative fixative to
formaldehyde in immunostaining and super-resolution microscopy. EMBO J 37: 139-159
Robinson RW, Snyder JA (2004) An innovative fixative for cytoskeletal components allows high
resolution in colocalization studies using immunofluorescence techniques. Histochem Cell Biol
122: 1-5
Sabatini DD, Bensch K, Barrnett RJ (1963) Cytochemistry and electron microscopy. The
preservation of cellular ultrastructure and enzymatic activity by aldehyde fixation. J Cell Biol 17:
19-58
Sati L, Huszar G (2013) Methodology of aniline blue staining of chromatin and the assessment
of the associated nuclear and cytoplasmic attributes in human sperm. Methods Mol Biol 927:
425-36
Smit JW, Meijer CJ, Decary F, Feltkamp-Vroom TM (1974) Paraformaldehyde fixation in
immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy. Preservation of tissue and cell surface
membrane antigens. J Immunol Methods 6: 93-8
Titford ME, Horenstein MG (2005) Histomorphologic assessment of formalin substitute fixatives
for diagnostic surgical pathology. Arch Pathol Lab Med 129: 502-6
Umlas J, Tulecke M (2004) The effects of glyoxal fixation on the histological evaluation of breast
specimens. Hum Pathol 35: 1058-62
Wang YN, Lee K, Pai S, Ledoux WR (2011) Histomorphometric comparison after fixation with
formaldehyde or glyoxal. Biotech Histochem 86: 359-65
Wicks LF, Suntzeff V (1943) Glyoxal, a Non-Irritating Aldehyde Suggested as Substitute for
Formalin in Histological Fixations. Science 98: 204
Zhang Z, Zhao D, Xu B (2013) Analysis of glyoxal and related substances by means of highperformance liquid chromatography with refractive index detection. J Chromatogr Sci 51: 893-8

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure Legends
Fig 1. Still images before and during PFA- and Gly-containing fixative cocktails.
First row. Live mEmbryos and hUC-MSCs before fixation.
Second-seventh rows. mEmbryos (n=49) and hUC-MSCs (n=14) during PFA, PFA/TX,
PFA+TX, Gly, Gly/TX and Gly+TX fixation procedures. Note the ZP thinning (arrowheads) and
blastomere dissociation (arrow) in Gly group; cytoplasmic blebs (arrows) in PFA group; See,
also Table 3 and Extended View Content for live videos.
Data information: T refers to time of fixation (20 min for mEmbryos; 15 min for hUC-MSC);
additional 5 min TX incubation was applied in +TX groups.
Scale bars: 50 µm.
Fig 2. Protein fixation capacities of 3.5% PFA and 3% Gly in hSpermatozoa and hUCMSCs.
A, A1 and A2. Western blot assays were used to show the percentage of unfixed proteins by
measuring the total signal intensity in Coomassie-blue–stained whole gel lanes in
hSpermatozoa and hUC-MSC lysates; (n=6 for each group from independent experiment).
B, B1, B2. Fluorescent-labelled 42 kD bands specific to β-actin in hSpermatozoa and hUCMSCs.
C, C1, C2. Fluorescent-labelled 57 kD bands specific to vimentin in hSpermatozoa and hUCMSCs.
D, D1, D2. Fluorescent-labelled 50 kD bands specific to α/β-tubulin in hSpermatozoa and hUCMSCs.
Data information: All intensity measurement results were found statistically different (p<0.001;
Kruskall-Wallis one-way ANOVA test) from the other groups. MW: Molecular weight markers.
Fig 3. Protein fixation capacities of 3.5% PFA and 3% Gly in mOocytes/granulosa cells.
A and A1. Western blot assays were used to show the percentage of unfixed proteins by
measuring the total signal intensity in Coomassie-blue–stained whole gel lanes in
mOocytes/granulosa cell lysates; (n=5 for each group from independent experiment).
B and B1. Fluorescent-labelled 42 kD bands specific to β-actin in mOocytes/granulosa cells.
Data information: All intensity measurement results were found statistically different (p<0.001;
Kruskal Wallis one-way ANOVA test) from the other groups. MW: Molecular weight markers.
Fig 4. MitoTrackerTM labelling of hUC-MSCs, hSpermatozoa after fixed with six fixative
cocktails.
First row. Live MitoTrackerTM labelling of hUC-MSCs and hSpermatozoa; (n=30 labelling
experiment).
Second-seventh rows. The efficiency of fixatives on MitoTracker labeling. The best signal-tonoise ratio was noticed in PFA+TX group in hUC-MSCs. No labelling was detected in the
PFA/TX and Gly/TX groups. The Gly+TX group did not display any label, but a strong
background. MitotrackerTM label was confined to the neck regions of hSpermatozoa (arrows).
The brightest signals were detected in the PFA group. The rest of the fixatives presented slightly
dimmer signal intensity (n=5 for each group from independent labelling experiment).
Data information: Scale bars: 20 µm.
Fig 5. Nuclear proteins and DNA markers in hUC-MSCs and hSpermatozoa after fixed
with six fixative solutions.
First column. CENP-A were characterised by nucleoplasmic spots when fixed with PFA alone,
PFA/TX, or PFA+TX. The signal intensity levels between the three groups were non-significant
(p=0.999) as quantified using CTCF measurements given in the graphs. Gly alone or Gly with
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

TX groups generally displayed intense cytoplasmic and/or nucleoplasmic background staining
as well as irregular nuclear/nucleolar foci (arrowheads); (n=5 for labelling; n=50 for signal
quantification).
Second column. Nucleostemin in hUC-MSCs was specific but with varying intensities with no
background. The highest intensity was detected in the PFA alone group; the Gly alone Gly/TX
groups showed the lowest intensities (p=0.019); (n=6 for labelling; n=60 for signal
quantification).
Third column. Lamin A/C appeared predominantly on the nuclear membrane except in the Gly
alone group, which displayed a disrupted arrangement. Labelling of DNA with common dyes
was tested in hSpermatozoa smears as shown in the fourth and fifth columns (p<0.001); (n=5
for labelling; n=50 for signal quantification).
Fourth column. Hoechst 33342 were consistently confined to the sperm nucleus in the head
region showing varying intensities between fixatives. The Gly alone group gave the weakest
signalling intensity, the difference between the other groups was insignificant (p=0.642); (n=8 for
labelling; n=80 for signal quantification).
Fifth column. 7-AAD labelling of DNA also displayed consistency in signal intensity with an
exceptionally high in the Gly+TX group (p<0.0001); (n=7 for labelling; n=70 for signal
quantification).
Data information: Scale bars: 10 µm. All significance analysis was carried out by Kruskal Wallis
one-way ANOVA test.
Fig 6. N-Cadherin and CD73 in hUC-MSCs after they were fixed with six fixative solutions.
First column. N-Cadherin was well preserved along the plasma membrane in the PFA alone
(highest compared with others; p=0.042), PFA+TX, and Gly+TX groups; (n=8 for labelling; n=80
for signal quantification).
Second column. CD73 was well preserved in all fixative groups; however, in the Gly/TX group
the signal intensity was detected significantly higher than in the other groups (p=0.021). CD73
signals in the Gly/TX group were further analysed in 3-D reconstructed image stacks obtained
using super-resolution microscopy in the Z-axis (2.44 µm in thickness). X-Y axis lateral and X-Z,
Y-Z axis orthogonal sections showed that most of the CD73 epitopes translocated to the
cytoplasm and nucleoplasm; (n=6 for labelling; n=60 for signal quantification).
Data information: Scale bars: 20 µm. All significance analysis was carried out by Kruskal Wallis
one-way ANOVA test.
Fig 7. Preservation of vimentin, pericentrin, α/β-tubulin in hUC-MSCs after fixing with six
fixative solutions.
First column. Vimentin was well retained with all fixatives; however, the best and most
consistent signals were found in the PFA/TX and Gly/TX groups (p=0.001); the PFA+TX and
Gly groups displayed weak vimentin signals (p<0.001); (n=5 for labelling; n=50 for signal
quantification).
Second column. Pericentrin was best retained in the PFA+TX and Gly+TX groups (p=0.005);
the Gly alone group revealed the lowest signal intensity (p=0.002). Pericentrin proteins were
also well-preserved in occasionally encountered mitotic cells (arrows); (n=5 for labelling; n=50
for signal quantification).
Third column. α/β-tubulin staining was best-preserved in all PFA formulations (p<0.001),
whereas Gly groups in general exhibited vary faint staining. Gly+TX did not preserve any α/βtubulin; (n=6 for labelling; n=60 for signal quantification).
Data information: Scale bars: 20 µm. All significance analysis was carried out by Kruskal Wallis
one-way ANOVA test.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig 8. Expression of ACRBP, IZUMO1, and DNMT3A in human spermatozoa after fixing
with six fixative solutions.
Two set of images were provided for each fixative because all those three protein labels
presented varying patterns and localizations.
First and second columns. The ACRBP protein was mainly detected in the acrosomal cap
region and mid-piece. The highest signal was noted in the PFA/TX, Gly and Gly/TX groups
(p=0.004); the relatively weakest signal was detected in the PFA alone group (p=0.001) (n=6 for
labelling; n=60 for signal quantification).
Third and fourth columns. The localization of IZUMO1 showed variations from the acrosomal
cap region to the mid-piece and neck. Signal intensity was noted highest in the PFA group
(p<0.0001); the weakest signal was detected in the Gly/TX group (p=0.001) (n=7 for labelling;
n=70 for signal quantification).
Fifth and sixth columns. DNMT3A was rather confined to the mid piece. The highest signal
intensity was noticed in the PFA group (p=0.014); the weakest was noted in the PFA-TX group
(p<0.0001); (n=6 for labelling; n=60 for signal quantification).
Data information: Scale bars: 5 µm. All significance analysis was carried out by Kruskal Wallis
one-way ANOVA test.
Fig 9. Preservation of cellular processes and plasma membranes in hUC-MSCs, and
mOocytes, respectively.
First column. DIC images showed the extremely flat, huge cell bodies of hUC-MSCs.
Second column. F-actin-labelled microspikes (arrows) were detected by surface topological
renderings. As indicated by thin arrows, microspikes were well preserved by PFA, whereas Gly
was not able to retain those cellular processes; (n=3 for labelling).
Third column. DIC images of mOocytes and cumulus-enclosed (asterisks) oocytes showed the
size difference, dissolution of ZP (arrowheads) in the Gly group compared with the intact ones in
PFA group (arrows); (n=16 from each independent experiment).
Fourth and fifth columns. Surface topologic renderings confirmed the size difference, ZP
dissolution, and oolemma destruction (arrows).
Data information: Scale bars: 20 µm.
Supplementary Movie Legends
mEmbryos (1-7)
Seven movie files are presented showing 20-min long time-lapse movies (40x) before and
during the fixation with PFA and PFA/TX groups. Additional 5 min-TX incubation is shown in the
PFA+TX and Gly+TX groups; (n=12 independent experiment).
Data information: Scale bars: 50 µm.
hUC-MSCs (8-14)
Seven movie files are presented showing 15-min long time-lapse movies (40x) before and
during the fixation with PFA and PFA/TX groups. Additional 5 min-TX incubation is shown in
PFA+TX and Gly+TX groups; (n=13 independent experiment).
Data information: Scale bars: 50 µm.
Table 1: Fixation/Extraction protocol and experiment groups.
Fixation/
Extraction
Agent

PFA

PFA/TX

PFA+TX

18

Gly

Gly/TX

Gly+TX

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Formula

3.5% PFA

3.5% PFA
with TX
(0.1%)

TX (0.1%)
after 3.5%
PFA

3% Glyoxal

Fixation
15 min @
15 min @
15 min + 5
15 min @
time and
RT*
RT*
min @ RT*
RT*
temp (°C)
*20 minutes @ room temperature (RT) for mOocytes and mEmbryos

3% Glyoxal
with TX
(0.1%)

TX (0.1%)
after 3%
Glyoxal

15 min @
RT*

15 min + 5
min @ RT*

Table 2. Live-cell imaging groups and protocols.

Before fixation
PFA
PFA/TX
PFA+TX
Gly
Gly/TX
Gly+TX

mEmbryos (n=49)
Time
Temp Interval
(min)
(˚C)
(sec)
20
37
8
20
RT
8
20
RT
8
20+5
RT
8
20
RT
8
20
RT
8
20+5
RT
8

19

hUC-MSCs (n=14)
Time Temp Interval
(min) (˚C)
(sec)
15
37
5
15
RT
5
15
RT
5
15+5
RT
5
15
RT
5
15
RT
5
15+5
RT
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 3. Summary of live-cell imaging results before and during fixation.
mEmbryos
Before fixation

Embryos from one-cell to
morula stage surrounded
by an intact ZP

PFA

Minimal thinning of ZP

PFA/TX

Swelling of blastomeres in
morula and blastocysts

hUC-MSCs
Normal saltatory movement of organelles and
vesicles in extremely flat and widened cell
bodies. Occasional retraction of cell cytoplasm
(see, upper part of the Supplementary video)
Formation of large cytoplasmic blebs
proceeded by plasma membrane rupture and
thus loss of cytosol
A minimal or no change of cell membrane
integrity, extracellular flow of tiny cytoplasmic
vesicles

No further significant
change
Enlargement of
perivitelline space,
thinning of ZP, dissolution
of ZP and dissociation of
blastomeres
Same effects as described
in Gly fixation
No further significant
change

PFA+TX

Gly

Gly/TX
Gly+TX

No further significant change

Minimal number of tiny blebs with no sign of
cytosolic loss
No change of cell membrane integrity, no
cytosolic loss
No further significant change

Table 4. The protein fixation capacity of (% of fixed proteins) in human cell lysates after PFA
and Gly fixation. The ratio of fixed vs. unfixed proteins was detected significantly higher in the
PFA group (p<0.001).
hSpermatozoa

PFA
(3.5%)
Gly
(3%)

hUC-MSCs

mOocytes

Total
Protein

β-actin

Vimentin

α/βtubulin

Total
Protein

β-actin

Vimentin

α/βtubulin

Total
Protein

β-actin

63

100

84

92

80

83

91

99.6

83

100

38

40

50

57

45

48

46

23

70

50

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 5. The overall performance of tested fixatives on various cell markers based on the
intensity measurements and qualitative analyses using ICC. Green designates positive
outcomes and red refers to negative outcomes.

PFA

PFA+TX

Gly

Gly/TX

Gly+TX

NS

✓✓✓

✓✓✓

NS

NS

NB

NB

✕✕

d

NB

✕✕✕

★★★

NS

★★★

★★★

NS

NS

✓✓✓

✓✓

✓✓

✓✓

✓✓

✓✓

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

✓✓

✓✓

✓✓

✓

✓✓

✓✓✓

NB

NB

NB

✕✕✕

✕✕

✕✕

★★★

★★★

★★★

★

★

★

✓✓

✓✓

✓✓✓

✓

✓✓✓

✓✓✓

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

★

★

★★

★

★★★

★★★

✓✓✓

✓✓

✓✓

✓

✓

✓✓✓

✕

✕

✕

NB

NB

NB

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

✓✓

✓✓✓

✓✓✓

✓✓

✓✓✓

✓✓✓

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

✓✓✓

✓✓

✓✓

✓✓

✓✓✓

✓✓✓

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

✓✓✓

✓✓

✓✓

NS

NS

✓✓

NB

NB

NB

✕

✕✕

NB

★★★

★★★

★★★

NS

NS

★★★

✓✓

✓✓

✓

✓✓

✓✓✓

✓✓

NB

NB

NB

NB

✕✕✕

NB

✓✓
TM

Mitotracker
MSC)

(hUC-

PFA/TX

a

c

NB

e

Live-cell
staining

b

TM

Mitotracker
(hSpermatozoa)

CENP-A (hUC-MSC)

Lamin A/C (hUC-MSC)

Nuclear
markers

Nucleostemin (hUCMSC)

Hoechst 33342
(hSpermatozoa)

7-AAD (hSpermatozoa)

Cellspecific
markers

N-Cadherin (hUCMSC)

CD73 (hUC-MSC)

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/625863; this version posted May 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ACRBP
(hSpermatozoa)

IZUMO1
(hSpermatozoa)

DNMT3A
(hSpermatozoa)

Vimentin (hUC-MSC)

Cytoskele
tal
markers

Pericentrin (hUC-MSC)

𝛂-𝛃 tubulin (hUC-MSC)

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

✓

✓✓✓

✓✓

✓✓✓

✓✓✓

✓✓

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

ND

f

ND

ND

ND

ND

ND

✓✓✓

✓✓

✓✓

✓✓

✓

✓✓✓

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

✓✓✓

✓✓✓

✓

✓

✓✓

✓

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

✓

✓✓✓

✓✓

✓

✓✓✓

✓✓✓

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

✓✓

✓✓

✓✓✓

✓✓

✓✓✓

✓✓✓

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

NB

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

★★★

✓✓✓

✓✓✓

✓✓✓

NS

NS

NS

NB

NB

NB

✕✕

✕✕

✕✕

★★★

★★★

★★★

NS

NS

NS

a

staining intensity out of three grades
NS: not stained
c
NB: no background staining
d
nonspecific background staining out of three grades
e
concordance with known cellular pattern as defined by poor (★), moderate (★★) and well (★★★)
f
ND: not determined as there is no literature information
b

22

mEmbr
yos

hUCMSCs

Bef
or
e
Fi
x
at
i
on
T0

T20

T0

T15

T0

T20

T0

T15

T0

T20

T0

T15

T20

T20+5

T15

T15+5

T0

T20

T0

T15

T0

T20

T0

T15

T20

T20+5

T15

T15+5

PFA

PFA/
TX

PFA+TX

Gl
y

Gl
y/
TX

Gl
y+TX

hSper
mat
ozoa

hUCMSCs

MW Unf
i
x
ed PFA Gl
i
x
edPFA
y Unf

A1 hSper
mat
ozoa

A2

hUCMSCs

Gl
y
T
ot
al
LaneI
nt
ensi
t
y

245
190
135
100
80
58
46

1,
2

1,
2

1,
0

1,
0

T
ot
al
LaneI
nt
ensi
t
y

A

0,
8
0,
6
0,
4
0,
2
0,
0

Unf
i
xed PFA

32

Gl
y

0,
8
0,
6
0,
4
0,
2
0,
0

Unf
i
xedPFA

Gl
y

25
22
17

Vi
ment
i
n

D
α/
βt
ubul
i
n
α/
βt
ubul
i
n

hSper
mat
oz
oa
Unf
i
x
ed PFA
Gl
y
hUCMSCs
Unf
i
x
ed PFA
Gl
y

5
4
3
2
1
0

Unf
i
xedPFA

57

25
20
15
10
5

Unf
i
xedPFA

hSper
mat
oz
oa
Unf
i
x
ed PFA
Gl
y
hUCMSCs
Unf
i
x
ed PFA Gl
y

50

5

25
20
15
10
5

Unf
i
xedPFA Gl
y

D2
50

25
20
15
10
5

Unf
i
xedPFA

10

0

30

0

15

Unf
i
xedPFA Gl
y

Gl
y

D1

50

20

C2

30

0

25

0

Gl
y

C1

57

hUCMSCs

30

Rel
at
i
veBandI
nt
ensi
t
y

42

B2

Rel
at
i
veBandI
nt
ensi
t
y

Vi
ment
i
n

hUCMSCs
Unf
i
x
ed PFA
Gl
y

hSper
mat
ozoa

6

Rel
at
i
veBandI
nt
ensi
t
y

C

42

Rel
at
i
veBandI
nt
ensi
t
y

βact
i
n

B1

Rel
at
i
veBandI
nt
ensi
t
y

βact
i
n

hSper
mat
oz
oa
Unf
i
x
ed PFA
Gl
y

Rel
at
i
veBandI
nt
ensi
t
y

B

Gl
y

40
30
20
10
0

Unf
i
xedPFA Gl
y

mOoc
y
t
es
/
gr
anul
os
ac
el
l
s A1
245
190
135
100
80

MW Unf
y
i
x
edPFA Gl

12

Tot
alLaneI
nt
ens
i
t
y

A

10

58
46

8
6
4
2
0

32

22
17

βact
i
n

y
Unf
i
x
ed PFA Gl

Rel
at
i
v
eBandI
nt
ens
i
t
y

25

B

Unf
i
x
ed PFA

Gl
y

Unf
i
x
ed PFA

Gl
y

B1
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

42

hUCMSCs

Bef
or
e
Fi
x
at
i
on

PFA

PFA/
TX

PFA+TX

Gl
y

Gl
y/
TX

Gl
y+TX

hSper
mat
oz
oa

NA

Hoechst33342

200

150

100

50

Gl
y
Gl
y/
TX
Gl
y+
TX

PF
A
PF
A/
TX
PF
A+
TX

0
6

Nucl
eost
emi
n
30

4
20

2
10

CTCFVal
ue(
106)

Lami
nA/
C

Gl
y
Gl
y/
TX
Gl
y+
TX

hUCMSCs
Nucl
eost
emi
n

PF
A
PF
A/
TX
PF
A+
TX

5

Gl
y
Gl
y/
TX
Gl
y+
TX

10

MeanGr
ayVal
ue(
0255)

15

PF
A
PF
A/
TX
PF
A+
TX

20

CTCFVal
ue(
106)

CENPA

Gl
y/
TX
Gl
y+
TX

Gl
y/
TX
Gl
y+
TX

Gl
y

25

Gl
y

PF
A/
TX
PF
A+
TX

250

PF
A

MeanGr
ayVal
ue(
0255)

30

PF
A
PF
A/
TX
PF
A+
TX

CTCFVal
ue(
105)

CENPA
hSper
mat
oz
oa
Hoechst33342
7AAD

PFA

PFA/
TX

PFA+TX

Gl
y

Gl
y/
TX

Gl
y+TX

40

0

Lami
nA/
C

0

300

350 7
AAD

200

250

150

100

50

Gl
y
PF
A
PF
A/
PF TX
A+
TX
Gl
y
Gl
y/
T
Gl X
y+
TX

PFA+TX
PFA/
TX
PF
A
PF
A/
T
PF X
A+
TX
Gl
y
Gl
y/
T
Gl X
y+
TX

CTCFVal
ue(
106)

PFA

CTCFVal
ue(
106)

NCadher
i
n
CD73
6

NCadher
i
n

4

2

0

30 CD7
3

25

20

15

10
5

0

XZ

CD73i
n3D

Gl
y/
TX
Y

Gl
y+TX

X

YZ

Gl
y+TX
PF
A
PF
A/
T
PF X
A+
TX
Gl
y
Gl
y/
T
Gl X
y+
TX

Gl
y

PFA/
TX
PF
A
PF
A/
PF TX
A+
TX
Gl
y
Gl
y/
T
Gl X
y+
TX

CTCFVal
ue(
106)
50

20

Gl
y
Gl
y/
T
Gl X
y+
TX

Gl
y/
TX

α/
βt
ubul
i
n

PF
A
PF
A/
PF TX
A+
TX

PFA+TX
CTCFVal
ue(
105)

PFA
Per
i
cent
r
i
n

CTCFVal
ue(
106)

Vi
ment
i
n
40

Vi
ment
i
n

30

20

10
0

50 P
er
i
cent
r
i
n

40
30

20
10
0

15

α/
βt
ubul
i
n

10
5

0

1
4

3

2

1

CTCFVal
ue(
x
105)

I
ZUMO1

I
ZUMO1

0
6

PF
A
PF
A/
T
PF X
A+
TX
Gl
y
Gl
y/
TX
Gl
y+
TX

2

CTCFVal
ue(
x
105)

3 ACRB
P

PF
A
PF
A/
T
PF X
A+
TX
Gl
y
Gl
y/
TX
Gl
y+
TX

PF
A
PF
A/
T
PF X
A+
TX
Gl
y
Gl
y/
TX
Gl
y+
TX

CTCFVal
ue(
x
105)

ACRBP
DNMT3A

PFA

PFA/
TX

PFA+TX

Gl
y

Gl
y/
TX

Gl
y+TX

5

DNMT3A

4

3

2

1

0

hUCMSCs/
DI
C

Sur
f
ac
eT
opol
ogy
/
Fac
t
i
n

mOoc
y
t
es
/
DI
C

Sur
f
ac
eT
opol
ogy
/
Fac
t
i
n
0
0

20

40

60

80

0
0

100

20

PFA

40

60

60

80

80

100

100

20

Gl
y

40

20

40

60

80

100

0
800

40
0

20

40

0
0

20

0

60

80

100

100

100 60

40

60

80

100

100

20

40

40

80

80 40

20

20

60

60 20

80

60

80

100

8

