bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Modeling and Visualization of Rice Root Based on
Morphological Parameters
Le Yanga, b, Peng Shaoa
(a.School of Computer and Information Engineering, Jiangxi Agriculture University, Nanchang China 330045;
b.Key Laboratory of Information Technology in Agriculture，College and Universities of Jiangxi Province,
Nanchang China 330045)

Abstract: To clarify the morphological distributional characteristic of rice roots, the
"root box" experiments are conducted to extract various morphological parameters of
roots. On the basis of experiments, in this paper, the rice root model based on
morphological parameters is constructed with B-spline curves by analyzing the
topological structure of rice roots, quantifying their biological characteristics,
summarizing the morphological structure and growth characteristics and improving
the Cubic growth function to describe the growth change of rice roots. Meanwhile, the
output accuracy of the model is tested. Finally, the dynamic simulation of rice root
growth characteristics in three-dimensional space is implemented by using Visual C+
+ and OpenGL standard graphics library. The compared results demonstrate that the
model could faithfully simulate the dynamic growing process of rice roots, and help to
enrich the methods of digitization and visualization for roots of other crops.
Key words：Rice roots; Morphological Parameters; B-spline curve; Visualization
1 Introduction
The functions of the plant roots are mainly used to absorb moisture and nutrient
ions in the surrounding soil (Kreszies 2018). As the "Engine" of rice growth, roots
absorb water and nutrient needed by plant growth and their morphological and
physiological indexes are closely related to the prophase growing development of the
overground part of roots, the crop output and grain quality in the later stage.
Therefore, it is the basis and guarantees to maintain the crop yield for the better root
morphological and physiological characteristics (Somaweera 2017). However, around
75 % of rice is cultivated in paddy soils under flooding condition during the growing
season (Atulba 2015). All important part of plants is typically hidden and difficult to
measure and study (Dunbabin 2013).Moreover, the rice roots have no more prominent
growth characteristics similar to main stems and leaves such as nodes. Therefore, it is
more difficult to quantify the structure of rice roots such as partitioning of basic units.
The root research is an important part of the rice science. The first descriptive threedimensional root system models were presented by Pages et al. (Pages 1989) and
Diggle (Diggle 1988). New root growth models with a strong focus on visualization
were developed (Spek 1997 and Lynch 1997). Pages et al. (Pages 2004) proposed the
RootTyp model which is a general model of roots. The RootTyp model describes
systematically the whole process of growing development of roots including the
growth position of roots, axial growth and radial growth direction and root branching
and so on. It implements the simulation of different roots. Dusserre et al. (Dusserre
2009) proposed a simple generic model for upland rice root length density estimation

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

from root intersections on soil profile. Leitner et al. (Leitner 2010) introduced a
parametric L-System model for root system growth. It is showed that the model can
reproduce well-known illustrations of three topologically different root systems.
Leitner et al. (Leitner 2010) adopted L-system to describe the interaction between
roots and soil, and take into consideration the effects of various tropic movements on
the root growth. Ge et al. (Ge 2011) established a three-dimensional visual simulation
model by using architectural parameters of upland rice root system. Clark et al. (Clark
2011) introduced a novel 3D imaging and software platform for the high-throughput
phenotyping of 3-dimensional root traits during seedling development. Zheng et al.
(Zheng 2012) constructed the morphological structure model of rice root using the
combination of dual-scale automaton and L-system. Yang et al. (Yang 2011, 2017)
built the mathematical models of morphological development of rice roots using crop
simulation technologies by analyzing the change pattern of the rice root growth along
with the process of development on the basis of analyzing the growth development
rule of rice roots. Han et al. (Han 2018) constructed the 3D images of the rice roots,
and the phenotypic traits were quantified from the 3D images.
The solving problems, which these research achievements mentioned above, are
the morphology and physiological functions based on rice roots, the relationship of
roots and over ground parts of roots, and the effects of cultivation and management
measures over roots. But they did not consider the combination of the morphological
structure and model parameters. In addition, the image simulation results were not
ideal and the system operation platform for the human-machine interface was not
developed. To observe and analyze accurately the growth and distribution
characteristics of rice roots in underground space, this paper adopts the "root box" to
make experiments and utilizes the root special scanner and morphological special
analysis software to achieve the correlation of root morphological parameters such as
the total root length, total root area and root volume of rice roots. In this paper, the
optimal regression model, which is between morphological indices of rice roots ,is
fitted by analyzing the mutation characteristics of root morphological indices. The
visualization simulation of rice roots is implemented combined the cubic growth
function and B-spline curve with L-system to simulate the curve rice roots with root
nodes as the center under the environment of the Visual C++ combined with the
OpenGL standard graphics library.
2 Materials and methods
2.1 The experiment design
The "root box" is adopted to do experiments in the experimental station of
Jiangxi Agriculture University during 2016 to 2018. The Ganxin 203 is used as an
experimental object to make the box planting experiment with its length, width and
height which are all 40cm. The boxes are separated into some small cells with 20 cells
in each floor by the stainless steel wire mesh and a volume of a cell is 0.1 m 3. The
"root box" is entangled by the nylon fiber which water and fertilizer can pass but roots
cannot pass freely to ensure the integrity of rice root morphology, as shown in Figure
1.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig.1 Schematic sketch of the “root box”
The planting method is as follows. Firstly, several mud holes are dug in soil and
the "root box" is placed into the mud holes before transplanting rice seedlings. Next,
the soil is taken layer by layer with 0.1m as the unit which is buried in the "root box"
and it should pay attention to maintaining the original soil composition and the weight
of the container. In green houses of the laboratory, rice seedlings are cultivated by the
way of floating seedlings (Punsalan 2013) and after 60 days of growth and
development the rice seedlings are transplanted into the "root box" of which row-plant
space is 20cm ×15cm and planting aperture is 4.5cm. After these operations, the rice
nutrient solution is added to the "root box" to meet the normal growth needs of them.
2.2 Measure projects and simulation methods
Before taking the rice roots, the “root box” is immersed fully in the 100g/L NaCl
solution. It is washed with tap water from top to bottom to obtain the whole rice
roots three hours later. Then the root soil of rice is cleaned carefully layer by layer.
While the whole rice roots are exposed on the surface part, it is time to observe and
analyze the morphological characteristics of rice roots and occurrence of branching
roots. Meanwhile, the position and growth direction of each single root are recorded
one by one.The morphological parameters such as the root length, diameter and
thickness of rice roots are measured .Then the average root length, the total root area
and the total root volume are calculated and analyzed. According to the experimental
data of the rice morphological features, the visualization simulation of rice roots is
implemented combined B-spline curve with L-system by using L-system to generate
self-similar grammatical rules for fractal reconstruction of rice roots.
3 Construction of rice root models
3.1 The morphological characteristics of rice roots
The rice roots belong to the fibrous roots, which can be divided to two categories
of the seminal roots and adventitious roots (Ackermann 2013). But only one seminal
root in the roots plays functions of absorbing water and nutrition during the rice
seedling growth and development. The main part of the roots is adventitious roots
which are produced from the residual part of rice stems. The branch roots produced
from the adventitious roots of rice roots are called as once branch roots. The branch
roots produced from the once branch roots are called as the secondary branch roots.
The number of the branch roots can be generated from five to six times under the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

condition of high yield of rice. Their morphological structure is with the characteristic
of self-similarity. During the growth and development of rice continuously, the
number of the adventitious roots rooting is also changing correspondingly. In the rice
seedlings stage, the number of the adventitious roots rooting is not large but along
with the continuous promotion of rice growth and development the number of the
adventitious roots is increasing day by day. When the rice is heading nearly, their
roots are the most prosperous and the branch roots of all levels are growing in a
crisscross pattern. Therefore, the dense and powerful root structure has been formed.
The formal diagrammatic sketch of rice roots is shown in Figure 2.

Fig.2 Root architecture of rice
3.2 Selection and improvement of the growth functions
What the growth function of rice roots describes is that growth factors (such as
the growth length of seminal roots, the number of branch roots of adventitious roots
producing) produce the continuous process along with the time change in the
condition of nature growth. The growth function unifies its parameters in the form of
expressions. The growth function can unifies its parameters with expressions which
are obtained by the functional expression of experimental data achieved usually from
the growth and development of rice roots directly which are analyzed by
mathematical statistics. There is obvious self-similarity between main roots and
branching roots according to the growth rhythm of rice roots. Thus the Cubic growth
function is chosen to describe the growth change of roots, which is expressed as
formulas (1).
dx
x
t
(1)
 6 2 (1  )t
dt
T
T
Where the parameter T is a growth cycle and t represents the time between 0 and
T. The initiate value x0 of the root growth increases to the growth terminal value xmax
continuously which is used to describe the cubic equation of the change process and
meets x ' (0)=x ' (T)=0 andΔx=xmax - x0.
However，based on the real growth situation of rice roots, we can analyze that
the growth rate of roots are different even at the same time and the same plant, which
is obviously contrary to the natural law when the same growth function is used. For

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

solving this disadvantage, the parameter rnd(1) is added into the Cubic growth
function as the regulation and control of growth rate The function definition domain is
defined at the growth cycle of geometric parameters, which is simple and intuitive.
The improved growth function not only maintains the growth characteristics of rice
roots, but also regulates and controls the growth rate by simple parameter rnd(1) to
solve the problem of speed difference between the above roots. The improved
function form is expressed as formulas (2).
x x
t

dx 6rnd (1) max 2 min (1  )t

T
T
dt 
0

T1  t  T2

(2)

t  T2

Where the parameter xmax represents the maximum of geometric parameters and
the parameter xmin represents the minimum of geometric parameters for root growth.
The growth cycle T equals T2 －T1 . The
is the parameter of speed control and
rnd (1)
its range is (0, 1].
Compared with the original growth function, the life cycle of the improved
function is its definition domain, which makes the expression more intuitive and
readable. What is more important is that the difference in growth rate between roots is
more consistent with natural growth situation by setting the value of
.
rnd (1)
3.3 The design of L-system based on B-spline curves
L-systems use grammars which contain a set of rules called production rules,
They allow the user to model complex objects by successively replacing parts of a
simple object (Bohl 2015).According to the growth characteristics of rice roots, the
topological structure of rice roots with self-similarity can be described with the
generation rules of L-system. This paper implements the virtual simulation image of
roots by adopting the method of the fractal reconstructing morphological structure of
rice roots. The B-spline curves are introduced to improve the expression of L-system
due to its advantages such as the smoothness, convexity and controllability to express
the curve shape of rice roots. In order to gain more local control and admit more
complexity of the occluded curve (Zhao 2013), the B-spline curves express the curve
roots by the start nodes, the end nodes, the control nodes and the de Boor-box
recursive formulas mainly. In the L-system of rice roots, firstly the coordinate of the
start nodes and the end nodes representing the character F between the root segments
are calculated .Then the control nodes are determined. The control nodes can be
added between the start nodes and the end nodes, or be set according to the convex
hull direction and the growth space direction of rice roots. Finally, the curve
characteristics of rice roots are simulated by de Boor-Cox recursive formulas. The Lsystem designed based on B-spline curves is shown as formulas (3).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

 : X (0,1)
p1: A(i, t )  X (i, t ) :  1
p 2 : A(i, t )  R (i, t ) :  2
p3 : X (i, t ) : t   T1  P (i  1, li 1 ) X (i  1, t  1)
p 4 : X (i, t ) : t   T1  [ P (1, l1 ) A(0,1)] X (i  1, t  1)
p5 : R (i, t ) : t   T2  P (i  1, li 1 ) R (i  1, t  1)
p 6 : R (i, t ) : t   T2  [ P(1, l1 ) A(0,1)]R (i  1, t 1)

(3)

 P (l , la )  P ( j , k  1, t )

p 7  P ( j , k  1, t ) : k  1  P(l , la )
 P ( j , k  1, t ) : k  1  P(i, k  2, t ) P(i  1, k  2, t )

In the L-system of rice roots, the parameter  represents the initial axiom.
is the initial strings to express the initial axiom. The growth nodes of roots and
X (0,1)
the growth parameter of nodes are represented with the parameter p and i respectively.
The parameter α represents the growth direction of roots.The growth time intervals of
branch roots of roots use is represented the parameter t. The probabilistic values that
the system calls production formulas p1 and p2 are  1 and  2 respectively. The
represents the growth of branch roots of roots with different probabilities
A(i, t )
1
and  2 . The parameter l represents the length of branch roots of roots described the
growth function. The start node P (0) and the end node P (n) are used to express a
curve branch root and n-1 control node vector are added between the start nodes and
the end nodes according to the direction of the convex hull of roots. Firstly, the
initiate position P(1,l1) is generated by the production formula p3.=The roots produce
the first branching roots and secondary branching roots after a growth time interval t.
X(i, t) and R(i, t) represent the different growth points respectively. The growth
process of them are represented by the different probabilities  1 and  2 of A(i,
t).The production formula p1 represents the rules of roots and the P(t) represents the
root curve. The parameter k represents the order of B-spline and the range of the
parameter is
.The production formula
and are calculated according to
p2
p3
i
0in
the de Boor-Cox recursive formula. If

,
is called or if
, is
i  j p2
i  j  k  r  1 p3

called, where the parameter r is the variable of B-spline curve times. The p7 should be
combined with the recursive calculation of b-spline curve, namely formula (4). In
order to express the curvature degree of rice roots vividly, it can be expressed by
formulas (5) combined with B-spline curves.
 Pi

Pi (t )   t  ti
t
 t [ r 1]
Pi[ r 1] (t )  i  k r
Pi 1 (t )
t
ti k  r  ti
 i  k  r  ti

r0

[r ]

r  1, 2, , k  1

(4)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

n

 f (h, l )

Et ,l  F { f ( h, l )  x} 

i

i 1

n

(5)

,xR

Where the parameters h and l are the quantification parameters and the parameter
x is the degree of maximal curve. The E and F represent the curve line or linear line
between two growth points.
4 Results and discussion
4.1 Model checking
(1) Methods of Model checking
To assess the level of agreement between the model-predicted and field-observed
data (Dash 2015), correlation coefficient and variation coefficient are combined to test
the accuracy of the rice root model.
1）Correlation coefficient
n

r





 ( x  x)( y  y)
i

i 1

n

i



n

(6)


 ( x  x)   ( y  y )
i 1

2

i

i

i 1

In the formulas (6), the parameter r is the correlation coefficient of the model.
The parameter i and xi represents the serial number of samples and measured values
respectively. The parameter  is the average values of measured values. The
x

parameters yi and y are the simulation values and the average values of simulation
values respectively. The parameter n represents the number of samples.


n



(y  x )
i

i 1

2

i

(7)

 
x
n

(8)



( x) 2
b

In the formulas (6) and formulas (7), the parameter  represents the confidence
level of the model and the band domain between



y  x b

and



y  x b

represents the

confidence band of  .
2）Variation coefficient
SD
(9)
100
AV
In the formulas (9), the parameter CV is the variation coefficient of the model and AV
is average values and SD represents the standard deviation.
(2) Comparison of Measure values and simulation values of roots
In the experimental station of Jiangxi Agriculture University, the Ganxin 203 is
used as an experimental object. From June 10, 2017, before tillering, the total root
CV 

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

length, diameter, total root surface area and total root volume are measured once
every two days. When the number of roots is 60 to 100, they are measured twice a
week and then once a week. Three plants are taken at each leaf age before the 10 th leaf
age and then two plants are taken at each leaf age. The root morphology is an
important characteristic of the differences of rice varieties. The greater the coefficient
of variation (Chittoori 2013), the greater the differences of rice varieties. In this paper,
the variation coefficient range of morphological index of rice roots is 0.64 to 0.79,
and the latter is 1.23 times of the former. The variation coefficient appears a trend of
total root length > total root area > total root volume, which is described in Table 1.
Table The morphological parameters of rice seedling roots
Morphological parameters

Changing range

Average values

CV

Total root length（cm）

113.35～2198.22

667.61

0.79

Total root area（cm2）

14.09～145.14

57.11

0.67

Total root volume（cm3）

0.13～0.98

0.43

0.64

In 2017, the experimental data is measured 50 groups of which 25 groups are
used to build the model of rice roots and others are used to test the model. In order to
test the accuracy of the morphological size of rice roots using the root model, the
average values of running 25 times simulations are computed and compared with the
experimental data of rice roots collected in 2016. The measured values and simulation
values of the total root length, the total root area, and the Total root volume of single
plant are compared respectively. The comparison results are shown in Figure 3. The
experimental results demonstrate that the values of the total root length, the total root
area, and the total root volume of single plant are almost corresponded with the
measured values achieved by the model. Therefore, the above model of rice roots can
better predict the dynamic changes of the roots with the root length, the root area and
the root volume during rice growth under the different conditions. The results of test
show that the root model achieves the good reliability.

（a） Total root length

（b） Total root area

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

（c） Total root volume
Fig.3 The comparison of observed values and simulated values

4.2 Comparison of different simulation solutions
According to the measured data and the growth trace of rice root morphological
index and taking single rice roots as an example, in 3D space, the simulation of single
rice roots is done using three different simulation solutions respectively, which the
results is shown in Figure 4.

（a）

（b）
（c）
Fig.4 Schematic diagram of Single Rice Root Morphology Simulation

In Figure 4(a), the rice root simulation results are shown by L-system iterating
twice to generate. From it we can see that it is not ideal for the curve degree because
the main root and branch roots of levels of roots are straighter. Moreover, the surface
of roots exists the wrinkle, which can only be used to barely express the topological
structure of rice roots. The Figure 4(b) is the rice root simulation chart which the
improved L-system generated. The system is combined with B-spline curve to
optimize deeply the 3D display effect of root images. The results show that the
generation of roots is more closed to smooth and the combination of the erect and
curve. It can express the curve of rice root geometric morphology.It is more natural
for the root morphology. However, it is not strong for the three-dimension effect of
the generating map of the whole root. Therefore, around the rice root growth trace, the
terraces are adopted to draw the root segments and all root segments are connected
together to form a whole root, which generates the rice root simulation chart in Figure
4(c). As can be seen from Figure 4(c), the chart presents the smoothness and
convexity and it can better reflect the natural smoothness and overall fidelity of rice

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

roots.
4.3 The 3D visualization simulation of rice roots
According to the 3D display model of single root rice roots and the rice roots
model based on morphological parameters and the topological structure base on the
rice roots, the 3D visualization simulation of rice roots is constructed by using the
Visual C++ operation platform and combining OpenGL standard graphic library. In
the system, the angle between roots, the curve degree of branch roots and the
extension situation of root growth should be considered. The system adopts random
functions to describe the possible random changes of various quantities, and controls
the growth of rice roots by controlling the diameter, length and iteration number of
root nodes. The iteration number is mainly used to control the topological structure of
roots.So the more the number of iterations, the denser the rice roots become. The
growth of diameter and length causes the roots to grow up continuously and produces
the effect of root growth. In this paper, a hybrid rice variety Ganxin 203 is used as a
test object. According to the description of the morphology and growth characteristics
of rice root growth at different development stages, the L-system production formula
of root characteristics was expressed by combined with Cubic growth function and Bspline curve. The three-dimensional image of rice roots was real-time processed by
color rendering, illumination processing and texture mapping. The dynamic growth
process of rice roots is illustrated in Figure 5.

（a）30 days

（b）45 days

（c）60 days

（d）75 days

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig.5 Diagramof the dynamic model of rice roots

5 Conclusions
The modeling and visualization simulation of rice roots is an evidently important
part for constructing virtual rice. This paper adopts the "root box" experiment to
observe and analyze the spatial morphological distributional characteristics of rice
roots and studies the morphological structure, the growth and distributional
characteristics during the growth and development of rice roots. Meanwhile, in this
paper, the L-system of rice roots is designed, and the rice root model based on
morphological parameters is constructed by optimizing the Cubic growth function and
combining with B-spline curve.The visualization simulation of rice roots is also
implemented by using the computer graphic technology. The results show that the
model simulates the geometric morphological parameter to show their growth and
development law preferably. The data achieved by the model is better corresponded
with the measured data.The correlation coefficient is 0.997 to run up to an extremely
significant level with a smaller coefficient variation. From the 3D images of the
system we can see they are very similar with ones of real rice roots in the
morphological structure, which indicates that it is very effect to use the root model to
simulate the growth and development of rice roots. But in this experiment many
environmental factors such as air, water, nitrogen and light are ignored. Moreover, the
factors such as the errors collecting the experimental data of rice roots and limitations
causes the experimental data to deviate greatly from the real data in natural
environment. Therefore, in the future work, the greenhouses based on the field-bus
control system are used to cultivate rice. The differential L-system is used to simulate
the discrete continuous situation of rice root growth. Meanwhile further combined
with physiological and ecological factors the visualization simulation is implemented
to obtain more realistic simulation effect, which makes the simulation images closer
to the natural ones.
Acknowledgment
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
61862032), the Science and Technology Plan Projects of Jiangxi Provincial Education
Department (No. GJJ160409).
References
Ackermann D. Dissecting the biological bases of traits of interest in rice: Architecture
and development of the root system [J]. Cahiers/agricultures, 2013, 22(5):475-483.
Atulba S L, Gutierrez J, Kim G W, et al. Evaluation of rice root oxidizing potential
using digital image analysis [J]. Journal of the Korean Society for Applied Biological
Chemistry, 2015, 58(3):463-471.
Bohl E, Terraz O, Ghazanfarpour D. Modeling fruits and their internal structure using
parametric 3Gmap L-systems[J]. The Visual Computer. 2015, 31(6): 819–829.
Chittoori R. Root physiological and morphological characteristics of 24 rice varieties
selected for diverse grain mineral [J]. Graellsia, 2013, 69(1).
Clark R. 3-dimensional root phenotyping with a novel imaging and software

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

platform[J]. Plant Physiology, 2011, 156(2):455.
Dash C J, Sarangi A, Singh D K, et al. Prediction of root zone water and nitrogen
balance in an irrigated rice field using a simulation model [J]. Paddy & Water
Environment, 2015, 13(3):281-290.
Diggle A J. ROOTMAP—a model in three-dimensional coordinates of the growth and
structure of fibrous root systems [J]. Plant & Soil, 1988, 105(2):169-178.
Dunbabin V M, Postma J A, Schnepf A, et al. Modelling root–soil interactions using
three–dimensional models of root growth, architecture and function[J]. Plant & Soil,
2013, 372(1-2):93-124.
Dusserre J, Audebert A, Radanielson A, et al. Towards a simple generic model for
upland rice root length density estimation from root intersections on soil profile.[J].
Plant & Soil, 2009, 325(1-2):277.
Ge Y, Ge Z, Yi H, et al. Visual Simulation of Upland Rice Root as Related to Soil
Compaction[C]// International Conference on Digital Manufacturing & Automation.
IEEE, 2011，1392-1394.
Kreszies T, Schreiber L, Ranathunge K. Suberized transport barriers in Arabidopsis,
barley and rice roots: From the model plant to crop species[J]. Journal of Plant
Physiology, 2018, 227(2): 75–83.
Leitner D , Klepsch S , Bodner G , et al. A dynamic root system growth model based
on L-Systems [J]. Plant & Soil, 2010, 332(1/2):177-192.
Leitner D, Klepsch S, Knieß A, Schnepf A. The algorithmic beauty of plant roots—an
L-system model for dynamic root growth simulation [J]. Mathematical Modelling of
Systems, 2010, 16(6):575-587.
Lynch J P, Nielsen K L , Davis R D , et al. SimRoot: Modelling and visualization of
root systems[J]. Plant and Soil, 1997, 188(1):139-151.
Pages L, Jordan M.O, and Picard D.A simulation model of the three-dimensional
architecture of the maize root system [J]. Plant & Soil, 1989, 119(1):147–154.
Pages L, Vercambre G, Drouet J L, et al. Root Typ: a generic model to depict and
analyses the root system architecture [J].Plant and Soil, 2004, 258(1): 103-119.
Punsalan A P. The germination of Helonias bullata L. (swamp pink) in response to
flooded, saturated, and dry conditions [J]. Dissertations & Theses - Gradworks, 2013,
MAI/ 51-06M(E)．
Somaweera K A T N, Sirisena D N, Costa W A J M D, et al. Age-related
morphological and physiological responses of irrigated rice to declined soil
phosphorus and potassium availability [J].Paddy & Water Environment, 2017:1-13.
Spek L Y. Generation and visualization of root-like structures in a three-dimensional
space[J]. Plant and Soil, 1997, 197(1):9-18.
Tsung-Han Han,Yan-Fu Kuo.Developing a system for three-dimensional
quantification of root traits of rice seedlings[J].Computers and Electronics in
Agriculture, 2018 ,(152) 90-100.
Yang L, Zhou Q Q, Wan Y, et al. Three dimensional visual simulation of rice root
growth[C]. International Conference on Multimedia Technology, IEEE,
2011:3289-3292.
Yang L. Modeling and Visualization of Rice Root Based on L-System[J]. Bulletin of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/553925; this version posted February 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Science & Technology, 2017, 33(5):156-158,202.
Zhao J. Discrete Variational Calculus for B-Spline Curves [J]. Mathematics in
Computer Science, 2013, 7(2):185-199.
ZhengboYin, FangYao. Construction and visualization of rice roots model based on
artificial life[C]. International Conference on Computer Science and Network
Technology. IEEE, 2012:539-544.
Corresponding author:
Shao Peng, 1983-, intelligent algorithms,E-mail:sp198310@163.com

