bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

An ESCRT-LEM domain inner nuclear membrane protein surveillance system is poised
to directly monitor the integrity of the nuclear envelope barrier and nuclear transport
system

David J. Thaller1, Matteo Allegretti2, Sapan Borah1, Paolo Ronchi3, Martin Beck2 and C.
Patrick Lusk1*

1

Department of Cell Biology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology Unit,
Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg D-69117, Germany
3
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Electron Microscopy Core Facility,
Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg D-69117, Germany
2

*Correspondence to C. Patrick Lusk
patrick.lusk@yale.edu

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
The integrity of the nuclear envelope membranes coupled to the diffusion barrier and
selective transport properties of nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) are a prerequisite for
the robust segregation of nucleoplasm and cytoplasm. Recent work supports that
mechanical membrane disruption or perturbation to NPC assembly can trigger an
ESCRT-dependent surveillance system that seals nuclear envelope pores: how these
pores are sensed and sealed remains to be fully defined. Here, we show that the
principal components of the nuclear envelope surveillance system in yeast, which
includes the ESCRT Chm7 and the integral inner nuclear membrane (INM) protein
Heh1, are spatially segregated by the nuclear transport system. Specifically, at steady
state Chm7 is actively restricted from the nucleus by Crm1/Xpo1. Consistent with the
idea that it is the exposure of the INM that triggers surveillance, the expression of a
transmembrane anchor and the winged helix domain of Heh1 is sufficient to recruit and
activate Chm7 at a membrane interface. Correlative light electron tomography under
conditions of Chm7 hyper-activation further show the formation of an elaborate network
of fenestrated sheets at the INM and suggest ER-membrane delivery at sites of nuclear
envelope herniation. Our data point to a model in which exposure of Chm7 to Heh1,
driven by any perturbation in the nuclear envelope barrier would lead to local nuclear
envelope remodeling to promote membrane sealing. Our findings have implications for
disease mechanisms associated with defects in NPC assembly and nuclear envelope
integrity.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
The molecular machinery that biochemically segregates the nucleus and the cytoplasm
has been extensively investigated. The foundational components of this selective barrier
include the double-membrane nuclear envelope with embedded nuclear pore
complexes (NPCs). NPCs impose a “soft” diffusion barrier to macromolecules larger
than ~40 kD (Popken et al., 2015; Timney et al., 2016) while providing binding sites for
the rapid and selective transport of signal-bearing (nuclear localization and nuclear
export signals; NLSs and NESs) macromolecules, which are ferried through the NPC by
shuttling nuclear transport receptors (NTRs; a.k.a. karyopherins/importins/exportins;
(Schmidt and Görlich, 2016)). Directionality and energy for NTR-selective transport is
imparted by the spatial segregation of the Ran-GTPase whose nuclear GTP-bound form
destabilizes and stabilizes import and export complexes, respectively (Floch et al.,
2014).
Interestingly, the robustness of the nuclear envelope barrier has been shown to be
compromised in several different contexts, including in diverse human diseases (Hatch
and Hetzer, 2014; Lusk and King, 2017). For example, there is an emerging body of
work linking the function of NTRs and NPCs with neurodegenerative diseases like ALS
and FTD (Nousiainen et al., 2008; Freibaum et al., 2015; Jovičić et al., 2015; Kaneb et
al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015; Kim and Taylor, 2017; Shi et al., 2017). These studies,
coupled to the observations of age-related declines in NPC function in both post-mitotic
multicellular systems (D’Angelo et al., 2009; Savas et al., 2012; Toyama et al., 2013)
and also in replicative aging models like budding yeast (Janssens et al., 2015; Lord et
al., 2015), support a theme in which the function of the nuclear envelope could be
mitigatory of age-related disease progression (Schreiber and Kennedy, 2013; Jevtić et
al., 2014; Serebryannyy and Misteli, 2018). Of similar interest, the hallmark cellular
pathophysiology of early-onset dystonia are nuclear envelope herniations (Goodchild et
al., 2005) that emanate from NPC-like structures (Laudermilch et al., 2016). As
analogous herniations have been observed in many genetic backgrounds associated
with defects in NPC biogenesis in yeast over several decades (Thaller and Lusk, 2018),
this has contributed to the idea that the herniations might be the result of either
defective NPC assembly events (Scarcelli et al., 2007; Onischenko et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2018) and/or the triggering of a NPC (Wente and Blobel, 1993) or NPC assembly
quality control pathway (Webster et al., 2014, 2016). The latter could depend on the
function of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT), a
membrane scission machinery that has been proposed to seal-off malforming NPCs
(Webster et al., 2016).
That there could be mechanisms to surveil the assembly of NPCs makes considerable
sense as there are hundreds of NPCs, each containing hundreds of nucleoporins/nups
(Kosinski et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2018) that are assembled during interphase in
mammalian cells (Maul et al., 1972; Doucet et al., 2010; Dultz and Ellenberg, 2010).
There are approximately 100 NPCs formed during a budding yeast cell cycle, which
includes a closed mitosis (Winey et al., 1997). As interphase NPC assembly likely
occurs through an inside-out evagination of the inner nuclear membrane (INM) followed

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

by membrane fusion with the outer nuclear membrane (ONM)(Otsuka et al., 2016),
holes are constantly being formed in the nuclear envelope. Without mechanisms to
surveil this process, de novo NPC biogenesis might pose a threat to nuclearcytoplasmic compartmentalization (Webster et al., 2014). Consistent with this idea,
malformed or damaged NPCs are not passed on to daughter cells in budding yeast
(Colombi et al., 2013; Makio et al., 2013; Webster et al., 2014) and deletion of the
ESCRT machinery in the context of genetic backgrounds where nuclear envelope
herniations have been observed e.g. nup116Δ (Wente and Blobel, 1993) or apq12Δ
(Scarcelli et al., 2007) cells require a nuclear envelope-specific ESCRT, Chm7 (the
orthologue of mammalian CHMP7) for viability (Bauer et al., 2015; Webster et al.,
2016). While we have previously proposed that a biochemical signature of malforming
NPCs is surveilled by integral inner nuclear membrane proteins of the LAP2-emerinMAN1 (LEM) domain family, specifically Heh2, it remains to be formally established
what the signal that leads to ESCRT recruitment to the nuclear envelope actually
comprises (Webster et al., 2014).
Evidence that the ESCRT machinery acts at holes in the nuclear envelope is further
exemplified by their critical role in performing annular fusion events during the final
stages of nuclear envelope reformation at the end of mitosis in mammalian cells (Olmos
et al., 2015, 2016; Vietri et al., 2015; Gu et al., 2017; Ventimiglia et al., 2018). Moreover,
ESCRTs are also required for the efficient repair of nuclear ruptures that arise during
the migration of cells through tight constrictions (Denais et al., 2016; Raab et al., 2016).
And, it is most likely that they also act to repair nuclear envelope ruptures that are
induced by intracellular mechanical stresses from either the actin cytoskeleton (Hatch
and Hetzer, 2016; Robijns et al., 2016), or from those observed during telomere crisis
(Maciejowski et al., 2015). Lastly, recent work also suggests a role for ESCRTs in the
context of turning over NPCs in terminally differentiated cells (Toyama et al., 2018). It
remains an open question, however, whether the mechanisms that repair nuclear
ruptures, seal the nuclear envelope at the end of mitosis, and protect against defective
NPC assembly respond to an identical upstream signal and proceed through the same
membrane-sealing mechanism.
Clues to what might constitute the upstream signal that leads to nuclear enveloperecruitment of ESCRTs could be drawn from other contexts where ESCRTs protect
membrane compartments including endolysosomes (Skowyra et al., 2018; Radulovic et
al., 2018) and the plasma membrane (Jimenez et al., 2014; Scheffer et al., 2014; Gong
et al., 2017). In both of these cases, there is evidence to suggest that the local release
of Ca2+ is a trigger for ESCRT recruitment, through (at least at the plasma membrane) a
Ca2+ binding protein, ALG-2 (Jimenez et al., 2014; Gong et al., 2017). Whether Ca2+
plays a role at the nuclear envelope remains unaddressed. More generally, there are
two, often redundant, recruitment mechanisms seeded by either an ESCRT-I, II
complex and/or ESCRT-II and ALIX (Bro1 in yeast) that bind and activate ESCRT-III
subunit polymerization (Wemmer et al., 2011; Henne et al., 2012; Tang et al., 2015,
2016; Christ et al., 2016) on specific membranes throughout the cell (reviewed in
(Schöneberg et al., 2017; McCullough et al., 2018)).

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ESCRT-III polymers predominantly made up of the most abundant ESCRT-III
(Snf7/CHMP4B) scaffold negative but also in at least one case, positive membrane
curvature (McCullough et al., 2015), and directly contribute to membrane scission (Adell
et al., 2014, 2017; Schöneberg et al., 2018). The AAA+ ATPase Vps4 disassembles
ESCRT-III filaments by directly interacting with MIM (MIT interacting motif) domains
present on a subset of ESCRT-III subunits (Obita et al., 2007; Stuchell-Brereton et al.,
2007; Agromayor et al., 2009; Xiao et al., 2009; Han et al., 2015) by threading the
ESCRT-III filaments through the central cavity of a hexameric ring (Yang et al., 2015;
Han et al., 2017; Monroe et al., 2017; Su et al., 2017). It is likely that ESCRT-III
disassembly by Vps4 directly contributes force to promote membrane scission
(Schöneberg et al., 2018). Whether the membrane scission reaction is different in
distinct subcellular contexts like at the nuclear envelope remains to be understood.
Consistent with the idea that there might be unique ESCRT membrane remodeling
mechanisms at play in distinct compartments, a step-wise recruitment and activation
mechanism requiring the ESCRT-II Vps25 and the ESCRT-III Vps20 is thought to be
required at budding yeast endosomes (Saksena et al., 2009; Teis et al., 2010; Tang et
al., 2015, 2016), but both of these proteins are absent from the genetic and biochemical
analyses of the nuclear envelope arm of the ESCRT pathway (Webster et al., 2014,
2016). These data suggest that other proteins likely contribute to ESCRT-III activation at
the nuclear envelope. Key candidates are Chm7 and the inner nuclear membrane (INM)
proteins, Heh1/Src1 (orthologue of LEM2) and Heh2 (orthologue of MAN1 or other
LEM-domain proteins). These proteins have collectively been shown to interact
biochemically and genetically with Snf7 (Webster et al., 2014, 2016) and Heh1 is
required for the focal accumulation of Chm7 at the nuclear envelope in genetic
backgrounds where NPC assembly is inhibited (Webster et al., 2016). Remarkably, the
interactions between Heh1 and Chm7 are well conserved in both fission yeast (Gu et
al., 2017) but also in mammalian cells, where LEM2 is required to recruit CHMP7 to the
reforming nuclear envelope at the end of mitosis (Gu et al., 2017). It remains to be
understood, however, whether LEM proteins (or Chm7) directly contribute to ESCRT-III
activation at the nuclear envelope or whether additional proteins are involved.
Heh1 and Heh2 contain an N-terminal helix-extension-helix (heh) motif (the LEM
domain), followed by an INM targeting sequence that (at least in the case of Heh2 but
likely also Heh1 (King et al., 2006; Lokareddy et al., 2015)) includes an NLS and a ~200
amino acid unstructured region that are both required for INM targeting (Meinema et al.,
2011). They both also contain a second nuclear-oriented domain, which likely folds into
a winged helix (WH)(also called MAN1/Src1-C-terminal homology domain or MSC;
(Caputo et al., 2006)); this domain is also well conserved through evolution (Mans et al.,
2004; Mekhail et al., 2008). The LEM domain proteins as a family have been ascribed
diverse roles in gene expression either through binding to transcription factors, BAF, or
the lamins (Barton et al., 2015). While yeasts lack BAF and lamins, the LEM domain
proteins nonetheless directly interface with chromatin (Grund et al., 2008; Barton et al.,
2015), contribute to rDNA repeat stability (Mekhail et al., 2008) and the mechanical
robustness of the nucleus (Schreiner et al., 2015). This latter function is likely revealed
by the observation in many diverse yeast species that loss of Heh1 leads to nuclear

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

envelope disruption (Yewdell et al., 2011; Gonzalez et al., 2012; Yam et al., 2013),
however, it might also reflect Heh1’s role in recruiting ESCRTs to the nuclear envelope.
Thus, the relationship between how the LEM proteins contribute to nuclear integrity and
ESCRT-mediated surveillance remains to be clearly defined.
In the following, we further explore the molecular determinants of Chm7 recruitment to
the budding yeast nuclear envelope by Heh1. We determine that the spatial segregation
of Chm7 and Heh1 on either side of the nuclear envelope is driven by NTRs and the
robustness of the nuclear transport system. Perturbations of this system, or the
exposure of Heh1 to the cytosol leads to the local recruitment and Heh1 WH-dependent
activation of Chm7. At sites of Chm7 hyperactivation, we observe remarkable
alterations to nuclear envelope morphology including nuclear envelope herniations and
intranuclear INM invaginations suggesting a role for membrane expansion and
remodeling during nuclear envelope repair.
Results
Chm7 is actively exported from the nucleus by Xpo1
It was our previous experience that visualizing endogenous levels of Chm7-GFP was
challenging due to its low level of expression (Webster et al., 2016), thus, to gain further
insight into the localization determinants of Chm7 in budding yeast, we overexpressed
Chm7-GFP behind the control of a galactose (GAL1) inducible promoter. As shown in
Figure 1C, culturing of cells in galactose for a short time (~45 min) led to the
appearance of Chm7-GFP fluorescence localized throughout the cytosol. Unexpectedly,
we also observed that Chm7-GFP was excluded from the nuclear interior (orange
asterisks). These data raised the possibility that Chm7-GFP is unable to cross the
diffusion barrier imposed by NPCs, or, there is an active nuclear export pathway that
prevents Chm7 from accessing the nucleus.
Consistent with the possibility that Chm7 might be recognized by an export NTR, we
identified two putative leucine-rich NESs at the C-terminus of Chm7 using the NES
prediction algorithm, LocNES ((Xu et al., 2015); Figure 1A, B). Interestingly, the higher
scoring predicted NES (NES2) overlapped with the potential MIM1 motif (Figure 1A,
Figure 1 – figure supplement 1A). Indeed, the Chm7 putative MIM1 motif stands out
from that of other budding yeast ESCRT-IIIs because of an additional isoleucine that
contributes the fourth hydrophobic amino acid required for an effective type 1a NES
(Figure 1-figure supplement 1A). A second leucine in the middle of this region also
aligns with the predictive spacing of residues in type 1b NESs (Figure 1-figure
supplement 1A). Moreover, these putative NESs were conserved in Chm7 orthologues
in other species of yeast, mice, flies and humans, although are curiously absent from C.
elegans (Figure 1 - figure supplement 1B). As LocNES predicts NESs specific for the
major export NTR, Xpo1/Crm1, we tested whether the inhibition of Xpo1 reversed the
nuclear exclusion of Chm7-GFP. For these experiments, we took advantage of the
xpo1-T539C allele, which sensitizes budding yeast Xpo1 to the Xpo1 inhibitor

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Leptomycin B (LMB)(Neville and Rosbash, 1999)(Figure 1E). As shown in Figure 1C, a
45 minute LMB treatment of cells expressing Chm7-GFP led to the striking
accumulation of Chm7-GFP at the periphery of the nucleus, most often in highly
fluorescent foci in over 60% of cells (Figure 1D), which is an underestimate as only
midplanes were quantified.
The focal accumulation of Chm7-GFP at the nuclear periphery suggested that Chm7
was able to enter the nucleus upon Xpo1 inhibition. Therefore, to distinguish whether
nuclear entry was driven by an active NTR-mediated nuclear import pathway, or,
whether it was the result of passive diffusion across the NPC, we generated a Chm7GFP fused to 5 maltose binding proteins (Chm7-MGM4); this ~280 kD protein would be
extremely inefficient at transiting through the NPC unless it contained an NLS.
Consistent with the idea that Chm7-GFP’s entry into the nucleus was governed by
diffusion and not active NLS-mediated transport, the distribution of Chm7-MGM4 was
indistinguishable from Chm7-GFP but, in contrast, incubation with LMB had no effect on
its localization (Figure 1C-E).
As inhibition of Xpo1 led to Chm7-GFP accumulation at the nuclear envelope, we
reasoned that it was likely that the prediction of NESs in Chm7 was likely accurate.
However, as both NLS and NES prediction is of limited utility, we directly tested whether
the predicted NESs were indeed sufficient to prevent an inert GFP reporter from
accessing the nucleus. We first tested NES2 (Figure 1A). As shown in Figure 1F, a
NES2CHM7-GFP fusion protein was only moderately excluded from the nucleus (middle
panel) when compared to GFP alone (top panel, nucleus demarked using a dsREDHDEL that localizes throughout the nuclear envelope-ER lumen) in a LMB-sensitive
fashion, with average line profiles drawn from the cytosol and bisecting the nucleus
suggesting an even distribution of fluorescence across the nuclear envelope (Figure 1G,
red lines). Indeed, only upon testing a fragment containing both NES1 and NES2
(Figure 1A) could we observe a more obvious nuclear exclusion of this NES1NES2CHM7-GFP construct that was sensitive to LMB treatment (Figure 1F, G; compare
red and yellow lines). Therefore, it is likely that both predicted NESs contribute to the
efficient export of Chm7. Consistent with this, the examination of a truncation of Chm7
(chm7OPEN; Figure 1A) lacking both NESs dramatically accumulates in one or two foci
on the nuclear envelope in a way that is not impacted by LMB (Figure 1C, D and see
(Webster et al., 2016)). Thus, the steady state nuclear exclusion of Chm7 in wildtype
cells is determined by its passive diffusion into the nucleus and the Xpo1-mediated
recognition of NESs in Chm7. That, having entered the nucleus, Chm7 accumulates in a
focus along the nuclear periphery is consistent with its binding and activation at the
INM. The latter being reflected in its focal accumulation, which would be consistent with
a polymerization event.
That Chm7 can be recruited and activated at the INM without any perturbation to the
nuclear envelope raises the possibility that there are no other upstream signals that
are necessary to trigger Chm7 recruitment. While this is difficult to conclusively prove,
we nonetheless tested whether Ca2+ could reflect an additional signal because of its
role in other ESCRT-mediated membrane repair processes (Jimenez et al., 2014;

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Scheffer et al., 2014; Gong et al., 2017; Skowyra et al., 2018). As Chm7 is recruited to
the nuclear envelope in apq12Δ cells when grown at elevated (37°C) temperatures
(Webster et al., 2016), we evaluated whether this recruitment was influenced by
chelating Ca2+ using BAPTA-AM. As shown in Figure 1H, there was no obvious change
to the number of Chm7-GFP foci that appear during the temperature shift in the
presence or absence of Ca2+(Figure 1H, I). Thus, it is unlikely that a Ca2+ signal is a
major contributor to this pathway.
Cytosolic exposure of the Heh1 WH domain is sufficient to recruit Chm7 to
membranes
We hypothesized that Chm7 was excluded from the nucleus in order to prevent its
untimely or inappropriate “activation” in the absence of a perturbation of the nuclear
envelope barrier. Such a model predicts that there must be a nuclear binding partner
that itself might be “hidden” from cytosolic Chm7; based on our and others’ prior work
(Webster et al., 2014, 2016; Gu et al., 2017) the most obvious candidate was Heh1. To
test this hypothesis, we generated deletion constructs of Heh1 coupled to the Red
Fluorescent Protein (RFP) expressed behind the GAL1 promoter (note that there is
vacuolar autofluorescence even under repressed glucose conditions, see asterisks in
Figure 2A). Unlike many other INM proteins that tend to back up into the ER upon
overexpression (Lusk et al., 2007), Heh1-RFP continues to accumulate at the INM even
at high levels due to its use of an active NTR-dependent INM targeting pathway (See
Figure 2A, B and (King et al., 2006)). Thus, even when overexpressed at levels that we
estimate to be an order of magnitude higher than endogenous levels, the majority of
Heh1 is localized to the INM and would be predicted to be inaccessible to cytosolic
Chm7 (Figure 2A, galactose, middle panels). Consistent with this, we observed no
change to the steady state distribution of endogenously-expressed Chm7-GFP, which
includes a minor fraction within a nuclear envelope focus in ~30% of cells (Webster et
al., 2016; Figure 2A). Deletion of the LEM domain of Heh1 also had no effect on Chm7GFP distribution as heh1(51-834)-RFP was also exclusively localized at the INM (Figure
2A).
We next tested deletions that encompassed the putative NLSs in Heh1 including
heh1(303-834), and heh1(442-834), which resulted in the accumulation of these
truncations throughout the cortical ER. Strikingly, we observed a concurrent redistribution of Chm7-GFP into foci that colocalized with the RFP signal (Figure 2A). In
the case of heh1(442-834), only the WH domain is available for Chm7 binding.
Consistent with this, there was a complete lack of Chm7-GFP at the ER in cells
expressing heh1(442-735), where the WH is removed (Figure 2A). Thus, exposure of
the Heh1 WH domain to the cytosol is both necessary and sufficient to recruit Chm7GFP to ER membranes.
We next assessed the functional importance of the Heh1-WH domain to apq12Δ cells,
which require both CHM7 and HEH1 for full viability (Yewdell et al., 2011; Bauer et al.,
2015; Webster et al., 2016)(Figure 2C). Interestingly, the loss of fitness observed in
heh1Δapq12Δ cells could only be rescued by the gene encoding full length Heh1 or the

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

heh1(51-834) allele. In contrast, deletions that resulted in Heh1 mistargeting or those
that are unable to recruit Chm7 (e.g. heh1(1-735), which lacks the coding sequence for
the WH domain) were unable to fully complement growth. Thus, while the WH domain is
important, the N-terminal INM targeting domain is also a critical component of Heh1
functionality in the context of apq12Δ cells.
Chm7 binds to an INM platform
The localization data clearly pointed to a direct interaction between the WH domain of
Heh1 and Chm7. Unfortunately, we were unable to detect a stable interaction in vitro
with purified recombinant proteins (one example shown in Figure 3 – figure supplement
1A), although we note such an interaction has been shown with the human versions of
these proteins (Gu et al., 2017). While there are many potential reasons for these
negative data, one possibility is that there are additional proteins (or lipids) that
contribute to the interaction in vivo. To test this idea, we affinity purified endogenously
expressed Chm7-GFP from whole cell extracts using anti-GFP nanobody-coupled
beads (Figure 3 – figure supplement 1B) and subjected protein eluates to MS/MS
peptide identification. Consistent with the idea that Chm7 is localized throughout the
cytosol in a potentially inactive form, we detected few specific peptide spectra with the
exception of Chm7 itself when compared to proteins derived from wildtype cell extracts
that bind non-specifically to the anti-GFP beads (Figure 3A). To facilitate visualization,
we directly relate the average spectral counts (two experiments) from bound fractions of
affinity purifications of Chm7-GFP and no-GFP controls in Figure 3A.
We therefore turned to examining the interactome of Chm7-GFP under conditions in
which it accumulates at the nuclear envelope, for example in vps4Δpom152Δ cells,
which we had previously shown leads to Chm7-GFP accumulation within a nuclear
envelope domain enriched for malformed NPCs (Webster et al., 2014, 2016). Shot-gun
MS identification of peptides derived from bound proteins to Chm7-GFP now revealed
specific interactions with several proteins including the ESCRT-III, Snf7, the ESCRT-II,
Vps36 (the ESCRT-III Vps20 was also found, but with comparably low abundance using
this semi-quantitative approach; Figure 3B). Most interestingly, dozens of spectra
specific for Heh1 were identified. Considering Heh1 is a low abundant integral
membrane protein (measured to be as low as 428 molecules/cell; (Kulak et al., 2014)),
this result was particularly striking. In addition, another low abundant (~354
molecules/cell; (Kulak et al., 2014)) integral INM protein, Nur1 was also detected. As
Nur1 is known to interact with Heh1 within the CLIP (chromosome linkage INM proteins)
complex (Mekhail et al., 2008), these data suggest that Chm7 engages Heh1 within a
broader INM platform, at least in the context of cells lacking VPS4. Of note, no
components of the NPC were specifically detected, nor was Heh2.
We next tested binding partners of chm7OPEN-GFP (Figure 3 – figure supplement 1B),
which also provides a potential mimic of the physiological circumstances when Chm7 is
recruited to the nuclear envelope. In this case, Heh1 was the top hit (Figure 3C). In
addition to Nur1, other members of CLIP were also specifically identified including Lrs4
and Csm1. Curiously, Gsp1 (budding yeast Ran) was also found (Figure 3C). Further,

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

alongside Snf7, other ESCRT-IIIs including Vps2, Vps24 and Did2 were detected
(Figure 3C). In contrast to bound proteins purified with Chm7-GFP in the
vps4Δpom152Δ cells, we did not detect any specific peptides for ESCRT-II subunits or
Vps20. We surmise this is likely because Chm7-GFP can also be seen in cytosolic foci
in vps4Δ cells (See (Webster et al., 2016) and Figure 5A), whereas chm7OPEN-GFP
exclusively localizes to the nuclear envelope. As a further test of the specificity of the
interactions between chm7OPEN-GFP and integral INM proteins, we observed the nearquantitative accumulation of both Heh1 and Nur1 fluorescent fusion proteins (produced
at endogenous levels) at the chm7OPEN focus, while the distribution of Heh2 was
unaltered (Figure 3D).
We noted that although we detected several additional ESCRT-III proteins in the affinity
purifications of chm7OPEN-GFP, we did not detect any peptides for Vps4. Thus, we
investigated whether a functional Vps4-GFP fusion (Adell et al., 2017) could also be
specifically recruited to the chm7OPEN focus at the nuclear envelope, which it was in
virtually all cells (Figure 3E). The fluorescence intensity of Vps4-GFP could be
correlated to that of the chm7OPEN-mCherry focus, suggesting a close relationship
between the number of Chm7 and Vps4 molecules recruited to this nuclear envelope
site (Figure 3 – figure supplement 1C). This result provided the opportunity to explore
the determinants of Vps4 recruitment at the nuclear envelope by deleting the genes
encoding ESCRT subunits found in the chm7OPEN-GFP affinity purifications including
SNF7, VPS24, VPS2, and DID2. In all cases, Vps4-GFP recruitment to Chm7OPENmCherry foci was reduced or, in the case of snf7Δ completely eliminated, with minimal
impact on the accumulation of chm7OPEN-mCherry itself (Figure 3E; Figure 3 – figure
supplement 1D, E); although we noted that the average area encompassed by the
chm7OPEN-mcherry focus was increased in snf7Δ cells (Figure 3E; Figure 3 – figure
supplement 1F). Of further interest, the deletion of VPS20 not only abolished Vps4-GFP
localization in cytosolic puncta, but in fact led to a ~3 fold increase of Vps4-GFP at the
nuclear chm7OPEN focus (Figure 3E, Figure 3 – figure supplement 1D) while the total
Vps4-GFP protein levels were not notably altered in any of the ESCRT deletion
backgrounds (Figure 3 – figure supplement 1G). Together, these data support a model
in which Vps4 can be recruited to the INM, likely through interactions with ESCRT-III
subunits recruited alongside or downstream of Snf7.
Fluorescence ESCRT Targeting and Activation (FETA) Assay
Interestingly, as shown in Figure 3D, chm7OPEN is able to shift the distribution of both
Heh1 and Nur1 from an evenly-distributed nuclear peripheral localization to one that is
co-localized with the chm7OPEN focus. This raised the formal possibility that Chm7
recruitment to the nuclear envelope might in fact be independent of and precede binding
to Heh1; in such a model Heh1 would be required for its focal accumulation, which we
interpret to be “activation”. Thus, this result illustrated the need to develop a better
controlled experimental system where the mechanism Chm7 recruitment and activation
can be decoupled. We thus generated an experimental approach that we termed the
Fluorescent ESCRT Targeting and Activation Assay (FETA; Figure 4A). FETA exerts
both temporal control over the expression of Chm7-GFP (through the GAL1 promoter)

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

in addition to spatial control over its recruitment to the nuclear envelope by binding to a
GFP-nanobody (GFP-binding protein/GBP) appended to Heh2. Thus, without any
perturbations to the nuclear envelope barrier, we can monitor the recruitment and
activation of Chm7-GFP at the nuclear envelope, the latter of which we interpret as the
local clustering of Chm7 as the most logical visual outcome of Chm7 polymerization at
the level of fluorescence microscopy.
By shifting cells to medium containing galactose, we induced the expression of Chm7GFP and monitored its distribution by timelapse microscopy. As shown in Figure 4B,
Chm7-GFP was first observed in the cytosol but accumulated at the nuclear envelope
within 20 minutes. Importantly, this nuclear envelope binding was due to its interaction
with Heh2-GBP-mCherry as overexpression of Chm7-GFP in strains lacking Heh2GBP-mCherry (Figure 1C) or lacking GBP (Figure 4 – figure supplement 1A, B) did not
lead to nuclear envelope accumulation or clustering. In contrast, Heh1-mCherry was
incorporated into the Chm7-GFP-Heh2-GBP foci (Figure 4 – figure supplement 1C).
Interestingly, nearly simultaneously with the broader nuclear envelope-localization,
Chm7-GFP and Heh2-GBP-mCherry accumulated in multiple foci throughout the
nuclear envelope (see arrowheads at 40 min). These foci coalesced into one or two
foci/cell over the length of the timecourse (90 min; Video 1). As a means to quantify this
focal accumulation, we calculated a coefficient of variation (CV) of the mCherry
fluorescence along the nuclear envelope in a mid-plane, which we plotted over time
(Figure 4C). This approach faithfully represented the observed clustering, which
reached a maximum value between 50 and 60 minutes (Figure 4B, C).
With the ability to temporally resolve recruitment and “activation,” we next interrogated
how Heh1 impacted these steps. Strikingly, the induction of Chm7-GFP expression in
heh1Δ cells lead to its accumulation at the nuclear envelope at a similar timepoint as in
wildtype cells, however, we did not observe any focal accumulation with a CV remaining
at ~1 over the 90 minute timecourse (Figure 4B, C, and Video 1). Thus, Chm7
recruitment to the INM is not sufficient to lead to Chm7-GFP clustering. Instead,
activation requires Heh1.
We next investigated whether other Chm7-interacting partners influenced Chm7-GFP
clustering in the FETA assay beginning with Nur1. Interestingly, deletion of NUR1 led to
a statistically-significant drop in the CV of Heh2-GBP-mCherry at the end point of the
FETA assay suggesting it could also contribute to Chm7 activation (Figure 5A, B).
Consistent with this idea, we also observed considerably less chm7OPEN-GFP
accumulation at the nuclear envelope in nur1Δ cells (Figure 5 – figure supplement 1A,
B). However, we also noted that the total levels of Heh1 are reduced in nur1Δ cells
(Figure 5 – figure supplement 1C), suggesting that this effect may be indirect and
ultimately mediated through Heh1. We further investigated the impact of deleting both
SNF7 and VPS4 on the extent of Heh2-GBP-mCherry clustering in the FETA assay. In
both cases, the CV of Heh2-GBP-mCherry was unaltered (Figure 5B). Yet, qualitatively,
we observed that there were more discrete foci at the nuclear envelope in both of these
genetic backgrounds, in addition to some foci (lacking Heh2-GBP-mCherry) in the

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

cytoplasm (Figure 5A). Thus, these downstream components could impact other factors
that elude measurement and interpretation with this approach.
The lack of Heh2-GBP-mCherry clustering in heh1Δ cells also provided a genetic
background to more fully vet the domains of Heh1 that contribute to Chm7 activation.
First, introduction of HEH1 on a plasmid rescued clustering of Chm7-GFP and Heh2GBP-mCherry in the heh1Δ strains, confirming that lack of clustering was indeed due to
the absence of Heh1 (Figure 5C, D). In contrast, expression of heh1(1-735), which lacks
the C-terminal WH domain, failed to restore Chm7 focal accumulation and Heh2-GBPmCherry clustering suggesting that the WH domain was required for Chm7 activation
(Figure 5C, D). Interestingly, however, the WH domain alone was insufficient to rescue
clustering but instead it required a membrane anchor through a Heh1-transmembrane
domain (Figure 5C, bottom panel). In the latter case, we also observed Chm7-GFP foci
throughout the cytosol as the heh1(703-834) construct does not contain INM targeting
sequences, consistent with data presented in Figure 2A. Thus, there is a clear coupling
between the Heh1 WH domain and the membrane required for Chm7 activation.
Chm7-Heh1 interactions drive nuclear envelope herniation and expansion
Our data support a model in which Chm7 and Heh1 are spatially segregated, but, upon
binding Chm7 is locally activated at a membrane interface. To investigate how Chm7
activation could translate into a mechanism capable of sealing a nuclear envelope hole,
we turned to a correlative light EM (CLEM) approach to investigate nuclear envelope
morphology at sites of Chm7 activation. While our initial attempts focused on examining
sites of Chm7-GFP localization in NPC assembly-defective strains that have nuclear
envelope herniations like in apq12Δ and nup116Δ cells, the combination of the low
abundance (and transience) of Chm7-GFP at these nuclear envelope foci coupled to
the loss of GFP fluorescence through the freeze-substitution process precluded this as
a viable approach. Thus, again, we turned to chm7OPEN-GFP (and Chm7-GFP in
vps4Δpom152Δ cells) as proxies to interrogate the membrane morphology at sites of
surveillance (hyper) activation.
As shown in in panel i of Figure 6A and B, we could effectively correlate fluorescence
images and electron tomograms (Kukulski et al., 2012), which showed the chm7OPENGFP foci apposed to the INM. Remarkably, this fluorescence demarked extensions of
the INM that invade the nucleus and form a fenestrated network of INM cisterna – the
lumen of the cisterna is continuous with the lumen of the nuclear envelope and is
colored teal or purple to facilitate visualization. In Figure 6A and B, the panels ii-iv
represent slices along the Z axis of the tomograms; 3D models were generated by
isosurface rendering, which can be visualized as still frames (Figure 6A, B, v-viii) and in
movies (Videos 2 and 3). These 3D views facilitate the observation of nuclear pores
(denoted by stars) in addition to a perspective of the extent of the network of fenestrated
cisternal membranes at the INM. Nearby, fenestrated ER membranes also appeared
with intriguing frequency (Figure 6A, vii, viii; 6B, iii; 6 out of 14 tomograms).

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The INM-associated cisternal network was often (11 out of 14 tomograms) found
underneath balloon-like herniations of the nuclear envelope (i.e. both the INM and
ONM) that extended several hundred nanometers into the cytosol (Figure 6A, B). The
lumen of the herniations were open to the nucleoplasm and tapered into ~45 nmdiameter membrane “necks”: in the image shown in Figure 6A, ii, two “necks” can be
observed (black arrowheads). Often (in 10 out of 14 tomograms) vesicles appear
nearby the sites of herniations some of which can be seen either fusing with, or
fissioning from, the ONM (Figure 6, white arrowheads). Additional INM evaginations
(extending into the nuclear envelope lumen, black arrowheads) are observed in tandem
arrays that are suggestive of precursors of the herniations (Figure 6A, iii). Indeed, often
several nuclear envelope herniations can be observed in a single tomogram, as
indicated by white arrows in Figure 6B. Interestingly, these membrane deformations
could also be formed in the absence of SNF7 (Figure 6 – figure supplement 1A, B,
Video 4).
Similar membrane morphology was also observed when CLEM was applied to the focal
accumulation of Chm7-GFP in vps4Δpom152Δ cells (Figure 7A, i,). Consistent with the
idea that the INM expansion and nuclear envelope herniation need not occur
simultaneously, in Figure 7A an example of a single herniation (with two necks; see
black arrow heads) is shown. A nuclear-perspective (bottom-up, Figure 7, v) view allows
a direct comparison between the herniation neck at the Chm7-GFP signal and nuclear
pores that would be filled with NPCs (stars). Lastly, a more dramatic example of a
vps4Δpom152Δ nuclear envelope where connections between the INM and a cisternal,
lamellar membrane with multiple deformations is presented in the Figure 7B.
Interestingly, in this thick section, no nuclear envelope herniation is observed
suggesting that there is no implicit link between the INM network and nuclear envelope
herniation; these two morphologies might arise stochastically and are not necessarily
directed in one, or the other, direction. Taken together, these data support a model in
which the interaction of Chm7 and Heh1, and its activation, can lead to expansion of the
INM and the formation of nuclear envelope herniations.
Morphologically distinct nuclear envelope herniations are associated with defects
in NPC biogenesis
It was tempting to speculate that the nuclear envelope herniations that we observed
under conditions of Chm7 activation were directly analogous to those observed in
genetic backgrounds where NPC assembly is perturbed, like in apq12Δ and nup116Δ
backgrounds. To perform a direct comparison, we first confirmed that, as in nup116Δ
cells (Wente and Blobel, 1993), NPC-like structures were found at the bases of the
nuclear envelope herniations seen in cells lacking APQ12 (Scarcelli et al., 2007) by
staining thin sections with the MAb414 antibody that recognizes several FG-nups. As
shown in Figure 8A, gold particles that label the MAb414 antibody were specifically
found at the bases of these herniations confirming that they emanate from structures
with nups. Furthermore, the diameter of the bases of these herniations averaged 78 nm,
which while statistically similar to those found at mature NPCs (mean of 87 nm), were
considerably larger than the ~45 nm diameter openings found at the necks of

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

herniations caused by Chm7 (Figure 8B, Video 5). Lastly, the lumen of the herniations
associated with both apq12Δ (Figure 8A, C) and nup116Δ cells (Figure 8 - figure
supplement 1A, Video 6 and (Wente and Blobel, 1993)) are filled with electron density,
whereas those associated with Chm7 appear to be empty (Figure 6A, B). Thus, we
suggest that the herniations associated with overactive Chm7 and those associated with
NPC assembly are morphologically distinct.
That activated Chm7 might drive membrane expansion and nuclear envelope
herniations that have unique characteristics to those found in NPC assembly mutants
does not exclude the possibility that Chm7 might nonetheless contribute to the
formation of both of these herniation types. We therefore next investigated whether
deletion of CHM7 impacted the prevalence of herniations in apq12Δ cells. As shown in
Figure 8B and D, deletion of CHM7 had little impact on the number of herniations
observed in thin sections of apq12Δ cells, which were only modestly reduced (23%
versus 31% of nuclei; Figure 8B). Most strikingly, however, we observed that 35% of the
nuclei in the thin sections of apq12Δchm7Δ cells (Figure 8B, E and Figure 8 – figure
supplement 2) had large (>500 nm) discontinuities in their nuclear membranes, which
suggests that these nuclei were unstable and could rupture. Similar nuclear envelope
discontinuities were observed in apq12Δsnf7Δ strains (Figure 8 - figure supplement 3).
Indeed, in some cases we could observe nucleoplasm escaping into the cytosol (Figure
8E, left panel). This result provides an explanation for the striking loss of NLS-GFP
reporter accumulation in the nucleus that was observed in only ~35% of apq12Δchm7Δ
cells (Webster et al., 2016). Thus, while these NPC-assembly-associated nuclear
envelope herniations might not require CHM7 or SNF7 for their biogenesis, ESCRTs
are nonetheless required to maintain the integrity of the nuclear membranes in the
context of these herniations.
Discussion
While there has been considerable focus over the last few decades on mechanisms that
control the targeting of proteins and lipids to distinct intracellular compartments, it is
becoming equally important to understand the protective mechanisms that maintain this
compartmentalization in the face of challenges to membrane integrity and/or the specific
biochemical identity of organelles. Here, we further explore the mechanism of ESCRT
surveillance of the nuclear membranes. We interpret our data in a model where the
nuclear envelope is surveilled by two principle components, the ESCRT Chm7 and the
integral INM protein, Heh1. This surveillance system appears to be set up to respond
directly to perturbations in the nuclear envelope barrier in a way that we suggest is
agnostic as to whether the perturbation is a result of defectively formed NPCs or a
mechanical (or other) disruption of the nuclear membranes.
The rationale behind this assertion is that the nuclear envelope surveillance system is
itself directly established by a functioning nuclear transport system, which physically
segregates Chm7 and Heh1 on either side of the nuclear envelope. For example, prior
work has shown that Heh1 requires the function of the NTRs Kap-α and Kap-β1 in
addition to the Ran-GTPase in order to be actively targeted to the INM through NPCs

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(King et al., 2006). Here, we establish that Chm7, while small enough to passively leak
through the NPC diffusion barrier, is actively exported by the major export NTR, Xpo1
(Figure 1). Therefore, any perturbations that impact active nuclear transport or the
diffusion barrier across the nuclear envelope would lead to increased Chm7 diffusion
into the nucleus and/or a deficit in its nuclear export increasing its likelihood of meeting
Heh1. While similar defects could also lead to Heh1 mistargeting and/or its diffusion into
the ONM, we suspect that this would be kinetically slower than Chm7 diffusion into the
nucleus as Heh1 is also bound to chromatin at the INM (Grund et al., 2008; Mekhail et
al., 2008; Gonzalez et al., 2012; Yam et al., 2013; Barton et al., 2015; Schreiner et al.,
2015). Indeed, it is probable that Heh1 functions in two major roles with respect to
nuclear integrity: first, it provides mechanical stability to the nucleus by binding
chromatin, and second, provides a binding site for Chm7 through its C-terminal WH
domain. These two inter-related roles could also help to explain why both the N- and Cterminal domains of Heh1 are required to maintain viability of apq12Δ cells, and why
HEH1 is generally more essential in budding and fission yeasts compared to CHM7.
This likely holds true in mammalian models as well as LEM2 is essential whereas
CHMP7 is dispensable for viability (in cell culture)(Hart et al., 2015).
Once a perturbation occurs to the nuclear envelope barrier through defects in NPC
assembly, loss of function of NPCs, or mechanical disruption of the nuclear
membranes, Chm7 and Heh1 are able to come together. While we have so far been
unsuccessful in reconstituting a direct biochemical interaction between Chm7 and Heh1
(although others have between LEM2 and CHMP7 (Gu et al., 2017)), we have
nonetheless provided evidence that this interaction likely leads to Chm7 activation
(Figure 4). Our data support a model in which the C-terminal WH domain of Heh1 in
addition to a membrane anchor are necessary and sufficient for this activation event. As
our prior data and that from Olmos et al. (2016), support that it is the N-terminal
ESCRT-II-like domain of Chm7 (which, interestingly, is also predicted to be made up of
tandem WH domains; Figure 1A) that is necessary for recruitment to the nuclear
envelope, it seems likely that the binding between the Heh1-WH domain and the Nterminus of Chm7 could trigger activation by removing some form of autoinhibition,
which is a common theme among ESCRT-III subunits (Zamborlini et al., 2006; Shim et
al., 2007; Lata et al., 2008; Bajorek et al., 2009; Henne et al., 2012; Tang et al., 2015,
2016) that ensures polymerization in the correct compartment. Clearly the precise
molecular mechanism of Chm7 activation by Heh1 will require structural insight, which
is no doubt on the horizon.
Even with structural information, it will ultimately be essential to reconstitute a minimal
nuclear envelope repair system that can also incorporate additional downstream
components including Snf7, but also Did2, Vps2 and Vps24 (Figure 3B, C). As the latter
impact the recruitment of Vps4, it is possible that the sequence of events of nuclear
envelope sealing are similar to those found at ILVs during MVB formation with a
fundamental difference being that a nuclear envelope hole instead of a single
continuous lipid bilayer, is the likely initial “substrate” for ESCRT-III action. Indeed, in
the more artificial scenarios that we present here, be it at sites of chm7OPEN
accumulation or Chm7 in vps4Δ cells (Figures 6 and 7), there are obvious parallels

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

between the morphologies observed at the INM and those at the plasma membrane
(von Schwedler et al., 2003; Hanson et al., 2008; Morita et al., 2011; Cashikar et al.,
2014; Jackson et al., 2017), and at endosomes (Adell et al., 2014; Wenzel et al., 2018)
in the context of mutants that stall or inhibit membrane scission. They also resemble
more physiological circumstances like in the ILVs of A. thaliana (Buono et al., 2017) and
C. elegans (Frankel et al., 2017), which resemble beads on a string. The network of
INM evaginations also resemble the fenestrated membrane cisternae formed in the ERderived unconventional secretion pathway, CUPS (Curwin et al., 2016).
Additionally, the size of the necks at the base of the INM evaginations and nuclear
envelope herniations is suggestive of the presence of a spiraling polymer analogous to
those observed in vitro and in vivo (McCullough et al., 2018), supporting that these
necks are likely stabilized by ESCRTs. Thus, while we acknowledge that such INM
evaginations might not be a physiological event in the nuclear envelope sealing
process, it remains tempting to speculate that they might be in the context of proposed
mechanisms of nuclear egress be it Mega-RNPs (Speese et al., 2012; Jokhi et al.,
2013), viruses (Lee et al., 2012, 2016; Arii et al., 2018), or in nucleophagy mechanisms
(Roberts et al., 2003; Dou et al., 2015; Mochida et al., 2015; Mostofa et al., 2018) that
so-far remain obscure but would require a membrane scission step. Interestingly, recent
work suggests that herpes virus nuclear egress requires ESCRTs (Arii et al., 2018),
including a role in controlling interesting INM extensions into the nucleus; such
intranuclear membrane might also be relevant in cell types that have so-called
“nucleoplasmic reticulum” (Malhas et al., 2011). The biogenesis and function of
nucleoplasmic reticulum remain enigmatic but our observations of intranuclear
fenestrated membrane emanating from the INM might suggest a yet-to-be discovered
role for Chm7 and Heh1 in forming such structures as well.
That NPC biogenesis during interphase also proceeds through an INM evagination
(Otsuka et al., 2016) step raises the possibility that ESCRTs might also directly
contribute to this process. However, while this remains a compelling hypothesis, our
data continue to argue against this possibility. For example, the herniations observed in
apq12Δ and nup116Δ cells are ostensibly products of either defective INM-ONM fusion
during NPC biogenesis (which is downstream of INM evagination), and/or, a triggering
of a NPC assembly surveillance mechanism (Thaller and Lusk, 2018). In the former
case, an expectation would be that deletion of CHM7 would prevent the formation of
nuclear envelope herniations, which clearly remain present in apq12Δchm7Δ strains
(Figure 8C, D). In the latter case, the expectation would be that the nuclear envelope
herniations would be unsealed without CHM7. It is highly unlikely, however, that we
would be able to capture a herniation that is “open” as these membranes would be
inherently unstable. Indeed, that we observe often-dramatic openings in the nuclear
envelope in apq12Δchm7Δ cells (Figure 8D and Figure 8 - figure supplement 2),
suggest that the herniations themselves might be prone to rupture. It follows then that
like in mammalian cells where much larger nuclear envelope herniations are precursors
to nuclear rupture (de Vos et al., 2011; Vargas et al., 2012; Hatch et al., 2013; Denais et
al., 2016; Hatch and Hetzer, 2016; Raab et al., 2016), these smaller NPC-assembly
associated herniations might also impact nuclear envelope integrity through

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

mechanisms that remain to be fully defined. In either case, it reinforces the concept that
the assembly of NPCs can be perilous, and it will be important to consider this
possibility when interpreting the underlying pathology of human diseases that are
associated with defects in NPC function or assembly, for example, DYT1 early-onset
dystonia (Laudermilch et al., 2016; Pappas et al., 2018) or Steroid Resistant Nephrotic
Syndrome (Miyake et al., 2015; Braun et al., 2016, 2018).
Interpreting the pathology of genetic diseases associated with nuclear envelope
malfunction will also benefit from a more mechanistic understanding of how the
activation of this surveillance pathway leads to nuclear membrane sealing. Two of the
more interesting observations of the EM tomographic analyses are the generation of
intranuclear membrane invaginations and the proximity of ER sheets and vesicles at the
ONM sites of nuclear envelope herniations (Figure 6, Figure 6 - figure supplement 1,
Figure 7, figure 7 - figure supplement 1). Both of these observations suggest that
nuclear envelope sealing might be coupled to the delivery of new membrane at sites of
rupture. Such a mechanism might be analogous to the reformation of the nuclear
envelope at the end of mitosis in mammalian cells, which requires ESCRTs and the
recruitment of ER membranes to the chromatin surface (Olmos et al., 2015, 2016; Vietri
et al., 2015). It seems plausible that sealing holes in the nuclear envelope (particularly
those larger than a nuclear pore) would require the local delivery of membranes.
Similarly, NPC quality control mechanisms that suggest the sealing of defective NPCs
would likely require some form of expansion of the pore membrane, as has been
proposed (Wente and Blobel, 1993). Whether such membrane is derived from new
synthesis or from the mobilization of existing stores remains to be explored. Of note,
recent work supports that even the INM may be metabolically active and have the
capacity to generate new lipid locally (Romanauska and Köhler, 2018). Further, close
examination of samples reveals that the morphology of the INM extensions are both
sheet-like and tubular in nature - it is not immediately obvious how such membrane
connections could be established but they closely resemble the ‘normal’ continuities
between the ONM and the broader ER network (West et al., 2011); together these data
suggest that ER-shaping proteins and lipid synthesis pathways might play an important
role in contributing to nuclear envelope sealing - topics for the future.
Lastly, any ESCRT-mediated nuclear envelope sealing mechanism will need to
incorporate a potential role for NTRs. The sequence overlap of the potential MIM
domain and one of the Chm7 NESs (Figure 1A, Figure 1 – figure supplement 1A) raises
the possibility that Xpo1 might directly impact Chm7 function at the nuclear envelope,
perhaps even playing a direct role in polymer formation. Likewise, Heh1 is synthesized
and inserted into ER membranes before it is targeted to the INM by NTRs. As exposure
of Heh1 to the cytosol is sufficient to induce Chm7 recruitment to ER membranes, do
NTRs inhibit Chm7 recruitment in this compartment? The latter concept points to a
similar level of regulation that must be imposed in mammalian cells during mitotic
nuclear envelope breakdown in which LEM2 would be exposed to CHMP7. Whether
NTRs also bind to LEM2 in mammalian cells remains an outstanding question but one
that is supported by the presence of NLS-like sequences in its N-terminus (Kralt et al.,
2015). Regardless, recent work is already suggesting additional regulatory proteins like

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Lgd/CC2D1B that control the spatiotemporal timing of CHMP4B and CHMP7 activity in
mammalian cells (Ventimiglia et al., 2018). These, and likely other yet-to-be defined
factors promise new insights into this emerging mechanism of organelle surveillance.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgements
We thank members of the Lusk, Beck and King laboratories for critical input in addition
to M. King for comments on the manuscript. We also acknowledge invaluable
assistance from Z. Hakhverdyan and M. Rout for affinity purifications and the Yale Keck
Proteomics facility, M. Graham and X. Liu for help with EM and generous support by
EMBL’s electron microscopy core facility and Y. Schwab. This work was supported by
the NIH, GM105672 to C.P.L. and D.J.T. was also funded by 5T32GM007223 and a
short term EMBO fellowship 6885. M.A was funded by an EMBO a long term fellowship
(ALTF-1389-2016).

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure Legends
Figure 1: Chm7 can diffuse across the NPC but is actively exported by Xpo1.
A) Schematic of Chm7 and deletion constructs with predicted winged helix domains
(teal), alpha helices (blue) and NESs (red boxes); numbers are amino acids.
B) Predicted Chm7 NESs with probability score from LocNES; numbers are amino acids
from Chm7 sequence. Hydrophobic residues in putative NESs are highlighted red as
per the consensus class 1a and 1b NESs shown.
C) Deconvolved inverted fluorescence micrographs of the indicated overexpressed
Chm7-GFP constructs in a LMB-sensitive strain (xpo1-T539C) treated with carrier
(MeOH) or LMB. Nuclei are marked with orange asterisks. Cells are outlined in black in
bottom panels. Scale bar is 5 µm.
D) Plots showing the percentage of cells with Chm7-GFP nuclear envelope foci from C.
Data are from three independent replicates where >100 cells were counted for each
strain. Only images of midplanes were quantified. P-values from unpaired Student’s ttest where ns is P > 0.05, **** P ≤ 0.0001.
E) Schematic of the experiment and interpretation of C.
F) Deconvolved fluorescence micrographs (merge of green and red channels) of the
indicated GFP, and GFP-NES constructs co-expressed with dsRed-HDEL to help
visualize the nucleus. Cells were treated with carrier (MeOH) or LMB before imaging.
Scale bar is 5 µm.
G) To quantify relative nuclear exclusion of the GFP and GFP-NES constructs in F, line
profiles bisecting the nucleus as shown in diagram were measured from 50
cells/condition pooled from 3 independent replicates. The normalized average (thick
lines) +/- SD (thin lines) of the carrier (red) and LMB-treated (yellow) cells are shown.
Vertical dotted lines designate nuclear boundaries.
H) Ca2+ chelation does not affect Chm7-GFP recruitment to the nuclear envelope in
apq12Δ cells. Deconvolved inverted fluorescence micrographs of endogenously
expressed Chm7-GFP in apq12Δ cells pretreated for 30 minutes with carrier (DMSO) or
BAPTA-AM and shifted to the indicated temperature for 45 minutes.
I) Plot quantifying the percentage of apq12Δ cells with Chm7-GFP foci at the indicated
temperature and treatment. 3 independent replicates of > 100 cells were quantified per
replicate. P-values are calculated from un-paired Student’s t-test where ns is P > 0.05.
Figure 1 – figure supplement 1: Chm7 can diffuse across the NPC but is actively
exported by Xpo1.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A) Amino acid sequences of S. cerevisiae ESCRT-III MIM1 domains aligned with class
1a and 1b Xpo1/Crm1 NESs. Blue coloring reflects alignment with the MIM1 consensus
(at top) and red coloring indicates additional hydrophobic amino acid residues in the
putative Chm7 MIM1 domain that align with both the class 1a and 1b NESs.
B) Alignment of predicted NES1 and NES2 from Chm7 with the analogous sequence of
the indicated species. Red coloring are hydrophobic residues that align with type 1a and
1b NES consensus sequences.
Figure 2: Cytosolic exposure of the Heh1 WH domain is sufficient to recruit Chm7
to ER membranes.
A) Deconvolved fluorescence micrographs of endogenously expressed Chm7-GFP
(inverted) either prior to (+glucose) or after 2 hours of overexpression (+galactose) of
RFP-tagged full length and truncations of Heh1 (depicted in cartoons at left in a lipid
bilayer). Asterisks indicate vacuolar autofluorescence in the red channel. Scale bar is 5
µm.
B) Cartoon of experiment and interpretation of A. The efficient INM targeting of Heh1
depends on Kap-α/Kap-β1 (blue and purple) and on Ran-GTP (red).
C) Tenfold serial dilutions of the indicated strains spotted onto YPG plates to express
the indicated truncations of Heh1. Plates imaged after growth at RT for 48 h.
Figure 3: Chm7 binds to Heh1, Nur1 and downstream ESCRTs required for Vps4
recruitment.
A-C) Affinity purifications of endogenously expressed Chm7-GFP and chm7OPEN-GFP
were performed from wildtype and vps4Δpom152Δ cells. Bound proteins were eluted
and subjected to LC-MS/MS peptide identification. Scatter plots of the number of
peptide spectra identifying the indicated proteins were directly compared to those
identified in “no GFP” samples. Dotted line and teal circles represent peptides found at
least 2 fold enriched over non-specific proteins (blue). Plots A and C represent an
average of two replicates of normalized spectral counts of peptides identified by MS.
D) Heh1 and Nur1 but not Heh2 colocalize with chm7OPEN. Deconvolved inverted
fluorescence micrographs of Heh1-mCherry, Heh2-mCherry, with and without
chm7OPEN-GFP, and Nur1-GFP with and without chm7OPEN-mCherry. Merge of green
and red channels shown in inset.
E) Vps4 recruitment to chm7OPEN requires Snf7 and downstream ESCRTs. Deconvolved
fluorescence micrographs of Vps4-GFP and chm7OPEN -mCherry in the indicated strain
backgrounds. Green, red and merged images shown.
Figure 3 – figure supplement 1: Chm7 binds to Heh1, Nur1 and downstream
ESCRTs required for Vps4 recruitment.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A) Recombinant purified Heh1 WH domain and GST-Chm7 fail to interact within an in
vitro solution binding assay. A coomassie-stained SDS-PAGE gel showing input and
bound fractions of a solution binding experiment where GST or GST-Chm7 were
incubated with the Heh1 WH domain (heh1(735-834)) and immobilized on GT-beads.
The position of MW markers are indicated at left.
B) Anti-GFP magnetic beads were incubated with cell extracts derived from wildtype
(W303) or cells expressing endogenous levels of Chm7-GFP or chm7OPEN-GFP.
Proteins bound to beads were eluted, separated by SDS-PAGE and either sent for
MS/MS peptide identification or stained with Coomassie as shown. Position of
molecular weight (MW) markers are shown at left.
C) Correlation of the total fluorescence (integrated density) in arbitrary units (A.U.) of
chm7OPEN-mCherry and Vps4-GFP co-localized at the nuclear envelope. Linear
regression calculated from 100 chm7OPEN foci pooled from three independent replicates;
r is the linear correlation (Pearson’s) coefficient.
D) Plot of average fluorescence intensity (in arbitrary units; A.U.) of Vps4-GFP colocalized with chm7OPEN-mCherry foci in the indicated genetic backgrounds. Error bars
represent SD of the mean from > 50 foci pooled from three independent replicates.
E) Plot of average fluorescence intensity (in arbitrary units) of chm7OPEN-mCherry foci in
the indicated genetic backgrounds. Error bars represent SD of the mean from >50 foci
pooled from three independent replicates. P-values from one-way ANOVA with
Dunnett’s correction where ** P ≤ 0.01.
F) Plot of the area encompassed by the chm7OPEN-GFP focus in the indicated genetic
backgrounds. Error bars represent SD of the mean from > 50 foci pooled from three
independent replicates. P-values from one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s correction where
ns is P ≥ 0.05, * P ≤ 0.05, and *** P ≤ 0.001.
G) Western blot to assess the total levels of Vps4-GFP in the indicated genetic
backgrounds. Anti-HA-labeling detected by HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies and
ECL. Ponceau-stain used to assess total protein loads. Position of MW markers at left.
Figure 4: Heh1 is required to induce the focal accumulation of Chm7.
A) Schematic of “Fluorescence ESCRT Targeting and Activation Assay” where Heh2 is
expressed as a fusion to GFP binding protein (GBP; red). Chm7-GFP is expressed by
the addition of galactose to the growth medium. The focal accumulation of Heh2-GBPmCherry is interpreted as Chm7 activation.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

B) Deconvolved fluorescence micrographs of overexpressed Chm7-GFP and Heh2GBP-mCherry at the indicated timepoints after addition of galactose to the growth
medium. Scale bar is 5 μm.
C) As a metric for the clustering of Heh2-GBP-mCherry, a coefficient of variation (CV) of
the Heh2-GBP-mCherry fluorescence along the nuclear envelope in a mid-section was
calculated over time. Mean and SD normalized to 0 timepoint are shown. n=25.
Figure 4 – figure supplement 1: Heh1 is required to induce the focal accumulation
of Chm7.
A) Overexpression of Chm7-GFP does not impact the distribution of Heh2-mCherry.
Deconvolved fluorescence micrographs of Heh2-mCherry and Chm7-GFP under
conditions where Chm7-GFP produced (galactose) or repressed (glucose). Merge of
green and red fluorescence also shown. Asterisks denote vacuolar autofluorescence.
Scale bar 5 μm.
B) Plot of the CV of Heh2-mCherry fluorescence along the nuclear envelope from
images and conditions in (A). Error bars represent SD of the mean from three
independent replicates of > 50 cells. P-values from Student’s t-test where ns is P ≥ 0.05.
C) Overexpression of Chm7-GFP in the context of Heh2-GBP leads to the accumulation
of Heh1-mCherry in Chm7-GFP foci at the nuclear envelope. Deconvolved fluorescence
micrographs of Heh1-mCherry and Chm7-GFP (in a strain also expressing Heh2-GBP)
under conditions where Chm7-GFP is produced (galactose) or repressed (glucose).
Merge of green and red fluorescence also shown. Asterisks denote vacuolar
autofluorescence. Scale bar 5 μm.
Figure 5: The Heh1 WH domain and a transmembrane anchor are necessary and
sufficient for Chm7 activation.
A) Deconvolved fluorescence micrographs of Heh2-GBP-mCherry and overexpressed
Chm7-GFP in the indicated genetic backgrounds, either prior to (glucose) or after 90
minutes in galactose to drive Chm7-GFP production. Green and red channels with
merge shown. Scale bar is 5 μm.
B) Plot of the CV of Heh2-GBP-mCherry fluorescence (as in Figure 4C) in the indicated
strains before (glucose) or after 90 minutes of galactose addition to induce Chm7-GFP
production. Data is from three independent replicates where 50 cells/genotype/replicate
were counted. P-values are from two-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s test where ns is P >
0.05, ** P ≤ 0.01, *** P ≤ 0.001, and **** P ≤ 0.0001.
C) Deconvolved fluorescence micrographs of Heh2-GBP-mCherry and overexpressed
Chm7-GFP produced for 90 minutes in galactose. All images are from heh1Δ strains

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

expressing the indicated genes encoding HEH1 and several deletion constructs
(schematized at left in a lipid bilayer).
D) Plot of the CV of Heh2-GBP-mCherry fluorescence (as in Figure 4C) in an heh1Δ
strain expressing HEH1 or heh1(1-735) after 90 minutes of galactose addition to induce
Chm7-GFP production. Data is from three independent replicates of 50 cells per strain.
P-values are from two-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s test where ns is P > 0.05, **** P ≤
0.0001.
Figure 5 – figure supplement 1: The Heh1 WH domain and a transmembrane
anchor are necessary and sufficient for Chm7 activation.
A) Deletion of NUR1 impacts chm7OPEN-GFP accumulation at the nuclear envelope.
Deconvolved fluorescence micrographs (inverted) of chm7OPEN-GFP in the indicated
strains.
B) Plot of the level of enrichment of chm7OPEN-GFP at nuclear envelope foci in the
indicated strains reflected by the ratio of its mean fluorescence at the nuclear envelope
focus over background fluorescence. Error bars represent SD of the mean of >100 foci
pooled from three independent replicates.
C) Heh1 levels are diminished in nur1Δ cells. Western blot of the total levels of a Heh13xHA fusion (produced from endogenous promoter) in the indicated strains. Heh1-3xHA
and actin, which is used as a total protein load reference, are detected using either antiHA antibodies or anti-actin antibodies followed by HRP-conjugated secondary
antibodies and ECL. Position of molecular weight (MW) standards at left.
Figure 6: chm7OPEN associates with a network of intranuclear fenestrated cisterna
often below nuclear envelope herniations.
A, B) Correlative light and electron microscopy of 300 nm thick sections was used to
examine the morphology of the nuclear envelope at sites of chm7OPEN-GFP
accumulation. i. Overlay of fluorescent and electron micrographs with tetrafluorescent
fiducials used for correlative alignment marked with (*); boxed region is magnified in iiiv. ii-iv. Several views along the z-axis of the tomogram shown with the nuclear
envelope/ER lumen filled with teal or light purple. v-viii. 3D models were generated and
several perspective views are shown. White arrows are herniations, while arrowheads
vesicles, black arrowheads are constrictions or necks of budding herniations, stars are
nuclear pores. N is nucleus. Scale bars are 250 nm.
Figure 6 – figure supplement 1: chm7OPEN associates with a network of
intranuclear fenestrated cisterna often below nuclear envelope herniations.
A and B) SNF7 is dispensable for the formation of an intranuclear fenestrated
membrane network in the context of chm7OPEN. i) Correlative light and electron

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

microscopy of ~220 nm thick sections was used to examine the morphology of the
nuclear envelope at sites of chm7OPEN-mCherry accumulation in snf7Δ cells. i. Overlay
of fluorescent (red) and electron micrographs; boxed region is magnified in ii. ii.
Tomographic slices where nuclear envelope membranes are colored blue or green with
ER in purple. iii. Views of 3D models. Stars are nuclear pores, Chr is chromatin and N is
nucleus. Scale bars in i are 1 µm and scale bars in ii, iii are 250 nm.
Figure 7: Chm7 associates with nuclear envelope herniations and intranuclear
membranes.
A, B) Correlative light and electron microscopy of 300 nm thick sections was used to
examine the morphology of the nuclear envelope at sites of Chm7-GFP accumulation in
vps4Δpom152Δ cells. i. Overlay of fluorescent and electron micrographs; boxed region
is magnified in ii and iii. ii, iii. Several views along the z-axis of the tomogram shown. ivvi. 3D models were generated with indicated perspective views shown. Nuclear
envelope/ER lumen colored blue or red. Black arrowheads are herniation necks or sites
of membrane constriction, stars are nuclear pores. N is nucleus. Scale bars are 250 nm.
Figure 8: CHM7 is required to maintain the integrity of the nuclear membranes in
the context of nucleoporin-associated herniations.
A) Nucleoporins are found at the bases of nuclear envelope herniations in apq12Δ cells.
Immunogold labelling of thin sections of apq12Δ cells with 5 nm gold-conjugated
secondary antibodies that detect MAb414 labeled nups at bases of herniations.
B) Left: Plot of the diameter of herniation necks in the indicated genetic backgrounds
and fenestrations within the intranuclear membrane network associated with chm7OPEN.
Middle: Plot of the percentage of nuclei of the indicated strains where nuclear envelope
herniations are observed. Right: Plot of the percentage of nuclei in the indicated strains
where nuclear envelope ruptures (NER) are observed. At least 100 cells from each
genotype were quantified. P-values are from Student’s t-test, where ** P ≤ 0.01, *** P ≤
0.001.
C) Electron tomograph of 300 nm thick section of apq12Δ cells grown at 37°C for 2
hours prior to high pressure freezing. Note the electron density within the herniations.
Tomograms were segmented to generate a 3D model with perspective views shown
(membranes/nuclear envelope-ER lumen colored pink with electron density within
herniation blue). Arrowheads point to herniation necks and stars are nuclear pores.
Scale bars are 250 nm.
D) Nuclear envelope herniations associated with nups persist in the absence of CHM7.
Representative electron micrographs of the apq12Δ and chm7Δapq12Δ strains grown
for 2 hours at 37°C prior to high pressure freezing. Asterisks denote herniation lumen. N
is nucleus.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

E) Nuclear envelope ruptures (NER) are observed in chm7Δapq12Δ cells. Electron
micrographs of chm7Δapq12Δ depicting nuclear envelope ruptures (NER). Nucleus is
indicated with “N”. Scale bars are 250 nm.
Figure 8 – figure supplement 1: CHM7 is required to maintain the integrity of the
nuclear membranes in the context of nucleoporin-associated herniations.
A) Tomographic slices from 300 nm sections of nup116Δ cell nuclear envelope
herniations. i-iii, Tomographic slice with boxed regions magnified in ii and iii. iv-ix.
Different persepectives of 3D model with nuclear envelope and ER membranes in red
and herniation densities (marked by asterisks in i-iii) are colored purple. White
arrowheads point out the bases of the herniations and stars are nuclear pores. Scale
bars are 250 nm.
Figure 8 – figure supplement 2: CHM7 is required to maintain the integrity of the
nuclear membranes in the context of nucleoporin-associated herniations.
A) Electron micrographs (from thin sections) showing nuclear envelope ruptures (NER)
in apq12Δchm7Δ cells after 2 hours at 37oC. Asterisks indicate herniations. Scale bars
are 250 nm.
Figure 8 – figure supplement 3: CHM7 is required to maintain the integrity of the
nuclear membranes in the context of nucleoporin-associated herniations.
A) Electron micrographs (from thin sections) showing nuclear envelope ruptures (NER)
and herniations (asterisks) in apq12Δsnf7Δ cells after 2 hours at 37oC. Scale bars are
250 nm
Video Legends
Video 1: Clustering of Heh2-GBP-mCherry in FETA assay requires Heh1.
Related to Figure 4. A timelapse series of fluorescence images acquired at 10 minute
intervals of overexpressed Chm7-GFP and Heh2-GBP-mCherry in wildtype and heh1Δ
cells. Green, red and merge shown. Timestamp shows elapsed time after galactose
induction of Chm7-GFP expression. Scale bar is 2 µm.
Video 2: Nuclear envelope morphology at sites of chm7OPEN-GFP accumulation.
Related to Figure 6A. Video showing full tomogram and 3D model from a nuclear
envelope region of chm7OPEN-GFP accumulation. Scale bar is 250 nm.
Video 3: Nuclear envelope morphology at sites of chm7OPEN-GFP accumulation.
Related to Figure 6B. Video showing full tomogram and 3D model from a nuclear
envelope region of chm7OPEN-GFP accumulation. Scale bar is 250 nm.
Video 4: Nuclear envelope morphology at sites of chm7OPEN-GFP accumulation in
the absence of SNF7.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Related to Figure 7A. Video showing full tomogram and 3D model from a nuclear
envelope region of chm7OPEN-mCherry accumulation. Scale bar is 250 nm.
Video 5: Morphology of nuclear envelope herniations in apq12Δ cells.
Related to Figure 8C. Video showing a tomogram and 3D model of the nuclear
envelope in apq12Δ cells. Scale bar is 250 nm.
Video 6: Morphology of nuclear envelope herniations in nup116Δ cells.
Related to Figure 8 – figure supplement 1A. Video showing a tomogram and 3D model
of the nuclear envelope in nup116Δ cells. Scale bar is 250 nm

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Yeast strains and growth conditions
All strains used in this study are from a W303 parent; their derivation and genotypes are
listed in Table 1. Fluorescent protein tagging and gene deletions were generated using
a PCR-based integration approach using the pFA6a plasmid series (Table 2) as
templates (Longtine et al., 1998; Van Driessche et al., 2005). Standard yeast protocols
for transformation, mating, sporulation, chromosomal DNA isolation and tetrad
dissection were followed (Amberg et al., 2005).
Cells were grown to mid-log phase in YPA (1% Bacto yeast extract (BD), 2% Bacto
peptone (BD), 0.025% adenine hemi-sulfate (Sigma)) or complete synthetic medium
(CSM) supplemented with 2% raffinose (R; BD), 2% D-galactose (G; Alfa Aesar) or 2%
D-glucose (D; Sigma) as indicated.
To compare relative growth rates of heh1Δapq12Δ strains expressing HEH1 alleles
(DTCPL1498, DTCPL1517, DTCPL1581, DTCPL1519, DTCPL1520) roughly equivalent
cell numbers from overnight cultures grown in in YPAR were spotted in 10-fold serial
dilutions onto YPG to induce expression of Heh1 or indicated truncations and imaged
after 36 hours at RT.
Leptomycin B and BAPTA-AM treatments
To test the impact of inhibiting nuclear export on the steady state distribution Chm7GFP, Chm7-MGM4, chm7OPEN-GFP, GFP, NES2CHM7-GFP, or NES1-NES2CHM7-GFP,
we used KWY175 (a gift from B. Montpetit and Karsten Weis) in which the genomic
deletion of XPO1 is covered with pRS413 expressing the xpo1-T539C allele that
confers sensitivity to Leptomycin B (LMB). These strains were grown in YPAR and
galactose (final concentration of 1%) was added to the growth medium to induce the
expression of the GFP fusion proteins for 2 hours before the addition of 2% D-glucose
to repress protein production. Cultures were then treated with 50 ng/mL LMB dissolved
in 7:3 MeOH:H2O solution (Sigma) for 45 minutes alongside a control of the equivalent
volume of MeOH before imaging.
To test if Ca2+ plays a role in the physiological recruitment of Chm7 to the nuclear
envelope, apq12Δ cells expressing Chm7-GFP (DTCPL567) were cultured overnight at
30°C, diluted to an OD600 of 0.2 and grown for an additional 2 hours at RT. Cells were
treated with either 25 µM (Li et al., 2011) of the cell permeable calcium chelater BAPTAAM (Tocris Bioscience) dissolved in DMSO or DMSO alone for 30 minutes followed by a
45 minute incubation at either RT or 37°C before imaging.
Plasmids
All plasmids are listed in Table 2.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To generate pRS406-ADH1-GFP, the GFP coding sequence was amplified by PCR and
inserted into pRS406-ADH1 (p406ADH1 was a gift from Nicolas Buchler & Fred Cross Addgene plasmid # 15974; http://n2t.net/addgene:15974 ; RRID:Addgene_15974))
using EcoRI and HindIII restriction sites.
To generate pCHM7-MGM4, the CHM7 ORF was amplified by PCR with ClaI restriction
sites and subcloned in pPP004 linearized with ClaI (gift of L. Veenhoff; (Popken et al.,
2015)), placing CHM7 in between the first MBP gene and the GFP.
To generate pRS406-ADH1-NES2-GFP, complimentary 4 nmol Ultramers (IDT) were
designed to code for amino acids 409-424 of CHM7 with overhangs that would be
generated with XbaI or BamHI. Ultramers were annealed by heating to 95°C for 5
minutes in Taq polymerase PCR buffer (Invitrogen) and allowing them to slowly cool to
RT. Annealed primers were then ligated using T4 ligase (Invitrogen) into pRS406ADH1-GFP linearized with XbaI/BamHI (New England Biolabs).
To generate pRS406-ADH1-NES1-NES2CHM7-GFP, the sequence encoding amino acids
370-429 of CHM7 was amplified with oligonucleotide primers containing the XbaI or
BamHI restriction sites. The PCR product was digested with XbaI/BamHI and gel
purified (Qiagen) before ligation with T4 ligase (Invitrogen) into pRS406-ADH1-GFP
linearized with XbaI/BamHI.
Gibson Assembly (New England BioLabs) was used to generate pFA6a-3xHA-GFPhis3MX6 for functional tagging of Vps4(Adell et al., 2017). The 3xHA epitope was PCRamplified from a pFA6a-3xHA-his3MX6 (Longtine et al. 1998) plasmid using Q5 DNA
polymerase (New England BioLabs) and assembled into pFA6a-GFP-hisMX6 (Longtine
et al. 1998) digested with SalI and PacI (New England BioLabs).
Western blotting
For whole cell protein extracts, approximately 2 OD600 of cells in mid log phase were
collected by centrifugation, washed in 1 mM EDTA, pelleted again and
resuspended/lysed in 2 M NaOH for 10 minutes on ice. Proteins were precipitated by
the addition of 50% TCA (Trichloroacetic acid) for 20 minutes on ice and then collected
by centrifugation. The precipitated proteins were washed in ice-cold acetone, air dried
and then resuspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer. Samples were then denatured by
at 95°C for 5 minutes. Denatured proteins were separated on precast SDS-PAGE, 420% gradient gels (BioRad) and transferred to 0.2 µm nitrocellulose membranes
(BioRad). Relative protein loading was visualized using Ponceau S Solution (Sigma).
Membranes were subsequently washed in TBST and blocked for 1 hour in 5% skim milk
in TBST at RT. Membranes were then incubated with HRP-conjugated anti-HA (Roche
3F10), or anti-actin (mAbcam 8224) diluted in TBST. Primary antibodies were detected
directly with ECL (ThermoFisher) or with anti-rabbit HRP-conjugated secondary
antibodies, followed by ECL and visualized using a VersaDoc Imaging System (BioRad).
Fluorescence microscopy

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

With the exception of the correlative light electron microscopy experiments described
below, all fluorescence micrographs were acquired using a DeltaVision microsope
(Applied Precision/GE Healthcare) fitted with a 100x, 1.4 NA objective (Olympus).
Images were taken using a CoolSnapHQ2 CCD camera (Photometrics), with the
exception of those in Figure 3 and Figure 4B which were acquired using a Evolve
EMCCD camera (Photometrics).
For timecourse assessment of Heh2-GBP-mCherry clustering in FETA assay in Figure
4B, cells were imaged in microfluidic plates (Y04C/CellASIC) in the ONIX microfluidic
platform (CellASIC). Cell were loaded into the microfluidic chamber in CSM with 2%
raffinose. CSM with 2% galactose was perfused into the microfluidic chamber at 0.25
psi for the course of the experiment. Z-stacks (0.4 µm sections) were acquired for 90
minutes at 10 minute intervals.
Image processing and analysis
All presented fluorescent micrographs were deconvolved using an iterative algorithm in
softWoRx (6.5.1; Applied Precision GE Healthcare). Unprocessed images after
background subtraction were used for quantification of fluorescence intensities.
Assessment of Heh2-GBP-mCherry or Heh2-mCherry clustering was quantified by
calculating the coefficient of variation (SD/mean x 100) of fluorescence of individual
nuclear envelopes(Fernandez-Martinez et al., 2012). A 4 pixel wide, freehand line was
traced over the entire nuclear envelope in a mid-plane section using FIJI/ImageJ
(Schindelin et al., 2012) and the mean fluorescence contained in the traced area was
measured.
To correlate the fluorescence intensity of co-localized Vps4-GFP and Chm7OPENmCherry, the integrated density of Vps4-GFP and Chm7OPEN-mCherry was measured
and plotted on a correlation curve. The linear correlation coefficient (Pearson coefficient,
r) was calculated in Prism (GraphPad 8.0).
Similarly, quantification of the integrated density and average fluorescence intensity of
Vps4-GFP and chm7OPEN-mCherry were measured by selecting a region of interest
(ROI) around the chm7OPEN-mCherry signal and measuring average fluorescence
intensity in both mCherry and GFP channels.
To measure relative nuclear exclusion of GFP, NES2CHM7-GFP, and NES1-NES2CHM7GFP constructs at steady state, a 3.75 µm line was traced across each nucleus
(encompassing cytoplasm both times the line crosses the nuclear envelope border) as
determined from the dsRed-HDEL localization. GFP fluorescence was measured using
the Plot Profile function in FIJI/ImageJ (Schindelin et al., 2012). Traces were normalized
to the maximum value measured within each trace before averaging.
Statistical Analyses
Graphs and statistical analyses were generated using Prism (GraphPad 8.0). P-values
in all graphs were generated with tests as indicated in figure legends and are

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

represented as follows: ns, P > 0.05; * P ≤ 0.05; ** P ≤ 0.01 *** P ≤ 0.001, **** P ≤
0.0001. All error bars represent the standard deviation from the mean. Scatter plots of
spectral counts from MS/MS analysis for Figure 3A, B, and C were generated using
Excel (Microsoft).
Nuclear export signal prediction
Xpo1/Crm1 NES sequences were predicted using LocNES (Xu et al., 2015) with default
threshold settings.
Recombinant protein binding experiments
GST, GST-Chm7 and GST-heh1(735-834) proteins were recombinantly produced and
purified as previously described (Webster et al., 2016) in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH
7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 2 mM CaCl2,10% glycerol, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM DTT,
complete protease inhibitors (Roche)). The soluble fraction was incubated with
glutathione sepharose (GT) beads for 1h at 4⁰C for binding. The GT beads were
collected by centrifugation and washed thrice with lysis buffer. GST and GST-Chm7
proteins were eluted from GT beads by 10 mM reduced glutathione and dialyzed in lysis
buffer. heh1(735-834) was cleaved off from GT beads by incubating with HRV3C
protease (Thermo Scientific) at 4⁰C overnight. For binding experiment, heh1(735-834)
was incubated with GST and GST-Chm7 in a dialysis cassette (3.5K Slide-A-Lyzer,
Thermo Scientific) and the binding reaction was dialyzed overnight in a binding buffer
(50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 2 mM CaCl2,10% glycerol, 0.5% NP40, 1 mM DTT). The reaction was collected, incubated with GT beads for 1 h at 4⁰C,
washed thrice with binding buffer and eluted in 2X Laemmli sample-buffer. Proteins
were resolved on a SDS-PAGE gel and visualized by SimplyBlue Safe-Stain
(Invitrogen).
Immunoaffinity purification
S. cerevisiae cells expressing Chm7-GFP (DTCPL81), Chm7-GFP vps4Δpom152Δ
(DTCPL133), chm7OPEN-GFP (DTCPL413) were grown to log phase in YPD at 30⁰C and
collected by centrifugation. Cells were washed once with ice-cold water, collected by
centrifugation and resuspended in a small volume of freezing buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH
7.4, 1.2% polyvinylpyrrolidone and protease inhibitor (Sigma)(Oeffinger et al., 2007) and
flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. The frozen yeast pellets were pulverized in a Retsch
MM400 mixer mill for 6 times at 30 Hz for 3 minutes. For immunoaffinity purification, 200
mg of frozen, ground yeast powder was solubilized in 4 volumes of homogenization
buffer (400 mM trisodium citrate, pH 8, 0.5% n-Dodecyl β-D-maltoside) and protease
inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The soluble fraction was incubated with 10 µl magnetic beads
(Dynabeads, M-270 Epoxy, Invitrogen) slurry coated with GFP-nanobody for 1 hour at
4⁰C (Cristea et al., 2005; LaCava et al., 2016). The beads were collected on a magnetic
rack and washed three times with 500 µl homogenization buffer. Bound proteins were
eluted by incubating the beads in 20 µl 1X NuPAGE LDS (lithium dodecyl sulfate)
sample buffer (Invitrogen) at 70⁰C for 10 minutes. Eluates were separated on a

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

magnetic rack and further incubated with 50 mM DTT at 70⁰C for 10 minutes. The
eluates were run on a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Novex) until the dye front just entered the
gel. The gels were stained with Imperial protein stain (Thermo Scientific) and protein
bands were excised for MS analysis.
Mass Spectrometry and analysis
MS/MS was performed at the Yale Keck Proteomics facility. Excised bands described
above were transferred to clean 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and digested with trypsin.
Subsequently, chromatographic separation of peptides was done using a Waters
nanoACQUITY ultra high pressure liquid chromatograph (UPLC), and peptides were
detected on a Waters/Micromass AB QSTAR Elite. Analysis of MS/MS peptide results
was completed using Scaffold 4.8.7 (Proteome Software Inc.). Peptides were identified
by SEQUEST and Mascot using X!Tandem (Craig and Beavis, 2003; Searle et al.,
2008) and validated using PeptideProphet (Keller et al., 2002; Nesvizhskii et al., 2003)
within Scaffold software (Proteome Software Inc.). Proteins were identified by
comparison with SwissProt database where peptide identifications required ≥ 2 peptides
from each replicate and ≥ 95.0% probability of correct identification to be included in
analysis. Quantitative analysis to determine significance of enrichment between
samples was done with total spectral counts from two replicates using Fischer’s exact
test with a significance threshold P < 0.05 (Figure 3A, C), or on presence/absence from
1 replicate (Figure 3B).
Correlative fluorescence and electron tomography
Correlated fluorescence and electron microscopy were conducted as previously
described (Kukulski et al., 2012; Curwin et al., 2016). In brief, yeast cells were high
pressure frozen (HPM010, AbraFluid), freeze substituted (EM-AFS2, Leica) with 0.1%
uranyl acetate in acetone and infiltrated with Lowicryl. 300 nm sections were cut with a
microtome (EM UC7, Leica) and picked up on carbon coated 200 mesh copper grids. 50
nm TretraSpeck fluorescent microspheres (fluorescence and electron dense fiducials,
Life technologies, Carlsbad, CA) were added to the grid for correlation. Grids used for
Figure 6A,B, Figure 6 - figure supplement 1A,B, Figure 8C, Figure 8 - figure supplement
1A, and Figure 8 - figure supplement 3A, were poststained with lead citrate to increase
contrast. In all cases, 15 nm protein A-coupled gold beads were adsorbed on both sides
of each grid and used as fiducial markers for overlaying high and low magnification
tomograms. 60° to -60° tilt series were acquired on a Technai F30 (Thermofisher, FEI)
at 300 kV with Serial-EM (Mastronarde, 2005) at 20000x and either 3900x or 4700x to
facilitate ease of correlation with TetraSpeck fiducials.
To perform CLEM, fluorescence images were acquired of the EM grids on images a
Nikon TI-E (Figure 6A, B) with sCMOS PCO edge 4.2 CL camera and solid state
illumination, or an Olympus IX81 with MT20 (Olympus) lamp and CCD (Orca-ER;
Hamamatsu Photonics) (Figure 7A, B, Figure 6 - figure supplement 1A, B). To
distinguish protein fluorescence signal from fluorescent fiducials, for each field of
view/grid four channels were acquired (GFP, mCherry/RFP, Cy5, and brightfield).

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Acquired images were further processed in FIJI using the Extended Depth of Field
Plugin (Forster et al., 2004). Correlation of fluorescence and reconstructed electron
tomograms was performed using the ec-CLEM Plugin (Paul-Gilloteaux et al., 2017) in
ICY (de Chaumont et al., 2012). Alignment was determined by clicking on
corresponding pairs of TetraSpeck fiducials in the two imaging modalities.
Tomograms were reconstructed using the IMOD package (Windows Version 6.2) and
Etomo (Version 4.9.8, (Kremer et al., 1996)). Patch tracking function was used to
perform a fiducial-less image alignment for reconstruction. 3DMOD software was used
for manual segmentation of the tomograms. Further editing and annotation were done in
Adobe Illustrator (Adobe). Video sequences were compiled in 3DMOD and exported
with further editing in ImageJ/FIJI (Schindelin et al., 2012). Video frames were
compressed as JPGs to reduce file size.
2D electron microscopy
To examine the ultrastructure of apq12Δ (CPL1326) and apq12Δchm7Δ (CPL1327)
strains, unfixed cells were high-pressure frozen using a Leica HMP100 at 2,000 psi and
freeze-substituted using a Leica Freeze AFS unit using 1% osmium tetroxide and 1%
glutaraldehyde. Samples were infiltrated with durcupan resin (Electron Microscopy
Science) and cut in 100 nm thick sections using a Leica UltraCut UC7. Sections were
collected on formvar/carbon coated nickel grids and stained with 2% uranyl acetate and
lead citrate. Grids were imaged in a FEI Tecnai Biotwin TEM at 80 kV with a Morada
CCD camera and iTEM (Olympus) Software.
Immunogold labeling
For immunogold labeling of nucleoporins, 70 nm Lowicryl sections generated as
described above for correlative light and electron tomography were cut using Leica
UltraCut UC7 onto 200 mesh copper grids (Quantifoil Micro Tools GmbH).
Immunolabeling was carried out with the MAb414 antibody diluted 1:100 in 1% BSA,
followed by washes in PBS, and probing with a secondary 10 nm gold-conjugated
antibody. After further washes, the grids were fixed in 1% glutaraldehyde in PBS. Lastly,
grids were post-stained with 1% uranyl acetate, washed in water and viewed with a
Biotwin CM120 Philips equipped with a 1K CCD Camera (Keen View, SIS).

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

REFERENCES
Adell MAY, Migliano SM, Upadhyayula S, Bykov YS, Sprenger S, Pakdel M, Vogel GF,
Jih G, Skillern W, Behrouzi R, Babst M, Schmidt O, Hess MW, Briggs JA,
Kirchhausen T, Teis D. 2017. Recruitment dynamics of ESCRT-III and Vps4 to
endosomes and implications for reverse membrane budding. Elife 6:e31652.
doi:10.7554/eLife.31652
Adell MAY, Vogel GF, Pakdel M, Müller M, Lindner H, Hess MW, Teis D. 2014.
Coordinated binding of Vps4 to ESCRT-III drives membrane neck constriction
during MVB vesicle formation. J Cell Biol 205:33–49. doi:10.1083/jcb.201310114
Agromayor M, Carlton JG, Phelan JP, Matthews DR, Carlin LM, Ameer-Beg S, Bowers
K, Martin-Serrano J. 2009. Essential role of hIST1 in cytokinesis. Mol Biol Cell
20:1374–87. doi:10.1091/mbc.e08-05-0474
Amberg DC, Burke D, Strathern JN. 2005. Methods in yeast genetics : a Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory course manual.
Arii J, Watanabe M, Maeda F, Tokai-Nishizumi N, Chihara T, Miura M, Maruzuru Y,
Koyanagi N, Kato A, Kawaguchi Y. 2018. ESCRT-III mediates budding across the
inner nuclear membrane and regulates its integrity. Nat Commun 9:3379.
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-05889-9
Bajorek M, Schubert HL, McCullough J, Langelier C, Eckert DM, Stubblefield W-MB,
Uter NT, Myszka DG, Hill CP, Sundquist WI. 2009. Structural basis for ESCRT-III
protein autoinhibition. Nat Struct Mol Biol 16:754–62. doi:10.1038/nsmb.1621
Barton LJ, Soshnev AA, Geyer PK. 2015. Networking in the nucleus: a spotlight on
LEM-domain proteins. Curr Opin Cell Biol 34:1–8. doi:10.1016/j.ceb.2015.03.005
Bauer I, Brune T, Preiss R, Kölling R. 2015. Evidence for a Nonendosomal Function of
the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ESCRT-III-Like Protein Chm7. Genetics 201:1439–
52. doi:10.1534/genetics.115.178939
Braun DA, Lovric S, Schapiro D, Schneider R, Marquez J, Asif M, Hussain MS, Daga A,
Widmeier E, Rao J, Ashraf S, Tan W, Lusk CP, Kolb A, Jobst-Schwan T, Schmidt
JM, Hoogstraten CA, Eddy K, Kitzler TM, Shril S, Moawia A, Schrage K, Khayyat
AIA, Lawson JA, Gee HY, Warejko JK, Hermle T, Majmundar AJ, Hugo H, Budde
B, Motameny S, Altmüller J, Noegel AA, Fathy HM, Gale DP, Waseem SS, Khan A,
Kerecuk L, Hashmi S, Mohebbi N, Ettenger R, Serdaroğlu E, Alhasan KA, Hashem
M, Goncalves S, Ariceta G, Ubetagoyena M, Antonin W, Baig SM, Alkuraya FS,
Shen Q, Xu H, Antignac C, Lifton RP, Mane S, Nürnberg P, Khokha MK,
Hildebrandt F. 2018. Mutations in multiple components of the nuclear pore complex
cause nephrotic syndrome. J Clin Invest 128:4313–28. doi:10.1172/JCI98688
Braun DA, Sadowski CE, Kohl S, Lovric S, Astrinidis SA, Pabst WL, Gee HY, Ashraf S,
Lawson JA, Shril S, Airik M, Tan W, Schapiro D, Rao J, Choi W-I, Hermle T,
Kemper MJ, Pohl M, Ozaltin F, Konrad M, Bogdanovic R, Büscher R, Helmchen U,
Serdaroglu E, Lifton RP, Antonin W, Hildebrandt F. 2016. Mutations in nuclear pore
genes NUP93, NUP205 and XPO5 cause steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome. Nat
Genet 48:457–65. doi:10.1038/ng.3512
Buono RA, Leier A, Paez-Valencia J, Pennington J, Goodman K, Miller N, Ahlquist P,
Marquez-Lago TT, Otegui MS. 2017. ESCRT-mediated vesicle concatenation in
plant endosomes. J Cell Biol 216:2167–2177. doi:10.1083/jcb.201612040

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Caputo S, Couprie J, Duband-Goulet I, Kondé E, Lin F, Braud S, Gondry M, Gilquin B,
Worman HJ, Zinn-Justin S. 2006. The carboxyl-terminal nucleoplasmic region of
MAN1 exhibits a DNA binding winged helix domain. J Biol Chem 281:18208–15.
doi:10.1074/jbc.M601980200
Cashikar AG, Shim S, Roth R, Maldazys MR, Heuser JE, Hanson PI. 2014. Structure of
cellular ESCRT-III spirals and their relationship to HIV budding. Elife 3.
doi:10.7554/eLife.02184
Christ L, Wenzel EM, Liestøl K, Raiborg C, Campsteijn C, Stenmark H. 2016. ALIX and
ESCRT-I/II function as parallel ESCRT-III recruiters in cytokinetic abscission. J Cell
Biol 212:499–513. doi:10.1083/jcb.201507009
Colombi P, Webster BM, Fröhlich F, Lusk CP. 2013. The transmission of nuclear pore
complexes to daughter cells requires a cytoplasmic pool of Nsp1. J Cell Biol
203:215–32. doi:10.1083/jcb.201305115
Craig R, Beavis RC. 2003. A method for reducing the time required to match protein
sequences with tandem mass spectra. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 17:2310–
16. doi:10.1002/rcm.1198
Cristea IM, Williams R, Chait BT, Rout MP. 2005. Fluorescent proteins as proteomic
probes. Mol Cell Proteomics 4:1933–41. doi:10.1074/mcp.M500227-MCP200
Curwin AJ, Brouwers N, Alonso Y Adell M, Teis D, Turacchio G, Parashuraman S,
Ronchi P, Malhotra V. 2016. ESCRT-III drives the final stages of CUPS maturation
for unconventional protein secretion. Elife 5:e16299. doi:10.7554/eLife.16299
D’Angelo MA, Raices M, Panowski SH, Hetzer MW. 2009. Age-Dependent Deterioration
of Nuclear Pore Complexes Causes a Loss of Nuclear Integrity in Postmitotic Cells.
Cell 136:284–295. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2008.11.037
de Chaumont F, Dallongeville S, Chenouard N, Hervé N, Pop S, Provoost T, MeasYedid V, Pankajakshan P, Lecomte T, Le Montagner Y, Lagache T, Dufour A,
Olivo-Marin J-C. 2012. Icy: an open bioimage informatics platform for extended
reproducible research. Nat Methods 9:690–6. doi:10.1038/nmeth.2075
de Vos WH, Houben F, Kamps M, Malhas A, Verheyen F, Cox J, Manders EMM,
Verstraeten VLRM, Van steensel MAM, Marcelis CLM, Van den wijngaard A, Vaux
DJ, Ramaekers FCS, Broers JLV. 2011. Repetitive disruptions of the nuclear
envelope invoke temporary loss of cellular compartmentalization in laminopathies.
Hum Mol Genet 20:4175–4186. doi:10.1093/hmg/ddr344
Denais CM, Gilbert RM, Isermann P, McGregor AL, te Lindert M, Weigelin B, Davidson
PM, Friedl P, Wolf K, Lammerding J. 2016. Nuclear envelope rupture and repair
during cancer cell migration. Science 352:353–8. doi:10.1126/science.aad7297
Dou Z, Xu C, Donahue G, Shimi T, Pan JA, Zhu J, Ivanov A, Capell BC, Drake AM,
Shah PP, Catanzaro JM, Ricketts MD, Lamark T, Adam SA, Marmorstein R, Zong
WX, Johansen T, Goldman RD, Adams PD, Berger SL. 2015. Autophagy mediates
degradation of nuclear lamina. Nature 527:105–109. doi:10.1038/nature15548
Doucet CM, Talamas JA, Hetzer MW. 2010. Cell cycle-dependent differences in nuclear
pore complex assembly in metazoa. Cell 141:1030–1041.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2010.04.036
Dultz E, Ellenberg J. 2010. Live imaging of single nuclear pores reveals unique
assembly kinetics and mechanism in interphase. J Cell Biol 191:15–22.
doi:10.1083/jcb.201007076

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fernandez-Martinez J, Phillips J, Sekedat MD, Diaz-Avalos R, Velazquez-Muriel J,
Franke JD, Williams R, Stokes DL, Chait BT, Sali A, Rout MP. 2012. Structurefunction mapping of a heptameric module in the nuclear pore complex. J Cell Biol
196:419–434. doi:10.1083/jcb.201109008
Floch AG, Palancade B, Doye V. 2014. Fifty years of nuclear pores and
nucleocytoplasmic transport studies: multiple tools revealing complex rules.
Methods Cell Biol 122:1–40. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-417160-2.00001-1
Forster B, Van De Ville D, Berent J, Sage D, Unser M. 2004. Complex wavelets for
extended depth-of-field: A new method for the fusion of multichannel microscopy
images. Microsc Res Tech 65:33–42. doi:10.1002/jemt.20092
Frankel EB, Shankar R, Moresco JJ, Yates JR, Volkmann N, Audhya A. 2017. Ist1
regulates ESCRT-III assembly and function during multivesicular endosome
biogenesis in Caenorhabditis elegans embryos. Nat Commun 8:1439.
doi:10.1038/s41467-017-01636-8
Freibaum BD, Lu Y, Lopez-Gonzalez R, Kim NC, Almeida S, Lee K-H, Badders N,
Valentine M, Miller BL, Wong PC, Petrucelli L, Kim HJ, Gao F-B, Taylor JP. 2015.
GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9orf72 compromises nucleocytoplasmic transport.
Nature 525:129–33. doi:10.1038/nature14974
Gong Y-N, Guy C, Olauson H, Becker JU, Yang M, Fitzgerald P, Linkermann A, Green
DR. 2017. ESCRT-III Acts Downstream of MLKL to Regulate Necroptotic Cell
Death and Its Consequences. Cell 169:286–300. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.03.020
Gonzalez Y, Saito A, Sazer S. 2012. Fission yeast Lem2 and Man1 perform
fundamental functions of the animal cell nuclear lamina. Nucleus 3:60–76.
doi:10.4161/nucl.18824
Goodchild RE, Kim CE, Dauer WT. 2005. Loss of the dystonia-associated protein
torsinA selectively disrupts the neuronal nuclear envelope. Neuron 48:923–932.
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2005.11.010
Grund SE, Fischer T, Cabal GG, Antúnez O, Pérez-Ortín JE, Hurt E. 2008. The inner
nuclear membrane protein Src1 associates with subtelomeric genes and alters their
regulated gene expression. J Cell Biol 182:897–910. doi:10.1083/jcb.200803098
Gu M, LaJoie D, Chen OS, von Appen A, Ladinsky MS, Redd MJ, Nikolova L, Bjorkman
PJ, Sundquist WI, Ullman KS, Frost A. 2017. LEM2 recruits CHMP7 for ESCRTmediated nuclear envelope closure in fission yeast and human cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 114:E2166–E2175. doi:10.1073/pnas.1613916114
Han H, Monroe N, Sundquist WI, Shen PS, Hill CP. 2017. The AAA ATPase Vps4 binds
ESCRT-III substrates through a repeating array of dipeptide-binding pockets. Elife
6:e31324. doi:10.7554/eLife.31324
Han H, Monroe N, Votteler J, Shakya B, Sundquist WI, Hill CP. 2015. Binding of
Substrates to the Central Pore of the Vps4 ATPase Is Autoinhibited by the
Microtubule Interacting and Trafficking (MIT) Domain and Activated by MIT
Interacting Motifs (MIMs). J Biol Chem 290:13490–9. doi:10.1074/jbc.M115.642355
Hanson PI, Roth R, Lin Y, Heuser JE. 2008. Plasma membrane deformation by circular
arrays of ESCRT-III protein filaments. J Cell Biol 180:389–402.
doi:10.1083/jcb.200707031
Hart T, Chandrashekhar M, Aregger M, Steinhart Z, Brown KR, MacLeod G, Mis M,
Zimmermann M, Fradet-Turcotte A, Sun S, Mero P, Dirks P, Sidhu S, Roth FP,

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Rissland OS, Durocher D, Angers S, Moffat J. 2015. High-Resolution CRISPR
Screens Reveal Fitness Genes and Genotype-Specific Cancer Liabilities. Cell
163:1515–26. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.015
Hatch E, Hetzer M. 2014. Breaching the nuclear envelope in development and disease.
J Cell Biol 205:133–41. doi:10.1083/jcb.201402003
Hatch EM, Fischer AH, Deerinck TJ, Hetzer MW. 2013. Catastrophic Nuclear Envelope
Collapse in Cancer Cell Micronuclei. Cell 154:47–60. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.007
Hatch EM, Hetzer MW. 2016. Nuclear envelope rupture is induced by actin-based
nucleus confinement. J Cell Biol 215:27–36. doi:10.1083/jcb.201603053
Henne WM, Buchkovich NJ, Zhao Y, Emr SD. 2012. The endosomal sorting complex
ESCRT-II mediates the assembly and architecture of ESCRT-III helices. Cell
151:356–71. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2012.08.039
Jackson CE, Scruggs BS, Schaffer JE, Hanson PI. 2017. Effects of Inhibiting VPS4
Support a General Role for ESCRTs in Extracellular Vesicle Biogenesis. Biophys J
113:1342–52. doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2017.05.032
Janssens GE, Meinema AC, González J, Wolters JC, Schmidt A, Guryev V, Bischoff R,
Wit EC, Veenhoff LM, Heinemann M. 2015. Protein biogenesis machinery is a
driver of replicative aging in yeast. Elife 4. doi:10.7554/eLife.08527
Jevtić P, Edens LJ, Vuković LD, Levy DL. 2014. Sizing and shaping the nucleus:
mechanisms and significance. Curr Opin Cell Biol 28:16–27.
doi:10.1016/j.ceb.2014.01.003
Jimenez AJ, Maiuri P, Lafaurie-Janvore J, Divoux S, Piel M, Perez F. 2014. ESCRT
machinery is required for plasma membrane repair. Science 343:1247136.
doi:10.1126/science.1247136
Jokhi V, Ashley J, Nunnari J, Noma A, Ito N, Wakabayashi-Ito N, Moore MJ, Budnik V.
2013. Torsin Mediates Primary Envelopment of Large Ribonucleoprotein Granules
at the Nuclear Envelope. Cell Rep 3:988–995. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.015
Jovičić A, Mertens J, Boeynaems S, Bogaert E, Chai N, Yamada SB, Paul JW, Sun S,
Herdy JR, Bieri G, Kramer NJ, Gage FH, Van Den Bosch L, Robberecht W, Gitler
AD. 2015. Modifiers of C9orf72 dipeptide repeat toxicity connect nucleocytoplasmic
transport defects to FTD/ALS. Nat Neurosci 18:1226–9. doi:10.1038/nn.4085
Kaneb HM, Folkmann AW, Belzil V V, Jao L-E, Leblond CS, Girard SL, Daoud H,
Noreau A, Rochefort D, Hince P, Szuto A, Levert A, Vidal S, André-Guimont C,
Camu W, Bouchard J-P, Dupré N, Rouleau GA, Wente SR, Dion PA. 2015.
Deleterious mutations in the essential mRNA metabolism factor, hGle1, in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum Mol Genet 24:1363–73.
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddu545
Keller A, Nesvizhskii AI, Kolker E, Aebersold R. 2002. Empirical statistical model to
estimate the accuracy of peptide identifications made by MS/MS and database
search. Anal Chem 74:5383–92.
Kim HJ, Taylor JP. 2017. Lost in Transportation: Nucleocytoplasmic Transport Defects
in ALS and Other Neurodegenerative Diseases. Neuron 96:285–97.
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2017.07.029
Kim SJ, Fernandez-Martinez J, Nudelman I, Shi Y, Zhang W, Raveh B, Herricks T,
Slaughter BD, Hogan JA, Upla P, Chemmama IE, Pellarin R, Echeverria I,
Shivaraju M, Chaudhury AS, Wang J, Williams R, Unruh JR, Greenberg CH,

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Jacobs EY, Yu Z, de la Cruz MJ, Mironska R, Stokes DL, Aitchison JD, Jarrold MF,
Gerton JL, Ludtke SJ, Akey CW, Chait BT, Sali A, Rout MP. 2018. Integrative
structure and functional anatomy of a nuclear pore complex. Nature 555:475–482.
doi:10.1038/nature26003
King MC, Lusk CP, Blobel G. 2006. Karyopherin-mediated import of integral inner
nuclear membrane proteins. Nature 442:1003–1007. doi:10.1038/nature05075
Kosinski J, Mosalaganti S, von Appen A, Teimer R, DiGuilio AL, Wan W, Bui KH, Hagen
WJH, Briggs JAG, Glavy JS, Hurt E, Beck M. 2016. Molecular architecture of the
inner ring scaffold of the human nuclear pore complex. Science 352:363–5.
doi:10.1126/science.aaf0643
Kralt A, Jagalur NB, van den Boom V, Lokareddy RK, Steen A, Cingolani G, Fornerod
M, Veenhoff LM. 2015. Conservation of inner nuclear membrane targeting
sequences in mammalian Pom121 and yeast Heh2 membrane proteins. Mol Biol
Cell 26:3301–3312. doi:10.1091/mbc.E15-03-0184
Kremer JR, Mastronarde DN, McIntosh JR. 1996. Computer visualization of threedimensional image data using IMOD. J Struct Biol 116:71–6.
doi:10.1006/jsbi.1996.0013
Kukulski W, Schorb M, Welsch S, Picco A, Kaksonen M, Briggs JAG. 2012. Precise,
Correlated Fluorescence Microscopy and Electron Tomography of Lowicryl
Sections Using Fluorescent Fiducial Markers. pp. 235–257. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12416026-2.00013-3
Kulak NA, Pichler G, Paron I, Nagaraj N, Mann M. 2014. Minimal, encapsulated
proteomic-sample processing applied to copy-number estimation in eukaryotic
cells. Nat Methods 11:319–24. doi:10.1038/nmeth.2834
LaCava J, Fernandez-Martinez J, Hakhverdyan Z, Rout MP. 2016. Optimized Affinity
Capture of Yeast Protein Complexes. Cold Spring Harb Protoc
2016:pdb.prot087932. doi:10.1101/pdb.prot087932
Lata S, Roessle M, Solomons J, Jamin M, Gottlinger HG, Svergun DI, Weissenhorn W.
2008. Structural basis for autoinhibition of ESCRT-III CHMP3. J Mol Biol 378:818–
27. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2008.03.030
Laudermilch E, Tsai P-L, Graham M, Turner E, Zhao C, Schlieker C. 2016. Dissecting
Torsin/cofactor function at the nuclear envelope: a genetic study. Mol Biol Cell
27:3964–71. doi:10.1091/mbc.E16-07-0511
Lee C-P, Liu G-T, Kung H-N, Liu P-T, Liao Y-T, Chow L-P, Chang L-S, Chang Y-H,
Chang C-W, Shu W-C, Angers A, Farina A, Lin S-F, Tsai C-H, Bouamr F, Chen MR. 2016. The Ubiquitin Ligase Itch and Ubiquitination Regulate BFRF1-Mediated
Nuclear Envelope Modification for Epstein-Barr Virus Maturation. J Virol 90:8994–
9007. doi:10.1128/JVI.01235-16
Lee CP, Liu PT, Kung HN, Su MT, Chua HH, Chang YH, Chang CW, Tsai CH, Liu FT,
Chen MR. 2012. The ESCRT Machinery Is Recruited by the Viral BFRF1 Protein to
the Nucleus-Associated Membrane for the Maturation of Epstein-Barr Virus. PLoS
Pathog 8:e1002904. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002904
Li X, Qian J, Wang C, Zheng K, Ye L, Fu Y, Han N, Bian H, Pan J, Wang J, Zhu M.
2011. Regulating Cytoplasmic Calcium Homeostasis Can Reduce Aluminum
Toxicity in Yeast. PLoS One 6:e21148. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0021148
Lokareddy RK, Hapsari RA, Van rheenen M, Pumroy RA, Bhardwaj A, Steen A,

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Veenhoff LM, Cingolani G. 2015. Distinctive Properties of the Nuclear Localization
Signals of Inner Nuclear Membrane Proteins Heh1 and Heh2. Structure 23:1305–
1316. doi:10.1016/j.str.2015.04.017
Longtine MS, McKenzie A, Demarini DJ, Shah NG, Wach A, Brachat A, Philippsen P,
Pringle JR. 1998. Additional modules for versatile and economical PCR-based
gene deletion and modification in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 14:953–961.
doi:10.1002/
Lord CL, Timney BL, Rout MP, Wente SR. 2015. Altering nuclear pore complex function
impacts longevity and mitochondrial function in S. cerevisiae. J Cell Biol 208:729–
44. doi:10.1083/jcb.201412024
Lusk CP, Blobel G, King MC. 2007. Highway to the inner nuclear membrane: rules for
the road. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:414–20. doi:10.1038/nrm2165
Lusk CP, King MC. 2017. The nucleus: keeping it together by keeping it apart. Curr
Opin Cell Biol 44:44–50. doi:10.1016/j.ceb.2017.02.001
Maciejowski J, Li Y, Bosco N, Campbell PJ, de Lange T. 2015. Chromothripsis and
Kataegis Induced by Telomere Crisis. Cell 163:1641–54.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.054
Makio T, Lapetina DL, Wozniak RW. 2013. Inheritance of yeast nuclear pore complexes
requires the Nsp1p subcomplex. J Cell Biol 203:187–96.
doi:10.1083/jcb.201304047
Malhas A, Goulbourne C, Vaux DJ. 2011. The nucleoplasmic reticulum: form and
function. Trends Cell Biol 21:362–73. doi:10.1016/j.tcb.2011.03.008
Mans BJ, Anantharaman V, Aravind L, Koonin E V, Wang Z, Casciola-Rosen L, Rosen
A. 2004. Comparative genomics, evolution and origins of the nuclear envelope and
nuclear pore complex. Cell Cycle 3:1612–37. doi:10.4161/cc.3.12.1345
Maul GG, Maul HM, Scogna JE, Lieberman MW, Stein GS, Hsu BY, Borun TW. 1972.
Time Sequence of Nuclear Pore Formation in Phytohemagglutinin-Stimulated
Lymphocytes and in Hela Cells During the Cell Cycle. J Cell Biol 55:433–447.
doi:10.1083/jcb.55.2.433
McCullough J, Clippinger AK, Talledge N, Skowyra ML, Saunders MG, Naismith T V.,
Colf LA, Afonine P, Arthur C, Sundquist WI, Hanson PI, Frost A. 2015. Structure
and membrane remodeling activity of ESCRT-III helical polymers. Science
350:1548–51. doi:10.1126/science.aad8305
McCullough J, Frost A, Sundquist WI. 2018. Structures, Functions, and Dynamics of
ESCRT-III/Vps4 Membrane Remodeling and Fission Complexes. Annu Rev Cell
Dev Biol 34:85–109. doi:10.1146/annurev-cellbio-100616-060600
Meinema AC, Laba JK, Hapsari RA, Otten R, Mulder FAA, Kralt A, van den Bogaart G,
Lusk CP, Poolman B, Veenhoff LM. 2011. Long unfolded linkers facilitate
membrane protein import through the nuclear pore complex. Science 333:90–3.
doi:10.1126/science.1205741
Mekhail K, Seebacher J, Gygi SP, Moazed D. 2008. Role for perinuclear chromosome
tethering in maintenance of genome stability. Nature 456:667–670.
doi:10.1038/nature07460
Miyake N, Tsukaguchi H, Koshimizu E, Shono A, Matsunaga S, Shiina M, Mimura Y,
Imamura S, Hirose T, Okudela K, Nozu K, Akioka Y, Hattori M, Yoshikawa N,
Kitamura A, Cheong H Il, Kagami S, Yamashita M, Fujita A, Miyatake S, Tsurusaki

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Y, Nakashima M, Saitsu H, Ohashi K, Imamoto N, Ryo A, Ogata K, Iijima K,
Matsumoto N. 2015. Biallelic Mutations in Nuclear Pore Complex Subunit NUP107
Cause Early-Childhood-Onset Steroid-Resistant Nephrotic Syndrome. Am J Hum
Genet 97:555–66. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.08.013
Mochida K, Oikawa Y, Kimura Y, Kirisako H, Hirano H, Ohsumi Y, Nakatogawa H. 2015.
Receptor-mediated selective autophagy degrades the endoplasmic reticulum and
the nucleus. Nature 522:359–362. doi:10.1038/nature14506
Monroe N, Han H, Shen PS, Sundquist WI, Hill CP. 2017. Structural basis of protein
translocation by the Vps4-Vta1 AAA ATPase. Elife 6:e24487.
doi:10.7554/eLife.24487
Morita E, Sandrin V, McCullough J, Katsuyama A, Baci Hamilton I, Sundquist WI. 2011.
ESCRT-III Protein Requirements for HIV-1 Budding. Cell Host Microbe 9:235–42.
doi:10.1016/j.chom.2011.02.004
Mostofa MG, Rahman MA, Koike N, Yeasmin AM, Islam N, Waliullah TM, Hosoyamada
S, Shimobayashi M, Kobayashi T, Hall MN, Ushimaru T. 2018. CLIP and cohibin
separate rDNA from nucleolar proteins destined for degradation by nucleophagy. J
Cell Biol 217:2675–90. doi:10.1083/jcb.201706164
Nesvizhskii AI, Keller A, Kolker E, Aebersold R. 2003. A statistical model for identifying
proteins by tandem mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 75:4646–58.
Neville M, Rosbash M. 1999. The NES-Crm1p export pathway is not a major mRNA
export route in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. EMBO J 18:3746–56.
doi:10.1093/emboj/18.13.3746
Nousiainen HO, Kestilä M, Pakkasjärvi N, Honkala H, Kuure S, Tallila J, Vuopala K,
Ignatius J, Herva R, Peltonen L. 2008. Mutations in mRNA export mediator GLE1
result in a fetal motoneuron disease. Nat Genet 40:155–7. doi:10.1038/ng.2007.65
Obita T, Saksena S, Ghazi-Tabatabai S, Gill DJ, Perisic O, Emr SD, Williams RL. 2007.
Structural basis for selective recognition of ESCRT-III by the AAA ATPase Vps4.
Nature 449:735–739. doi:10.1038/nature06171
Oeffinger M, Wei KE, Rogers R, DeGrasse JA, Chait BT, Aitchison JD, Rout MP. 2007.
Comprehensive analysis of diverse ribonucleoprotein complexes. Nat Methods
4:951–956. doi:10.1038/nmeth1101
Olmos Y, Hodgson L, Mantell J, Verkade P, Carlton JG. 2015. ESCRT-III controls
nuclear envelope reformation. Nature 522:236–239. doi:10.1038/nature14503
Olmos Y, Perdrix-Rosell A, Carlton JG. 2016. Membrane Binding by CHMP7
Coordinates ESCRT-III-Dependent Nuclear Envelope Reformation. Curr Biol
26:2635–41. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.039
Onischenko E, Tang JH, Andersen KR, Knockenhauer KE, Vallotton P, Derrer CP, Kralt
A, Mugler CF, Chan LY, Schwartz TU, Weis K. 2017. Natively Unfolded FG
Repeats Stabilize the Structure of the Nuclear Pore Complex. Cell 171:904–17.e19.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.09.033
Otsuka S, Bui KH, Schorb M, Hossain MJ, Politi AZ, Koch B, Eltsov M, Beck M,
Ellenberg J. 2016. Nuclear pore assembly proceeds by an inside-out extrusion of
the nuclear envelope. Elife 5. doi:10.7554/eLife.19071
Pappas SS, Liang C-C, Kim S, Rivera CO, Dauer WT. 2018. TorsinA dysfunction
causes persistent neuronal nuclear pore defects. Hum Mol Genet 27:407–420.
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddx405

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Paul-Gilloteaux P, Heiligenstein X, Belle M, Domart M-C, Larijani B, Collinson L,
Raposo G, Salamero J. 2017. eC-CLEM: flexible multidimensional registration
software for correlative microscopies. Nat Methods 14:102–3.
doi:10.1038/nmeth.4170
Popken P, Ghavami A, Onck PR, Poolman B, Veenhoff LM. 2015. Size-dependent leak
of soluble and membrane proteins through the yeast nuclear pore complex. Mol
Biol Cell 26:1386–94. doi:10.1091/mbc.E14-07-1175
Raab M, Gentili M, de Belly H, Thiam HR, Vargas P, Jimenez AJ, Lautenschlaeger F,
Voituriez R, Lennon-Duménil AM, Manel N, Piel M. 2016. ESCRT III repairs nuclear
envelope ruptures during cell migration to limit DNA damage and cell death.
Science 352:359–62. doi:10.1126/science.aad7611
Radulovic M, Schink KO, Wenzel EM, Nähse V, Bongiovanni A, Lafont F, Stenmark H.
2018. ESCRT-mediated lysosome repair precedes lysophagy and promotes cell
survival. EMBO J 37:e99753. doi:10.15252/embj.201899753
Roberts P, Moshitch-Moshkovitz S, Kvam E, O ’toole E, Winey M, Goldfarb DS, O’Toole
E, Winey M, Goldfarb DS. 2003. Piecemeal microautophagy of nucleus in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol Biol Cell 14:129–41. doi:10.1091/mbc.E02
Robijns J, Molenberghs F, Sieprath T, Corne TDJ, Verschuuren M, De Vos WH. 2016.
In silico synchronization reveals regulators of nuclear ruptures in lamin A/C
deficient model cells. Sci Rep 6:30325. doi:10.1038/srep30325
Romanauska A, Köhler A. 2018. The Inner Nuclear Membrane Is a Metabolically Active
Territory that Generates Nuclear Lipid Droplets. Cell 174:700–15.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.047
Saksena S, Wahlman J, Teis D, Johnson AE, Emr SD. 2009. Functional reconstitution
of ESCRT-III assembly and disassembly. Cell 136:97–109.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2008.11.013
Savas JN, Toyama BH, Xu T, Yates JR, Hetzer MW. 2012. Extremely long-lived nuclear
pore proteins in the rat brain. Science 335:942. doi:10.1126/science.1217421
Scarcelli JJ, Hodge CA, Cole CN. 2007. The yeast integral membrane protein Apq12
potentially links membrane dynamics to assembly of nuclear pore complexes. J
Cell Biol 178:799–812. doi:10.1083/jcb.200702120
Scheffer LL, Sreetama SC, Sharma N, Medikayala S, Brown KJ, Defour A, Jaiswal JK.
2014. Mechanism of Ca2+-triggered ESCRT assembly and regulation of cell
membrane repair. Nat Commun 5:5646. doi:10.1038/ncomms6646
Schindelin J, Arganda-Carreras I, Frise E, Kaynig V, Longair M, Pietzsch T, Preibisch S,
Rueden C, Saalfeld S, Schmid B. 2012. Fiji: an open-source platform for biologicalimage analysis. Nat Methods 9:676–682.
Schmidt HB, Görlich D. 2016. Transport Selectivity of Nuclear Pores, Phase Separation,
and Membraneless Organelles. Trends Biochem Sci 41:46–61.
doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2015.11.001
Schöneberg J, Lee I-H, Iwasa JH, Hurley JH. 2017. Reverse-topology membrane
scission by the ESCRT proteins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18:5–17.
doi:10.1038/nrm.2016.121
Schöneberg J, Pavlin MR, Yan S, Righini M, Lee I-H, Carlson L-A, Bahrami AH,
Goldman DH, Ren X, Hummer G, Bustamante C, Hurley JH. 2018. ATP-dependent
force generation and membrane scission by ESCRT-III and Vps4. Science

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

362:1423–8. doi:10.1126/science.aat1839
Schreiber KH, Kennedy BK. 2013. When lamins go bad: nuclear structure and disease.
Cell 152:1365–75. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.02.015
Schreiner SM, Koo PK, Zhao Y, Mochrie SGJ, King MC. 2015. The tethering of
chromatin to the nuclear envelope supports nuclear mechanics. Nat Commun
6:7159. doi:10.1038/ncomms8159
Searle BC, Turner M, Nesvizhskii AI. 2008. Improving Sensitivity by Probabilistically
Combining Results from Multiple MS/MS Search Methodologies. J Proteome Res
7:245–53. doi:10.1021/pr070540w
Serebryannyy L, Misteli T. 2018. Protein sequestration at the nuclear periphery as a
potential regulatory mechanism in premature aging. J Cell Biol 217:21–37.
doi:10.1083/jcb.201706061
Shi KY, Mori E, Nizami ZF, Lin Y, Kato M, Xiang S, Wu LC, Ding M, Yu Y, Gall JG,
McKnight SL. 2017. Toxic PRn poly-dipeptides encoded by the C9orf72 repeat
expansion block nuclear import and export. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114:E1111–
E1117. doi:10.1073/pnas.1620293114
Shim S, Kimpler LA, Hanson PI. 2007. Structure/Function Analysis of Four Core
ESCRT-III Proteins Reveals Common Regulatory Role for Extreme C-Terminal
Domain. Traffic 8:1068–1079. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0854.2007.00584.x
Skowyra ML, Schlesinger PH, Naismith T V., Hanson PI. 2018. Triggered recruitment of
ESCRT machinery promotes endolysosomal repair. Science 360:5078.
doi:10.1126/science.aar5078
Speese SD, Ashley J, Jokhi V, Nunnari J, Barria R, Li Y, Ataman B, Koon A, Chang YT, Li Q, Moore MJ, Budnik V. 2012. Nuclear Envelope Budding Enables Large
Ribonucleoprotein Particle Export during Synaptic Wnt Signaling. Cell 149:832–
846. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.032
Stuchell-Brereton MD, Skalicky JJ, Kieffer C, Karren MA, Ghaffarian S, Sundquist WI.
2007. ESCRT-III recognition by VPS4 ATPases. Nature 449:740–4.
doi:10.1038/nature06172
Su M, Guo EZ, Ding X, Li Y, Tarrasch JT, Brooks CL, Xu Z, Skiniotis G. 2017.
Mechanism of Vps4 hexamer function revealed by cryo-EM. Sci Adv 3:e1700325.
doi:10.1126/sciadv.1700325
Tang S, Buchkovich NJ, Henne WM, Banjade S, Kim YJ, Emr SD. 2016. ESCRT-III
activation by parallel action of ESCRT-I/II and ESCRT-0/Bro1 during MVB
biogenesis. Elife 5:e15507. doi:10.7554/eLife.15507
Tang S, Henne WM, Borbat PP, Buchkovich NJ, Freed JH, Mao Y, Fromme JC, Emr
SD. 2015. Structural basis for activation, assembly and membrane binding of
ESCRT-III Snf7 filaments. Elife 4:e12548. doi:10.7554/eLife.12548
Teis D, Saksena S, Judson BL, Emr SD. 2010. ESCRT-II coordinates the assembly of
ESCRT-III filaments for cargo sorting and multivesicular body vesicle formation.
EMBO J 29:871–83. doi:10.1038/emboj.2009.408
Thaller DJ, Lusk CP. 2018. Fantastic nuclear envelope herniations and where to find
them. Biochem Soc Trans 46:877–89. doi:10.1042/BST20170442
Timney BL, Raveh B, Mironska R, Trivedi JM, Kim SJ, Russel D, Wente SR, Sali A,
Rout MP. 2016. Simple rules for passive diffusion through the nuclear pore
complex. J Cell Biol 215:57–76. doi:10.1083/jcb.201601004

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Toyama BH, Arrojo E Drigo R, Lev-Ram V, Ramachandra R, Deerinck TJ, Lechene C,
Ellisman MH, Hetzer MW. 2018. Visualization of long-lived proteins reveals age
mosaicism within nuclei of postmitotic cells. J Cell Biol 1–16.
doi:10.1083/jcb.201809123
Toyama BH, Savas JN, Park SK, Harris MS, Ingolia NT, Yates JR, Hetzer MW. 2013.
Identification of long-lived proteins reveals exceptional stability of essential cellular
structures. Cell 154:971–82. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.07.037
Van Driessche B, Tafforeau L, Hentges P, Carr AM, Vandenhaute J. 2005. Additional
vectors for PCR-based gene tagging in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Schizosaccharomyces pombe using nourseothricin resistance. Yeast 22:1061–8.
doi:10.1002/yea.1293
Vargas JD, Hatch EM, Anderson DJ, Hetzer MW. 2012. Transient nuclear envelope
rupturing during interphase in human cancer cells. Nucleus 3:88–100.
doi:10.4161/nucl.18954
Ventimiglia LN, Cuesta-Geijo MA, Martinelli N, Caballe A, Macheboeuf P, Miguet N,
Parnham IM, Olmos Y, Carlton JG, Weissenhorn W, Martin-Serrano J. 2018.
CC2D1B Coordinates ESCRT-III Activity during the Mitotic Reformation of the
Nuclear Envelope. Dev Cell 47:547–63.e6. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2018.11.012
Vietri M, Schink KO, Campsteijn C, Wegner CS, Schultz SW, Christ L, Thoresen SB,
Brech A, Raiborg C, Stenmark H. 2015. Spastin and ESCRT-III coordinate mitotic
spindle disassembly and nuclear envelope sealing. Nature 522:231–5.
doi:10.1038/nature14408
von Schwedler UK, Stuchell M, Müller B, Ward DM, Chung H-Y, Morita E, Wang HE,
Davis T, He G-P, Cimbora DM, Scott A, Kräusslich H-G, Kaplan J, Morham SG,
Sundquist WI. 2003. The protein network of HIV budding. Cell 114:701–13.
Webster BM, Colombi P, Jäger J, Lusk CP. 2014. Surveillance of nuclear pore complex
assembly by ESCRT-III/Vps4. Cell 159:388–401. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.012
Webster BM, Thaller DJ, Jäger J, Ochmann SE, Borah S, Lusk CP. 2016. Chm7 and
Heh1 collaborate to link nuclear pore complex quality control with nuclear envelope
sealing. EMBO J 35:2447–67. doi:10.15252/embj.201694574
Wemmer M, Azmi I, West M, Davies B, Katzmann D, Odorizzi G. 2011. Bro1 binding to
Snf7 regulates ESCRT-III membrane scission activity in yeast. J Cell Biol 192:295–
306. doi:10.1083/jcb.201007018
Wente SR, Blobel G. 1993. A temperature-sensitive NUP116 null mutant forms a
nuclear envelope seal over the yeast nuclear pore complex thereby blocking
nucleocytoplasmic traffic. J Cell Biol 123:275–84. doi:10.1083/jcb.123.2.275
Wenzel EM, Schultz SW, Schink KO, Pedersen NM, Nähse V, Carlson A, Brech A,
Stenmark H, Raiborg C. 2018. Concerted ESCRT and clathrin recruitment waves
define the timing and morphology of intraluminal vesicle formation. Nat Commun
9:2932. doi:10.1038/s41467-018-05345-8
West M, Zurek N, Hoenger A, Voeltz GK. 2011. A 3D analysis of yeast ER structure
reveals how ER domains are organized by membrane curvature. J Cell Biol
193:333–346. doi:10.1083/jcb.201011039
Winey M, Yarar D, Giddings TH, Mastronarde DN. 1997. Nuclear pore complex number
and distribution throughout the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle by threedimensional reconstruction from electron micrographs of nuclear envelopes. Mol

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Biol Cell 8:2119–32. doi:10.1091/mbc.8.11.2119
Xiao J, Chen X-W, Davies BA, Saltiel AR, Katzmann DJ, Xu Z. 2009. Structural basis of
Ist1 function and Ist1-Did2 interaction in the multivesicular body pathway and
cytokinesis. Mol Biol Cell 20:3514–24. doi:10.1091/mbc.e09-05-0403
Xu D, Marquis K, Pei J, Fu S-C, Cağatay T, Grishin N V, Chook YM. 2015. LocNES: a
computational tool for locating classical NESs in CRM1 cargo proteins.
Bioinformatics 31:1357–65. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu826
Yam C, Gu Y, Oliferenko S. 2013. Partitioning and remodeling of the
Schizosaccharomyces japonicus mitotic nucleus require chromosome tethers. Curr
Biol 23:2303–10. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.09.057
Yang B, Stjepanovic G, Shen Q, Martin A, Hurley JH. 2015. Vps4 disassembles an
ESCRT-III filament by global unfolding and processive translocation. Nat Struct Mol
Biol 22:492–8. doi:10.1038/nsmb.3015
Yewdell WT, Colombi P, Makhnevych T, Lusk CP. 2011. Lumenal interactions in
nuclear pore complex assembly and stability. Mol Biol Cell 22:1375–88.
doi:10.1091/mbc.E10-06-0554
Zamborlini A, Usami Y, Radoshitzky SR, Popova E, Palu G, Gottlinger H. 2006.
Release of autoinhibition converts ESCRT-III components into potent inhibitors of
HIV-1 budding. Proc Natl Acad Sci 103:19140–5. doi:10.1073/pnas.0603788103
Zhang K, Donnelly CJ, Haeusler AR, Grima JC, Machamer JB, Steinwald P, Daley EL,
Miller SJ, Cunningham KM, Vidensky S, Gupta S, Thomas MA, Hong I, Chiu S-L,
Huganir RL, Ostrow LW, Matunis MJ, Wang J, Sattler R, Lloyd TE, Rothstein JD.
2015. The C9orf72 repeat expansion disrupts nucleocytoplasmic transport. Nature
525:56–61. doi:10.1038/nature14973
Zhang W, Neuner A, Rüthnick D, Sachsenheimer T, Lüchtenborg C, Brügger B,
Schiebel E. 2018. Brr6 and Brl1 locate to nuclear pore complex assembly sites to
promote their biogenesis. J Cell Biol 217:877–94. doi:10.1083/jcb.201706024

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
Figurecertified
1: Chm7
can diffuse across theaCC-BY-NC-ND
NPC but is
exported
by Xpo1.
4.0 actively
International license
.

A

B
Winged Helix 1

1

Winged Helix 2

α1

α2/3

α5 MIM α6

α4

NES1 NES2

chm7OPEN 1

409

*
*

*

*

*

*

*

*

100

*

*

*

*
*

*

*

*
*

*

*
*

*

*

Chm7-MGM4

80

ns

****

60

Chm7-GFP

40
ns

20
0

ca
rr
+ ier
L
+ MB
ca
rr
+ ier
L
+ MB
ca
rr
+ ier
LM
B

*

*

E

Ran-GTP

FP

4

Xpo1/Crm1

-G

M
G

N

M

PE

7-

O

7
ch

C

hm

chm7OPEN-GFP

FP

G

7-

m

Ch

nuclear line profile

+ LMB

G

H

GFP
Fluorescence intensity
(normalized to max)

0.5

n=50
0
2.
0
3.
0

µm

1.0
0.5

1.
0
2.
0
3.
0

0.

0

0.0

µm

I

100
80
60
40
20
0

ns
ns

+
BA ca
PT rrie
A r
+ + -AM
BA ca
PT rrie
A- r
AM

NES1-NES2CHM7-GFP
Fluorescence intensity
(normalized to max)

1.

0
2.
0
3.
0

0

0.0

+

0.5

% of cells with
Chm7-GFP foci

µm

1.0

0.

dsRed-HDEL

NES2CHM7-GFP
Fluorescence intensity
(normalized to max)

1.

0.

0

0.0

+ LMB

37°C

Chm7-GFP apq12∆

GFP

1.0

+ carrier

23°C

Carrier
LMB

+ carrier

xpo1-T539C

+ BAPTA-AM

+ carrier

NES1-NES2CHM7-GFP NES2CHM7-GFP

LMB

+

Chm7-GFP

*

*

GFP (inverted)

Chm7-MGM4

*

*

429

D

xpo1-T539C

% cells (midplanes)
with Chm7-GFP foci

C

Φ=Leu, Val, Ile, Phe or Met

424

370

NES1-NES2CHM7

F

NES1 374-EAEEEIERELEQLEL-388 0.386
NES2 409-SSSEDLLKRLNNLKI-423 0.556
ΦXXXΦXXΦXΦ 1a
Xpo1/Crm1
NES consensus sequences ΦXXΦXXΦXΦ 1b

450

369

NES2CHM7

score

m

Chm7

Predicted NESs

23°C 37°C

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
Figure
1 - figure supplement 1: Chm7
can diffuse
across
the. NPC but is actively exported by
aCC-BY-NC-ND
4.0 International
license

A
Saccharomyces cerevisiae ESCRT-III MIM1 domains
D
R
EXXLXXRLXXLK
216-NPDDDLQARLNTLKK-231
208-RMVNEMRERLRALQN-224
190-EKEDKLAQRLRALRG-205
222-DEEDEDEKALRELQA-236
283-DELDELKKRFDALRR-297
208-EERSDTKEPLALLLS-221
213-EPNLDTEDKNKALES-229
410-SSSEDLLKRLNNLKI-423
1a ΦXXXΦXXΦXΦ
Xpo1/Crm1 NES
1b ΦXXΦXXΦXΦ

MIM1 motif
Vps2
Vps24
Did2
Snf7
Ist1
Vps20
Vps60
Chm7

Chm7 NES conservation
NES1 / α5
NES2 / MIM1

B
S. cerevisiae
S. kudriavzevii
S. pombe
S. japonicus
D. melanogaster
C. elegans
M. musculus
H. sapiens

ΦXXXΦXXΦXΦ
ΦXXΦXXΦXΦ
372-DEEAEEEIERELEQLEL-388
372-NDVAEEEIERELERLEL-388
385-IDLEDEAVEKEWQDLVA-401
377---QEDEDIEKEWNKLVK-391
380-ASQEDDQLEQELRELAG-397
352-NGFNDADLEQELEDLIS-368
373-LDFDSEELEKELDILLQ-389
371-LDFDSEELEKELDILLQ-389

ΦXXXΦXXΦXΦ 1a
Xpo1/Crm1 NES
ΦXXΦXXΦXΦ 1b
409-SSSEDLLKRLNNLKINT-425
409-DNGEDLLKKLDSLRIDI-425
406---VEDIVSTLGNVSLKT-449
394-QKEEDLVSLLERTSLRS-410
417-ITDEEMIAMLQDLEVED-433
394--EEDQLEKRLARLRQAI-411
416-ILDAELEAELEKLSLSE-433
417-SDAE-LEAELEKLSLS--431

46

Xpo1.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2: Cytosolic exposure of the Heh1-WH domain is sufficient to recruit Chm7 to ER membranes.
A

Cytosol

*
*

*

Chm7-GFP
Kap-β1
Kap-α
Heh1

Heh1-RFP

Heh1-RFP (off)

Merge

Ran-GTP
Nucleus

C
wildtype

WT

+ vector
heh1∆apq12∆

+ galactose

heh1(442-735)-RFP heh1(442-834)-RFP heh1(303-834)-RFP heh1(51-834)-RFP

WH

RFP

+ glucose

INM
targeting

B

Chm7-GFP
(inverted)

+ HEH1
+ heh1(51-834)
+ heh1(442-834)
+ heh1(1-735)

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
Figure 3: Chm7 binds to Heh1, Nur1
and downstream
required for Vps4 recruitment.
aCC-BY-NC-ND
4.0 InternationalESCRTs
license.

A
140

B

2 fold

Chm7

Chm7-GFP vps4∆pom152∆
normalized spectral counts

Chm7-GFP
average spectral counts

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

> 2 fold enriched
0

20

40

60

2 fold

140

100

100

120

Snf7
Vps36
Heh1
Nur1

80
60

Vps2
Vps24
Vid27
Vps25
Vps22
Vps20
Gis4
Bro1

40
20

not enriched

80

Chm7

120

0

> 2 fold enriched
0

140

no GFP
average spectral counts

20

40

60

80

not enriched
100

120

vps4∆pom152∆
normalized spectral counts

C

D
60

2 fold

Chm7

50

Heh1-mCh

Heh1

Heh2-mCh

Nur1-GFP

45
40

30
25
20
15
10

Nur1
Snf7

Vps24
Lrs4 Gsp1
Gsp1
Csm1

Vps2
Did2

5

> 2 fold enriched

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

not enriched
45

50

55

Chm7OPEN-mCh

35

chm7OPEN-GFP

chm7OPEN-GFP
average spectral counts

55

60

no GFP
average spectral counts

E

vps20∆

snf7∆

vps24∆

vps2∆

did2∆

vps60∆

ist1∆

Merge

Vps4-GFP

chm7OPEN-mCh

wildtype

48

140

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not

certified3by
review)
is the author/funder,
granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
Figure
- peer
figure
supplement
1: who has
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Chm7 binds to Heh1, Nur1 and downstream ESCRTs required for Vps4 recruitment.

B
FP
-G
N

O

30
C 3
hm
ch 7-G
m FP
7

w

150
100
75

Vps4-GFP int. den (A.U.)

100
75

250

Chm7-GFP
chm7OPEN-GFP

50

50
37

37

25
20
15
10

2000
r = 0.70

1500
1000
500
0
0

25
20

500

1000

chm7OPEN-mCherry int. den. (A.U.)

coomassie

coomassie

Average fluorescence intensity
-mCherry (A.U.)
chm7

E
1500
1000

500

∆

∆

∆

∆

∆

w
ild
ty
vp pe
s2
0
sn
f
vp 7
s2
vp 4
s2
di
vp d2
s6
0
is
t1

∆

∆

300
200
100
0

∆

G

0.2

∆

∆

∆

∆

∆

vp

s2
sn 0∆
f7
∆
vp
s2
4
vp ∆
s2
di ∆
d2
∆
vp
s6
is 0∆
t1
∆

pe

ty

FP
G

MW:
100
75

***

w
ild

*

no

0.3

∆

chm7OPEN-mCherry
Vps4-GFP

ns

0.4

**

w
ild
ty
vp pe
s2
0
sn
f
vp 7
s2
vp 4
s2
di
vp d2
s6
0
is
t1

0

**

400

OPEN

500

Vps4-GFP
WB: α-HA

0.1
0

∆

∆

∆

∆

∆

∆

w
ild
ty
vp pe
s2
0
sn
vp f7
s2
vp 4
s2
di
vp d2
s6
0
is
t1

Area of chm7 OPEN focus (μm2)

Average fluorescence intensity
Vps4-GFP (A.U.)

D

F

C

250
150

-

GST-Chm7

GST

heh1(735-834)

GST-Chm7

MW:

GST

Input (10%) Bound (50%)

PE

A

∆

ponceau

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4: Heh1 is required to induce the focal accumulation of Chm7.
A

Fluorescence ESCRT Targeting and Activation Assay (FETA)
+glucose

Cytosol

+galactose

Chm7-GFP

+galactose

NPC

Heh2-GBP-mCherry
Recruitment and activation

C
BP
-m
er
ge

C
3
wildtype
heh1∆
2

1
n=25
0

0

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Time (minutes)

90 min

80 min

70 min

60 min

50 min

+ galactose

40 min

30 min

20 min

10 min

0 min

Heh2-GBP-mCherry clustering
normalized (CV x 100)

H

eh
2G

FP
7G
hm
C

er
ge
M

eh
2G

C

hm

B

H

7G

FP

BP
-m

C

he
rry

he
rry

Recruitment

M

Nucleus

C
heh1∆

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4 - figure supplement 1: Heh1 is required to induce the focal accumulation of Chm7.
B

*
*

*
*

Chm7-GFP

Merge

*
*

*

*

*

25
20
15
10

ns

5
0

gl
uc
ga ose
la
ct
os
e

*

30

+

+

+ galactose

+ glucose

Heh2-mCherry

Heh2-mCherry clustering
(CV x 100)

A

Chm7-GFP Heh2-mCherry

C

*

*
*

*

Chm7-GFP

Merge

+ galactose

+ glucose

Heh1-mCherry

Heh2-GBP

51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

snf7∆

er
ge

hm
C

M

7G

FP

BP
-m
+ heh1
(703-834)

+ heh1
(735-834)

heh1∆

+ galactose

nur1∆

heh1∆

heh1
(1-735)

+ HEH1

wildtype

+ glucose

+ vector

H

M

eh
2G

C

er
ge

7G
C

H

hm

eh
2G

A

FP

BP
-m

C

C

he
rry

he
rry

Figure 5: The Heh1 WH domain and a transmembrane anchor are necessary
and sufficient for Chm7 activation.

vps4∆

+ galactose

+ glucose

10
0

+
+ galactose

ns

5

∆
s4

∆
f7

vp

nu

sn

∆
h1

he

ty
ild

ty

w

w
ild

pe

0

15

H
h1 EH
(1 1
-7
35
)

5

20

he

ns

10

ns ****

or

****

15

****

****

****

25

ct

20

**

ve

***

30

+

25

D

ns

Heh2-GBP-mCherry
clustering (CV x 100)

ns

pe

Heh2-GBP-mCherry
clustering (CV x 100)

30

r1
∆

B

heh1∆

52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5 - figure supplement 1: The Heh1 WH domain and a transmembrane anchor
are necessary and sufficient for Chm7 activation.

MW:

10
****

5
0

ild
ty
pe
nu
r1
∆

A
H
N

o

15

chm7OPEN -GFP

Heh1-3xHA

100
75

n.d.

ild
ty
p
he e
h1
nu ∆
r1
∆

nur1∆

Heh1-3xHA

20

w

heh1∆

mean fluorescencefoci
mean fluorescencebackground

wildtype

C

25

w

B
chm7OPEN-GFP

A

50
37

WB: α-HA

WB: α-actin

53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not

certified
peer review) associates
is the author/funder,
who has
granted bioRxiv
license to display the
preprint in perpetuity.
It is madeoften
available under
Figure
6: by
chm7
with
a network
of aintranuclear
fenestrated
cisterna
OPEN
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
below nuclear envelope herniations.

A
*

i

ii

iv

iii

chm7OPEN-GFP

N
*

N

*

N

v

ER

vi

vii

N

N

viii
ER

ER

N

B

i

ii

iii

iv
ER

ER

chm7OPEN-GFP

N
N
v

N
vi

ER

N

vii

viii

ER
ER

ER

N

N

ii

iii

iv

54

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
Figure
6-figure supplement 1: chm7OPEN
associates
with alicense
network
of intranuclear fenestrated
aCC-BY-NC-ND
4.0 International
.

cisterna often below nuclear envelope herniations.
A

ii

chm7OPEN-mCherry snf7∆

i

iii

ER

N
B

bottom view

chm7OPEN-mCherry snf7∆

i

ii

iii

N
Chr

N

55

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
Figure certified
7: Chm7
associates with nuclear
envelope4.0herniations
and
intranuclear membranes.
aCC-BY-NC-ND
International license
.

A
i

ii

iii
ER

Chm7-GFP vps4∆pom152∆

ER

ER

N

N
top/side view

bottom view

top/back view

ER

ER

N

iv

v

vi

ii

iii

N

B

Chm7-GFP vps4∆pom152∆

i

N

N

N

NPC

iv

v

N

vi

N
56

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
Figure
8: CHM7 is required to maintain
the4.0
integrity
the. nuclear membranes in the context
aCC-BY-NC-ND
Internationalof
license

of nucleoporin-associated herniations.

B

*

60
40
20
0

0

w

ild
ty
ch pe
ch
m
m ap 7∆
7∆ q1
ap 2∆
q1
2∆

N
ch
m ap PC
7 q1 s
O
2∆
PE
N G
FP

C

% of cells with NER

50

80

100
80
60
40
20
0

ild
t
ch ype
ch
m
m ap 7∆
7∆ q
ap 12∆
q1
2∆

100

100

** ***

w

apq12∆

α: MAb414

N

neck diameter (nm)

150

% of cells with
herniations

A

top view

*

*
*

chm7∆apq12∆

apq12∆

N
side view
ER

N
N

bottom view

D

apq12∆

apq12∆chm7∆

*

*

*

N

N
apq12∆chm7∆

E

N
NER

* *

N

2 hours, 37 ˚C

N

*

NER

NER

57

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 8 - figure supplement 1: CHM7 is required to maintain the integrity of the nuclear membranes
in the context of nucleoporin-associated herniations.
A

nup116∆
i
*

N

ii

ii
*

*

ER

*

*
*

*

*

*

iii
*

ER

iii

*

*
*
*

N

N

*

*
*
*

iv

ER

v

ER

vi
ER

ER

ER

N

N
vii

N
viii

ix

ER

ER

top view

bottom view

bottom view

58

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
4.0 to
International
license
.
Figure 8 - figure supplement 2: CHM7aCC-BY-NC-ND
is required
maintain
the
integrity of the nuclear membranes

in the context of nucleoporin-associated herniations.
A

apq12∆chm7∆
NER

NER

*

*
*

N

N

NER

*

N
NER
NER

NER

N
N

N

*
*

NER

NER
NER

N

N

N
NER
* *

NER

*
N

*

*

NER

N

NER

N

NER

59

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/523670; this version posted January 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND
4.0 International
license. the integrity of the nuclear membranes
Figure 8 - figure supplement 3: CHM7
is required
to maintain

in the context of nucleoporin-associated herniations.
A

NER

apq12∆snf7∆

*

*

N

*

N

60

