bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Protein secondary structure determines the temporal relationship between
folding and disulfide formation
Philip J Robinson1, Shingo Kanemura2, Xiaofei Cao1, Neil J Bulleid1*
1

Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, College of Medical Veterinary and Life Sciences,
Davidson Building, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK.

2

Kwansei Gakuin University, 2-1 Gakuen, Sanda, Hyogo 669-1337 Japan.

ORCID: PJR (0000-0003-2576-5010), NJB (0000-0002-9839-5279)
*corresponding author: +44 141 330 3870, neil.bulleid@glasgow.ac.uk.
Classification: Biological Sciences, Biochemistry

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract
How and when disulfides form in proteins during their folding is a fundamental question in cell
biology. Two models describe the relationship between disulfide formation and folding, the folded
precursor model, in which formation of nascent structure occurs prior to the disulfides and the
quasi-stochastic model where disulfides form prior to complete domain folding. Here we investigate
oxidative folding within a cellular milieu of three structurally diverse substrates in order to
understand the folding mechanisms required to achieve correct cysteine coupling. We use a
eukaryotic translation system in which we can manipulate the redox conditions and produce stalled
translation intermediates representative of different stages of translocation. We identify different
disulfide bonded isomers by non-reducing SDS-PAGE. Using this approach, we determined whether
each substrate followed a folding driven or disulfide driven mechanism. Our results demonstrate
that the folding model is substrate-dependent with disulfides forming prior to complete domain
folding in a domain lacking secondary structure, whereas disulfide formation was absent at this
stage in proteins with defined structural elements. In addition, we demonstrate the presence and
rearrangement of non-native disulfides specifically in substrates following the quasi-stochastic
model. These findings demonstrate why non-native disulfides are prevented from forming in
proteins with well-defined secondary structure.
Key words
Protein folding, nascent chain, endoplasmic reticulum, disulfide formation

Significance statement
A third of human proteins contain structural elements called disulfide bonds that are often crucial
for stability and function. Disulfides form between cysteines in the specialised environment of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), during the complex process of protein folding. Many proteins contain
multiple cysteines that can potentially form correct or incorrect cysteine pairings. To investigate how
correct disulfide pairs are formed in a biological context, we developed an experimental approach to
assess disulfide formation and rearrangement as proteins enter the ER. We found that a protein
domain with atypical secondary structure undergoes disulfide orchestrated folding as it enters the
ER and is prone to incorrect disulfide formation. In contrast, proteins with defined secondary
structure form folding dependent, native disulfides. These findings show how different mechanisms
of disulfide formation can be rationalised from structural features of the folding domains.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

\body
Introduction
A central question in protein folding is how proteins that contain multiple cysteines achieve the
correct disulfide pattern. Intramolecular disulfide bonds consist of covalent cross-links between
cysteines within a polypeptide (1), and their formation imposes conformational restraints that
influence protein folding, stability and function. Disulfides form through an oxidative reaction
between paired cysteines in the presence of an appropriate catalyst (2). In eukaryotic cells, the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the main site for disulfide formation, it provides a favourable redox
environment and catalysts in the form of resident protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) family members
(3). When polypeptides contain more than two cysteines, correct pairing is required to form the
native disulfide pattern; the spatial positioning of cysteine sidechains is required for this correct
pairing, closely linking disulfide formation to the process of conformational folding.
Two models have been proposed that broadly explain the relationship between disulfide formation
and conformational folding:(i) the folded precursor mechanism, in which nascent structure forms
first, which then positions paired cysteines favourably to form a disulfide and (ii) the quasi-stochastic
model, in which cysteines in an unfolded precursor pair more randomly, and the resulting disulfide
influences further folding (4). Recent studies have identified substrates that favour the folded
precursor mechanism (5-7), while other studies have identified contributions from both mechanisms
at different stages of the folding process (8). Incorrect (non-native) disulfides can also form during
folding, which are subsequently reduced and re-arranged (9, 10). In the ER, this reduction step is
performed by specific PDI family members (11, 12) using reducing equivalents that originate in the
cytosol (13). Evidence shows that non-native disulfides can act as important intermediates in the
native folding of certain proteins (10).
Folding and disulfide formation in the cell is a vectorial process. During the early stages of
translation, nascent polypeptides enter the ER through the Sec-translocon (14). The space
constraints of the ribosome/Sec-complex limit structure formation until enough polypeptide has
entered the ER-lumen (15). The addition of each amino acid to the polypeptide expands the
repertoire of intra-molecular interactions and the diversity of potential folds that might form. Both
native and non-native disulfides can form at this co-translational stage (16, 17). The exposure of the
nascent polypeptide to the ER, as well as the folding of the nascent polypeptide and the accessibility
of PDI family members dictates native disulfide formation (18). Non-native disulfides may also form
owing to the partial exposure of nascent polypeptides to the ER, which prevents completion of
folding, leading to incorrect cysteine coupling.
The question of how proteins with multiple cysteines achieve the correct disulfide pattern is a
difficult one to address due to the structural diversity of disulfide-containing proteins and the
technical barriers that hinder folding assays performed in a biologically relevant context. In an earlier
study, we devised an approach to investigate the folding of a protein containing a single disulfide as
it emerges into the ER lumen (7). Here, we expand on this approach to study nascent polypeptides
with diverse structures and complex disulfide patterns to investigate the relationship between
protein folding and correct disulfide formation. Our results demonstrate the influence of protein
secondary structure on the fidelity of disulfide formation within a cellular context.
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Results
Experimental design
The three proteins used in this study, β2-microglobulin (β2M), prolactin and the disintegrin domain
of ADAM10, were chosen for their diversity of secondary structure and disulfide bonding (Fig. 1A).
We added a C-terminal extension to each protein (Fig. 1B) to act as a tether to the ribosome and to
enable the folding domain to enter the ER lumen before completion of translation (Fig 1 Ci). DNA
templates were synthesised that encode specific polypeptide lengths that lack stop codons. The
templates were transcribed and the resulting mRNA used to programme translation reactions that
produce stalled nascent chains of differing lengths. Translations were performed using a rabbit
reticulocyte lysate supplemented with semi-permeabilised (SP) cells to study folding in the ER (19) or
without SP cells to represent folding in the cytosol. All samples were treated with NEM on
completion to irreversibly modify thiols and freeze the disulfide status of the samples for
downstream processing.
We adjusted the redox status of the translation reactions by adding specific components to the
rabbit reticulocyte lysate. In all, we used three different lysates in our experiments. (1) A reducing
lysate supplemented with DTT, in which proteins synthesised are unable to form disulfides in the
absence or presence of SP-cells. (2) An oxidising lysate that contained no additional components;
this lysate allows disulfides to form in proteins synthesised in the absence or presence of SP cells.
And (3) a redox-balanced lysate supplemented with G6Pi to drive G6PD and TrxR1 activity (13) (Fig.1
Cii); this lysate is sufficiently reducing to prevent disulfide formation in proteins synthesised without
SP cells but allows disulfide formation in translocated proteins when SP-cells are present (13).
Proteins synthesised in the redox-balanced lysate supplemented with SP cells have the capacity for
disulfide reduction and rearrangements. This is because the activity of cytosolic G6PD and TrxR1 is
the source of reducing equivalents for an ER-reductive pathway, which is required to reduce nonnative disulfides (Fig. 1 Ciii). Thus, by comparing disulfide formation in oxidising and redox-balanced
lysates, we can assess the influence of the reducing pathway on the fidelity of disulfide formation.
Stochastic disulfide formation is absent in β2M
β2M is a small, β-sheet rich protein with two cysteines and a single disulfide (Fig. 1Ai). It has an Nterminal signal peptide that is cleaved following ER-targeting (Fig. 2 Ai). We can follow disulfide
formation in β2M by non-reducing SDS-PAGE as it has a faster mobility than the reduced protein (7).
When wild type β2M was translated without SP cells in the redox-balanced or reducing lysates, the
resulting product migrated as a single species corresponding to the reduced preprotein (Fig., 2Aii,
lanes 1 and 2; prered). When translated in the oxidising lysate a faster migrating species was detected
indicating disulfide formation (lane 3; preox). When β2M was synthesised in the presence of SP cells,
ER-targeting resulted in signal peptide cleavage with the translation product from the reducing
lysate migrating as two species representing reduced preprotein (prered) and reduced mature protein
(matred) (lane 4). The translation product from the redox-balanced and oxidised lysates also migrated
as two species but the mature protein (matox) runs faster relative to matred indicating disulfide
formation. Disulfide formation also occurred in preprotein translated in the oxidising lysate (lane 6)
as seen in the absence of SP-cells. These results demonstrate that disulfide formation takes place
following polypeptide translocation into the ER in both redox-balanced and oxidising lysates.
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

In a previous study we used an extended-β2M sequence (Fig. 2B) to investigate folding events during
ER entry and found that disulfide formation is a folding-driven process that requires the β2M
sequence to be fully translocated into the ER (Fig. 2Ci) (7). This finding is consistent with a structured
precursor mechanism of folding. We performed these experiments in a redox-balanced lysate and
consequently the ER reductive pathway may prevent any disulfide formation prior to translocation
of the folding domain. To investigate if this was the case we translated the 175 intermediate of
extended-β2M in either the absence (oxidising lysate) or presence (redox-balanced lysate) of a
robust ER reductive pathway (Fig. 2 Cii). At this intermediate length, both cysteine residues will have
exited the Sec-complex while part of the folding domain remains within. The RNA transcript did not
contain a stop codon thereby preventing its release from the ribosome. The resulting translation
products had the same migration independent of the lysate used (lanes 1-3) indicating a lack of any
disulfide formation when the nascent chain is tethered to the ribosome. Only upon release of the
polypeptide from the ribosome following RNase treatment did disulfides form, specifically in
samples translated in oxidising and redox-balanced lysates (triangle) (lanes 5 and 6). This result
demonstrates that the lack of disulfide formation prior to full translocation of the β2M folding
domain is independent of the ER reductive pathway. This indicates that β2M follows the structuredprecursor mechanism for disulfide formation despite redox conditions that are more likely to favour
disulfide formation.
To investigate the role of ER factors in folding and disulfide formation we synthesised stalled RNCs of
β2M in the oxidising lysate in the absence of SP-cells. We previously showed that these conditions
are sufficient to induce disulfide formation in wild type β2M released from the ribosome (Fig 2Aii).
Polypeptide synthesis in the absence of ER factors to regulate disulfide formation may favour
stochastic disulfide formation. For these experiments, we used a β2M sequence that did not contain
an amino-terminal signal sequence in case this affected protein folding. Three intermediate lengths
were chosen based on estimates assuming that ~40 amino acids span the length of the ribosome
tunnel (2/3 of the amino acids required to span the entire ribosome/Sec-complex) (7, 20). The
schematics in Fig. 2D illustrate the predicted cysteine exposure in each case. Following translation in
the different lysates, stalled RNCs were either isolated by ultracentrifugation through a sucrose
cushion or immunoisolated following RNaseA treatment (Fig, 2D i, ii, iii). No disulfide formation
occurred for stalled and released intermediates translated in redox-balanced or reducing lysates
(lanes 1, 2, 4, 5). The stalled intermediates translated in the oxidising lysate showed no evidence of
disulfide formation either (lanes 3), despite exposure of both cysteines to the oxidising lysate in the
141 and 165 intermediates. Disulfide formation occurred only following release of the nascent
chains from the ribosome (lanes 6).
These results with β2M support our earlier findings (7) that suggested disulfide formation requires a
folding-driven mechanism. Here we extend this conclusion to include conditions where stochastic
disulfide formation is more likely. The translations in oxidising lysate both with and without SP cells
show that the entire folding domain needs to exit the ribosome before disulfide formation can take
place. This suggests that stochastic disulfide formation does not occur during β2M folding and that
disulfides form only once the polypeptide folds.
Disulfide formation in prolactin favours a structured precursor-folding model

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

The next substrate studied was bovine prolactin, which has an α-helical structure and three native
disulfide bonds (21). A schematic illustrates the extended-prolactin construct (Fig. 3A). We
monitored N-linked glycosylation at position 230 to determine the intermediate length required for
prolactin domain exposure to the ER lumen (Fig 3B). Following translation of increasing lengths of
the extended-prolactin, glycosylation occurred from an intermediate length of 305 amino acids (Fig.
3Bi). We calculated that 75 amino acids (305-230) are required to span the distance between the Psite of the ribosome and the active site of the oligosaccharyl transferase (OST). Taking into account
the ~12 residues it takes to reach from the exit of the Sec-complex to the OST, we estimate that 63
residues span the ribosome/Sec-complex (Fig. 3B ii), the same value observed with the β2M
construct (7). Based on this result, we predicted the length of polypeptide exposed to the ER for
each intermediate as shown in both table and topology-diagram (Fig 3. Biii). For the remaining
experiments with prolactin, we used a construct without the glycosylation site to simplify SDS-PAGE
analysis.
The presence of the long-range disulfide (C88-C204) in prolactin polypeptides results in a significant
mobility difference when comparing reduced and non-reduced samples on SDS-PAGE (Fig. 3C). The
long-range disulfide forms in the wild type protein when synthesised in the redox-balanced lysate
(lane 2). The two short-range disulfides do not influence SDS-PAGE mobility (21) and so are not
detected in these assays. As prolactin contains six cysteines there is also the potential for long–
range, non-native disulfides to form that may also influence gel mobility. To determine if long-range
disulfides form in prolactin nascent chains we translated a range of stalled intermediates in the
redox-balanced lysate and compared the resulting gel mobility under reducing (+DTT) or nonreducing (-DTT) conditions (Fig. 3Di). Of the three intermediate lengths tested (275, 310 and 330),
the migration of the signal-peptide cleaved polypeptide is the same under non-reducing or reducing
gel conditions, revealing an absence of disulfide formation in each case. In contrast, samples treated
with RNaseA to release nascent chains from the RNCs formed disulfides (Fig. 3Dii). Based on the
glycosylation results (Fig 3Biii) the 310 and 330 RNCs have a prolactin domain exposed to the ER and
yet the long-range disulfide fails to form until nascent chain release from the ribosome.
We tested if the ER reductive pathway is responsible for preventing disulfide formation in the RNCs,
by synthesising prolactin in the presence of SP cells in the oxidising lysate. Translation of the 310
intermediate resulted in a polypeptide with the same gel-mobility as that produced from translation
in the redox-balanced or reducing lysates (Fig. 3Ei, lanes 1-3). Disulfide formation was observed only
following release of the nascent chain (Fig 3Ei, lanes 5 and 6). This result demonstrates that the ERreductive pathway is not actively reducing prolactin intermediates to prevent premature disulfide
formation. We also tested whether disulfides can form in the absence of added SP-cells (Fig 3Eii). For
this assay, we translated a prolactin construct that did not contain the N-terminal signal sequence
(residues 31-310) and was of sufficient length (280 aa) to ensure the folding domain exited the
ribosomal tunnel. When this intermediate was translated in the oxidising lysate, SDS-PAGE analysis
shows an absence of disulfide formation in the RNCs (lanes 3) before RNaseA induced release (lane
6). Polypeptides synthesised in the redox-balanced and reducing lysates showed no disulfide
formation in either stalled or released polypeptides. These results demonstrate that the
requirement for nascent chain release before disulfide formation is independent of ER-factors.
Mechanistically, the absence of either native or non-native disulfide formation upon cysteine
exposure to the oxidising milieu shows that stochastic disulfide formation is absent. This indicates
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

that disulfide formation does not occur via the quasi-stochastic mechanism of folding, in which
disulfides form first in unstructured, folding precursors before conformational folding takes place.
Instead, the dependence of disulfide formation on ribosomal release is consistent with a foldingdriven mechanism in which release provides the freedom that is necessary for conformational
folding to occur, which then drives disulfide formation. These results thus favour the structured
precursor model of oxidative folding.
Multiple disulfide species in partially exposed disintegrin intermediates indicate a stochastic
mechanism of disulfide formation
Both β2M and prolactin have stable secondary structures in which the disulfide density is low, these
features may favour the structured precursor model of oxidative folding. To investigate if a
contrasting protein structure folds via an alternative mechanism, we studied the disintegrin domain
of ADAM10. This protein domain has a dense disulfide bonding pattern and little defined secondary
structure (Fig.1 A iii) (22, 23). We illustrate the organisation of the disintegrin construct and its
pattern of disulfide bonding in Fig 4A. We monitored glycosylation at position 125 to determine the
intermediate length required for disintegrin domain exposure to the ER lumen (Fig. 4Bi), using the
same procedure as described for the prolactin construct. Glycosylation occurred from a length of
200 amino acids onwards, which corresponds to the 63 amino acids of extension sequence required
to span the length of the ribosome/Sec-channel. This is the same length observed for β2M (7) and
prolactin (Fig. 3). We depict the predicted ER exposure, in terms of polypeptide length and number
of cysteines exposed to the ER as a table in Fig. 4Bii, with arrows on the topology diagram illustrating
ER-exposure expected at specific intermediate lengths. For the remaining experiments with
disintegrin, we used a construct without the glycosylation site to simplify SDS-PAGE analysis.
To evaluate disulfide bonding in the disintegrin domain relative to translocation, we expressed a
range of intermediates with increasing levels of ER-exposure (Fig. 4C). When translated in the
presence of SP-cells and in a reducing lysate, we observed two products in each lane that
corresponded to reduced preprotein and reduced mature protein (Fig 4.Ci). When translated in a
redox-balanced lysate, the shorter intermediates ran as five distinct species (Fig. 4Cii) (lanes 1-3). By
comparing these to the reduced sample, we concluded that the slowest migrating species
corresponds to untranslocated, reduced preprotein and that the four faster migrating species
represent translocated species with different disulfide bond configurations. The clear separation of
the species indicates that the disulfides produce specific long-range constraints that contribute to
changes in SDS-PAGE mobility. The formation of disulfides occurs prior to full translocation of the
disintegrin domain. This early disulfide formation and the mixed population of species that result
indicate a quasi-stochastic mechanism of cysteine coupling. For the longer intermediates, the
abundance of each gel species changes, indicating that the disulfide configuration that forms is
highly dependent on the degree of ER-exposure (lanes 4-6). We observed a distinct faster migrating
species once the disintegrin domain was fully exposed, (lane 6 <). This demonstrates that a single,
disulfide pattern is favoured once the entire disintegrin domain enters the ER lumen.
When we preformed the same translation reactions in an oxidising lysate, a distinctly different gelmigration pattern is observed (Fig. 4Ciii). Under these conditions, disulfide formation can occur in
untargeted preprotein and the ER loses the capacity for disulfide rearrangement. The absence of
products that correspond to the reduced protein shows that disulfide formation is extensive. For
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

each sample, the fast-migrating gel-species correspond to intermediates with intra-chain disulfides
(< for the 210 intermediate), and the slower migrating species indicates the presence of inter-chain
disulfides (vertical bar for the 210 intermediate). The intra-chain species that formed in the oxidising
lysate showed more diffuse patterns on SDS-PAGE in comparison to those synthesised in the redoxbalanced lysate, indicating the presence of a heterogeneous mixture of disulfide-bonded species. As
the intermediates increased in length, a less heterogeneous mix of species became evident (Fig.4 C
iii, lanes 5-6). These results indicate that the disintegrin disulfides formed in the oxidising lysate are
slow to rearrange into distinct intermediates, resulting in an ensemble of disulfide-bonded species.
ER-specific disulfide rearrangements occur in disintegrin nascent chains
The disulfides formed in partially exposed disintegrin intermediates are likely to be non-native
disulfides that require subsequent rearrangement. Disulfide rearrangement mechanisms depend on
the ER-reductive pathway. The activity of this pathway could explain why we see a different disulfide
pattern when comparing partially exposed intermediates translated in redox-balanced and oxidising
lysates. In the above experiments with the disintegrin domain, the translation products were
immunoisolated using the V5-antibody, which recognises both preprotein and mature protein.
Judging by the extent of signal-peptide cleavage in reducing samples (Fig. 4Ci), only about 50 % of
the protein is ER targeted. This mixed population makes it difficult to define which of the multiple
bands observed under redox-balanced and oxidising conditions originate from translocated
polypeptides, and which if any originate from disulfide formation in the lysate. To define disulfide
formation and rearrangements taking place in ER translocated intermediates requires a method to
separate preprotein and mature protein. For this purpose we utilised a neo-epitope tag (NE) placed
between the signal peptide and the disintegrin domain. This epitope is only recognised if the signal
peptide is cleaved, allowing the isolation of mature protein without contamination from preprotein
(24).
To identify ER specific disulfide bonded species we translated the intermediate length 146 with SP
cells in reducing, redox-balanced or oxidising lysates (Fig. 5A). Samples were immunoisolated using
the NE antibody or the V5 antibody and separated under non-reducing conditions. Following V5isolation, translation products from the reducing lysate migrated as two species corresponding to
preprotein and mature protein (lane 1) and a single band corresponding to mature protein following
NE-isolation (lane 4). This confirms that the NE-antibody only recognises mature protein. Results
with the redox-balanced lysate showed that of the five species detected following V5 isolation (lane
2) all except the reduced preprotein are ER-translocated species (lane 5). Analysis of the same
intermediate translated in the oxidising lysate, showed that the fast-migrating smear is observed in
both the V5-isolated (lane 3) sample and NE-isolated sample (lane 6) confirming that these products
also represent ER-translocated disulfide bonded species. These results suggests that non-native
disulfides form in the oxidising lysate and that the difference in disulfide bonding when comparing to
the redox-balanced lysates is due to the activity of the ER reductive-pathway. The formation of nonnative disulfides in the disintegrin domain indicates that cysteines are pairing through a quasistochastic mechanism.
Having confirmed that disulfides can form in partially translocated intermediates, we next
investigated if we could directly monitor disulfide rearrangements in nascent chains. To do so we
synthesised the 146 intermediate in oxidising lysate and added G6Pi after nascent chain synthesis to
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

activate the reductive pathway post-translationally (Fig. 5B). Translation products synthesised in
reducing, redox-balanced or oxidising lysate were run alongside the samples for comparison (lanes
1-3). Over the 30 min time course following G6Pi addition, the mobility of the translation products
changed from a diffuse smear (lane 4, 1 min) to the equivalent pattern formed in the redox-balanced
lysate (lanes 5,6 10-30 min). The NE-isolated samples show the same pattern as the V5-isolated
samples but without reduced preprotein. These results demonstrate that disulfide rearrangements
can take place in nascent chains prior to release from the ribosome.
Finally, we confirmed that thioredoxin reductase is the source of reducing equivalents for the
disulfide rearrangements observed by performing G6Pi recovery experiments in the presence of the
thioredoxin reductase inhibitor auranofin. Treatment with auranofin prevented disulfide
rearrangement (Fig. 5C compare lanes 5 and 7), which confirms that cytosolic thioredoxin reductase
is the source of reducing equivalents for these disulfide rearrangements.
Decreasing cysteine density of the disintegrin domain does not prevent stochastic disulfide
formation
The disintegrin domain has a higher density of disulfide bonds than the substrates that follow the
structured precursor mechanism. High cysteine density could be a feature that favours quasistochastic coupling. To test if lowering the cysteine density alters the folding mechanism we
generated disintegrin constructs with specific cysteine residues substituted for serine. We designed
three constructs, with 4, 3 or 1 native cysteine pairs, termed N-term cluster (4 native disulfides
located at the N-terminus) triple (3 sequential disulfides) and single (1 long range disulfide).
Intermediates were produced that either enable partial (146 or 165) or full (210) translocation of the
disintegrin domain to the ER. Following translation, translation products was immunoisolated using
V5 and Neo-epitope antibodies to compare total and ER-translocated products.
Analysis of the partially translocated N-term cluster intermediates (Fig 6Bi) showed similar gelbanding patterns to that observed for the wild type protein, with multiple species present under
both balanced and oxidising conditions (lanes 2, 3 and 5, 6). This is not surprising as the ER-exposed
portion of the disintegrin domain is identical to that of the wild type protein. Increasing the length of
the intermediate (Fig 6Bii), resulted in a prominent fast migrating species under redox-balanced
conditions (lane 8 and 11). The transition from multiple species to a single species shows that a
single configuration is favoured even in the absence of the C-terminal cysteines. Synthesis of the 146
intermediate of the triple construct in the redox-balanced lysate showed two bands representing
preprotein and mature protein (Fig 6. Ci, lane 2). This result contrasts to the array of disulfidebonded species observed for the non-mutated and the N-term cluster construct and reflects the loss
of specific disulfide arrangements. The preprotein runs faster in the oxidising lysate (lane 3 (o)),
revealing disulfide formation in untargeted material. The ER-localised protein had a subtle change in
mobility (*) when comparing the balanced and oxidising conditions (lanes 2, 3 and 5, 6) to the
reduced controls (lanes 1 and 4). This indicates short-range disulfide formation occurring prior to full
translocation and exposure of the domain to the ER. A more prominent disulfide-bonded species (<)
is detected in redox-balanced and oxidised samples (Fig 6. C ii, lanes 8, 9 and 11, 12 ) upon full
domain translocation, indicative of a long-range disulfide. In contrast to the non mutated protein,
the process was less efficient, with the loss of cysteine residues compromising long-range disulfide
formation.
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

We translated a longer intermediate (165) for the single disulfide construct to allow ER exposure of
both cysteines. Even with just two cysteines disulfide formation (Fig 6 Di (<)) occurred in the
oxidising and redox-balanced lysates (lanes 2, 3 and 5, 6) prior to full domain translocation. On full
translocation, the disulfide formed albeit inefficiently (lanes 8, 9 and 11, 12).
These results show that disulfide formation can occur on partial exposure of the disintegrin domain
despite lowering the cysteine density. This suggests that disulfide formation remains quasistochastic despite the lower cysteine content. In each case, the removal of cysteines results in a less
efficient disulfide formation process, indicating that disulfides in the native sequence that form
stochastically in the early stages of folding influence the formation of subsequent disulfides later in
the process.

Discussion
In this study, we used an in vitro translation system to assess nascent chain disulfide formation, in
three proteins with diverse structures and disulfide bond patterns- β2M, prolactin and the
disintegrin domain of ADAM10. Our results indicate that disulfide formation occurs via two
mechanisms that depend on a protein’s secondary structure. In substrates with a regular secondary
structure, conformational folding drives disulfide formation. By contrast, in substrates with an
atypical secondary structure, the folding of disulfide-rich domains occurs through a disulfide driven
process.
For β2M, disulfide formation depends on the protein’s folding domain being fully exposed to the ERlumen and for prolactin, the formation of the long-range disulfide requires that the protein is
released from the ribosome/Sec-complex. In both cases, there is a delay in disulfide formation,
despite the exposure of multiple cysteines to the ER lumen. This absence of early cysteine coupling
favours the structured precursor mechanism of folding. For β2M, it is already established that
disulfide formation follows folding (7) with an initial collapse of the nascent chain occurring during
ER entry. In this case, the partial folding of early intermediates is likely to spatially separate cysteines
and prevent disulfide formation, despite the favourable oxidising conditions. For prolactin, disulfide
formation depends on the nascent chain’s release from the ribosome/Sec-complex, which suggests
that the tethering of the polypeptide to the ribosome prevents folding from reaching completion.
Viable explanations for this dependence on release include a requirement for C- and N-terminal
interactions to initiate the folding process (25, 26), and inhibitory interactions with cellular factors
(27, 28) that are alleviated on release. Although ribosome tethering clearly prevents conformational
folding from being completed, the absence of cysteine coupling indicates that the translation
intermediates are unlikely to be unstructured. Instead, we propose a similar mechanism to that
identified for β2M in which partially folded precursors spatially separate cysteines and prevent
premature disulfide formation. These findings fit with those of other studies that have demonstrated
partial folding at the co-translational stage (29).
In contrast to β2M and prolactin, disulfide formation occurs in disintegrin intermediates prior to the
folding domain’s full exposure to the ER lumen and results in a mixed population of non-native
disulfide-bonded species. A combination of the structural restrictions on the polypeptide when it is
partially ER-exposed, combined with a stochastic mechanism of cysteine coupling explains the array
of species we observe. This is consistent with the quasi-stochastic model of folding where disulfides
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

form first in an unstructured precursor before conformational folding (4). Despite this stochastic
mechanism, the formation of a single disulfide bonded form on full domain exposure reveals cooperatively to the process. We conclude that the disintegrin domain has a disulfide driven
mechanism of folding, where quasi-stochastic cysteine coupling in the early stages provides the
structural constraints for specific cysteine coupling at the later stages.
In a previous study, we identified ADAM10 as a substrate of the reductase ERp57 along with other
proteins that share densely disulfide-bonded domains with low levels of secondary structure (30).
This association is evidence for non-native disulfide formation and suggests that proteins with these
structural features follow a stochastic cysteine-coupling process. Further examples of proteins that
form non-native disulfides during folding include LDLR (10), and Bowman-Birk inhibitor (31), both of
which contain disulfide-rich, irregularly structured domains. The disintegrin constructs we
investigated with lower cysteine density retained the features of the quasi-stochastic process. This
suggests that secondary structure rather than the cysteine density is the deciding factor in the
mechanism of cysteine coupling.
In this study, we assayed disulfide formation in stalled translation intermediates to provide insight
into the folding mechanisms that achieve correct cysteine coupling in native protein structures. Our
results provide novel insights into the relationship that exists between disulfide formation and
protein folding. Our findings also raise questions for future studies to address, including (i) whether
these mechanisms apply to a broader number and diversity of substrates; (ii) the molecular
interactions involved in these folding processes; and (iii) how folding events correlate with
translation in real time. Such studies will help to further characterise the mechanisms described here
and will advance our understanding of the fundamentally important process of oxidative protein
folding in the cell.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Wellcome Trust (grant number 103720) and the Royal Society (ref
IE140492). XC is the recipient of a Chinese Scholarship Council award.
Declaration
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Materials and Methods
Molecular graphics
The ribbon diagrams (Fig.1) were drawn using the UCSF Chimera package, version 1.8, from the
Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization, and Informatics at the University of California, San
Francisco (32) using PDB files 1A1M (β2M), 1RW5 (prolactin) and 5L0Q (ADAM10 disintegrin).
Template generation
All protein constructs had the same C-terminal extension sequence with alternate N-terminal
domains. This was either human β2M (extended-β2M), bovine prolactin (extended-prolactin) or
human ADAM10 residues 456-550 (extended-disintegrin). The extended-β2M and extendedprolactin constructs contained their native N-terminal signal sequences while the extendeddisintegrin construct had the human-β2M signal sequence and the Neo-epitope sequence
(IIPVEEENP) added at the N-terminus. These constructs were synthesised as plasmid DNA (Table S1)
using GeneArtTM gene synthesis (ThermoFisher Scientific), with the sequence of each provided in
supplementary material (Fig. S1-S3). Cysteine variants of the extended-disintegrin construct were
also synthesised in this way (Table S1). Mutations to remove glycosylation sites were introduced by
site-directed mutagenesis using ACCUZYMETM (Bioline). Plasmid DNA was used as a template for PCR
using an appropriate forward primer that adds a T7 promoter (Table S2) and various reverse primers
that lack stop codons (Table S3). PCR products were ethanol precipitated, re-suspended in nucleasefree water, and transcribed into RNA templates using T7 RNA polymerase (Promega) (at 37 °C, 2 h).
The resulting RNA was ethanol precipitated and resuspended in nuclease-free water for use as
template in translation reactions. Templates containing stop codons for β2M and prolactin were
generated as described previously (7, 13).
Cell free translation
Translations were performed using the Flexi® Rabbit Reticulocyte Lysate System (Promega)
supplemented with 10 mM DTT (Melford) for reducing lysate, 5 mM G6Pi (Sigma) for redox-balanced
lysate or ddH20 (oxidising lysate). Typical translation reactions contained amino acids except for
methionine (20 μM), KCl (40 mM), EasyTagTM EXPRESS35S Protein Labeling Mix (PerkinElmer) (1
μl/25-μl reaction) and RNA template. Semi-permeabilised HT1080 human fibrosarcoma cells were
prepared as described previously (19) and added to a concentration of ∼105 per 25 μl translation
reaction if required. Following assembly of components, translation reactions were incubated at 30
°C for either 10 min, for glycosylation experiments and all experiments with stalled β2M and
Prolactin intermediates, or 30 min, for templates with stop codons and stalled-disintegrin
intermediates. After this time, samples were either treated with RNase A (Sigma) (1 mg/ml, 5 min at
30 °C) or placed directly on ice. Samples were treated with N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) (Sigma) at a
concentration of 20 mM before further processing. Samples for glycosylation assays or downstream
processing through ultracentrifugation were also treated with cycloheximide (2 mM). Alternative
translation conditions were optimised for prolactin 30-310 (Fig 3. Eii), with amino acids except for
cysteine replacing amino acids except for methionine and the KCl concentration increased to 50 mM.
Sample processing
Samples containing SP cells were centrifuged (16,000 × g, 30 s) following translation to isolate cell
pellets, which were washed with KHM buffer and re-suspended either in SDS-PAGE sample buffer
(20 μl) for direct SDS-PAGE analysis (crude samples) or in immunoisolation (IP) buffer (50 mM Tris,
pH 7.5, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM PMSF, and 0.02% (w/v) sodium
azide) for immunoisolation where indicated. Samples translated without SP cells, were processed by
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

various procedures following NEM treatment. In each case, either (i) IP buffer (0.9 ml) was added for
immunoisolation, (ii) crude translation product was run directly on non-reducing SDS-PAGE or (iii)
ribosome-nascent chain complexes were isolated by ultracentrifugation. For the ultracentrifugation
procedure, samples were loaded onto a sucrose cushion (2.5 M sucrose, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 10 mM
MgCl2, 25 mM KCl) for 90 min at 265,000 x g. Pellets were rinsed with nuclease free water and resuspended in non-reducing sample buffer for SDS-PAGE analysis.
Immunoisolation procedure
Samples in IP buffer were incubated with 0.5% (v/v) Protein A-Sepharose (Generon) for 30 min (4 °C)
and then centrifuged (2000 × g, 5 min) to clear samples of material that is bound non-specifically.
The resulting supernatant was incubated with Protein A-Sepharose (0.5% v/v) and the indicated
antibody at 4 °C overnight. The antibodies used were the polyclonal rabbit anti-human β2M
antibody (Dako) (used at 1/1000), the anti-V5 antibody (Invitrogen) (used at 1/10,000) or aminoantibody to the mature form of PLAP153 (used at 1/500) (33), which we term the Neo-epitope (NE)
antibody. For NE immunoisolation procedures, PAS was pre-treated with 1% Bovine serum albumin
(BSA). Following overnight incubation with the antibody, samples were isolated by centrifugation
(2000 × g, 5 min) and washed three times with 1 ml of IP buffer and once with 100 μl of 20 mM
HEPES, pH 7.5. Protein was eluted by boiling the beads in non-reducing SDS-PAGE sample buffer. If
samples were to be run under reducing conditions then 10 mM DTT was added to the sample before
boiling and once cooled NEM was added (1 μl, 1M NEM) before loading. Samples were run on SDSPAGE and the gels were fixed, dried and exposed to either BioMax MR film (KODAK) for analysis by
autoradiography or to phosphoimager plates for analysis on a FLA‐7000 bioimager (Fujifilm).
G6Pi recovery and auranofin treatment
Following translation of the 146 disintegrin intermediate (10 min at 30 °C) in oxidising lysate, G6Pi
was added (5 mM) and samples incubated at 30°C for 10 min. Aliquots were removed at the time
points specified and treated with NEM for subsequent processing using V5 and NE immunoisolation,
as described above. For the auranofin treatment, 10 minute translations were performed before
auranofin (Sigma) was added at a concentration of 20 μM to relevant samples. Following a further
10 min incubation at room temperature, 5mM G6Pi was added for 30 min at 30°C. Samples were
treated with NEM before V5 immunoisolation and SDS-PAGE analysis, as described above.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

D. Fass, C. Thorpe, Chemistry and Enzymology of Disulfide Cross-Linking in Proteins. Chem.
Rev. 118, 1169-1198 (2018).
D. A. Hudson, S. A. Gannon, C. Thorpe, Oxidative protein folding: from thiol-disulfide
exchange reactions to the redox poise of the endoplasmic reticulum. Free Radic. Biol. Med.
80, 171-182 (2015).
O. B. Oka, N. J. Bulleid, Forming disulfides in the endoplasmic reticulum. Biochimic. Biophys.
Acta 1833, 2425-2429 (2013).
E. Welker, W. J. Wedemeyer, M. Narayan, H. A. Scheraga, Coupling of conformational folding
and disulfide-bond reactions in oxidative folding of proteins. Biochemistry 40, 9059-9064
(2001).
M. Qin, W. Wang, D. Thirumalai, Protein folding guides disulfide bond formation. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 112, 11241-11246 (2015).
P. Kosuri et al., Protein folding drives disulfide formation. Cell 151, 794-806 (2012).
P. J. Robinson, M. A. Pringle, C. A. Woolhead, N. J. Bulleid, Folding of a single domain protein
entering the endoplasmic reticulum precedes disulfide formation. J. Biol. Chem 292, 69786986 (2017).
J. M. Lv et al., Conformational folding and disulfide bonding drive distinct stages of protein
structure formation. Sci. Rep. 8, 1494 (2018).
A. Land, D. Zonneveld, I. Braakman, Folding of HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein involves
extensive isomerization of disulfide bonds and conformation-dependent leader peptide
cleavage. FASEB J. 17, 1058-1067 (2003).
A. Jansens, E. van Duijn, I. Braakman, Coordinated nonvectorial folding in a newly
synthesized multidomain protein. Science 298, 2401-2403 (2002).
N. Hirano et al., Molecular cloning of the human glucose-regulated protein ERp57/GRP58, a
thiol-dependent reductase. Identification of its secretory form and inducible expression by
the oncogenic transformation. Eur. J. Biochem. 234, 336-342 (1995).
O. B. Oka, M. A. Pringle, I. M. Schopp, I. Braakman, N. J. Bulleid, ERdj5 is the ER reductase
that catalyzes the removal of non-native disulfides and correct folding of the LDL receptor.
Mol. Cell 50, 793-804 (2013).
G. J. Poet et al., Cytosolic thioredoxin reductase 1 is required for correct disulfide formation
in the ER. EMBO J. 36, 693-702 (2017).
T. A. Rapoport, L. Li, E. Park, Structural and Mechanistic Insights into Protein Translocation.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 33, 369-390 (2017).
M. Thommen, W. Holtkamp, M. V. Rodnina, Co-translational protein folding: progress and
methods. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 42, 83-89 (2017).
W. Chen, J. Helenius, I. Braakman, A. Helenius, Cotranslational folding and calnexin binding
during glycoprotein synthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 6229-6233 (1995).
L. W. Bergman, W. M. Kuehl, Formation of an intrachain disulfide bond on nascent
immunoglobulin light chains. J. Biol. Chem 254, 8869-8876 (1979).
M. Molinari, A. Helenius, Glycoproteins form mixed disulphides with oxidoreductases during
folding in living cells. Nature 402, 90-93 (1999).
R. Wilson et al., The translocation, folding, assembly and redox-dependent degradation of
secretory and membrane proteins in semi-permeabilized mammalian cells. Biochem. J. 307 (
Pt 3), 679-687 (1995).
D. V. Fedyukina, S. Cavagnero, Protein folding at the exit tunnel. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 40, 337359 (2011).
M. A. Kaderbhai, B. M. Austen, Studies on the formation of intrachain disulphide bonds in
newly biosynthesised bovine prolactin. Role of protein-disulphide isomerase. Eur. J.
Biochem. 153, 167-178 (1985).
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

32.
33.

P. W. Janes et al., Adam meets Eph: an ADAM substrate recognition module acts as a
molecular switch for ephrin cleavage in trans. Cell 123, 291-304 (2005).
T. C. M. Seegar et al., Structural Basis for Regulated Proteolysis by the alpha-Secretase
ADAM10. Cell 171, 1638-1648 e1637 (2017).
C. A. Bailey, L. Gerber, A. D. Howard, S. Udenfriend, Processing at the carboxyl terminus of
nascent placental alkaline phosphatase in a cell-free system: evidence for specific cleavage
of a signal peptide. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86, 22-26 (1989).
M. M. Krishna, S. W. Englander, The N-terminal to C-terminal motif in protein folding and
function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 1053-1058 (2005).
G. Haran, How, when and why proteins collapse: the relation to folding. Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol. 22, 14-20 (2012).
G. Kramer, D. Boehringer, N. Ban, B. Bukau, The ribosome as a platform for co-translational
processing, folding and targeting of newly synthesized proteins. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16,
589-597 (2009).
L. D. Cabrita et al., A structural ensemble of a ribosome-nascent chain complex during
cotranslational protein folding. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 23, 278-285 (2016).
W. Holtkamp et al., Cotranslational protein folding on the ribosome monitored in real time.
Science 350, 1104-1107 (2015).
C. E. Jessop et al., ERp57 is essential for efficient folding of glycoproteins sharing common
structural domains. EMBO J. 26, 28-40 (2007).
R. R. Singh, A. G. Appu Rao, Reductive unfolding and oxidative refolding of a Bowman-Birk
inhibitor from horsegram seeds (Dolichos biflorus): evidence for "hyperreactive" disulfide
bonds and rate-limiting nature of disulfide isomerization in folding. Biochimic. Biophys. Acta
1597, 280-291 (2002).
E. F. Pettersen et al., UCSF Chimera--a visualization system for exploratory research and
analysis. J. Comput. Chem. 25, 1605-1612 (2004).
T. D. Spurway, J. A. Dalley, S. High, N. J. Bulleid, Early events in glycosylphosphatidylinositol
anchor addition. substrate proteins associate with the transamidase subunit gpi8p. J. Biol.
Chem 276, 15975-15982 (2001).

Figure Legends
Figure 1. An experimental system to monitor disulfide formation and rearrangement in translation
intermediates. (A) Ribbon diagrams representing the substrates used in this study: (i) human β2M
(PDB 1A1M); (ii) human prolactin (PDB 1RW5); and (iii) the disintegrin domain of human ADAM10
(PDB 5L0Q). Disulfide bonds are highlighted in yellow. (B) Schematic illustrating the C-terminal
extension added to each folding domain to produce the extended constructs. The position of the
signal peptide (SP), glycosylation site (NST), V5 epitope and five methionine residues (5xM) are
indicated. (C) (i) Schematic of the ribosome-Sec complex expressing an ER-exposed nascent
polypeptide. Phase 1 shows how the C-terminal extension retains the polypeptide attached to the
ribosome to allow Phase 2. In Phase 2 the N-terminal folding domain of the polypeptide is fully
exposed to the ER lumen. (ii) G6Pi drives the cytosolic reducing pathway, which (iii) is the source of
reducing equivalents for disulfide rearrangements in the ER.
Figure 2. β2M-disulfide formation is folding driven. (A) (i) Diagram illustrating signal peptide
cleavage that occurs following translocation of β2M (ii) Non-reducing SDS-PAGE of immunoisolated
wild type β2M translated with or without SP cells in reducing (Red), redox-balanced lysate (Bal) or
oxidising (Ox) lysate. The migration of preprotein (pre) and mature protein (mat) when oxidised (ox)
or reduced (red) is indicated with associated symbols (*,>,o, triangle) (B) Organisation of the
extended β2M construct with the single disulfide (C45-C100) displayed. (C) (i) Diagram illustrating
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

the dependence of disulfide formation on domain exposure, arrows highlight the end of the β2M
folding domain. (ii) Non-reducing SDS-PAGE shows isolated 175 intermediates translated with SP
cells in redox-balanced (Bal), oxidising (Ox), and reducing (Red) lysate. RNaseA treatment following
translation is indicated. (D) Non-reducing SDS-PAGE analysis of isolated ribosome/nascent chain
complexes representing β2M (i) 21-105, (ii) 21-141, and (iii) 21-165 translated in redox-balanced
(Bal), oxidising (Ox) or reducing (Red) lysate without SP cells. Samples treated with RnaseA following
translation are indicated. Schematics next to each panel indicate the predicted cysteine exposure at
each intermediate length. All gels in this figure are representative of at least 3 repeats.
Figure 3. Disulfide formation in prolactin only occurs after ribosome release (A) Organisation of the
extended prolactin construct with disulfide bond positions indicated. (B) (i) Reducing SDS-PAGE of
extended-prolactin intermediates AST (285-310 aa in length), translated with SP cells. Glycosylated
protein is highlighted for the 310 intermediate (*), (ii) a schematic of the extension length (63 aa)
required for ER-exposure and (iii) a table of prolactin intermediate lengths containing the predicted
exposure of amino acids and cysteine residues to the ER-lumen and a topology diagram with ERexposure of specific intermediates indicated by arrows. (C) Non-reducing SDS-PAGE of wild type
prolactin translated with SP cells in reducing (Red) or redox-balanced lysate (Bal). (D) Extendedprolactin intermediates (275-330) translated with SP cells in redox-balanced lysate and either (i)
stalled or (ii) released through RNaseA treatment. Samples were immunoisolated (V5) and run under
reducing (+DTT) and non-reducing (-DTT) conditions. (E) Non-reducing SDS-PAGE of the 310
intermediate translated in reducing (Red), redox-balanced (Nat) or oxidising (Ox) lysate in (i) the
presence or (ii) the absence of SP cells. Stalled samples are compared to the released (RNaseAtreated) samples. In panels C, D, E bands corresponding to reduced preprotein (*), reduced mature
protein (circle), oxidised preprotein (arrow) and oxidised mature protein (triangle) are highlighted.
Representative data is shown in this figure from at least 3 experimental repeats in each case.
Figure 4. Disulfide formation occurs in a partially ER-exposed disintegrin domain. (A) Organisation
of the disintegrin construct with the sequence and native disulfide bonding pattern highlighted. (B)
(i) Reducing SDS-PAGE to identify glycosylation in extended disintegrin intermediates of lengths 180225, with the table and topology diagram (ii) detailing expected exposure of amino acids and
cysteine residues to the ER-lumen. (C) Non-reducing SDS-PAGE showing radiolabelled intermediates
of increasing length (146-210 preprotein length) translated in (i) reducing, (ii) redox-balanced or (iii)
oxidising lysate. All gels in this figure represent translation reactions with SP cells immunoisolated to
the V5 epitope, and are representative of 3 independent repeats.
Figure 5. ER-specific disulfide rearrangements occur in a partially ER-exposed disintegrin
intermediate. Non-reducing SDS-PAGE shows either total translation product (V5) or ER-specific
species (NE) for the 146 intermediate of the disintegrin domain; (A) when translated in reducing
(Red), redox-balanced (Bal) and oxidising (Ox) lysate; (B) when translated in oxidising lysate, with
G6Pi added after translation and samples taken at specific time points post G6Pi treatment (lanes 46); and (C) when translated in oxidising lysate, to which G6Pi was added after translation in the
presence or absence of auranofin (Aur) (lanes 4-7). Control samples for panels B and C were
translated in reducing, redox-balanced and oxidising lysates (lanes 1-3 in both cases) for gel mobility
comparison. Panel A and B were repeated 3 times and panel C twice, with representative data
shown.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. Stochastic disulfide formation occurs even when the cysteine density decreases. (A)
Topology diagram showing the location of disulfides in the wild type sequence of the disintegrin
domain. (B-D) Non-reducing SDS-PAGE showing disulfide formation in stalled intermediates
translated under reducing (Red), redox-balanced or oxidising (ox) conditions for either (B) N-term
cluster (C) triple or (D) single constructs immunoisolated using either a V5 or NE antibody as
indicated. For each case (i) partially ER-exposed (146 or 165) intermediates are compared to (ii) fully
exposed (210) intermediates. Topology diagrams above each panel show the position of disulfides in
the relevant construct with an arrow indicating the degree of ER-exposure expected. Each condition
was repeated 3 times and representative data is shown.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary information
Table S1: Plasmid list
Plasmid

Description

Extended-β2M

DNA Sequence in Fig.S1

Extended- β2M AST

Extended- β2M with N120A mutation

Extended-prolactin

DNA Sequence in Fig.S2

Extended-prolactin AST

Extended-prolactin with N230A mutation

Extended-disintegrin

DNA Sequence in Fig.S3

Extended-disintegrin AST

Extended-disintegrin with N125A mutation

Extended-disintegrin AST: N-term cluster

Extended-disintegrin with N125A mutation and
cysteines at positions 77,84,85,98,104,110 and 117
substituted for serines.
Extended-disintegrin with N125A mutation and
cysteines at positions 34, 45, 58 , 69 , 77 ,84 , 85, 104
and 110 substituted for serines.
Extended-disintegrin with N125A mutation and
cysteines at positions 34, 45, 47, 53, 58, 69, 77, 84,
85, 98, 104, 110, 117 substituted for serines

Extended-disintegrin AST: triple

Extended-disintegrin AST: single

Table S2: Forward primers for transcription/translation template generation
Extended-β2M Fwd*

GATGGCTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGTCAGGCCACCATGAGCAGATCT
GTGGCCCTGG

Extended-β2M mature Fwd

GATGGCTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGTCAGGCCACCATGATCCAGCGG
ACCCCCAAGATCCAGGTGTA

Extended-prolactin Fwd

GATGGCTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGTCAGGCCACCATGGACAGCAAA
GGTTCGTCGC

Extended-prolactin
Fwd

mature GATGGCTAATACGACTCACTATAGGGTCAGGCCACCATGACCCCCGTCT
GTCCCAATGGGC

*This primer is also used to generate disintegrin templates as the extended-disintegrin construct
contains the β2M signal sequence.
Table S3: Reverse PCR primers to generate templates for stalled intermediates
Length of intermediate from start codon
(aa)
β2M

Prolactin Disintegrin

Primer sequence

105

-

-

CACGTGGTTCACTCTGCAG

141

-

146

CATCATCATCATCATGGTGCTGTC

-

-

155

AGCAGAGCTGGCGCT

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

-

-

165

AGAGCTGGCTGTGGCTC

165

275

-

GCCGCCAGCAGATGTAGAG

175

285

180

TGTAGATCCGCCTGTAGAGC

-

300

195

AGCTCCGCCAGTAGATCCT

-

305

200

TGTTCCAGTAGAGGCAGCTC

-

310

205

TCCGCCCCCAGCAGCT

-

-

210

AGAAGAAGCTCCGCCTCC

-

330

225

TGTTGTTCCGGTGCCTGTAG

Figure S1. DNA sequence of the β2M construct
ATGAGCAGATCTGTGGCCCTGGCTGTGCTGGCCCTGCTGTCTCTGTCTGGCCTGGAAGCCATCCAGCGGACCC
CCAAGATCCAGGTGTACAGCAGACACCCCGCCGAGAACGGCAAGAGCAACTTCCTGAACTGCTACGTGTCCG
GCTTCCACCCCAGCGACATCGAGGTGGACCTGCTGAAGAACGGCGAGCGGATCGAGAAGGTGGAACACAGC
GACCTGAGCTTCAGCAAGGACTGGTCCTTCTACCTGCTGTACTACACCGAGTTCACCCCCACCGAGAAGGACG
AGTACGCCTGCAGAGTGAACCACGTGACCCTGAGCCAGCCCAAGATCGTGAAGTGGGACCGGGACATGAAC
AGCACCGGCAAGCCCATCCCCAACCCTCTGCTGGGCCTGGACAGCACCATGATGATGATGATGTCCGGCACCG
CCAGCGCCAGCTCTGCTGGATCTGGCGGCGGAGCCACAGCCAGCTCTACATCTGCTGGCGGCACAAGCACCG
GCTCTACAGGCGGATCTACAGCAGGCGCTGCTGGCGCAACAGGCGGAGGATCTACTGGCGGAGCTGCCTCTA
CTGGAACAGCTGCTGGGGGCGGAGGCGGAGCTTCTTCTGGAACAGGCACAGGCGCCAGCGGCGCTACAGGC
ACCGGAACAACA
Figure S2. DNA sequence of the prolactin construct
ATGGACAGCAAAGGTTCGTCGCAGAAAGGGTCCCGCCTGCTCCTGCTGCTGGTGGTGTCAAATCTACTCTTGT
GCCAGGGTGTGGTCTCCACCCCCGTCTGTCCCAATGGGCCTGGCAACTGCCAGGTATCCCTTCGAGACCTGTT
TGACCGGGCAGTCATGGTGTCCCACTACATCCATGACCTCTCCTCGGAAATGTTCAACGAATTTGATAAACGGT
ATGCCCAGGGCAAAGGGTTCATTACCATGGCCCTCAACAGCTGCCATACCTCCTCCCTTCCTACCCCGGAAGAT
AAAGAACAAGCCCAACAGACCCATCATGAAGTCCTTATGAGCTTGATTCTTGGGTTGCTGCGCTCCTGGAATG
ACCCTCTGTATCACCTAGTCACCGAGGTACGGGGTATGAAAGGAGCCCCAGATGCTATCCTATCGAGGGCCAT
AGAGATTGAGGAAGAAAACAAACGACTTCTGGAAGGCATGGAGATGATATTTGGCCAGGTTATTCCTGGAGC
CAAAGAGACTGAGCCCTACCCTGTGTGGTCAGGACTCCCGTCCCTGCAAACTAAGGATGAAGATGCACGTTAT
TCTGCTTTTTATAACCTGCTCCACTGCCTGCGCAGGGATTCAAGCAAGATTGACACTTACCTTAAGCTCCTGAAT
TGCAGAATCATCTACAACAACAACTGCAACAGCACCGGCAAGCCCATCCCCAACCCTCTGCTGGGCCTGGACA
GCACCATGATGATGATGATGTCCGGCACCGCCAGCGCCAGCTCTGCTGGATCTGGCGGCGGAGCCACAGCCA
GCTCTACATCTGCTGGCGGCACAAGCACCGGCTCTACAGGCGGATCTACAGCAGGCGCTGCTGGCGCAACAG
GCGGAGGATCTACTGGCGGAGCTGCCTCTACTGGAACAGCTGCTGGGGGCGGAGGCGGAGCTTCTTCTGGA
ACAGGCACAGGCGCCAGCGGCGCTACAGGCACCGGAACAACA
Figure S3. DNA sequence of the disintegrin construct
ATGAGCAGATCTGTGGCCCTGGCTGTGCTGGCCCTGCTGTCTCTGTCTGGCCTGGAAGCCATTATTCCGGTGG
AAGAAGAAAACCCGGGGCAGCCTATCTGCGGCAACGGAATGGTGGAACAGGGCGAAGAGTGCGACTGTGG
CTACAGCGACCAGTGCAAGGACGAGTGCTGCTTCGATGCCAACCAGCCTGAGGGCAGAAAGTGCAAGCTGA
AGCCTGGCAAGCAGTGCAGCCCTAGCCAGGGACCTTGTTGCACAGCCCAGTGTGCCTTCAAGAGCAAGAGCG
AGAAGTGCCGCGACGACTCTGATTGTGCTAGAGAGGGCATCTGCAACGGCTTCACCGCTCTGTGTCCTGCCAG
CGATCCTAAACCTAACAGCACCGGCAAGCCCATCCCCAACCCTCTGCTGGGCCTGGACAGCACCATGATGATG
ATGATGTCCGGCACCGCCAGCGCCAGCTCTGCTGGATCTGGCGGCGGAGCCACAGCCAGCTCTACATCTGCTG
GCGGCACAAGCACCGGCTCTACAGGCGGATCTACAGCAGGCGCTGCTGGCGCAACAGGCGGAGGATCTACT
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

GGCGGAGCTGCCTCTACTGGAACAGCTGCTGGGGGCGGAGGCGGAGCTTCTTCTGGAACAGGCACAGGCGC
CAGCGGCGCTACAGGCACCGGAACAACA

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/564740; this version posted September 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 6

