bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Integrated Metabolomic and Transcriptomic Profiling Reveals Novel
Activation-Induced Metabolic Networks in Human T cells
S. Hiemer1,2,*, S. Jatav3,*, J. Jussif1, J. Alley1, S. Lathwal3, M. Piotrowski1, J.
Janiszewski1, R. Kibbey3,4, T. Alves4, D. Dumlao1, A. Jha3 and H. Bandukwala1,5
1

Pfizer Inc, 1 Portland Street, Cambridge, MA 02139
Present Address: Rheos Medicines, 38 Sidney Street, Cambridge, MA 02139
3
Elucidata, 625 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139
4
Yale School of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine (Endocrinology), PO
208020, 300 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT, 06519
5
Sigilon Therapeutics, 100 Binney Street, Cambridge, MA 02139
*
These authors contributed equally
2

Abstract
The targeting of metabolic pathways is emerging as an exciting new approach for modulating
immune cell function and polarization states. In this study, carbon tracing and systems biology
approaches integrating metabolomic and transcriptomic profiling data were used to identify
adaptations in human T cell metabolism important for fueling pro-inflammatory T cell function.
Results of this study demonstrate that T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation leads to a significant
increase in glucose and amino acid metabolism that trigger downstream biosynthetic processes.
Specifically, increased expression of several enzymes such as CTPS1, IL4I1, and ASL results in the
reprogramming of amino acid metabolism. Additionally, the strength of TCR signaling resulted in
different metabolic enzymes utilized by T cells to facilitate similar biochemical endpoints.
Furthermore, this study shows that cyclosporine represses the pathways involved in amino acid
and glucose metabolism, providing novel insights on the immunosuppressive mechanisms of this
drug. To explore the implications of the findings of this study in clinical settings, conventional
immunosuppressants were tested in combination with drugs that target metabolic pathways.
Results showed that such combinations increased efficacy of conventional immunosuppressants.
Overall, the results of this study provide a comprehensive resource for identifying metabolic
targets for novel combinatorial regimens in the treatment of intractable immune diseases.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Immune cells undergo profound metabolic changes during immune-cell activation to help
them prepare and adapt for the increased anabolism required to sustain explosive proliferation
and production of large amounts of biomolecules such as cytokines and immunoglobulins1. Wang
et al. identified a key role for the transcription factor Myc in such metabolic reprogramming of T
cells by showing that specific ablation of Myc suppressed pro-inflammatory functions in T cells2.
Taken together, these studies support the hypothesis that targeting metabolic pathways in T cells
could provide a novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of autoimmune and inflammatory
diseases, thus resulting in a renaissance in the field of immunometabolism.
In addition to the role of immune cell metabolism in immune suppression and activation,
recent reports have also revealed that specific metabolic pathways can also be used to regulate
the fate and polarization state of immune cells. Rathmell and colleagues demonstrated that the
induction of aerobic glycolysis upon TCR stimulation was critical for the pro-inflammatory
functions of T cells. Blocking glucose uptake through ablation of the glucose transporter, Glut1,
or altering the flux of pyruvate into the TCA cycle through modulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase
activity were found to impact the inflammatory functions of T cells3,4. In agreement with these
observations Chi and colleagues identified HIF1α as a key transcription factor required for the
increased aerobic glycolysis and pro-inflammatory functions of T cells5. Interestingly, blocking
glycolysis not only suppressed differentiation of inflammatory Th17 cells but also promoted the
differentiation of naïve T cells into Foxp3 expressing regulatory T cells. Got1 is another key
enzyme that could regulate the polarization of both innate and adaptive immune cells. Got1
activity was selectively required for M2 macrophage polarization and for the differentiation of
pathogenic Th17 cells. Additionally, inhibiting Got1 promotes the generation of Foxp3 regulatory
T cells at the expense of Th17 differentiation6. These data provide further evidence that targeting
key metabolic pathways can suppress the induction of inflammatory functions of immune cells
as well as alter the polarization state of both innate and adaptive immune cells.
Pioneering works by several groups have highlighted the potential of targeting metabolic
pathways not only for suppression of immune responses but also for augmenting immune cell
function. Koichi and colleagues demonstrated that transient suppression of mTOR activation
during priming of naïve T cells promotes the generation of memory T cells7. Pearce et al. similarly
reported that administration of the anti-diabetic drug metformin promoted memory T cell
differentiation through AMPK activation and indirect inhibition of mTOR function8. Corroborating
these data, Rao and colleagues showed that mTOR inhibition promoted persistent
Eomesodermin expression which in turn increased memory cell differentiation and recall
responses9. Sukumar and colleagues translated these findings in pre-clinical oncology models and
reported that inhibition of glycolysis during early T cell priming could enhance the memory and
antitumor function of CD8+ T cells10. These data showed that modulation of immune cell
metabolism could alter cellular differentiation programs. Additionally, these data highlighted
that therapeutic applications of immunometabolism modulation are not limited to inflammatory
diseases but can also be extended to anti-viral and immuno-oncology applications.
While there is increased enthusiasm to develop novel therapies based on advances in the
understanding of immune cell metabolism, a majority of these studies have investigated
metabolic programs in murine immune cells and not human cells. Further work is needed to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

successfully translate these results to a clinical setting and explore whether metabolic pathways
that influence the function of murine immune cells are evolutionarily conserved in human
immune cells. Hess and colleagues have demonstrated that some key observations obtained
through the study of murine T cell metabolism are well conserved in human T cells11–14. Pearce
and colleagues demonstrated a key ‘moonlighting‘ role for the glycolytic enzyme Gapdh in
murine T cells to suppress translation of IFN-γ by binding to the 3’-UTR of its mRNA. Increased
aerobic glycolysis induced upon T cell activation reduces Gapdh binding to the IFN-γ UTR thus
promoting its translation15. Hess and colleagues demonstrated that this function of Gapdh was
evolutionarily conserved in human T cells where increased aerobic glycolysis was required for
IFN-γ production by human effector T cells11. Furthermore, Geltink et al. demonstrated that CD28
costimulation promoted mitochondrial remodeling and increased spare respiratory capacity of
murine CD8+ T cells. These processes were required for increased effector function in vitro and
increased antitumor activity in vivo16. Bantug and colleagues demonstrated that similar
mechanisms were utilized by human memory T cells which have expanded numbers of
mitochondria in close approximation with the endoplasmic reticulum forming
“Immunometabolic Hubs” that promoted their recall response14.
While these studies demonstrate that some key metabolic pathways are utilized similarly
by both murine and human T cells, a few recent papers have highlighted some important
differences in the human and murine immune system. These differences are in part due to the
evolutionary divergence of these species 65 million years ago17 but also in part due to the highly
regulated and specific pathogen-free conditions most laboratory mice are housed in. Masopoust
and colleagues demonstrated that housing laboratory mice under environmental conditions
more similar to what humans are exposed to led to significant changes in their immune systems18.
These data suggest that there may be important differences by which human and murine
immune cells may function due to differences in both environmental exposure as well as speciesspecific genetic architecture. A striking example of this difference was recently highlighted by
Akondy et al. who demonstrated that quiescent human memory cells generated in response to
vaccination had a doubling time which was over 450 days19. In sharp contrast, orthologous
memory cells in mice generated in response to viral encounter had an intermitotic interval of
only 50 days7,20,21. The 9-fold difference in the rates of turnover of human and murine memory T
cells are likely to require different metabolic adaptations. To further explore differences and
similarities between murine and human metabolism, we sought to profile the metabolic
pathways that are triggered in human effector T cells upon TCR stimulation that help fuel their
ability to proliferate and produce inflammatory cytokines.
In this study, we investigated the fate of two fundamental nutrients essential for T cell
function, glucose and glutamine, to elucidate metabolic changes that are induced in primary
human CD4+ T cells upon TCR stimulation. Using phenotypic assays, carbon tracing experiments,
and a system-wide approach combining metabolomic and transcriptomic profiling, we show that
human effector T cells primarily use glucose to fuel TCA anaplerosis but not mitochondrial
respiration. The results of this study reveal a key adaptation of human effector T cells which
allows them to undergo rapid proliferation while secreting energy expensive biomolecules like
cytokines and chemokines. Additionally, we found that TCR stimulation of human effector T cells
upregulates numerous metabolic enzymes which synergistically utilize amino acids such as
glutamine and arginine to fuel TCA. Furthermore, analysis of integrated metabolomic and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

transcriptional profiling studies show that clinically relevant immunosuppressive drugs such as
rapamycin and cyclosporine suppress the upregulation of amino acid metabolism pathways.
These results provide new insights into the mechanisms by which these clinical agents limit
inflammatory processes. Additionally, the results in this study reveal the suppressive effects of
these clinical agents on additional metabolic pathways, which may in turn result in toxic adverse
events of these agents. Finally, by combining CRISPR-based gene ablation and pharmacological
inhibition studies, we dissect the contribution of TCR-induced signaling pathways to identify
novel metabolic enzymes that could be targeted for more precise immune regulation in the
absence of dose-limiting adverse events. The data and results of this study provides an important
stepping-stone for the translation of exciting advances in immunometabolism into clinical
therapies.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Materials and Methods
Primary human CD4+ T cell isolation, culture, and activation
Blood was collected from healthy human patients in accordance with IRB standards. CD4+ T cells
were purified using RosetteSep isolation kit (StemCell) as per manufacturer’s protocol. Cells were
cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10% heat inactivated FBS, HEPES, penicillin/streptomycin,
non-essential amino acids, glutamax, and sodium pyruvate. Cells were initially activated for 72
hours on plate-bound α-CD3 (200 ng/mL; OKT3; BioXCell) and α-CD28 (200 ng/mL; 9.3; BioXCell)
on goat-α-mouse (10 µg/mL; Jackson Immuno Research Labs) pre-coated high-binding plates
(Corning Costar). After 72 hours, cells were removed from plate activation and were expanded
until Day 8-12, maintained at ~1X106 cells/mL by supplementing with fresh media as required.
Cells were then washed with PBS and either rested or re-activated at 0.5-1X106 cells/mL in fresh
media with plate-bound α-CD3/α-CD28 (100 ng/mL each) or with soluble ImmunoCult CD3/CD28
(1:100 dilution; StemCell). Cells were treated with Rapamycin (100 nM) and/or Cyclosporin A (2
µM), or equivalent volume of DMSO during re-activation.

Lentiviral transduction and shRNA knockdown
Lenti-X 293T (Clontech) cells were plated on poly-D-lysine (0.1 mg/mL; Sigma) coated plates at a
density of 1.67X105 cells/mL. After 72 hours, cells were transfected with psPAX2 (1.5 µg), pCMVVSV-G (0.5 µg), and pZIP-mCMV-ZsGreen-shRNA NT Control or mTOR plasmids (2 µg; Transomic)
using the TransIT-LT1 transfection reagent (Mirus) as per manufacturer’s protocol. Virus was
collected after an additional 72 hours and CD4+ T cells were spin infected after 48 hours of
activation using undiluted virus (~1X108 IFU yielding a MOI of ~70) supplemented with polybrene
(10 µg/mL; AmericanBio Inc). After an additional 24 hours of activation, the transduced CD4+ T
cells were removed from activation and expanded in the presence of puromycin (1 µg/mL) until
Day 8-12, maintained at ~1X106 cells/mL by supplementing with fresh media as required. Cells
were then washed and activated as described above.

CRISPR/Cas-9 knockout
Cells were activated on plate-bound α-CD3/α-CD28 as described above. Cells were removed from
plate activation after 72 hours and were rested overnight at ~1X106 cells/mL. The following day
the conditioned media was saved before washing the cells and resuspending in buffer T (Neon
Transfection System; ThermoFisher) at 25X106 cells/mL. Guides targeting human mTOR and
ZAP70 were designed using the Broad Institute’s online sgRNA designer
(https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gpp/public/analysis-tools/sgrna-design)22 (see Sup Table 2). 5
guides per gene were synthesized by IDT and duplexed in a 1:1 ratio with Alt-R-CRISPR-Cas9tracrRNA (IDT) as per manufacturer’s protocol. Duplexed guides were incubated with Alt-R S.p.
Cas9 Nuclease (IDT) before mixing with 2.5X106 cells and electroporating using the Neon
Transfection System (ThermoFisher; 100uL tip at 1550V, 10 milliseconds, 3 pulses). Cells were
allowed to recover for 1 hour in fresh media before adding back conditioned media in a 1:1 ratio
conditioned to fresh media. Cells were expanded in the presence of IL-2 (2 ng/mL; R&D) until Day
8-12, maintained at ~1X106 cells/mL by supplementing with fresh media as required. Cells were
then washed and activated as described above.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Antibodies, Dyes, and Flow cytometry analysis
Cells were washed and stained with Live/Dead Fixable Near-IR Dead Cell stain (1:1000;
ThermoFisher) for 10 min at room temperature. Cells were washed, fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature, and washed again for downstream staining
or FACS analysis. Cells were permeabilized in 90% methanol for 1 hour at -20°C, washed, and
stained overnight with α-human-phospho-S6(PS235/PS236)-AF647 (1:50; BD Biosciences) or αhuman-ZAP70-PE (1:30; Biolegend) and equivalent isotype control. To assess mitochondrial mass
and polarity, viable cells were incubated in MitoTracker Orange CM-H TMRos (250 nM;
ThermoFisher) for 30 min at 37°C. To assess ROS, viable cells were incubated in CellRox Orange
(750 nM; ThermoFisher) for 1 hour at 37°C. To assess apoptosis, viable cells were incubated in
Annexin V Pacific Blue (1:100; ThermoFisher) for 15 min at room temperature. After incubations,
cells were washed, stained with viability stain, and fixed as described above. To assess
proliferation, viable cells were incubated in CellTrace Violet (2 µM; ThermoFisher) for 20 min at
37°C. Cells were washed with FBS and fresh media and activated for 72-96 hours as described
above. Cells were then harvested, stained with viability stain, and fixed as described above. Flow
cytometry data were collected on a BD LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences) and analyzed using FlowJo
software (TreeStar). 10000 events were collected, gated on the viable>singlet>ZsGreen positive
population; or the viable>singlet population.
2

Cytokine analysis
Supernatants were collected at the indicated time point and assessed using the V-PLEX Plus
Proinflammatory Panel 1 (human) Kit (Meso Scale Diagnostics) according to manufacturer’s
protocol.

Metabolic Assays
ECAR and OCR were measured using a Seahorse XFe96 Analyzer (Agilent). Cells were counted and
plated on the day of the experiment in assay media (Seahorse XF base medium supplemented
with glutamine (2 mM), with or without sodium pyruvate (1 mM) or glucose (10 mM), adjusted
to pH 7.4). Cells were plated at 0.4X106 cells/well on Cell-Tak (22.4 µg/mL; Corning) coated plates.
Final concentrations of the following compounds were used: Glucose (10 mM), Oligomycin (1
µM), 2-Deoxyglucose (50 mM), FCCP (500 nM), Rotenone+Antimycin A (1 µM), Etomoxir (40 µM),
BPTES (3 µM), UK5099 (2 µM). Data was analyzed using Wave (Agilent) and GraphPad Prism
software. Supernatants were removed immediately following the assay and lactate production
was measured using the L-Lactate Assay Kit (Colorimetric; Abcam).

RNA Sequencing
5X106 cells were collected at the indicated time points, lysed with RNeasy (Qiagen) kit, and
purified according to manufacturer’s protocol. RNA quantity was assessed using the QIAxpert
and RNA quality was assessed using the Agilent 4200 TapeStation. RNA library preparation was
performed using Illumina Stranded mRNA library preparation kit and sequencing was performed
using NextSeq High Output Run with single end read 1x75bp.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Untargeted metabolomics
300 μl of extraction buffer (acetonitrile:methanol:water 2:2:1) was added to frozen cell pellets
(1X106 cells) on ice and allowed to stand for 30 min. Samples were vortexed then centrifuged for
10 min at 15,000 RPM. The supernatants were transferred to new vial and dried under vacuum
centrifugation. Samples were resuspended with 100 μl of resuspension buffer (acetonitrile:water
5:95). 10 μl of each sample was injected on our LC-HRMS system (Agilent 1290 UPLC in tandem
with a Thermofisher High Field Q-Exactive) and separated using an ion-pairing chromatography.
Positive mode: Waters Acquity 2.1X100 mm BEH C18, 1.7μ column heated to 50°C. Mobile phase
A – 5 mM perfluoropentanoic acid, mobile phase B – 50% Acetonitrile; flow rate: 0.4 mL/min;
gradient – time 0 min = 2% B, time 0.5 = 2% B, time 10 min = 60% B, time 10.2 min = 90% B, time
12 min = 90% B, time 12.2 min = 50% B, time 14 min = 50% B, time 14.2 min = 2% B, time 18 min
= 2% B. MS parameters: 120,000 resolution, AGC Target 1.0X106, Maximum IT 100 ms, Sheath
Gas Flow 30, Aux Gas Flow 5, Sweep Gas Flow 5, Spray Voltage (Kv) 4.3, Capillary Temp (°C) 275,
S Lens RF 70, Aux Heat Temp (°C) 250.
Negative mode: Waters Acquity 2.1X100mm HSS T3, 1.7μ column heated to 35°C. Mobile phase
A – 5% Methanol + 10 mM tributylamine & 15 mM acetic acid, mobile phase B – Isopropyl alcohol;
flow rate: 0.4 mL/min; gradient – time 0 min = 0% B, time 4 = 0% B, time 7 min = 2% B, time 12.5
min = 10% B (flow rate 0.35 mL/min), time 13 min = 10% B (flow rate 0.3 mL/min), time 17 min =
25% B (flow rate 0.2 mL/min), time 20 min = 25% B (flow rate 0.2 mL/min), time 23 min = 0% B
(flow rate 0.3 mL/min), time 24 min = 0% B (flow rate 0.4 mL/min), time 29 min = 0% B (flow rate
0.4 mL/min). MS parameters: 120,000 resolution, AGC Target 1.0X106, Maximum IT 100 ms,
Sheath Gas Flow 30, Aux Gas Flow 5, Sweep Gas Flow 5, Spray Voltage (Kv) 4.3, Capillary Temp
(°C) 275, S Lens RF 70, Aux Heat Temp (°C) 250.

Glutamine/Glucose labeling
Human CD4+ T cells were isolated and expanded as described above. On day 12 post initial
activation, cells were either left unstimulated or acutely restimulated with ImmunoCult as
described above. Cells were subsequently harvested and incubated in fresh cold media (RPMI
with glucose or glutamine (MP Biomedicals) supplemented with sodium bicarbonate (3.7 g/L),
HEPES (10 mM), essentially FFA free BSA (0.2%; Sigma), sodium pyruvate (0.05 mM), and L-lactate
(0.45 mM; Sigma) for 1 hour. Subsequently cells were washed and pulsed with media containing
labeled Glucose[U-13C6] (5.5 mM; CLM-1396; Cambridge Isotopes) or labeled Glutamine[1,2-13C2]
(4 mM; CLM-2001; Cambridge Isotopes) for 4 hours. Cells were then washed with ice-cold PBS
and immediately quenched with ice-cold 20% methanol in 0.1% formic acid supplemented with
D4-taurine (10 µM; Cambridge Isotopes), Sodium Fluoride (3 mM; Sigma), phenylalanine (1 mM;
Sigma), and EDTA (100 µM).

MIMOSA Fluxomics
Extraction and Mass Spectrometry
Frozen quenched samples were lyophilized to dryness overnight in V-bottom plates (Bioexpress;
Cat No. T-3025-8B). Samples were resuspended in water and 2 μL of each sample was analyzed

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

on our LC-DMS/MS system (Agilent 1290 UPLC in tandem with Sciex 6500+ equipped with a DMS
frontend). The method was previously described by Alves et al23. Briefly, glycolytic metabolites
were analyzed using Imtakt amino acid 50 x 2.1 mm, 3μ column with the following mobile phase
scheme: mobile phase A – 100 mM ammonium acetate, pH 6.9 and mobile phase B –
acetonitrile. At a constant flow rate of 0.600 mL/min, metabolites were measured with the
following gradient: time = 0 min (90% B), time = 0.75 min (90% B), time = 2 min (70% B), time =
3.6 min (70% B), time = 4 min (90% B), time = 5 min (90% B). The instrument parameters used
are as follows: Curtain gas 30, CAD 9, IonSpray Voltage -3000, Temp 450, Gas 1 60, Gas 2 60, DMS
Temp low, DMS Modifier 2-propanol, DMS Modifier Composition low, SV 2200, DR off, DMS
Modifier flow (μL/min) 250, Dwell 10 msec, Pause 3 msec, Column Temp RT. TCA metabolites
were analyzed using Hypercarb 100 x 2.1 mm column with the following mobile phase scheme:
mobile phase A – 15 mM ammonium formate, 20 μL 0.5 EDTA pH 6.9 and mobile phase B –
acetonitrile. At a constant flow rate of 0.400 mL/min, metabolites were measured with the
following gradient: time = 0 min (0% B), time = 1 min (0% B), time = 1.75 min (1.5% B), time = 3.2
min (1.5% B), time = 3.5 min (0% B), time = 7 min (0% B). The instrument parameters used are as
follows: Curtain gas 30, CAD 9, IonSpray Voltage -3000, Temp 450, Gas1 55, Gas 2 55, DMS Temp
medium, DMS Modifier 2-propanol, DMS Modifier Composition low, SV 2600, DR open, DMS
Modifier flow (μl/min) 325, Dwell 10 msec, Pause 3 msec, Column Temp RT. Optimized MRM and
DMS parameters for each metabolites are detailed in Sup Table 3 (MRM).

Data analyses
All mass spectrometry data was processed using Elucidata’s (www.elucidata.io) software
packages: El-Maven and Polly.
Steady state precursor-product isotopic ratio (phi) analysis
The processing for MIMOSA fluxomics data was done through El-Maven. Briefly, peaks were
picked for each of the MRM transitions (Sup Table 3) and peak areas were exported as a .csv file.
PollyPhiTM LC-MS/MS Relative app was then used to calculate ratios of various precursor and
product fragments at isotopic steady state as described by Alves et al23. A phi value of 1 typically
implies that there is no dilution of the isotopic label between the precursor and the product,
whereas a ratio of less than 1 implies dilution due to either unlabeled carbons or labeled forms
other than from the precursor. A description of the phi values used in this work along with the
equations used to calculate them are provided in Sup Table 4.
Metabolomic data analysis
The
processing
for
metabolomic
datasets
was
done
through
El-Maven
(https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2537593). The compound database used for processing was
derived from KEGG44 database, our final compound database consisted of all the compounds
found in all of the KEGG’s reaction database. Automated peak picking feature of El-Maven was
then used to get the peak intensity of all the metabolites. To get the differential expression
between different cohorts metaboanalyst45 was used (http://www.metaboanalyst.ca). To
annotate the metabolomic peaks, the mass which had least p-value in differential expression was
selected. Enrichment of pathways in figure 3f was calculated using metaboanalyst.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Transcriptomic data analysis
Transcriptional data was aligned using STAR46 (https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR) aligner. hg38
reference
genome
indexes
for
STAR
aligner
from
GDC48
(https://api.gdc.cancer.gov/data/9c78cca3-c7d3-4cde-9d6c-54ec09421958) were used along
with default settings of STAR aligner. Gene counts from resulting bam files were generated using
featurecounts47 using GTF file from UCSC49 (http://bioinf.wehi.edu.au/featureCounts/).
Differential expression between different cohorts was calculated using DESeq250 package
available with Bioconductor, only the top ten thousand transcripts were considered, sorted
according to counts. DAVID51 was used to calculate the enrichment of different pathways in figure
3. GSVA52 package in R was used to calculate the pathway scores in figure 4a.
Network Analysis (CoMBI-T)
Network analysis pipeline prescribed by Sergushichev et al.53 was used to construct the maps
depicted in all figures. The network analysis pipeline suggested by Sergushichev et al. performs
the integrated network analysis of transcriptional and metabolomic data to find the most
changing subnetworks in the KEGG database. In order to compare CoMBI-T networks, the same
FDR values were applied to the following figures: Supplementary figure 2, Supplementary figure
4, Figure 8. To compare two CoMBI-T networks and find rewiring of metabolism as in figure 5 we
used Dynet54 analysis as devised by Goenawan et al.
Statistical Analysis
Data was analyzed using GraphPad Prism software. Data are presented as indicated in the figure
legend which also highlights the statistical analysis used. Statistical significance is indicated in all
figures by the following annotation: ns p≥0.05; *p<0.05; **p<0.01; **p<0.001; ****p<0.0001.
Data and Software Availability
All transcriptomic data is submitted to GEO with accession number GSE129829. All metabolomic
data is submitted to metabolights55 with id MTBLS926. All data and CoMBI-T maps can be
accessed online through an R shiny app available here: https://shashj199.shinyapps.io/shinyapp/

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Results
Labeling analysis reveals increased utilization of glucose and altered metabolism
of glutamine and fatty acids in activated human CD4+ T cells
Upon stimulation through their TCRs, human effector/memory CD4+ T cells undergo rapid
cell division and concomitant production of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. An
increased metabolism is required to support these functions as is seen by the increased
extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) and oxygen consumption rate (OCR) (Figure 1a-b). Previous
studies showed that T cells require nutrients such as glucose and glutamine to fuel this increased
metabolism24. To specifically investigate if glucose and glutamine were the predominant carbon
sources required to fuel mitochondrial ATP production in human CD4+ effector T cells, we
performed a mitochondrial fuel flexibility test (Figure 1c-d). These data demonstrated that
pharmacological blockade of the mitochondrial pyruvate transporter (MPC) with UK5099 did not
significantly suppress the OCR, a measure of mitochondrial respiration. These data might suggest
that activated human T cells do not utilize glucose as the primary carbon source to fuel
mitochondrial ATP production (Sup Figure 1a-b). Treatment with BPTES, an inhibitor for the
enzyme glutaminase (GLS) required for glutamine entry into the TCA cycle, also failed to decrease
the OCR (Sup Figure 1c-d). Etomoxir, an inhibitor carnitine palmitoyl transferase (CPT) required
for mitochondrial uptake of long chain fatty acid derived carbons was the only pharmacological
agent which reduced OCR of activated T cells. However, a recent report demonstrating a direct
inhibitory effect of etomoxir on complex I of the electron transport chain reduces the utility of
this agent in delineating the role of long chain fatty acids in T cell functions25. Activated T cells in
the fuel flexibility test also exhibited a large residual OCR (~100 pmol/min) despite the presence
of all three inhibitors together (Figure 1c-d, Sup Figure 1). While the residual OCR might come
from non-mitochondrial respiration, Sup Figure 7b suggests that non-mitochondrial respiration
is minimal in activated T cells. These data led us to believe that the mitochondrial fuel flexibility
test was not able to capture the dependence of the activated T cells on glucose and glutamine.
To determine the fate of glucose and glutamine, nutrients critical for effector functions
of human T cells, we performed stable isotopic labeling in rested and acutely activated CD4+ T
cells with either [U-13C6]-D-glucose or with [1,2-13C2]-L-glutamine. After introduction of [U-13C6]D-glucose (Figure 2a), while the overall pools of pyruvate and lactate significantly increased upon
activation, the ratio of labeled to unlabeled fractions were similar in rested and activated cells.
Along with increased ECAR in activated T cells (Figure 1a), these data suggest a greater flux of
glucose carbons through glycolysis upon activation without dilution of these pools through
gluconeogenic or other contributing processes. The pool size of TCA cycle intermediates was also
higher in activated T cells (Figure 2a). Overall, the percentage of labeled citrate was increased in
activated cells compared to resting cells, but this increase in labeling was not consistently
observed in other TCA intermediates such as malate suggesting increased dilution of the glucosederived label (e.g., from glutamine or other unlabeled carbon sources).
In order to investigate these changing fractional enrichments, we used mass isotopomer
multi-ordinate spectral analysis (MIMOSA) approach to perform steady state isotopomer ratio
analysis on TCA cycle metabolites as described by Alves et al.23 Between pyruvate and glutamate
(φPyrGlu) label was diluted by >80% in rested T cells and >90% in activated T cells (Sup Figure 2).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

This dilution indicates that unlabeled carbons enter somewhere between these two metabolites.
In the absence of exogenous acetate, ketones, or branched chain amino acids, pyruvate
dehydrogenase (PDH) and β-oxidation are the principal contributors to mitochondrial Acetyl-CoA
(AcCoA). Under these conditions PDH will contribute labeled carbons while β-oxidation will
contribute unlabeled carbons to AcCoA. In activated T cells we observed that PDH has a much
greater contribution than β-oxidation to AcCoA indicated by a φPyrAc value of 0.8. In contrast, a
φPyrAc value of 0.4 for rested T cells is a direct measure that the majority of AcCoA comes from
unlabeled sources (i.e., beta-oxidation) (Figure 2b). Additionally, the value of φAcCit, which is
indicative of the extent of dilution of citrate through unlabeled carbons from carboxylation of αketoglutarate (α-KG), shows a modest but significant decrease in activated T cells. The largest
difference is observed in the value of φCitGlu, where the enrichment dropped 70% from citrate
to glutamate in activated T cells compared to 25% in rested T cells. Since there are reversible
reactions between citrate and glutamate, this additional dilution indicates that anaplerosis
and/or exchange of glutamate with α-KG in activated cells was large relative to the flux within
the TCA cycle compared to a much smaller exchange/anaplerosis in rested T cells. The estimated
enrichment in oxaloacetate through pyruvate carboxylase (PC) was 2-3% in both states leading
to a small φPyrOAA value indicating a negligible PC contribution to the TCA cycle in both rested
and activated cells (Sup Figure 2).
In the presence of [1,2-13C6]-L-glutamine, there was a significant increase in the glutamine
label in glutamate as well as TCA cycle metabolites in activated T cells (Figure 2d). The
enrichments downstream from glutamine label also suggest a change in ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY)
in activated T cells compared to resting cells as indicated by φCitMal (Figure 2e). The lack of
enrichment in pyruvate and lactate (Figure 2d) also suggest negligible cataplerosis through
oxaloacetate/malate by either PEPCK or Malic Enzyme (ME). Because the reversibility of the
enzymes do not allow for quantitative measures, the increased steady state enrichment ratios
(φGlnGlu, φGluCit) indicate a qualitative increase in glutamine exchange and/or anaplerosis.
Taken together, labeling and phenotypic data demonstrate an increased utilization of
glucose in activated T cells. These data also reveal either increased anaplerosis or altered
exchange reactions upon activation between glutamate and α-KG as well as altered fatty acid
metabolism as observed through lowered dilution of AcCoA after glucose label and lowered
dilution of malate after glutamine label.

Integrated transcriptomic and metabolomic profiling reveals that TCR stimulation induces
non-canonical reprogramming of metabolic pathways.
To gain a mechanistic understanding of how TCR stimulation might augment anaplerosis,
we profiled the kinetics of T cell transcriptome and metabolome changes. RNA-sequencing
following 2, 6, or 24 hours of activation was performed from T cells from 4 human donors. Among
7000 metabolism-associated genes, we selected the top 3000 differentially expressed genes for
K-means clustering (Figure 3a). Four distinct kinetic expression patterns were identified:
decreased (T-1); transiently increased (T-2); stably increased (T-3); decreased at early time points
and subsequently increased (T-4). Representative genes for each of the expression groups are
shown in Figure 3b.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Gene ontology (GO) analysis of each group revealed several expected terms including
immune cell activation (T-1, T-2, Figure 3c) and cell cycle (T-4, Figure 3c). Intriguingly, despite the
profound metabolic changes, no canonical metabolic pathways were in the group T-1, where
expression was decreased with TCR stimulation. Additionally, enrichment for genes of nitrogen
and amino acid metabolism increased dramatically in T-2 and T-3 (Figure 3c) during the first few
hours of activation and remained elevated. Non-targeted metabolomics were used to
complement the transcriptional analysis where 308 metabolites changed upon TCR stimulation
(Figure 3d). Four distinct metabolite clusters had kinetics mirroring the transcriptomic clusters in
Figure 3a: M-1: metabolite abundance decreases over time; M-2: abundance peaks and returns
to original levels; M-3: abundance increase over time; M-4: abundance dips early and increases
over time (Figure 3e). Figure 3 provides a global picture of metabolism with limited focus on
individual metabolites and genes.
The orthogonal transcriptomic and metabolomic data sets were integrated to reinforce
influential metabolic pathways using CoMBI-T. Jha and colleagues have previously utilized to
CoMBI-T to characterize global changes in metabolic pathways that accompany polarization of
murine macrophages26. Geiger and colleagues utilized an analogous approach in which they
integrated metabolomic and proteomic data sets to delineate the role of arginine metabolism in
the regulation of human T cell survival27. Complementing the findings of these two reports, the
data generated in this study describe rapid modulation of metabolic pathways in human T cells
upon TCR stimulation and further identifies unexpected contribution of numerous amino acid
metabolism pathways.
Kinetics of changes in metabolic processes upon TCR stimulation: We integrated the
transcriptional and metabolomic data obtained at 2-, 6- and 24-hours post-stimulation (Figure
4a, Sup Figure 3) to identify metabolic genes whose transcription was modulated by TCR
stimulation and to link them to changes in abundance of their known metabolite substrates and
products in a pathway-agnostic approach. Through these analyses we observed significant
changes in several metabolic modules. Many of these metabolic changes such as glycolysis,
galactose metabolism, pentose phosphate pathway, TCA, Arginine metabolism, methionine
metabolism, showed sustained upregulation at all time points as shown by GSVA analysis (Figure
4b-c).
Regulation of glucose metabolism upon TCR stimulation. Glycolysis appears as one of the most
prominently changing metabolic modules in the CoMBI-T network, where expression of both
upper and lower glycolytic genes is significantly upregulated (Sup Figure 4). Moreover,
quantification of the extent of upregulation in glycolysis through GSVA reveals increased and
sustained upregulation over time. CoMBI-T analysis also revealed metabolic modules of enzymes
such as alpha-galactosidase (GLA) which promote conversion of glucose to other hexoses such as
mannose, inositol, sorbitol, and galactitol (Figure 4c). The role of these hexoses in human CD4+
T cell function remain incompletely understood and warrants further investigation of these
pathways.
Nucleotide synthesis. Consistent with the rapid proliferation that T cells are known to undergo,
we observed changes in the expression of multiple enzymes and metabolites required for

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

nucleotide synthesis (Figure 4c, upper and middle left). Several of these enzymes are known
targets of clinical drugs such as methotrexate (dihydrofolate reductase; DHFR), or enzymes in
which congenital mutations lead to clinical immunodeficiency such as adenosine deaminase 2
(CECR1) or CTP synthase 1 (CTPS1)28.
Amino acid metabolism. Consistent with results from our tracing studies we found several
enzymes associated with amino acid metabolism to be strongly upregulated. The two overall
themes suggested by the CoMBI-T analysis were a) biosynthesis of amino acids from both glucose
and glutamine derived metabolites and b) the utilization of amino acids such as glutamine as
substrates for anaplerotic filling of TCA cycle intermediates.
The first theme of biosynthesis of amino acids was readily exemplified through increased
abundance of proline and alanine whose corresponding enzymes’ transcripts were also
upregulated. These biosynthetic processes are well characterized and were mapped to be
mediated by the canonical enzymes pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1 (PYCR1) (Figure 4c,
lower left) and alanine aminotransferase 2 (GPT2) (Figure 4c, center). The CoMBI-T algorithm also
suggests that proline and alanine could possibly be derived from glutamate and pyruvate
respectively, however this hypothesis needs to be tested in subsequent experiments.
A key exemplifier of the second theme was the increased expression of enzymes involved
in glutamine utilization. Although the tracing studies pointed out that increase in labeled carbons
in the TCA cycle coming from glutamine might be due to increased exchange or glutamine
anaplerosis, there is a higher evidence for anaplerosis since transcripts of the enzymes
responsible for glutamine to glutamate conversion (CTPS1 and GLS1) and glutamate to α-KG
conversion (GOT2) are upregulated and appear in CoMBI-T. A key step in the utilization of
glutamine is its deamination by GLS1. However, CoMBI-T analysis mapped the enzyme CTPS1 as
a potential catalyst for glutamine to glutamate conversion because it is more significantly
upregulated than GLS1 (although GLS1 is also strongly upregulated) (Figure 4c, lower left). The
CTPS1 enzyme catalyzes CTP synthesis and during this process, transfers an amino group from
glutamine to UTP to produce glutamate. While additional perturbational and tracing studies
would be required to further substantiate the requirement for CTPS1 in the deamination of
glutamine in activated human T cells, the results in this study suggest an efficient way for
activated T cells to recycle nitrogen for nucleotide synthesis under metabolically demanding
phases of cellular proliferation.
Two additional TCA intermediates that were increased in activated T cells were malate
and fumarate. In agreement with the data reported by Geiger and colleagues27 we observed a
strong accumulation of argininosuccinate, a key intermediate of the urea cycle. Notably,
argininosuccinate seemed to be acting as a precursor of fumarate. Increased expression of the
enzyme argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) supported a pathway for arginine utilization for
accumulation
of
fumarate.
Similarly,
the
concomitant
upregulation
of
phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase (PAICS) and adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL)
suggested the conversion of arginine into fumarate (Figure 4c, lower right). Collectively, the data
suggest that TCR-stimulation induces the expression of several novel metabolic nodes to
synergistically promote two key features that have been described to accompany T cell
activation; increased mitochondrial function and mass as well as nucleotide metabolism. These
enzymes could be pharmacologically targeted for therapeutic modulation of the immune cells

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

for inflammatory diseases. A list of the metabolic enzymes emphasized by the CoMBI-T analyses
are provided in Supplementary Table 1.

Strength of TCR stimulation differentially regulates metabolic reprogramming of human
CD4+ T cells.
Physiological stimulation of T cells is achieved in vivo through cognate interactions
between the TCR expressed on mature T cells and a specific antigenic peptide presented in the
context of MHC molecules expressed on the surface of antigen presenting cells. Mimicking these
processes under in vitro cell culture conditions is quite challenging. High-throughput screening
efforts required for drug discovery have conventionally used polyclonal stimuli that utilize
stimulatory antibodies that cross link the TCR and costimulatory receptors such as CD28 to better
simulate in vivo conditions in in vitro experiments. We compared the effects of two commonly
used cross-linking formats which result in different strengths of TCR stimulation: 1) a weak TCR
stimulation provided by the ImmunoCult reagent (α-CD3 and α-CD28 antibodies crosslinked with
a soluble polymer) and 2) a stronger stimulation provided by well-established stimulation
protocols in which α-CD3 and α-CD28 antibodies were immobilized on highly adsorbent tissueculture plates (Plate-bound).
We first performed global transcriptomic analyses to compare the effects of these two
stimulation conditions. Distinct gene expression patterns were obtained when the T cells were
stimulated with either ImmunoCult or Plate-bound antibodies (Figure 5a). Whereas stimulation
with Plate-bound antibodies gave a much stronger induction of genes enriched for the GO term
‘positive regulation of cytokine production’, cells stimulated with ImmunoCult exhibited
increased expression of genes enriched for the GO term ‘DNA replication’ (Figure 5b). Analysis of
cytokine production and cell proliferation confirmed these observations as stimulation with
Plate-bound antibodies produced almost a log-fold increase in IFN-γ, IL-2 and TNF-α secretion
compared to cells stimulated with ImmunoCult (Figure 5c). Conversely, cells stimulated with
ImmunoCult exhibited increased proliferation compared to those stimulated with plate-bound
antibodies (Figure 5d). CoMBI-T analyses revealed that the format used for TCR stimulation had
distinct effects on metabolic reprogramming of human T cells. While there were numerous
pathways that were similarly induced by ImmunoCult and Plate-bound formats of TCR
stimulation, there were some notable differences (Figure 5e, Sup Figure 5). Expression of key
enzymes required for inositol metabolism were found to be distinctly changed upon strong TCR
stimulation provided by plate-bound antibodies. In contrast enzymes involved in amino acid
metabolism were more strongly induced by the weaker stimulation provided by the ImmunoCult
reagent. Furthermore, CoMBI-T analyses indicated that stimulation with the two different
protocols resulted in different networks being adopted by T cells to facilitate similar metabolic
transformations. A clear example could be visualized for one type of carbon metabolism (Figure
5e, middle left) involving the conversion of glutamate to formate. In the ImmunoCult activated
cells, this conversion of glutamate to formate was facilitated through dihydrofolate reductase
(DHFR), which formed the intermediary tetrahydrofolate, tetrahydrofolate synthase (MTHFD1)
which subsequently catalyzed the conversion of tetrahydrofolate to formate. In contrast, upon
Plate-bound activation glutamate was converted to glutathione by γ-glutamyltransferase 1
(GGT1), which was subsequently converted to formate by the activation of S-formylglutathione

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

hydrolase (ESD). Collectively these data demonstrate that the nature and strength of TCR
stimulation can have a differential impact on the regulation of T cell metabolism, although further
studies are required to elucidate how closely these in vitro stimulation protocols mimic the
metabolic changes that occur upon more physiologic stimulation of T cells in vivo.

TCR-mediated increase in mTOR activity sustains metabolic reprogramming and proinflammatory functions of human CD4+ T cells.
mTOR kinase is a kinase subcomponent of the mTORC1 complex that has been shown to
promote protein translation and anabolic metabolism in numerous cell types. We (Sup Figure 6f)
and others29 have observed a strong upregulation of mTOR activation upon stimulation of human
T cells. As such, we investigated the contribution of mTOR kinase activation in the regulation of
metabolism and function of activated human T cells.
Using the Seahorse cell analyzer, we measured the ECAR and OCR of resting and activated
CD4+ T cells isolated from 9 independent human donors. The results demonstrate that shRNAmediated inhibition of mTOR expression (Sup Figure 6) repressed activation-induced
upregulation of aerobic glycolysis (and oxidative pentose phosphate pathway which also gives
off acid) as well as mitochondrial respiration in T cells (Figure 6a-k, Sup Figure 7). As mTOR activity
is very low in resting T cells, we saw no significant impact of mTOR knockdown on the respiration
of resting T cells. Further dissection of the impact of mTOR knockdown revealed not only a
suppression of ongoing glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration but also a strong impact on the
maximal glycolytic capacity, maximal respiration, and ATP producing capability of activated CD4+
T cells (Figure 6a-k). These data suggested that mTOR activation is not only required for glucose
uptake (as previously reviewed30 ) but is also important for expression of various enzymes
required for glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration. Analysis of mitochondrial mass with
MitoTracker green and levels of reactive oxygen species with CellROX dyes supported these
observations and revealed an inability of CD4+ T cells transduced with mTOR shRNA to increase
their mitochondrial mass and produce reactive oxygen species (Figure 6l-m).
Due to such a broad impact of mTOR knockdown on T cell metabolism, we hypothesized
that there would be a corresponding reduction in the pro-inflammatory functions of the CD4+ T
cells. To test this hypothesis and confirm shRNA knockdown observations, we disrupted the
mTOR gene in human CD4+ T cells using CRISPR-based reagents (Sup Figure 8). Intriguingly, while
mTOR deletion did not lead to a complete block in pro-inflammatory functions of activated T
cells, there was a significant and clear (< 80%) inhibition of cytokine production (Figure 7a-c). In
contrast, deletion of ZAP70, a critical kinase required for early TCR signaling31, led to a complete
block in both cytokine production and TCR-stimulated proliferation (Figure 7a-e, Sup Figure 9).
We performed CoMBI-T analysis to determine if the decrease in pro-inflammatory functions we
observed upon disruption of mTOR and ZAP70 expression were accompanied by attenuation of
metabolic reprogramming. In keeping with a more pronounced impact of ZAP70 deletion on the
pro-inflammatory functions of CD4+ T cells, ZAP70 deletion had a much stronger effect on
expression of metabolic genes and abundance of their corresponding metabolites (Figure 7f-g).
Collectively these data suggest that while mTOR activation is a key component of TCR-induced
signaling cascades other TCR-induced signaling cascades also play non-redundant roles in
rewiring of T cell metabolism.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Targeting T cell metabolism enhances the immunosuppressive effects of antiinflammatory drugs.
The results of this study show that while ablating mTOR expression had a strong impact
on the pro-inflammatory functions of T cells it was not sufficient to completely abrogate them.
These data are consistent with studies that demonstrate that treatment with rapamycin (Rapa)
in the context of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation delays pathogenic graft versus host
disease rather than block it completely32, 33. Targeting ZAP70 for a more complete block of early
TCR signaling has been challenging due to high levels of homology in the active site and ATP
binding domains of these kinases, which poses difficulties in developing highly selective
pharmacological inhibitors of ZAP7034. Therefore, we explored whether a combination of drugs
such as cyclosporine (CsA) and Rapa which block distinct TCR-induced signaling pathways result
in a more complete suppression of metabolism and inflammatory functions of human T cells.
We first evaluated the impact of each inhibitor alone on TCR-induced metabolic
reprogramming using the CoMBI-T approach (Figure 8). In contrast to the results with mTOR
deletion, we found that Rapa treatment had a modest impact on T cell metabolism. We observed
inhibition of glutamine, glutamate. and arginine derived anaplerotic and biosynthetic processes,
however we failed to see suppression of glycolytic genes (Figure 8a). These observations could
be explained by the fact that the mTOR kinase is required for the function of both the mTORC1
as well as the mTORC2 complexes which have divergent and non-redundant anabolic functions.
In contrast, Rapa has been demonstrated to completely block the function of the mTORC1
complex with a limited impact on the mTORC2 complex35.
Compared to Rapa, treatment with CsA alone had a much broader impact on the
metabolic pathways in activated human CD4+ T cells suggesting that the upregulation of several
metabolic enzymes was mediated through NFAT-driven transcription. Furthermore, we observed
that the effects of CsA treatment were not limited to metabolic genes that we had previously
found to be upregulated upon TCR stimulation. Specifically, we found that key genes associated
with the pentose-phosphate pathway such as ribose-5-phosphate isomerase (RPIA), 6phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (PGD) and Ribulose-phosphate 3-epimerase (RPE) were all
strongly repressed by CsA treatment (Figure 8b). As these gene are not induced upon T cells
activation, the data in this study suggest that the NFAT family of transcription factors are required
for maintaining metabolic homeostasis in resting T cells as well.
We next evaluated how combined treatment of T cells with Rapa and CsA affects T cell
metabolism and function. We activated human CD4+ T cells with ImmunoCult or Plate-bound
antibodies in the presence of either CsA or Rapa alone or in combination. While CsA treatment
was sufficient to completely block proliferation induced by weak ImmunoCult stimulation it was
unable to halt proliferation induced by strong stimulation using Plate-bound antibodies. In
keeping with earlier observations with our mTOR deletion experiments, Rapa treatment alone
was also insufficient to completely block proliferation of activated T cells under both ImmunoCult
and Plate-bound activation. However, combined treatment with Rapa and CsA suggested
additive effects and led to a complete block in CD4+ T cell proliferation (Figure 9a-b). We further
inquired if the additive effects of CsA and Rapa on T cell proliferation were reflected in the
metabolic states. We performed CoMBI-T analysis of T cells which were stimulated with Plate-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

bound antibodies in the presence of either CsA or Rapa alone or in combination (Figure 9c). There
was no evidence for any novel pathways being impacted with the combination. Rather, we
observed that addition of Rapa further potentiated the immunosuppressive effects of CsA (Figure
9d). These data confirm observations that these inhibitors have an additive rather than
synergistic effect on T cell metabolism and function. Collectively these data suggest that CoMBIT analysis can be an efficient tool to determine the most appropriate combinations of drugs
which can provide enhanced therapeutic modulation of immune responses while minimizing the
impact on pathways whose inhibition could lead to increased adverse events and toxicity.

Discussion
In this study we investigated the contribution of two key nutrients, glucose and glutamine,
to the pro-inflammatory functions of human effector T cells. Pharmacological blockade of either
the mitochondrial pyruvate transporter (MPC) and/or glutaminase (GLS1) did not suppress the
increase in OCR following activation of human effector CD4+ T cells. Combinatorial addition of
these inhibitors further precluded the possibility that human effector T cells were highly flexible
in their fuel choice for glucose and glutamine and could circumvent the requirement of either of
these nutrients by solely relying on the other.
In contrast, OCR of activated T cells was reduced by etomoxir, an inhibitor of carnitine
palmitoyl transferase (CPT1a), an enzyme to be transported into the mitochondria. While, it is
tempting to speculate from these data that long chain fatty acids are the primary fuel source for
human effector T cells, recent data have demonstrated that etomoxir may not be specific and
may also inhibit complex 1 of the mitochondrial electron transport chain25. Further experiments
would be required to more specifically establish the requirement for fatty acids for mitochondrial
respiration.
It is possible that either the pharmacologic blockade could be incomplete or that GLS and
MPC may be dispensable for mitochondrial ATP production. The former is supported by the
carbon-tracing experiments that clearly demonstrate that both glucose- as well as glutaminederived carbons can enter into the metabolites of the TCA cycle. MIMOSA and CoMBI-T analyses
suggest that deamination of glutamine is increased to generate glutamate in activated T cells
which could indeed fuel mitochondrial ATP production. Since 80% of the mitochondrial AcCoA
comes from pyruvate, the combination oxidation and anaplerosis from both glucose and
glutamine, but not beta-oxidation, appear to be dominant as T cells become activated.
Transcriptomic and metabolomic profiling studies complement the above data and
demonstrate that upon T cell activation several novel pathways are induced to synergistically
promote nucleotide synthesis and TCA anaplerosis. In principle, these pathways could
compensate for the inhibitory effects of BPTES on glutaminase activity in activated T cells. The
importance of one such enzyme, CTPS1, is underscored by clinical presentation of impaired T cell
immunity in patients with congenital CTPS1 deficiency28. These data suggest that modulation of
metabolic pathways could alter immune cell function and provide a rationale for therapeutic
inhibition of key metabolic enzymes for ameliorating inflammatory diseases.
CoMBI-T analyses reveal several pathways such as the glutamine metabolism, urea cycle, and
polyol metabolism which are specifically upregulated upon T cell activation. Inhibitors of a key
component of the polyol pathways, aldo-keto reductase (AKR1B1) which were initially developed

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

for the treatment of diabetic nephropathy36 have been demonstrated to have anti-inflammatory
activities in pre-clinical models of inflammation37–40. Additionally, Geiger and colleagues have
demonstrated that arginine metabolism in activated T cells is critical for their survival27. Finally,
results from this study, which suggest that glutamine is a key precursor for biosynthetic reactions
that not only promote TCA anaplerosis but also DNA and proline synthesis, could provide a
rationale for the efficacy of DON, a glutamine inhibitor in ameliorating rejection of allogeneic
transplants in mice as well as protecting mice from inflammation associated-encephalomyelitis
induced by alphavirus infection41,42. Collectively, these data suggest that the CoMBI-T analyses
described here point toward several new enzymes which could be targeted for inflammatory
diseases. A list of these candidate enzymes is provided in Supplementary Table 1.
The knockdown and deletion experiments performed in this study confirmed that among
the numerous pathways triggered upon TCR stimulation, activation of mTOR kinase is a key
pathway which drives the metabolic reprogramming required for the pro-inflammatory functions
of human effector T cells. In agreement with previous reports43, we observed a critical role of
mTOR not only in the upregulation of glycolytic pathway genes but also in the upregulation of
genes involved in fatty acid metabolism (Sup figure 10). CoMBI-T analyses further revealed
additional pathways that required mTOR activity. Specifically, we found that upregulation of
ornithine aminotransferase (OAT) and ornithine decarboxylase (ODC1), enzymes required for
polyamine metabolism, was impaired in the absence of mTOR activity. Similarly, expression of
glutamate and proline biosynthesis as well as TCA pathway genes were attenuated correlating
with both decreased ECAR and OCR of activated T cells transduced with mTOR shRNA vectors.
Further studies would be required to determine if these pathways are critical for the function of
T cells or contribute to adverse events such as oral mucositis and hypertriglyceridemia observed
upon clinical use of mTOR inhibitors.
While the effect of mTOR inhibition on T cell metabolism was broad, it was insufficient to
completely block the proinflammatory functions of T cells. This study demonstrated that ZAP70
deletion attenuated expression of additional metabolic pathways which were distinct from those
affected by mTOR deletion. These data suggest that additional mTOR-independent signaling
cascades triggered upon TCR stimulation also play important roles in metabolic reprogramming
of activated human T cells.
Rapamycin (Rapa) and cyclosporine (CsA) are two clinically utilized immunosuppressants
which are often used in combination for the prevention and treatment of transplant associated
GVHD. Using CoMBI-T analysis we evaluated the impact of these agents on T cell metabolism.
Contrary to expectations, we found a broader impact of CsA treatment on T cell metabolism. Part
of this could be due to the fact that Rapa affects only one of the two complexes, mTORC1, which
require mTOR kinase activity. Intriguingly, we also found that CsA impacts the expression of
numerous metabolic genes which are expressed at steady state levels in T cells and not further
increased upon T cell stimulation. Combinatorial treatment with both inhibitors did not impact
any additional metabolic pathways but did increase the extent to which these pathways were
suppressed, supporting an additive rather than synergistic effect of combining these two drugs.
We propose that CoMBI-T analyses could inform the development of novel combinatorial
regimens which could synergistically target immune cell metabolism to suppress their
inflammatory functions without dose-limiting adverse events.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1.

Lee, Y. S., Wollam, J. & Olefsky, J. M. An Integrated View of Immunometabolism. Cell 172,
22–40 (2018).

2.

Wang, R. et al. The Transcription Factor Myc Controls Metabolic Reprogramming upon T
Lymphocyte Activation. Immunity 35, 871–882 (2011).

3.

Jacobs, S. R. et al. Glucose Uptake Is Limiting in T Cell Activation and Requires CD28Mediated Akt-Dependent and Independent Pathways. J. Immunol. 180, 4476–4486
(2008).

4.

Cao, Y., Rathmell, J. C. & Macintyre, A. N. Metabolic Reprogramming towards Aerobic
Glycolysis Correlates with Greater Proliferative Ability and Resistance to Metabolic
Inhibition in CD8 versus CD4 T Cells. 9, 1–15 (2014).

5.

Shi, L. Z. et al. HIF1α–dependent glycolytic pathway orchestrates a metabolic checkpoint
for the differentiation of T H 17 and T reg cells. J. Exp. Med. 208, 1367–1376 (2011).

6.

Xu, T. et al. Metabolic control of TH17 and induced Treg cell balance by an epigenetic
mechanism. Nature (2017). doi:10.1038/nature23475

7.

Araki, K. et al. mTOR regulates memory CD8 T-cell differentiation. Nature 460, 108–112
(2009).

8.

Pearce, E. L. et al. Enhancing CD8 T-cell memory by modulating fatty acid metabolism.
Nature 460, 103–107 (2009).

9.

Rao, R. R., Li, Q., Odunsi, K. & Shrikant, P. A. The mTOR kinase determines effector versus
memory CD8+ T cell fate by regulating the expression of transcription factors T-bet and
Eomesodermin. Immunity 32, 67–78 (2010).

10.

Sukumar, M. et al. Inhibiting glycolytic metabolism enhances CD8+ T cell memory and
antitumor function.pdf. 123, 4479–4488 (2013).

11.

Gubser, P. M. et al. Rapid effector function of memory CD8+T cells requires an
immediate-early glycolytic switch. Nat. Immunol. 14, 1064–1072 (2013).

12.

Zenhaeusern, G. et al. A high-mobility, low-cost phenotype defines human effectormemory CD8 + T cells. Blood 113, 95–99 (2009).

13.

Dimeloe, S. et al. The Immune-Metabolic Basis of Effector Memory CD4+ T Cell Function
under Hypoxic Conditions. J. Immunol. 196, 106–14 (2016).

14.

Bantug, G. R. et al. Mitochondria-Endoplasmic Reticulum Contact Sites Function as
Immunometabolic Hubs that Orchestrate the Rapid Recall Response of Memory CD8 + T
Cells. Immunity 48, 542–555.e6 (2018).

15.

Chang, C.-H. et al. Posttranscriptional control of T cell effector function by aerobic
glycolysis. Cell 153, 1239–51 (2013).

16.

Geltink, R. I. K. et al. Article Mitochondrial Priming by CD28. Cell 171, 385–390.e11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

(2017).
17.

Mestas, J. & Hughes, C. C. W. Of Mice and Not Men: Differences between Mouse and
Human Immunology. J. Immunol. 172, 2731–2738 (2004).

18.

Beura, L. K. et al. Normalizing the environment recapitulates adult human immune traits
in laboratory mice. Nature 532, 512–516 (2016).

19.

Akondy, R. S. et al. Origin and differentiation of human memory CD8 T cells after
vaccination. Nature 552, 362–367 (2017).

20.

Pilyugin, S. S., Ganusov, V. V., Murali-Krishna, K., Ahmed, R. & Antia, R. The rescaling
method for quantifying the turnover of cell populations. J. Theor. Biol. 225, 275–283
(2003).

21.

Choo, D. K., Murali-Krishna, K., Anita, R. & Ahmed, R. Homeostatic Turnover of VirusSpecific Memory CD8 T Cells Occurs Stochastically and Is Independent of CD4 T Cell Help.
J. Immunol. 185, 3436–3444 (2010).

22.

Doench, J. G. et al. Optimized sgRNA design to maximize activity and minimize off-target
effects of CRISPR-Cas9. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 184–191 (2016).

23.

Alves, T. C. et al. Integrated, Step-Wise, Mass-Isotopomeric Flux Analysis of the TCA
Cycle. Cell Metab. 22, 936–947 (2015).

24.

van der Windt, G. J. W. & Pearce, E. L. Metabolic switching and fuel choice during T-cell
differentiation and memory development. Immunol. Rev. 249, 27–42 (2012).

25.

Yao, C.-H. et al. Identifying off-target effects of etomoxir reveals that carnitine
palmitoyltransferase I is essential for cancer cell proliferation independent of βoxidation. PLOS Biol. 16, e2003782 (2018).

26.

Jha, A. K. et al. Network integration of parallel metabolic and transcriptional data reveals
metabolic modules that regulate macrophage polarization. Immunity 42, 419–430
(2015).

27.

Geiger, R. et al. L-Arginine Modulates T Cell Metabolism and Enhances Survival and Antitumor Activity. Cell 167, 829–842.e13 (2016).

28.

Martin, E. et al. CTP synthase 1 deficiency in humans reveals its central role in
lymphocyte proliferation. Nature 510, 288–92 (2014).

29.

Angela, M. et al. Fatty acid metabolic reprogramming via mTOR-mediated inductions of
PPAR&gamma; directs early activation of T cells. Nat. Commun. 7, 1–15 (2016).

30.

Salmond, R. J. mTOR Regulation of Glycolytic Metabolism in T Cells. Front. Cell Dev. Biol.
6, 1–9 (2018).

31.

Au-Yeung, B. B., Shah, N. H., Shen, L. & Weiss, A. ZAP-70 in Signaling, Biology, and
Disease. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 36, 127–156 (2018).

32.

Shin, H. J. et al. Rapamycin and IL-2 reduce lethal acute graft-versus-host disease
associated with increased expansion of donor type CD4+CD25+Foxp3+regulatory T cells.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Blood 118, (2011).
33.

Albert, M. H., Yu, X. Z., Martin, P. J. & Anasetti, C. Prevention of lethal acute GVHD with
an agonistic CD28 antibody and rapamycin. Blood 105, 1355–1361 (2005).

34.

Zhao, H. & Caflisch, A. Discovery of ZAP70 inhibitors by high-throughput docking into a
conformation of its kinase domain generated by molecular dynamics. Bioorganic Med.
Chem. Lett. 23, 5721–5726 (2013).

35.

Jacinto, E. et al. Mammalian TOR complex 2 controls the actin cytoskeleton and is
rapamycin insensitive. Nat. Cell Biol. 6, 1122–1128 (2004).

36.

Oates & Mylari. Aldose reductase inhibitors: therapeutic implications for diabetic
complications. Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs 8, 2095–2119 (1999).

37.

Johnson, Z. I. et al. TNF-α Promotes Nuclear Enrichment of TonEBP/NFAT5 to Selectively
Control Inflammatory but not Osmoregulatory Responses in Nucleus Pulposus Cells. J.
Biol. Chem. jbc.M117.790378 (2017). doi:10.1074/jbc.M117.790378

38.

Ramana, K. V. & Srivastava, S. K. Mediation of aldose reductase in lipopolysaccharideinduced inflammatory signals in mouse peritoneal macrophages. Cytokine 36, 115–122
(2006).

39.

Sánchez-Gómez, F. J. et al. Detoxifying Enzymes at the Cross-Roads of Inflammation,
Oxidative Stress, and Drug Hypersensitivity: Role of Glutathione Transferase P1-1 and
Aldose Reductase. Front. Pharmacol. 7, 237 (2016).

40.

Yadav, U. C. S., Ramana, K. V. & Srivastava, S. K. Aldose reductase inhibition suppresses
airway inflammation. Chem. Biol. Interact. 191, 339–345 (2011).

41.

Lee, C. F. et al. Preventing Allograft Rejection by Targeting Immune Metabolism. Cell Rep.
13, 760–770 (2015).

42.

S., M., V.K., B., K.L.W., S., B.S., S. & D.E., G. Protective effects of glutamine antagonist 6diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine in mice with alphavirus encephalomyelitis. J. Virol. 90, 9251–
9262 (2016).

43.

Angela, M. et al. Fatty acid metabolic reprogramming via mTOR-mediated inductions of
PPARγ directs early activation of T cells. Nat. Commun. 7, 13683 (2016).

44.

Kanehisa, M. & Goto, S. KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. Nucleic Acids
Res. 28, 27–30 (2000).

45.

Jasmine Chong, Othman Soufan, Carin Li, Iurie Caraus, Shuzhao Li, Guillaume Bourque,
David S Wishart, Jianguo Xia; MetaboAnalyst 4.0: towards more transparent and
integrative metabolomics analysis, Nucleic Acids Research, Volume 46, Issue W1, 2 July
2018, Pages W486–W494, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky310

46.

Alexander Dobin, Carrie A. Davis, Felix Schlesinger, Jorg Drenkow, Chris Zaleski, Sonali
Jha, Philippe Batut, Mark Chaisson, Thomas R. Gingeras; STAR: ultrafast universal RNAseq aligner, Bioinformatics, Volume 29, Issue 1, 1 January 2013, Pages 15–21,
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

47.

Yang Liao, Gordon K. Smyth, Wei Shi; featureCounts: an efficient general purpose
program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features, Bioinformatics, Volume 30,
Issue 7, 1 April 2014, Pages 923–930, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt656

48.

Grossman, Robert L., Heath, Allison P., Ferretti, Vincent, Varmus, Harold E., Lowy,
Douglas R., Kibbe, Warren A., Staudt, Louis M. (2016) Toward a Shared Vision for Cancer
Genomic Data. New England Journal of Medicine375:12, 1109-1112

49.

UCSC Genome Browser: Kent WJ, Sugnet CW, Furey TS, Roskin KM, Pringle TH, Zahler
AM, Haussler D. The human genome browser at UCSC. Genome Res. 2002 Jun;12(6):9961006.

50.

Love MI, Huber W, Anders S (2014). “Moderated estimation of fold change and
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2.” Genome Biology, 15, 550. doi:
10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8

51.

Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward the
comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009;37(1):1-13.

52.

Hänzelmann S, Castelo R, Guinney J (2013). “GSVA: gene set variation analysis for
microarray and RNA-Seq data.” BMC Bioinformatics, 14, 7. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-7,
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/14/7

53.

Sergushichev et al. GAM: a web-service for integrated transcriptional and metabolic
network analysis. Nucleic Acids Research. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw266

54.

Goenawan, Ivan H., Kenneth Bryan, and David J. Lynn. "DyNet: visualization and analysis
of dynamic molecular interaction networks." Bioinformatics (2016): btw187

55.

Haug et al. MetaboLights-- an open-access general-purpose repository for metabolomics
studies and associated meta-data. Nucl. Acids Res. (2013) doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1004

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure legends
Figure 1: Utilization of glucose through MPC or glutamine through GLS1 are dispensable for
mitochondrial ATP production in activated human CD4+ T cells.
Primary human CD4+ T cells were rested or activated for 24 hours with CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult.
a, ECAR and b, OCR measurements from one representative donor in response to glucose,
oligomycin (Oligo), and 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG). OCR measurements from one representative
donor in response to Etomoxir, BPTES, and UK5099 indicating fatty acid c, dependency and d,
capacity.
Figure 2: Glucose- and glutamine-derived carbon are used in anaplerotic processes in human
CD4+ T cells.
Primary human CD4+ T cells from one donor were rested or activated for 24 hours with CD3/CD28
ImmunoCult. a, Incorporation of [U-13C6]-D-glucose label (red) compared to unlabeled
metabolites (grey) in Rested or Activated cells. Circle size corresponds to the pool size of each
metabolite. b, Phi values of select metabolites. c, Schematic of glucose label flow. d,
Incorporation of [1,2-13C2]-L-glutamine label (blue) compared to unlabeled metabolites (grey) in
Rested or Activated cells. e, Phi values of select metabolites. f, Schematic of glutamine label flow.
Data are presented as the mean ±SD, n=6. Unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-tests were performed.
Statistical significance is indicated as *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001.
Figure 3: Kinetic transcriptomic and metabolomic profiling reveal expression of nitrogen and
amino acid metabolism to be an early and sustained event upon TCR stimulation.
Primary human CD4+ T cells from two independent donors were left rested (0) or were activated
for 2, 6, or 24 hours with CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult. Cells were isolated for transcriptomic or
metabolomic analysis. a, Heatmap of the top 3217 genes differentially expressed over time out
of 7099 metabolically associated genes as defined by KEGG. Expression patterns of 4 K-means
clusters (T-1 to T-4) are highlighted to the right. b, Expression of representative genes over time
from each cluster. c, GO term enrichment (Description) and associated FDR q-value of each
cluster with respect to the 7099 metabolically associated KEGG genes. d, Heatmap of the top 308
metabolites changing over time. Expression patterns of 4 K-means clusters (M-1 to M-4) are
highlighted to the right. e, Expression of representative metabolites over time from each cluster.
f, Over Representation Analysis (Description) and associated FDR q-value of each cluster with
respect to Pathway-associated metabolite sets (MetaboAnalyst).
Figure 4: Integrated transcriptomic and metabolomic analysis reveal non-canonical
reprogramming of metabolic pathways.
Primary human CD4+ T cells from two independent donors were rested (0) or were activated for
2, 6, or 24 hours with CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult. Cells were isolated for transcriptomic or
metabolomic analysis. a, GSVA indicating score of select pathways during activation time-course.
b, Venn diagram of differentially expressed transcripts (top) or metabolites (bottom) at each
activation time-point compared to rested cells. Specific transcripts or metabolites common to all
activation time-points are highlighted with their respective pathway. c, Concordant

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

metabolomics integrated with transcriptomics (CoMBI-T) analysis of 24 hour activation (red) vs
rested cells (blue). Connecting lines represent transcriptional expression of enzymes, circular
nodes represent metabolite expression, and increased width indicates higher significance.
Specific pathways are highlighted.
Figure 5: Strength of TCR stimulation differentially regulates metabolic reprogramming in human
CD4+ T cells and correlates with differential pro-inflammatory phenotypes.
Primary human CD4+ T cells from four independent donors were rested (0) or were activated for
24 hours with either CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult (green) or Plate-bound α-CD3/α-CD28 (blue). Cells
were isolated for transcriptomic or metabolomic analysis. a, Heatmap of the top 1000
differentially expressed genes. Expression patterns of 3 K-means clusters (T-1 to T-3) are
highlighted to the right. b, GO term enrichment (Description) and associated FDR q-value of each
cluster with respect to all 21706 detected genes. c, Quantification of IFN-γ, IL-2, and TNF-α in
supernatants collected at the indicated time points from one representative donor, n=3. d,
CellTrace Violet staining of cells after 96 hours of activation from one representative donor (left).
Cells were gated on viable singlets. Quantification of the CellTrace Violet-low population from
three independent donors (right), each dot representing the average of one donor, n=3. Ratio
paired two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed. Statistical significance is indicated as *p<0.05;
**p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001. e, DyNet comparison of CoMBI-T maps from 24 hour
activation vs rested cells in either CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult or Plate-bound α-CD3/α-CD28.
Connecting lines represent transcriptional expression of enzymes and circular nodes represent
metabolite expression. Transcripts and metabolites common to both comparisons are
highlighted in grey while those specific to either CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult or Plate-bound α-CD3/αCD28 are highlighted in green or blue respectively. Specific pathways are highlighted.
Figure 6: mTOR is required for increased glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration upon acute TCR
activation.
Primary human CD4+ T cells co-expressing ZsGreen and shNT CTL or shmTOR were rested or
activated for 24 hours with CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult. a, ECAR measurements from one
representative donor in response to glucose, oligomycin (Oligo), and 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG).
Schematic below depicts the quantification of b, glycolysis, c, glycolytic capacity, d, glycolytic
reserve, and e, non-glycolytic acidification from 9 independent donors, each dot representing the
average from one donor, n=3. f, Quantification of lactate from one representative donor
following the last ECAR measurement, n=3. g, OCR measurements from one representative donor
in response to oligomycin, FCCP, and Rotenone+Antimycin (Rot+Ant). Schematic below depicts
the quantification of h, basal respiration, i, maximal respiration, j, ATP production, and k, spare
respiratory capacity from 9 independent donors, each dot representing the average from one
donor, n=3. l, MitoTracker and m, CellRox staining from one representative donor, n=3. Cells were
gated on ZsGreen-positive viable singlets. Data are presented as the mean ±SEM. Two-way
ANOVA was performed with Tukey test to correct for multiple comparisons. Statistical
significance is indicated as *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001.
Figure 7: ZAP70 inhibition has a larger impact on T cell function and metabolism than mTOR
inhibition.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Primary human CD4+ T cells electroporated with CRISPR guides crNT CTL, crmTOR, or crZAP70
were rested or activated with either Plate-bound α-CD3/α-CD28 or CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult.
Supernatants were collected after 24 hours for quantification of pro-inflammatory cytokines a,
IFN-γ, b, IL-2, and c, TNF-α from three independent donors, each dot representing the average of
one donor, n=3. d, CellTrace Violet staining of cells after 96 hours of activation from one
representative donor. Cells were gated on viable singlets. e, Quantification of the CellTrace
Violet-low population from three independent donors, each dot representing the average of one
donor, n=3. Data are presented as the mean ±SEM. Paired two-tailed Student’s t-tests were
performed. Statistical significance is indicated as *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001.
f, CoMBI-T analysis of crmTOR (red) vs crZAP70 (blue) after 24 hours of Plate-bound α-CD3/αCD28 stimulation. Connecting lines represent transcriptional expression of enzymes, circular
nodes represent metabolite expression, and increased width indicates higher significance.
Specific pathways are highlighted. g, Principle component analysis of transcripts (left) or
metabolites (right) after 24 hours of Plate-bound α-CD3/α-CD28 stimulation, each dot
representing an independent donor.
Figure 8: The anti-inflammatory drug Cyclosporine has a larger effect on T-cell metabolism than
Rapamycin, a metabolic regulator.
Primary human CD4+ T cells were activated for 24 hours with Plate-bound α-CD3/α-CD28 in the
presence of vehicle (DMSO), Rapamycin (Rapa), or Cyclosporin (CsA). Cells were isolated for
transcriptomic or metabolomic analysis. CoMBI-T analysis of a, Rapa (red) vs DMSO (blue) and b,
CsA (red) vs DMSO (blue). Connecting lines represent transcriptional expression of enzymes,
circular nodes represent metabolite expression, and increased width indicates higher
significance. Specific pathways are highlighted.
Figure 9: Targeting T cell metabolism using Rapamycin enhances the immunosuppressive effects
of Cyclosporine.
Primary human CD4+ T cells were rested or activated with either Plate-bound α-CD3/α-CD28 or
CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult in the presence of vehicle (DMSO), Rapamycin (Rapa), Cyclosporin (CsA),
or Rapa+CsA. a, CellTrace Violet staining of cells after 72 hours of activation from one
representative donor. Cells were gated on viable singlets. b, Quantification of the Cell-Trace
Violet-low population from three independent donors, each dot representing the average of one
donor, n=3. Data are presented as the mean ±SEM. Paired two-tailed Student’s t-tests were
performed. Statistical significance is indicated as *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001.
c, CoMBI-T analysis of CsA (blue) vs Rapa+CsA (red) after 24 hours of Plate-bound α-CD3/α-CD28
stimulation. Connecting lines represent transcriptional expression of enzymes, circular nodes
represent metabolite expression, and increased width indicates higher significance. Specific
pathways are highlighted. d, Principle component analysis of transcripts (left) or metabolites
(right) after 24 hours of Plate-bound α-CD3/α-CD28 stimulation, each dot representing an
independent donor.
Sup Figure 1: Utilization of glucose through MPC or glutamine through GLS1 are dispensable for
mitochondrial ATP production in activated human CD4+ T cells.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Primary human CD4+ T cells were rested or activated for 24 hours with CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult.
OCR measurements from one representative donor in response to UK5099, BPTES, and Etomoxir
indicating glucose a, dependency and b, capacity; and glutamine c, dependency and d, capacity.
e, Quantification of glucose, glutamine, and fatty acid capacity, dependency, and flexibility in an
additional donor. Data are presented as the mean ±SEM, n=3. Two-way ANOVA was performed
with Tukey test to correct for multiple comparisons. Statistical significance is indicated as
*p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001.
Sup Figure 2: Glucose-derived carbon is diluted out of TCA cycle between the metabolites
pyruvate and glutamate.
Primary human CD4+ T cells from one donor were rested or activated for 24 hours with CD3/CD28
ImmunoCult. Cells were labeled with [U-13C6]-D-glucose. Phi values of select metabolites are
illustrated. Data are presented as the mean ±SD, n=6. Unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-tests were
performed. Statistical significance is indicated as *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001.
Sup Figure 3: Kinetic profiling of integrated transcriptomic and metabolomic analysis reveal early
and sustained changes in metabolic pathways.
Primary human CD4+ T cells from two independent donors were rested (0) or were activated for
2, 6, or 24 hours with CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult. Cells were isolated for transcriptomic or
metabolomic analysis. CoMBI-T analysis of a, 2 hour, b, 6 hour, or c, 24 hour activated cells (red)
vs rested cells (blue). Connecting lines represent transcriptional expression of enzymes, circular
nodes represent metabolite expression, and increased width indicates higher significance.
Specific pathways are highlighted.
Sup Figure 4: Expression of glycolytic enzymes upon TCR stimulation.
Primary human CD4+ T cells from two independent donors were left rested (0) or were activated
for 24 hours with CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult. Cells were isolated for transcriptomic analysis. Log 2Fold Change plotted for select glycolytic enzymes after 24 hours of activation compared to rested
cells.
Sup Figure 5: Strength of TCR stimulation differentially regulates metabolic reprogramming in
human CD4+ T cells and correlates with differential pro-inflammatory phenotypes.
Primary human CD4+ T cells from two independent donors were rested (0) or were activated for
24 hours. Cells were isolated for transcriptomic or metabolomic analysis. CoMBI-T analysis of a,
CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult, or b, Plate-bound α-CD3/α-CD28 activated cells (red) vs rested cells
(blue). Connecting lines represent transcriptional expression of enzymes, circular nodes
represent metabolite expression, and increased width indicates higher significance. Specific
pathways are highlighted.
Sup Figure 6: Efficiency of lentiviral-mediated shRNA knockdown in primary human CD4+ T cells.
Primary human CD4+ T cells co-expressing ZsGreen and shNT CTL or one of three shmTOR
hairpins were rested or activated for 24 hours with CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult. a, Viability of
transduced cells after acute activation. b, Percent of cells expressing ZsGreen, gated on viable
singlets. c, Dot plots of ZsGreen, gated on viable singlets. Phospho-S6 expression represented as

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

d, MFI and e, percent positive cells, gated on ZsGreen-positive viable singlets. f, Representative
histograms of phospho-S6 staining.
Sup Figure 7: mTOR is required for increased glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration upon acute
TCR activation.
Primary human CD4+ T cells co-expressing ZsGreen and shNT CTL or shmTOR were rested or
activated for 24 hours with CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult. a, ECAR measurements from three additional
donors in response to glucose, oligomycin (Oligo), and 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG). b, OCR
measurements from three additional donors in response to oligomycin, FCCP, and
Rotenone+Antimycin (Rot+Ant). c, Quantification of coupling efficiency. d, Annexin V staining
from one representative donor, n=3. Two-way ANOVA was performed with Tukey test to correct
for multiple comparisons. Statistical significance is indicated as *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001;
****p<0.0001.
Sup Figure 8: Efficiency of CRISPR-Cas9 mediated knockout of mTOR in primary human CD4+ T
cells.
Primary human CD4+ T cells electroporated with one of five crmTOR CRISPR guides or mock were
rested or activated for 24 hours with CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult. a, Viability of electroporated cells
after acute activation. Phospho-S6 expression represented as b, MFI and c, percent positive cells,
gated on viable singlets. d, Representative histograms of phospho-S6 staining.
Sup Figure 9: Efficiency of CRISPR-Cas9 mediated knockout of ZAP70 in primary human CD4+ T
cells.
Primary human CD4+ T cells were electroporated with one of five crZAP70 CRISPR guides or mock.
a, Viability of electroporated cells. ZAP70 expression represented as b, MFI and c, percent
positive cells, gated on viable singlets. d, Representative histograms of ZAP70 staining. e, MFI and
f, percent positive cells, gated on viable singlets, after staining with ZAP70 antibody or isotype
control in mock or crZAP70 #4 knockout cells. g, Representative histograms of ZAP70 and isotype
control staining.
Sup Figure 10: mTOR is required for upregulation of genes related to fatty acid metabolism upon
acute TCR activation.
Primary human CD4+ T cells from two independent donors co-expressing ZsGreen and shNT CTL
or shmTOR were rested or activated for 24 hours with CD3/CD28 ImmunoCult. Cells were isolated
for transcriptomic analysis.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

a

b

c

d

Fig 1

a

Glucose[U-13C6] label
Unlabeled
R Rested
A Activated

Glucose[U-13C6]

R

PEP

A
Lactate

R

A

d

PEP

A

R

Pyruvate

A

R

AKG

Glucose[U-13C6] label
**

R

A
Aspartate

A

R

Succinate
A
R

****

R

A
Malate

b

A

Citrate

OAA

A

Acetyl-CoA

R
Aspartate

R

Pyruvate

Lactate

Acetyl-CoA

R

Glutamine[1,2-13C2] label
Unlabeled
R Rested
A Activated

Glucose

R

Glutamate
Glutamine

Citrate

R

A
Malate

A

R

AKG

Succinate
A
R

e

c
Glucose[U-13C6]

****

OAA

Glutamine[1,2-13C2] label
****

A

****

A

Glutamate

R

f
Glucose

***

PEP
Lactate

PEP

Pyruvate
ϕPyrAc
Acetyl-CoA

Fatty acid
oxidation

ϕAcCit

Aspartate

OAA

Succinate

Fig 2

Lactate

Fatty acid
oxidation

Pyruvate

Fatty acid
synthesis

Acetyl-CoA

Citrate
AKG

Fatty acid
synthesis

Acetyl-CoA+OAA

ϕCitGlu

Malate

A

Glutamine[1,2-13C2]

Malate

Glutamate
Glutamine

Acetyl-CoA+OAA

Aspartate

OAA

Citrate

Malate

AKG

ϕCitMal
Malate

ϕGluCit

Succinate

Glutamate

ϕGlnGlu
Glutamine[1,2-13C2]

a

b

c

kmeans 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Time
Transcripts
Description
FDR q-value
Donor

Time
0

AQP3

CR1

FASLG

SLC7A5

CTPS1

MTHFD1L

2

Gene count (log2)

T-1

6
24

T-2

Donor
1
2

T-4

Expression

T-3

GALE

Immune system process
Leukocyte activation

3.38E-04
3.74E-03

Macromolecule metabolism
Nitrogen metabolism
T-cell activation

1.38E-18
1.83E-17
8.76E-14

Nitrogen metabolism
Amino acid metabolism

4.32E-23
3.91E-13

Cell cycle process
DNA metabolism

1.56E-18
1.51E-15

PFKFB4

Time

d
Time
Donor
Time
0
2

Time (hours)

row max

e

kmeans 4

row min

Metabolites
Aspartate

Inosine

M-2

Intensity

2

M-3
M-4

Arginine
No significant enrichment

Glucose-6P

Pyruvate

Glutamate

Threonine

Time

row min

Fig 3

row max

FDR q-value

No significant enrichment

Intensity

Donor
1

Description

Carnitine

M-1

6
24

f

Time (hours)

Gluconeogenesis
Glycolysis
Warburg effect
Galactose metabolism

5.07E-08
7.19E-07
1.89E-04
1.81E-02

Aspartate metabolism
Glycine and Serine metabolism

1.70E-02
2.95E-02

a

c

Alanine,
Aspartate Metabolism

Arginine
Metabolism

Pathway score

Purine
Metabolism
Galactose
Metabolism

Glycolysis

Pentose Phosphate
Pathway

Methionine
Metabolism
Glycolysis

Time (hours)

ed
st

24

vs

5
-6

GALE
AKR1B1

MAT2A
ADI1
IL4I1

71
Rested 6 h r vs R
es
8
6

24

3

2

21

89
rv
s Rested -

Glycolysis
Galactose
Metabolism
Pentose Phosphate
Pathway
Methionine
Metabolism

One Carbon
Metabolism

Aspartate,
Glutamate
Metabolism

TCA
Cycle

Metabolites
- 79

41

4h

ENO1
ALDOA
PGM2
GPI
HK2
LDHA

PGM2
PFKP

d
te

2h

ted - 63

19
25

15

Fig 4

18

22

5

d

Transcripts

6 hr v
s

4

18

hr

r vs Res
te

- 49

s
Re

2hr vs Re

b

Galactose
Metabolism

Pentose Phosphate
Pathway

TCA Cycle

Arginine
Metabolism

G1P
Glucose
Glycerone phosphate
2PG
PEP
Lactate

Glycolysis

UDP Glucose
Sorbitol

Galactose
Metabolism

Isocitrate
2-Oxoglutarate

TCA Cycle

SAH
Methionine
SAM

Methionine
Metabolism

Proline, Glycine,
Serine Metabolism
Metabolite
Transcript
Significance
Not measured

Higher in
Rested
Higher in
Activated

Higher in
Activated

Higher in
Rested
Log2FC
-2

-1

0

1

2

Time
Donor
Activation

c

Description

Activation
Rested
ImmunoCult

Immune system process
Defense response
Signal transduction

T-1

Plate-bound

FDR q-value

T-2

Cytokine-mediated signaling
Regulation of cell proliferation
Positive regulation of cytokines

2.64E-10
6.04E-09
1.19E-07

T-3

Cell cycle process
DNA metabolic process
DNA replication

1.95E-32
2.72E-24
6.59E-21

Time
0
24

Expression

4

Time

row min

e

Plate-bound
ImmunoCult
Rested

Viable>Singlet

Plate-bound
ImmunoCult
Rested

**

Plate-bound
ImmunoCult
Rested

CTV

row max

TCA
Cycle

Proline, Glycine,
Serine Metabolism

Galactose
Metabolism
Glycolysis

One Carbon
Metabolism

Inositol
Phosphate
Metabolism

5-Aminolevulinate

Aspartate,
Glutamate
Metabolism

Purine
Metabolism
Arginine
Metabolism

Fig 5

TNF-α

Time (hours)

d

3

IL-2

6.30E-03
3.43E-03
8.80E-02

Donor
1
2

IFN-γ

pg/mL

b

kmeans 3

a

Methionine
Metabolism

Pentose
Phosphate
Pathway

TCA
Cycle

Metabolite
Transcript

Common to both comparisons
Specific to Plate-bound activation
Specific to ImmunoCult activation

a

b

c

d

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version
copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
* posted July 16, 2019. The****
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted
the preprint
**** bioRxiv
** a license to display****
* in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

e

f
****
****

**
****

g

h

Basal
respiration
****
****

k

i

Maximal
respiration
**

j

ATP
production
****
****

*

l

m
****
****

Fig 6

****

****
****

a

Plate-bound
ns

f

ImmunoCult

****

*

**

IFN-γ

crNT CTL
crmTOR
crZAP70

Galactose
Metabolism

ns

****

*

**

ns

****

ns

****

Higher in
crmTOR

Pentose
Phosphate
Pathway

IL-2

b

Higher in
crZAP70

Metabolite
Transcript
Significance
Not measured

c

Higher in
crmTOR

Log2FC
-2

-1

0

1

2

Methionine
Metabolism

Inositol
Phosphate
Metabolism

TNF-α
d

Higher in
crZAP70

Arginine
Metabolism
Viable>Singlet

Plate-bound ImmunoCult

crNT CTL
crmTOR

Alanine,
Aspartate
Metabolism

Activated

crZAP70

Proline,
Glycine,
Serine
Metabolism

Rested

CTV

e

g
ns
**

ns

crNT CTL
crmTOR
crZAP70

Fig 7

Transcripts

Metabolites
crNT CTL
crmTOR
crZAP70

a

b

Rapa vs DMSO

CsA vs DMSO
Arginine
Metabolism

TCA
Cycle

Histidine
Metabolism

Tryptophan
Metabolism

TCA
Cycle

Aspartate,
Glutamate
Metabolism
Pentose
Phosphate
Pathway

Histidine
Metabolism

Glycolysis
Aspartate,
Glutamate
Metabolism

TCA
Cycle
Methionine
Metabolism

Galactose
Metabolism

Metabolite
Transcript
Significance
Not measured

Fig 8

Higher in
DMSO
Higher in
treatment

Higher in
DMSO

Higher in
treatment

Log2FC
-2

-1

0

1

2

Inositol Phosphate
Metabolism

Proline, Glycine,
Serine Metabolism

a

c

Viable>Singlet
DMSO
Rapa
CsA
Rapa+CsA
Rested

Galactose
Metabolism

Plate-bound
Activated

Inositol
Phosphate
Metabolism

Glycolysis

CTV

b

Aspartate,
Glutamate
Metabolism

ns
***

**

ns

DMSO
Rapa
CsA
Rapa+CsA
Rested

Histidine
Metabolism
TCA
Cycle

d

Transcripts

Metabolites
DMSO
Rapa
CsA
Rapa+CsA

Purine
Metabolism

Metabolite
Transcript
Significance
Not measured

Fig 9

Methionine
Metabolism

Higher in
CsA
Higher in
Rapa+CsA

Higher in Higher in
CsA
Rapa+CsA
Log2FC
-2

-1

0

1

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

a

b

c

d

e

****

ns
ns

Sup Fig 1

****
****

****

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Glucose[U-13C6] label
****

Sup Fig 2

ns

a

b

2hr Activated vs Rested
Galactose
Metabolism
Aspartate,
Glutamate
Metabolism

c

6hr Activated vs Rested
Purine
Metabolism

Glycolysis

24hr Activated vs Rested
Purine
Metabolism

Methionine
Metabolism

Pentose Phosphate
Pathway

Galactose
Metabolism

One Carbon
Metabolism
Proline, Glycine,
Serine Metabolism

Methionine
Metabolism

Glycolysis

Proline,
Glycine,
Serine
Metabolism

One Carbon
Metabolism

TCA
Cycle

Glycolysis

Galactose
Metabolism

TCA
Cycle

Purine
Metabolism

One Carbon
Metabolism
Inositol
Phosphate
Metabolism

TCA
Cycle

Glycolysis
Histidine
Metabolism

Cysteine
Metabolism
Metabolite
Transcript
Significance
Not measured

Sup Fig 3

Aspartate,
Glutamate
Metabolism

TCA
Cycle

Methionine
Metabolism
Glycolysis

Aspartate,
Glutamate
Metabolism

Arginine
Metabolism
Higher in
Rested
Higher in
Activated

Arginine
Metabolism
Higher in
Rested

Higher in
Activated

Log2FC
-2

-1

0

1

2

Proline, Glycine,
Serine Metabolism

-log10(non-adjustedp-value)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

120
Significance

PKM

FDR<0.01

LDHA

80

PGAM1
GAPDH
PGK1

40

0

SLC2A3

0

SLC2A1 PFKM
ALDOC

1

HK2

2

log2 fold change

Sup Fig 4

ENO1

3

4

a

b

ImmunoCult
Pentose Phosphate
Pathway

Galactose
Metabolism

Plate-bound

Inositol Phosphate
Metabolism

Purine
Metabolism

Purine
Metabolism
Galactose
Metabolism
Methionine
Metabolism

Methionine
Metabolism

Pentose
Phosphate
Pathway

Glycolysis

Aspartate,
Glutamate
Metabolism
One Carbon
Metabolism

Aspartate,
Glutamate
Metabolism

Arginine
Metabolism

Glycolysis

TCA
Cycle
Arginine
Metabolism
Proline, Glycine,
Serine Metabolism

Sup Fig 5

TCA
Cycle

Metabolite
Transcript
Significance
Not measured

Higher in
Rested
Higher in
Activated

Higher in
Rested

Higher in
Activated

Log2FC
-2

-1

0

1

2

a

b

c

shmTOR

Viable>Singlet

77

78

79

Activated
Rested

FSC-A

shNT CTL

ZsGreen

d

e

f

Viable>Singlet>+ZsGreen

shNT CTL

pS6

Sup Fig 6

77

shmTOR
78

79

Activated
Rested

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

a

b

c

d
****

Sup Fig 7

a

d

c

b

crmTOR

Viable>Singlet

Mock

pS6

Sup Fig 8

1

2

3

4

5

Activated
Rested

a

d

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

c

b

crZAP70 #

Viable>Singlet

1

2

3

5

4

crZAP70 #
Mock

ZAP70

e

f

g

Viable>Singlet

Mock

PE

Sup Fig 9

crZAP70 4

α-ZAP70
α-IgG1
Unstained

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/635789; this version posted July 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Time
Donor
Knockdown

Gene ID
ACACA
FASN
LDLR
DBI
FABP5
FADS2
SCARB1
ELOVL1
ACSL3
LRP8
VLDLR
PPARG
PLIN2

row min

Sup Fig 10

row max

Time
0
24
Donor
1
2
Knockdown
shNT CTL
shmTOR

