bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses

MKPV (aka MuCPV) and related chapparvoviruses are
nephro-tropic and encode novel accessory proteins p15 and
NS2.
Christopher J. Jolly†1,2 Quintin Lee2, Matthew P. Padula3, Natalia Pinello2, Simon H. Williams4,
Matthew B. O'Rourke5, Marcilio Jorge Fumagalli6, Joseph D. Orkin7,8, Babak Shaban9, Ori
Brenner10, Wolfgang Weninger2,11, William Marciel de Souza6, Amanda D. Melin7,12, Justin J.-L.
Wong2, Marcus J. Crim13, Sébastien Monette14 and Ben Roediger†2,15
†

Authors for correspondence: c.jolly@unsw.edu.au, ben.roediger@novartis.com

1

Adult Cancer Program, Faculty of Medicine, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University of New
South Wales Sydney, NSW, Australia
2
Centenary Institute, The University of Sydney Faculty of Medicine and Health, NSW, Australia
3
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Technology Sydney, NSW, Australia
4
Center for Infection & Immunity, Mailman School of Public Health,
, New York, NY, USA
5
Kolling Institute of Medical Research, The University of Sydney Faculty of Medicine and Health,
NSW, Australia
6
Virology Research Center, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto of the University of São Paulo,
Ribeirão Preto, Brazil
7
Institut de Biologia Evolutiva, CSIC-Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
8
Department of Anthropology and Archaeology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada
9
Melbourne Integrative Genomics, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
10
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
11
Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria
12
Department of Medical Genetics and Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute, Cumming
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
13
IDEXX BioAnalytics, 4011 Discovery Drive, Columbia, MO, USA
14
Laboratory of Comparative Pathology, Center of Comparative Medicine and Pathology,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, The Rockefeller University, Weill Cornell Medicine,
New York, NY, USA
15
Autoimmunity, Transplantation, Inflammation (ATI) Disease Area, Novartis Institutes for
Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland

Abstract
Mouse kidney parvovirus (MKPV) is a member of the provisional Chapparvovirus genus that
causes renal disease in immune-compromised mice, with a disease course reminiscent of
polyomavirus-associated nephropathy in immune-suppressed kidney transplant patients. Here we
map four MKPV transcripts, created by alternative splicing, to a common transcription initiation
region, and use mass spectrometry to identify “p10” and “p15” as novel chapparvovirus accessory
proteins produced in MKPV-infected kidneys. p15 and a splicing-dependent putative accessory
protein NS2 are conserved in all near-complete tetrapod chapparvovirus genomes currently
available (from mammals, birds and a reptile). In contrast, p10 may be encoded only by viruses
with >60% amino acid identity to MKPV. We show that MKPV is kidney-tropic and that the bat
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
chapparvovirus DrPV-1 and a non-human primate chapparvovirus, CKPV, are also found in the
kidneys of their hosts. We propose, therefore, that chapparvoviruses with >60% VP1 amino acid
identity to MKPV be classified into a genus dubbed Nephroparvovirus, which is consistent with
nomenclature for the genus Erythroparvovirus.

Introduction
Parvoviruses are small, non-enveloped, polyhedral, single-strand DNA viruses with genomes 4–
6kb in length which bear short (120–600 base) inverted terminal repeats (ITRs) forming hairpin
telomeres. All parvoviruses comprise 2 major genes encoding a non-structural replication protein
NS1 (gene rep) and a capsid protein VP1 (gene cap). Alternative splicing or alternative translation
initiation sites can allow the production of truncated forms of VP1; all sharing the same C-terminal
region (1, 2). Open reading frames (ORFs) overlapping the major NS1 or VP1 reading frames
encode smaller genus-specific accessory proteins. Genetic simplicity combined with a singlestranded DNA genome dictates that parvoviruses can only replicate when the host cell itself
replicates. Many members of the Dependoparvovirus genus (e.g. adeno-associated virus, AAV)
can furthermore only replicate if a helper virus is also present (1, 3), but this is not a universal
feature of the Dependoparvovirus genus – close avian relatives of AAV that cause Derzsy’s disease
in geese and Muscovy ducks replicate autonomously (4).
Vertical transmission of parvoviruses across the placenta can kill developing embryos or newborns
in domesticated species such as dogs and pigs (5, 6), but many parvoviruses are highly adapted to
infecting specific cell types. For instance, Erythroparvovirus B19 infects red blood cell precursors
in humans, potentially inducing anaemia (7), and even though AAV2 can transduce many tissues,
it mostly targets the liver if intravenously injected and is naturally liver-adapted (8). Horizontal
transmission of the newly-identified mouse kidney parvovirus (MKPV) induces adult renal failure
in severely immune-deficient laboratory mice, without obvious pathology in other tissues (9). Coincidentally, a virus very similar to MKPV was identified in mice living wild in New York City
(NYC) and dubbed murine chapparvovirus (MuCPV), but the state of kidney disease was not
assessed in that study (10).
MKPV and MuCPV are only distantly related to other known murine parvoviruses and are
members of the provisional genus Chapparvovirinae; so-called because the earliest examples,
discovered by metagenomic analyses, were found in chiropteran, avian and porcine hosts (i.e. bats,
birds and pigs) (11-13). Recently, additional chapparvovirus sequences were discovered by
screening of draft genome assemblies; presumed to reflect parvoviral infection of the source
animal rather than viral genome integration (14). The growing list of host species now includes
marsupials, fish and invertebrates, with chapparvoviral genomes incorporated into some
invertebrate genomes (15-17). Thus, chapparvoviruses are an ancient lineage within the family
Parvoviridae, clustering separately from members of the two currently established parvoviral
subfamilies Parvovirinae and Densovirinae (16). Curiously, fish and arthropod chapparvoviruses
are more related to each other than to tetrapod chapparvoviruses (16). In all, at least forty-seven
chapparvovirus species have been identified so far; in the tetrapods spread across bats, pigs,
rodents, dogs, non-human primates, marsupials, birds and reptiles.
MKPV is currently the only chapparvovirus for which the inverted terminal repeats (ITR) are
published, and the only one proved to be viable, infective and pathogenic, to date. Here, we extend
our characterisation of MKPV and related viruses. Specifically, we assess the global distribution
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
of MKPV and report co-occurrence of MKPV with mouse kidney disease at additional sites,
analyse MKPV tropism, map the major MKPV transcripts, describe a closely-related full-length
chapparvovirus from a primate kidney, and identify accessory proteins in MKPV that are
conserved in tetrapod-hosted Chapparvovirinae genomes. Conservation of genome structure,
coding potential and kidney association suggest that many mammal-infecting chapparvovirus
species may be adapted to a nephron niche.

Results
MKPV and MuCPV are the same virus species
The Rep plus Cap sequence of “murine chapparvovirus” (MuCPV), lacking ITRs, was originally
assembled from the faecal virome of house mice living wild in New York City (NYC; accession
MF175078) (10). Independently, a full-length 4,442 nt sequence of “mouse kidney parvovirus”
(MKPV), including ITRs, was assembled from the kidney viromes of two renal disease-affected
immune-deficient Rag1-/- mice in the colony of the Centenary Institute, Sydney, Australia (CI;
accession MH670587), and a 3.5 kb fragment of MKPV encompassing NS1 and VP1 was then
amplified by PCR from the kidneys of two immune-deficient mice necropsied at Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, NYC (MSKCC; accession MH670588) (9). BLAST revealed that the
MuCPV and MKPV genomes are 98% identical to one another; thus, they belong to the same
species according to ICTV guidelines. Using primers 889, 890, 891 and 893 based on the CIMKPV strain (Fig 1A and Table S1), the 5’- and 3’-sequences of NYC-MuCPV and MSKCCMKPV were extended outwards to include the innermost repeat and hairpin region of each ITR
(see NCBI accessions MF175078.2 and MH670588). This confirmed that MuCPV and MKPV
share identical heterotelomeric ITRs (Fig 1A).

MKPV expresses novel “p10” and “p15” accessory proteins
All viable parvoviruses encode NS1 and VP1, and production of these proteins in MKPV-infected
tissue was confirmed previously by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) (9). However, both MKPV and the extended MuCPV sequence have potential to produce
several other polypeptides from ORFs >25 aa in length. We performed a new independent LCMS/MS analysis of an MKPV-infected kidney and an uninfected kidney, focusing on previously
undiscovered MKPV accessory proteins. In addition, we mined our previous LC-MS/MS datasets
(PXD010540) (9) for trypsin-derived peptides predicted by these ORFs. These analyses reidentified NS1 and VP1, as expected. They also identified twelve unique peptides (with E-values
<0.001) covering 65% of a 14.7 kDa ORF, “p15”, which overlaps the N-terminus of NS1, and two
peptides covering the C-terminal 16% of a 9.8 kDa ORF, “p10”, which is situated immediately
downstream of the 5’ ITR (see Fig 1B and Table S2 and Table S3). No MKPV-derived peptides
were detectable in extracts from uninfected control kidneys. The fact that p15 peptides were more
abundant than NS1 peptides in two fully-independent LC-MS/MS analyses suggests that p15 is an
abundant protein in MKPV-infected cells, but quantitative assays would be needed to confirm this.

MKPV mRNA splicing
Previous alignment of Illumina reads with the confirmed MKPV genome indicated the presence
of three major introns (9) (see accession MH670587). The two splice donor (SD) and three splice
acceptor (SA) sites used by these introns all conform to donor or acceptor consensuses according
to a Hidden Markov model for splice site prediction (18). To directly confirm intron splicing, we
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
extracted RNA from kidneys of MKPV+ve Rag1–/– mice and exposed it to DNase I and Exo I to
destroy MKPV DNA. After reverse transcription (RT), we amplified MKPV cDNA using
antisense primers 902, 905 or 933 paired with primers 890, 955, 904 or 947, which are mapped in
Fig 1A–B. The sense primers “walked” from the hairpin of the 5’ ITR (primer 890) to just upstream
of the most 5’ splice donor site (primer 947, Fig 1B). Agarose gel analysis of PCR products (Fig
1C–D) indicated the presence of transcripts 1–4 illustrated in Fig 1B. Splicing of the donor and
acceptor sites in transcripts 2–4 was confirmed by Sanger sequencing; similarly, Sanger
sequencing confirmed that transcript 1 contained the small 5’ intron intact.
Consistently strong RT-PCR yields using primers 947 and 904 (Fig 1D) suggested that
transcription start sites for all four transcripts lie 5’ to MKPV nucleotide 214. In contrast, RT-PCR
yields were consistently weak with primer 955, despite this primer yielding strong amplification
from MKPV DNA (Fig 1C). Primer 890, located in the hairpin of the 5’ ITR, produced no
detectable products in RT-PCR reactions at all, despite being able to produce products from kidney
DNA (albeit with relatively low efficiency; Fig 1C). This indicated that MKPV’s major
transcription start site(s) lie a short distance downstream of the 5’ ITR.

Mapping of transcription start and polyadenylation sites by RACE
To precisely map the 5’-ends of MKPV transcripts, we deployed rapid amplification of cDNA
ends (RACE) following SMARTer® full-length cDNA synthesis (Fig S1A). Sanger-sequencing of
major 5’ RACE products (Fig 1E and Fig S1B) confirmed that they corresponded to transcripts 2–
4 – as labelled in Fig 1E. Two major transcription start sites, P1 and P2, were mapped for transcript
2 (Fig 1A). P1 corresponds to nucleotide 147 with “smearing” to nucleotides 144–146 (transcript
2A), while P2 corresponds to nucleotides 266–267 (transcript 2B). The transcription starts for
transcripts 3 to 4 mapped to precisely the same nucleotides as transcript 2A – i.e. P1 (Fig 1B) but
not P2. These results were consistent with the RT-PCR reactions in Fig 1D. Since the interior
repeat of the MKPV 5’ ITR immediately abuts P1 (Fig 1A), transcription predominantly initiates
from very near the 3’-end of the 5’ ITR.
To map polyadenylation sites, we deployed 3’ RACE (Fig 1E, Fig S1A and Fig S1C,). This
mapped a major site of polyadenylation (polyA) to nucleotides 3491–2 (“GA”), which lie 13–14
nt 3’ to a polyA signal embedded in the middle of VP1 (signal A in Fig 1B); the “A” lying at nt
3492 prevented single-base precision (see Fig S1C). Polyadenylation sites were also mapped to
nucleotides 4292–3 and 4297–8 (both “CA”), which lie 18–24 nt 3’ to the polyA signal at the end
of VP1 (signal “B” in Fig 1B). Another polyadenylation site, lying 20–30 nt from the 3’ end of the
MKPV genome may also be used (“B3” in Fig 1E), but we did not attempt to map this site precisely
because the 3’ ITR is extremely resistant to Sanger sequencing.
We presume that polyadenylation signal A is used by transcripts 1–3 and that signal B is used by
transcript 4, but it is possible that transcripts 1–3 use both A and B polyA signals (Fig 1B). Other
transcription start sites and polyadenylation sites were indicated by capillary electrophoresis of
RACE products (Fig 1E) and by sequencing (Fig S1B–C), but these were very minor. Surprisingly,
none of the major 5’ RACE products corresponded to transcript 1, which carries the smallest intron
intact (Fig 1D). A very faint 5’ RACE product was detected that might correspond to transcript 1
(“1” in Fig 1E), because it was about 80 bp larger than the 5’ RACE product corresponding to
transcript 2A, but it’s yield was too low to be Sanger sequenced.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
NS1, which was detected by LC-MS/MS of MKPV-infected kidneys, could theoretically be
translated from transcripts 1, 2a or 2b (Fig 1B). The ATG start codon of the p15 ORF, also detected
by LC-MS/MS, aligns exactly with the splice acceptor site of transcripts 2a and 2b in Fig 1B (Fig
S1). Therefore, p15 could also be produced from transcripts 1, 2a or 2b. In addition, these
transcripts potentially encode “NP”, a hypothetical chapparvoviral ORF first noted in a turkey
chapparvovirus (13). Transcript 3 encodes a splice variant of NP that we previously dubbed NS2P (9); however, we have not detected any NS2 or NP peptides by LC-MS/MS so far to confirm
production of these polypeptides in vivo. Transcript 4 encodes the capsid protein VP1, which was
detected by LC-MS/MS (Fig 1B). p10, also detected by LC-MS/MS, is potentially encoded in all
transcripts that start from the P1 promoter, but not from transcripts starting at P2.

MKPV RNA is restricted to the kidney
During the natural course of infection, MKPV DNA was detected in the kidney first, in young
adult mice, then appeared in liver, spleen and blood as infection progressed (9). The mapping of
MKPV RNA splicing (Fig 1) enabled quantitation of active MKPV infection via qPCR for spliced
MKPV RNA in different tissue sites. We extracted DNA and RNA from liver, spleen (a proxy for
blood) and kidneys of naturally MKPV-infected Rag1–/– mice, then performed qPCR using DNA
or cDNA templates. For DNA, we used NS1 primers 869 and 870, as previously reported (9) (Fig
2A). For cDNA, we used primers 947 and 948 (Fig 2A) and a short extension time, to ensure the
product formed from spliced transcripts only. We did not establish a standard curve for cDNA, but
instead report the difference between Ct for Hprt versus MKPV Cap cDNA (Fig 2B). Consistent
with our previous study (9), MKPV DNA was much more abundant in kidney than in liver or
spleen (Fig 2B). Critically, spliced MKPV RNA was below the detection threshold in liver and
spleen, but readily detectable in kidneys (Fig 2B).
To examine a greater range of tissues, we deployed an MKPV-specific in situ hybridization
(RNAscope®) probe (9) in tissue sections from necropsies of two MKPV+ve NOD-scid
IL2Rgammanull (NSG) mice. These two mice had histopathologic evidence of chronic inclusion
body nephropathy (IBN) and ISH had detected abundant MKPV nucleic acids in tubular epithelial
cells (9), as reproduced here (Fig 2Ci). No pathologic change attributed to the virus was observed
outside the kidneys on H&E stained sections. Mild multifocal ISH staining was also observed in
the caecum mucosal epithelium and lamina propria of one mouse, but not the other, and in the
urinary bladder urothelium (mostly umbrella cells) of both mice (Fig 2Cii-iii, arrows). In addition,
there were strongly positive cells in the urinary bladder lumen of both mice, which were
presumably casts of necrotic tubular cells sloughed from the kidney; an unsurprising finding (Fig
2Ciii, asterisks). No ISH signal for MKPV was detected in any of the 21 other tissues screened
(e.g. Fig 2Civ-vi) (Table S4). Another thirteen tissues sampled during necropsy were not probed
because the decalcification process used in their preparation for H&E-staining was incompatible
with ISH (see Table S4).
Together, these data demonstrate that although MKPV can become widely disseminated during
the course of infection, production of MKPV RNA – a definitive marker for active MKPV
replication – occurs predominantly, or perhaps exclusively, in the kidneys. We noted previously
that MKPV DNA was often more abundant in liver than in other non-kidney sites (9); indeed,
MuCPV DNA was originally detected in wild mice in livers and anal swabs (10). Our current
analysis revealed significantly higher MKPV DNA levels in liver compared to spleen (Fig 2B;
adjusted P = 0.0009), which suggests that the liver may act as an MKPV/MuCPV sink or filter
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
during viremia (19), even though it is not a site of active MKPV replication (see Fig 2Civ). The
presence of MKPV DNA in spleen is explained by the onset of viremia, as previously described
(9). MuCPV DNA in anal swabs (10) may be related to the faint caecum MKPV ISH signal in Fig
2Cii, or it could reflect contamination of the anal region with urine.
To test whether viruses related to MKPV might also be kidney-restricted, we screened kidneys and
livers from seven vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus) previously identified as hosts for the
chapparvovirus DrPV-1 (14). Kidney DNA from all seven vampire bats was re-confirmed as
PCR+ve for DrPV-1 NS1, while liver DNA was uniformly PCR-ve (Fig 3). While this does not prove
that DrPV-1 specifically infects kidneys, it demonstrates that DrPV-1 DNA is substantially more
abundant in kidneys than livers of host vampire bats.

MKPV geographical distribution and polymorphism
MKPV/MuCPV was reported in five sites previously: in the wild in NYC, USA and in laboratory
mice housed in NYC and Baltimore in the USA, and in Sydney plus another Australian city. We
screened two additional sets of necropsy specimens from laboratory mice with histologically
diagnosed IBN by PCR and detected MKPV DNA in laboratory mice housed at University of
North Carolina (Chapel Hill, USA) and in Israel (Fig 4). The specimen from Israel was also probed
using ISH and abundant MKPV nucleic acids localised to tubular epithelial cells were detected
(Fig 4). This increases the number of sites in which MKPV is associated with mouse kidney disease
to six sites in three continents.
In our previously reported investigation of the association of MKPV and IBN in laboratory mice
in the facilities of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Weill Cornell Medicine (MSKWCM) over an 11 year period, the virus was retrospectively detected by 25-cycle conventional
PCR in 29 of 34 mice affected by IBN, while it was never found in mice without the disease (9).
We attributed the negative results in 5 mice affected by IBN as false negatives due to the limitation
of 25-cycle PCR sensitivity on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. Since then, we
have performed ISH in these 5 cases and detected MKPV nucleic acids in 4 of them (Table S5).
The ISH negative mouse was an immunocompetent animal with minimal histological lesions and
was co-housed with an ISH positive animal. Therefore, we have demonstrated the presence of
MKPV all cases of IBN at MSK-WCM in a period of 11 years.
Alignment of our original CI-MKPV, MSKCC-MKPV and wild NYC MuCPV sequences revealed
numerous single nucleotide variations (SNVs) and a two-base insertion in CI-MKPV; Sanger and
Illumina sequencing data also revealed a few SNVs within each virus strain (Fig 1A). One notable
SNV was the insertion of an extra “C” in the 3’ ITR of a sub-strain present in one CI mouse,
converting the sequence C4G4 to C5G4 in the interior repeat (“▲” in Fig 1A), without the insertion
of a complementary base in the exterior inverted repeat. This SNV creates an extra 1 nt bubble in
the structure predicted to be formed by the 3’ ITR (Fig S2), but whether it results in viable virus
remains to be determined. A window of concentrated NS1 polymorphisms – boxed in blue in Fig
1A – was selected for sequencing in a larger sample of viruses. This region was amplified (using
primers 934 and 935; Fig 1A) from kidney FFPE-specimens or from randomly-selected faecal
samples sent to Idexx Laboratories (Columbia, Missouri) from multiple laboratory facilities (in the
USA, Canada, Europe and Israel), then Sanger sequenced from both ends. SNVs were collated in
a 267 bp window. Including a partial MKPV NS1 sequence identified by whole animal
metagenomics of Mus musculus living wild in Xinjiang, China (Accession MG679365), this
analysis identified 22 MKPV sub-strains, varying by 3–22 SNVs from the consensus sequence
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
(Fig 5). The MSK-WCM colonies provided the largest set of time-shifted samples for the same
location, from 2007 to present. There was no clear evidence of one strain replacing another over
time in the MSK-WCM colonies. Instead, more than one strain was present in the MSK-WCM
colonies at most timepoints, and two sub-strains present in MSK-WCM in 2008–2009 and 2015–
2017 were identical (within our SNV window) to sub-strains from the University of North Carolina
(2018) and Johns Hopkins University (2006), respectively. All of the wild NYC samples shared
some SNVs with laboratory strains, mostly located in the same continental region. It was notable
that the wild NYC sample Q-055 shared four SNVs with Australian laboratory mice (Fig 5), and
the wild NYC sample M-118 shared three SNVs with lab specimens from Europe and Israel (Fig
5). This is consistent with MKPV being carried within immune-deficient lab mice when they were
live-exported from the USA to labs outside the Americas, but does not prove it.
Virtually all SNVs in the 934–935 window were synonymous, with just four exceptions (Fig 5):
Glu187Asp present in 2008-9 MSKCC, 2014-2015 wild NYC and 2018-2019 samples from UNC
and another nearby location; Glu187Gln in a 2018 sample from the USA Northeast, Thr118Ile in
a 2019 sample from the USA Midwest; and Ala123Ser in wild mice from Xinjiang province in
China. None of these non-synonymous mutations are likely to affect NS1’s tripartite helicase
domain.

MKPV prevalence
To estimate the prevalence of MKPV in research mice, mouse faecal samples that were submitted
to IDEXX BioAnalytics over a seven-month period and representing 78 biomedical research
institutions were tested for MKPV by qPCR. Overall prevalence was 5.1%, with 178 positive
samples out of 3,517 samples tested. Immune status is unknown for most of the samples. Of those
samples designated as representing immunodeficient mice, 16 were positive out of 171 tested
(9.4%), and for samples designated as representing immunocompetent mice, 56 out of 513 (10.9%)
tested positive for MKPV. It should be noted that many of the faecal samples are likely to represent
soiled-bedding sentinel mice, and the prevalence among sentinel mice may differ from colony
animals, which may be immunocompetent or immunodeficient, based on a variety of factors
including shedding dynamics and efficiency of transmission by soiled bedding.
Faecal samples from multiple time-points from a single pet shop in Columbia, MO were also
submitted to IDEXX BioAnalytics. Seventeen samples were qPCR-positive out of 73 tested
(23.3%). In toto, the data establish that MKPV-infection is common in wild, laboratory and pet
mice globally.

The assembly of a closely-related chapparvovirus sequence from primate kidney DNA
In addition to MKPV/MuCPV, metagenomics or mining of draft genome assemblies has
assembled several near-complete chapparvoviral genomes from five mammals (vampire bat (14),
fruit bat (20), rat (21), pig (11) and the marsupial Sarcophilus harrisii (Tasmanian devil) (15),
three birds (chicken (22), brown mesite (14) and red-crowned crane (23)), and a reptile (the pit
viper (14)). Partial genomes lacking substantial 5’- or 3’-coding sequences have also been
assembled from numerous species, including from the draft genome of the capuchin monkey
(Cebus capucinus imitator) (14). The draft capuchin genome was assembled using DNA extracted
from the kidney (24). We used the genome of MKPV as a scaffold to re-arrange two sequence
fragments present in Cebus imitator scaffold NW_016109986 into a near-complete parvoviral
genome, but lacking ITRs and with a probable gap in NS1 (Fig S3). Using SAMtools (25), we
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
mapped high quality reads in the complete capuchin kidney NGS dataset (24) to this draft viral
genome, which in-filled a 5 nt gap in the NS1 sequence compared to scaffold NW_016109986.1.
By recovering sequences from “soft”-clipped reads at the 5’- and 3’-ends of this new alignment
(Fig S3), we produced an extended but still incomplete draft viral genome. A final round of read
assembly and recovery of clipped ITR sequences produced a complete parvovirus genome with
apparently full-length ITRs. We have dubbed this complete viral genome “capuchin kidney
parvovirus” (CKPV, Accession MN265364). The kidney DNA sample used to produce CKPV
(and the draft Cebus imitator genome) was extracted in a biological safety cabinet inside a BSL-2
laboratory facility with strict CL3 protocols to minimise contamination with foreign DNA, but it
is no longer available, so we cannot strictly rule out the possibility that CKPV is an extraneous
contaminant.
The CKPV genome is strikingly similar to MKPV (Fig 6A) and encodes proteins homologous to
MKPV p15 and p10; the VP1, NS1, p15 and p10 proteins of CKPV are 77%, 71%, 76% and 55%
identical to their MKPV counterparts, respectively (Fig 6B). Furthermore, the U2-dependent splice
donor and acceptor sites used in MKPV for expression of VP1 and for the hypothetical accessory
protein NS2 (9) are conserved in CKPV (Fig 6A and Fig S4). We predict a spliced NS2 protein in
CKPV that is a remarkable 84% identical to MKPV’s spliced NS2 protein (Fig 6B). In contrast,
non-spliced variants of NS2 (“NP-L, -I and -F”) are less conserved because CKPV lacks the inframe ATG codons upstream of NS2 exon 2 that are present in MKPV (Fig 6A). Finally, the
hairpin structures with the lowest Gibbs-free energy predicted for minus strand CKPV ITRs are
strikingly similar to the structures predicted for minus strand MKPV ITRs (Fig 6A).

ORFs encoding p15 and spliced NS2 are conserved in all tetrapod chapparvoviruses
Encouraged by ORF conservation between MKPV and CKPV, we searched all near-complete
tetrapod-hosted chapparvovirus genomes for conserved ORFs using “Genie” software (18) to
identify likely splice donor and acceptor sites for these ORFs. In all cases, we found a p15-like
ORF and a 2-exon NS2-like ORF (Fig 6C and Fig S4). Furthermore, consensus U2-dependent
splice donor and acceptor sites were predicted to produce transcripts equivalent to MKPV
transcripts 1–4 in nearly all cases (Fig 6C and Fig S4). The exceptions (annotated as “NF” for “not
found” in Fig 6C) were that Genie software did not find splice acceptor sites upstream of the
Protobothrops sp. or M. unicolor virus VP1 regions, nor for the M. unicolor virus NS2 exon 2.
Nonetheless, manual alignment of reading frames implies a functional acceptor site for the M.
unicolor virus NS2 exon 2 and “acceptor-like” sites a short distance upstream of VP1 in the
Protobothrops sp. and M. unicolor viruses (see Fig S4).
Based on our parsing of chapparvovirus genomes, we produced consensus protein sequences for
p15 and NS2 using T-Coffee (26) and searched Pfam and SwissProt for proteins carrying similar
motifs on the HMMER server (see Methods), but did not find any significant matches.
Nonetheless, p15 universally carries clusters of basic amino acids in the C-terminal region that are
suggestive of nuclear localisation signals (NLS).
While all tetrapod chapparvoviruses we have examined potentially express a two-exon NS2
protein, not all of them carry ATG codons upstream of, or within, NS2 exon 2 necessary for
expression of the shorter single exon variant of NS2 originally annotated as the hypothetical NP
polypeptide in turkey chapparvovirus (13) – see Sus scrofa PV7 (Fig 6C). This suggests that
expression of two-exon NS2 is preferred over single-exon NP. However, some parvoviruses are
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
known to use cryptic translation start codons (27), so all tetrapod chapparvoviruses might
nonetheless express NP in addition to, or instead of, spliced NS2.
p15 was significantly less conserved across tetrapod chapparvoviruses compared to VP1 and
spliced NS2 polypeptides (Fig 6B). On the other hand, VP1 and NS2 were significantly more
conserved than NS1 (Fig 6B). To the limited extent that parvovirus tropism may be dictated by the
capsid (8), our identification of VP1 as the most conserved ORF suggests that chapparvoviruses
might target a similar cell type in all tetrapod hosts. Similarly, spliced ORF conservation suggests
that NS2 plays an important role in the virus life cycle even though we have not been able to
directly detect NS2 protein in MKPV-infected tissue to date.

The p10 ORF is not present in most chapparvoviruses
Apart from the two closest MKPV relatives, which were found in a capuchin monkey and in faeces
of two Tasmanian devils (Fig 6B), an ORF corresponding to p10 was not identifiable in any other
chapparvoviruses we examined (Fig 6C), even when complete NS2 exon 1 sequence was available
(e.g. in DrPV-1). The capuchin CKPV and Tasmanian devil CPV-2 viruses encode VP1, NS2,
NS1 and p15 proteins with >71% amino acid identity to the MKPV proteins, but their p10 proteins
are <60% identical to MKPV p10 (Fig 6B). Thus, p10 is poorly conserved, even absent in many
chapparvovirus species, unlike the accessory proteins p15 and NS2. Therefore, p10 would appear
to be less important than p15 and NS2 in chapparvoviral life cycles.

Discussion
Our data add to the association between MKPV and chronic IBN in immune-deficient laboratory
mice and demonstrate that MKPV is distributed worldwide. MKPV can be detected in immunesufficient laboratory mice (9) as well as in wild-living mice in the USA (10) and China, which
indicates that MKPV does not require immune-deficiency to propagate and that mice are a natural
MKPV host. The virtual absence of SNV diversity in MKPV samples from Australian laboratory
mice spanning a decade (Fig 5) suggests that a single MKPV strain was imported into Australia
and has been transmitted horizontally in laboratory mice since, with little or no re-infection from
wild mouse sources. In contrast, infection of mouse colonies in the USA by virus from wild mouse
pools appears to have occurred repeatedly, but these infections may have occurred prior to the
establishment of modern barrier facilities. The MKPV-infected Australian colonies we first
reported (9) were all descended from the Rag1tm1Bal strain (28) – imported into Australia from
northeast USA in the mid-1990s. Fig 5 indicates that this strain is the original source of MKPV in
Australian laboratory mice, because all MKPV+ve Australian lab mice carry the same MKPV strain.
Shared SNVs between the Australian MKPV strain and wild mouse sample Q-055 (Fig 5) suggest,
but do not prove, that infection originally occurred in the USA. Our MKPV-free Rag1–/– colony
descends from the Rag1tm1Mom strain (29) supplied by The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine,
USA). Mus musculus is not native to Australia and is thought to have arrived onboard European
ships 230 to 420 years ago (30). Given that that other parvoviruses are prevalent in feral house
mice in Australia (31) and a virus closely related to MKPV was found in faeces from Tasmania
(15), it appears likely that MKPV will be found in Mus musculus living wild in Australia. In
contrast to Mus musculus, Pseudomys and other native mice have lived in Australia for four million
years or more (32). Since Sarcophilus harrisii CPV2 is only distantly related to the other CPVs
found in Tasmanian devil faeces ((15) e.g. Sarcophilus harrisii CPV6, see Fig 6), we speculate
that Sarcophilus harrisii CPV2 infects native rodents that form part of the diet of Tasmanian devils.
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
Our original proteomic analysis of proteins produced by MKPV (9) was limited to NS1, NS2/NP
and VP1. Inclusion of all MKPV ORFs ≥25 amino acids in the current analysis identified MKPV
p15 and p10 in two independent MKPV-infected kidneys. The so-far universal presence of ORFs
encoding p15 and NS2 in tetrapod-hosted chapparvoviruses demonstrates that these are accessory
proteins likely to be important in the life cycle of all tetrapod-adapted Chapparvovirinae. In
contrast, the hypothetical NP protein and the p10 accessory protein seem to be much less conserved
or absent in many chapparvoviruses; this is markedly the case for p10. Neither NS2 nor p15 bear
any significant structural homologies to other proteins, so we have no clues to their functions at
present.
We have now demonstrated conclusively that MKPV replicates preferentially in the mouse kidney
(Fig 2). Furthermore, the absence of any obvious co-replicating virus in MKPV-infected kidneys
(9) strongly implies, but does not prove, that MKPV replicates autonomously. Strong conservation
of VP1 sequence, accessory proteins (excepting p10) and splicing, plus near-complete kidneytropism in MKPV combined with at least some degree of kidney-tropism in CKPV and DrPV-1,
suggests that viruses closely-related to MKPV are also adapted to kidney niches in distantly-related
mammalian hosts, including non-human primates. It is tempting therefore to speculate that many
tetrapod-adapted Chapparvovirinae preferentially infect the kidneys. The structural conservation
between MKPV and CKPV of heterotelomeric ITRs furthermore provides a prototypical genome,
illustrated in Fig 6A, for a genus we propose be dubbed Nephroparvovirus. The
“Nephroparvovirus” genome is clearly distinct from the prototypical genomes of Protoparvovirus,
Ambidensovirus, Erythroparvovirus, Bocaparvovirus and Dependoparvovirus (reviewed in (1)).
MKPV infection in Rag1–/– mice shares clinico-pathological features with polyomavirusassociated nephropathy (PVAN), which is a significant complication in immune-suppressed
kidney transplant recipients (9, 33). Our assembly of the complete CKPV genome from the kidney
DNA of a capuchin monkey increases the possibility that a Chapparvovirinae species might infect
human kidneys. Reasoning that urine from immune-suppressed kidney transplant patients is the
most likely material in which human chapparvoviral infection might be detected, we mined the
published fastq files produced by deep-sequencing the urinary DNA of 27 kidney transplant
patients ((34), NCBI accession PRJEB28510), searching for chapparvoviral sequences. However,
we found none within the datasets. Indeed, we found no parvoviral sequences of any sort within
the datasets, as originally reported (34). This limited sample suggests that human kidney
chapparvoviral infection is not widespread – at least not in the USA, but it will nonetheless be
worthwhile to determine if antibodies against chapparvoviral VP1 antigens are present in human
populations. If antibodies are absent, then recombinant AAV vectors pseudo-typed with
chapparvoviral VP1 capsid may be better able to evade antibody-mediated immunity than AAV
vectors presently used in the clinic, which are unsuitable for use in the >70% of the human
population with pre-existing anti-AAV immunity (35).

Acknowledgments
We thank G. Duytschaever (University of Calgary), Erica K. Creighton and David C. Eckhoff
(IDEXX BioAnalytics), and the staff at the Centenary Institute animal facility for their assistance.
Supported by the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (W.W., B.R., P.B. &
J.J.-L.W), the Cancer Institute NSW (B.R. & J.J.-L.W), the Hillcrest Foundation (C.J.J.), the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (S.H.W.), the National Institutes of Health (U19AI109761 Center for
Research in Diagnostics and Discovery, S.H.W.), the National Cancer Institute Cancer Center
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
Support Grant P30 CA008748 (S.M.), the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São
Paulo, Brazil (No. 17/13981-0 and 18/09383-3, W.M.S, & M.J.F.), the National Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (A.D.M), the Canada Research Chairs program
(A.D.M.), the Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute (A.D.M. & J.D.O.) and the Beatriu
de Pinós postdoctoral programme of the Government of Catalonia's Secretariat for Universities
and Research of the Ministry of Economy and Knowledge (J.D.O.).

Competing Interests
B.R. and W.W. are co-inventors on an international patent application (PCT/AU2018/050505)
submitted by the Centenary Institute that is related to the detection and use of MKPV in research
and commercial applications. M.J.C is an employee of IDEXX BioAnalytics, a division of IDEXX
Laboratories, Inc., a veterinary diagnostics company with a commercial interest in MKPV, and
IDEXX BioAnalytics funded the portion of the reported work performed there. B.R. is presently
an employee at Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research. Novartis did not fund the study, nor
did it play any role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript. All other authors declare no competing interests.

Figure Legends
Figure 1
Structure of the MKPV genome. (A-B) Maps of the MKPV/MuCPV strains from Centenary
Institute (CI, accession MH670587.1), Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC,
accession MH670588.2) and New York City basements (wild-NY, MF175078.2). “Bowties”
indicate ITRs. (A) SNVs between the CI, MSKCC and wild-NY accessions. Vertical lines differences between accessions. Half height vertical lines - polymorphisms within an accession.
Down-pointing triangle – 2 bp insertion in the CI strain. Up-pointing triangle – 1 bp insertion in a
CI sub-strain. Dashed lines - missing extremities in MSKCC and wild-NY accessions, which
consist of the exterior inverted repeats in the full-length CI sequence. (B-C) Alternative splicing
allows production of the polypetides p15, NS1, NS2-P and VP1. Red or orange indicate peptides
present in LC-MS/MS datasets PXD010540 (9) or PXD014938 (this paper), respectively. p15, p10
and NP-L/I could theoretically be produced from multiple transcripts. (C-D) Detection of spliced
transcripts by RT-PCR, using primers mapped in A-B. Input templates were MKPV-infected (C)
kidney DNA or (D) DNAse/ExoI-treated RNA, converted (RT+) or mock-converted (RT-) to
cDNA. RT-PCR products corresponding to transcripts 1 to 4 are indicated by white numbers. (E)
Mapping of transcription start and stop sites by RACE. See Fig S1 for RACE details. Major 5’ and
3’ RACE products, indicated by black arrows and corresponding to transcripts 2 to 4 or
polyadenylation signals A and B, were gel-purified and Sanger sequenced. Other products
mentioned in the text are indicated by white arrows.

Figure 2
MKPV mRNA is kidney-restricted. (A) Placement of PCR primers and the in situ hybridization
(ISH) probe relative to the MKPV cap transcript (i.e. transcript 4 in Fig 1). (B) Quantitation by
qPCR of MKPV genomes (left) or MKPV cap mRNA (right) in organs of naturally-infected Rag1–
/–
mice, using primers 869-870 or 947-948, respectively (Tukey’s box and whisker plots; n = 8).
MKPV DNA is presented as viral genome copies. Cap mRNA abundance is indicated by Ct
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
relative to RT-qPCR for Hprt mRNA. ND = not detected. Significance is indicated by asterisks (*,
P<0.05; **, P<0.01, ***, P<0.001, ****, P<0.0001; ns, p>0.05; 1-way paired ANOVA with
Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). (C) ISH for MKPV nucleic acids in necropsy specimens from
NSG mouse 16-1653 housed in MSKCC in 2016. Scale bar = 25 µm. Panel (i) is reproduced from
(9). Arrows in panels (ii-iii) indicate mild multi-focal staining in caecum and urinary bladder;
asterisks in panel (iii) indicate casts of necrotic tubular cells sloughed from the kidney into the
urinary bladder lumen. Full details of ISH outcomes are listed in Table S4.

Figure 3
Detection of viral rep DNA of DrPV-1 in kidneys and livers of 7 Desmodus rotundus vampire bats
captured in a rural area of Araçatuba city, São Paulo State, Brazil in 2010 (14). Agarose gel
electrophoresis showing 783 bp amplicon specific for the rep gene of DrPV-1; M = 100 bp DNA
ladder. Sample IDs are shown above and tissues are indicated by silhouettes.

Figure 4
Haematoxylin/eosin (H&E)-staining of historical formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
mouse kidney necropsy samples from the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, USA and
Israel, paired with agarose gels of 25 cycle 869-870 PCR for MKPV DNA using DNA extracted
from FFPE kidney shavings of necropsies from the same sites. For the Israel specimen, RNAscope
for MKPV nucleic acids was also performed. Arrows show examples of inclusion bodies in each
H&E stain. PCR panels include a 100 bp marker at left and control DNA at right from MKPVinfected Centenary Institute Rag1–/– mice (+ve) or MKPV-free Rag1–/– mice (-ve, sourced from
Australian BioResources, Mittagong NSW).

Figure 5
Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of MKPV/MuCPV sub-strains based on a 267 bp region in
NS1 (see blue box in Fig 1A), using the Tasmanian devil CPV2 sequence (15) as outlier. The scale
bar represents units of substitutions per site. Bootstrap nodal support values are indicated. The
provenance of each sequence is indicated by text at left and by flags at right, with red text indicating
accessions, from top to bottom, MH670587, MH670588, MF175078 and MG679365.1; for
IDEXX BioAnalytics pathology samples, donor institutions are identified by an anonymizing code
unique to each institution and by a geographical region where known – each in brackets. Shading
over the text indicates infection of an immune-competent strain (blue = laboratory mouse, orange
= wild-caught mouse). The coloured bar at the top indicates the consensus sequence (yellow = A,
green = G, blue = C, red = T). SNVs varying from the consensus are presented as in Fig 1A, with
colour-coding to indicate the non-consensus base. Non-synonymous SNVs are indicated by
“XnnnX”.

Figure 6
VP1, NS1, NS2 and p15 ORFs, introns and ITR structures are conserved in tetrapod
chapparvoviruses. (A) Maps comparing the complete genomes of MKPV (top) and CKPV
(bottom), to scale. “Bowties” indicate ITRs. Three colours are used to indicate the three plus-strand
reading frames. Dashed lines indicate introns – actual (MKPV) or hypothetical (CKPV). The
lowest Gibb’s energy structures predicted for the minus-strand ITR regions (36) are shown below
each map, with the 5’ ITR above the 3’ ITR. (B) The percentage identity at the amino acid level
between MKPV ORFs and the corresponding ORFs from the nine other near-complete tetrapod
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
chapparvoviral genomes currently available (MUSCLE alignment (37)). Tukey’s box and
whiskers are used. Significant differences (non-parametric Friedman test) are indicated as in the
Fig 2 legend. Colours indicate source(s) of the virus sequences: blue – kidney or urine, orange –
faeces, yellow – lungs or respiratory tract, green – liver, pink – muscle. (C) Maps (same scale,
colours and symbols as panel A) indicating conserved p10, p15, NS2, NS1 and VP1 ORFs and
putative introns in ten other tetrapod chapparvoviral genomes. The sources for the genomes are:
(11, 14, 15, 20-23). Ragged ends indicate incomplete ORFs that continue beyond the currently
available sequence. Slice donor and acceptor sites for all introns shown in A and C are listed in
Fig S4.

Materials and Methods
Mice and mouse specimens
A colony of naturally MKPV-infected Cxcr6gfp/gfp Rag1–/– mice (C57BL/6.Cg) was maintained in
the Centenary Institute mouse facility (Sydney, NSW, Australia), as previously described (9);
MKPV-free Rag1–/– mice (C57BL/6.Cg), originally sourced from The Jackson Laboratory, were
purchased from Australian BioResources (Moss Vale, NSW, Australia). Fresh tissue specimens
were harvested from mice immediately after humane euthanasia with approval for mouse care and
experimental procedures by the Animal Welfare Committee, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital
(Sydney, NSW, Australia; approval number 2017-043) and in accordance with NSW and
Australian Federal legislation and the Australian code for the care and use of animals for scientific
purposes (38). Multiple colonies representing various strains of mice, including NOD.CgPrkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) and Tac:SW (Swiss Webster) were maintained at Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center (MSK) and Weill Cornell Medicine (WCM), as described previously (9).
Mouse care and experimental procedures were approved by the MSK and WCM Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee and maintained in accordance with the National Academy of
Sciences’ Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals in AAALAC International-accredited
facilities.
Samples analysed for MKPV nucleic acids by PCR or ISH (RNAscope) were formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimens archived from historical necropsies of diseased mice from
these or other colonies, as described previously (9). DNA or total RNA was extracted from fresh
tissue or FFPE samples using QIAamp® DNA Mini Kits or RNeasy® Mini Kits from Qiagen
(Hilden, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions – with modifications as described
previously (9). Total nucleic acids were extracted from mouse samples submitted to IDEXX
BioAnalytics using a commercially available platform (NucleoMag® VET Kit; Macherey-Nagel
GmbH & Co. KG, Düren, Germany).

PCR from MKPV DNA and phylogenetic analysis
All primers mentioned in this report are listed in Table S1. Most PCRs used 100 ng input DNA,
Phire II hot start Mastermix (Thermo Fisher, Vilnius, Lithuania) and 0.5 µM primer pairs. Cycling
conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 98°C for 30 s, followed by 30 cycles (Fig 1C
and Fig 5) or 25 cycles (Fig 4) of denaturation at 98°C for 5 s, annealing at 58°C (Fig 1C and Fig
5) or 48˚C (Fig 4) for 5 s, and extension at 72°C for 15 s, and concluded with a final extension at
72°C for 5 min. 5 or 7 μL of the completed PCR product was then loaded onto 1.5% agarose
(Vivantis, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia) gels prepared in 1X TAE buffer (Invitrogen, Grand
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
Island, NY, USA) and 1:10,000 dilution of GelRed (Biotium, Fremont, CA, USA). Electrophoresis
was conducted at 110 A for 60 min before imaging with G:BOX (SynGene, Cambridge, UK) using
Syngene’s GeneSnap v7.05 software. PCR amplifications of sequences missing from the 5’- and
3’ends of the previously-described NYC and MSKCC strains of MuCPV/MKPV used primers 890
and 889 for the 5’end or 891 and 893 for the 3’-end, using 30 to 35 cycles of PCR as above. The
products were then Sanger-sequenced (Macrogen, Seoul, South Korea).
PCR amplifications for MKPV SNVs used primers 934 and 935 (Table S1) and were mostly
perfomed using Phire II hotstart Mastermix as described above, with the following exceptions.
PCR for SNVs at IDEXX BioAnalytics used LA Taq™ (TaKaRa Bio, Ōtsu, Japan) and 20 µM
primer pairs. Cycling conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 94°C for 1 min, followed
by 40 cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 30 s, annealing at 58°C for 30 s, and extension at 72°C
for 30 s, and concluded with a final extension at 72°C for 5 min. PCR for SNVs from wild NYC
mice used AmpliTaq Gold 360 Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), 50 µM primers
and cycling conditions as follows: initial denaturation for 95°C for 8 min, followed by 10 cycles
of denaturation at 95°C for 30 s, annealing at 60°C (decreasing by 0.5°C per cycle) for 30 s, and
extension at 72°C for 30 s, then a further 35 cycles with similar conditions aside from an annealing
temperature of 55°, and concluded with a final extension at 72°C for 7 min. Both strands of PCR
products were Sanger sequenced at Macrogen (S Korea; Australian specimens), or at Genewiz Inc.
(South Plainfield, NJ; IDEXX and wild NYC specimens). For phylogenetic analysis, nucleotide
sequences were aligned in Geneious 10.2.3 (39), and exported to MEGA6 (40) where model
selection was performed. A maximum likelihood tree was constructed using the Tamura 3parameter model (41) with 1000 bootstrap repetitions. The newick tree was exported to FigTree
(v1.2.2, http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/) for annotation.

Testing for prevalence of MKPV DNA by IDEXX BioAnalytics
MKPV detection by IDEXX BioAnalytics used a real-time PCR assay based on the IDEXX
Laboratories, Inc. proprietary service platform. The MKPV real-time PCR primers and hydrolysis
probe were designed with PrimerExpress® version 3.0 (Applied BioAnalytics™; Waltham, MA,
USA) using the genome sequence available in GenBank. The assay was designed and validated to
detect 1-10 template copies. Analysis was performed at IDEXX BioAnalytics (Columbia, MO,
USA) with standard primer and probe concentrations using the master mix LightCycler® 480
Probes Master (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN, USA) in a commercially available
instrument (LightCycler® 480; Roche Applied Science). In addition to positive and negative assay
controls, a hydrolysis probe-based real-time PCR assay targeting universal prokaryotic (16s
rRNA) and eukaryotic reference genes (18s rRNA) was amplified for all samples to confirm the
presence of amplifiable DNA and absence of PCR inhibition.

PCR, RACE and qPCR from MKPV RNA
For splice site confirmations, MKPV-infected kidney RNA was treated or mock-treated with
TurboTM DNase (Thermo Fisher, 0.4 U/µg RNA) and ExoI (New England Biolabs, 2 U/µg RNA)
for 30 min at 37˚C, followed by incubation with DNase Inactivation Reagent (Thermo Fisher,
0.2ul/ µg RNA). First-strand cDNA was produced using random hexamer (Bioline, London, UK)
priming and SuperScript III reverse transcriptase (Thermo Fisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. PCR was then performed using input cDNA equivalent to 4 ng
RNA and Phire II hot start Mastermix (Thermo Fisher, Vilnius, Lithuania), exactly as described
for Fig 1C in the preceding section.
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
Rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) was performed using reagents from an In-Fusion®
SMARTer® Directional cDNA Library Construction Kit (TaKaRa) and custom primers. First
strand cDNA synthesis was performed using the SMARTer CDS primer (Table S1),
SMARTScribe reverse transcriptase (RT) and 500 ng of MKPV-infected kidney RNA, according
to the kit instructions. A switch to using a “Template Switch” oligonucleotide (Table S1) as
template occurred during first strand synthesis when the RT incorporated untemplated dCMP
nucleotides after encountering the 5’ end of an mRNA template (see Fig S1). For 5’-RACE, a 2
µL aliquot of the first strand cDNA diluted 1:50 was amplified using Phire II hot start Mastermix
(ThermoFisher, Vilnius, Lithuania) and 0.12 µM of 5’-RACE primer (Table S1) paired with an
MKPV-specific antisense oligodeoxynucleotide as return primer. For MKPV transcripts 2a and
2b, primary 5’-RACE with MKPV primer 902 produced two dominant products after 34 PCR
cycles (see Fig 1E). For transcripts 3 or 4, primary 5’-RACE used MKPV-specific return primers
905 or 933, respectively, for 25 PCR cycles; a 2 µL aliquot of primary PCR reaction diluted 1:100
was then used as template for semi-nested secondary 5’-RACE using MKPV-specific return
primers 900 or 948, respectively, for 34 PCR cycles to produce a single dominant product in each
case (see Fig 1E). For 3’-RACE, a 2 µL aliquot of the first strand cDNA diluted 1:50 was amplified
in a similar way, using an MKPV-specific sense oligodeoxynucleotide paired with the 3’ RACE
primer (Table S1) as return primer. For polyadenylation site A, primary 3’-RACE used MKPVspecific primer 932 and produced a dominant product after 34 PCR cycles (see Fig 1E). For
polyadenylation site B, primary 3’-RACE was performed using MKPV-specific primer 940 for 25
cycles; a 2 µL aliquot of the primary 3’-RACE reaction diluted 1:100 was then used as template
for semi-nested 3’RACE using MKPV-specific primer 891 for 34 PCR cycles to produce two or
three dominant products (see Fig 1E). Sizes and yields of RACE products (2 µL aliquots) were
determined using a Fragment Analyzer (Advanced Analytics; now Agilent, Santa Clara USA)
equipped with 55 cm electrophoresis capillaries and reagents capable of resolving dsDNA
fragments between 35 and 1500 bp (see Fig 1E), according to the manufacturer’s procedures.
Signal traces from each capillary were converted into pseudo-gel images using PROSize 2.0
software (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA – see Fig 1E). The remaining bulk of the
RACE reactions were then resolved by conventional 1.5% agarose gel electrophoresis, as
described (9). DNA bands stained with GelRed (Biotium, Freemont CA, USA) were excised under
blue light. The DNA was extracted from the excised agarose using a PCR product purification kit
(Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA), following the manufacturer’s instructions for agaroseembedded DNA, then Sanger-sequenced (Macrogen, Seoul, S Korea) using the appropriate
MKPV-specific primer.
qPCR for MKPV DNA was performed exactly as described before (9), using primers 869 and 870,
an annealing temperature of 48˚C and an extension time of 0.5 min. For RNA qPCR, RNA
equivalent to 1 ug tissue was pre-treated with DNase, as described above, then reverse-transcribed
using oligo-dT primer and SuperScript III reverse transcriptase (ThermoFisher, Carlsbad, CA,
USA) at 50 ˚C for 60 min. First-strand cDNA equivalent to 40 ng tissue was then used as template
for qPCR reactions using primers 947 and 948, iQTM SYBR® Green Supermix (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA, USA), an annealing temperature of 68.5˚C and an extension time of 0.5 min.

Cebus imitator genome assembly
The Cebus capucinus imitator genome was assembled as described (24). In brief, DNA for shotgun
sequencing was derived from the kidney of an adult male (id no. Cc_AM_T3) that was killed by a
vehicle in Costa Rica. Samples were transported to the laboratory of A.D.M. at Washington
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
University in St Louis, MO under CITES export permit 2015-CR1258/SJ (no. S 1320). Total
sequence genome input coverage on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 instrument was approximately 81x
(50x fragments, 26x 3kbs, and 5x 8kbs) using a genome size estimate of 3.0Gb. The combined
sequence reads were assembled using ALLPATHS-LG software (42) to produce assembly
GCA_001604975.1.

Desmodus rotundus specimens and DrPV-1 PCR
DNA was extracted from kidney and liver samples previously obtained from seven DrPV-1+ve
Desmodus rotundus individuals (vampire bats) captured in a rural area of Araçatuba city, São
Paulo State, Brazil, in June 2010 (14) using a QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, USA). Sample
collection and handling procedures were approved by the Brazilian Committee on Animal
Experimentation (protocol number 00858-2012) and Chico Mendes Institute for the Conservation
of Biodiversity; protocol numbers 12.751-3/2009 and 27.346-1/2011. DNA was screened for
DrPV-1 sequences using Platinum® Taq DNA polymerase and high fidelity PCR buffer
(Invitrogen), primers Chap-DRPv-fwd and Chap-DRPv-rev, an initial temperature of 94˚C for 0.5
min, and 35 cycles of 94˚C for 0.25 min, 57˚C for 0.5 min and 68˚C for 1 min. Products were
resolved by agarose gel electrophoresis.

Tissue staining
Tissue sections were prepared and stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or with an ISH
(RNAscope) probe specific for MKPV nucleic acids and positive and negative control probes as
previously described (9). Positive results on caecum and urinary bladder were confirmed by
duplicate staining on two serial sections performed in two independent staining runs.

LC-MS/MS
Kidney protein extracts from an age- and gender-matched pair of MKPV-infected and uninfected
Rag1–/– mice were prepared and digested with trypsin as described (9). Using an Acquity M-class
nanoLC system (Waters, USA), 5 µL of each sample was loaded at 15µL/min for 3 minutes onto
a nanoEase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm x 20 mm) before being washed onto a
PicoFrit column (75 µmID x 300 mm; New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with Magic C18AQ
resin (3 µm, Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA). Peptides were eluted from the column and into
the source of a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using the following
program: 5-30% MS buffer B (98% Acetonitrile + 0.2% Formic Acid) over 90 minutes, 30–80%
MS buffer B over 3 minutes, 80% MS buffer B for 2 minutes, 80–5% for 3 min. The eluting
peptides were ionised at 2400V. A Data Dependant MS/MS (dd-MS2) experiment was performed,
with a survey scan of 350–1500 Da performed at 70,000 resolution for peptides of charge state 2+
or higher with an AGC target of 3e6 and maximum Injection Time of 50ms. The Top 12 peptides
were selected fragmented in the HCD cell using an isolation window of 1.4 m/z, an AGC target of
1e5 and maximum injection time of 100ms. Fragments were scanned in the Orbitrap analyser at
17,500 resolution and the product ion fragment masses measured over a mass range of 120-2000
Da. The mass of the precursor peptide was then excluded for 30 seconds.
The MS/MS data files were searched using Peaks Studio X against a database comprised of the
Mus musculus proteome (UniProt UP000000589) plus all MKPV ORFs >25 amino acids plus a
database of common contaminants; with the following parameter settings. Fixed modifications:
none. Variable modifications: propionamide, oxidised methionine, deamidated asparagine.
Enzyme: semi-trypsin. Number of allowed missed cleavages: 3. Peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm.
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
MS/MS mass tolerance: 0.05 Da. The results of the search were then filtered to include peptides
with a –log10P score that was determined by the False Discovery Rate (FDR) of <1%, the score
being that where decoy database search matches were <1% of the total matches.

Bioinformatics
Potential splice donor and acceptor sites in chapparvoviral genomes were sought using “Genie”
software (18) online (http://www.fruitfly.org/seq_tools/splice.html). Alignments of
chapparvoviral proteins p15, p10, NS1, NS2, NP and VP1 were performed by MUSCLE (37) or
T-Coffee (26), as stated in the text, using MacVector v16 software (MacVector, Inc, North
Carolina, USA). Proteins functionally similar to NS2 and p15 were sought using profile hidden
Markov models deployed by the HMMER server (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/hmmer/). Fastq
sequences in NCBI accession PRJEB28510 were downloaded to a local database and searched for
sequences homologous to MKPV using MacVector v16 software.

References
1.

Cotmore SF, Tattersall P. 2014. Parvoviruses: Small Does Not Mean Simple. Annu Rev Virol
1:517-37.

2.

Stutika C, Gogol-Döring A, Botschen L, Mietzsch M, Weger S, Feldkamp M, Chen W,
Heilbronn R. 2016. A Comprehensive RNA Sequencing Analysis of the Adeno-Associated
Virus (AAV) Type 2 Transcriptome Reveals Novel AAV Transcripts, Splice Variants, and
Derived Proteins. J Virol 90:1278-1289.

3.

Cotmore SF, Agbandje-McKenna M, Canuti M, Chiorini JA, Eis-Hubinger AM, Hughes J,
Mietzsch M, Modha S, Ogliastro M, Penzes JJ, Pintel DJ, Qiu J, Soderlund-Venermo M,
Tattersall P, Tijssen P, Ictv Report C. 2019. ICTV Virus Taxonomy Profile: Parvoviridae. J
Gen Virol doi:10.1099/jgv.0.001212.

4.

Lukashov VV, Goudsmit J. 2001. Evolutionary relationships among parvoviruses: virushost coevolution among autonomous primate parvoviruses and links between adenoassociated and avian parvoviruses. J Virol 75:2729-40.

5.

Nandi S, Kumar M. 2010. Canine parvovirus: current perspective. Indian J Virol 21:31-44.

6.

Meszaros I, Olasz F, Csagola A, Tijssen P, Zadori Z. 2017. Biology of Porcine Parvovirus
(Ungulate parvovirus 1). Viruses 9:E393.

7.

Serjeant GR, Topley JM, Mason K, Serjeant BE, Pattison JR, Jones SE, Mohamed R. 1981.
Outbreak of aplastic crises in sickle cell anaemia associated with parvovirus-like agent.
Lancet 2:595-7.

8.

Logan GJ, Dane AP, Hallwirth CV, Smyth CM, Wilkie EE, Amaya AK, Zhu E, Khandekar N,
Ginn SL, Liao SHY, Cunningham SC, Sasaki N, Cabanes-Creus M, Tam PPL, Russell DW,
Lisowski L, Alexander IE. 2017. Identification of liver-specific enhancer-promoter activity
in the 3' untranslated region of the wild-type AAV2 genome. Nat Genet 49:1267-1273.

9.

Roediger B, Lee Q, Tikoo S, Cobbin JCA, Henderson JM, Jormakka M, O’Rourke MB, Padula
MP, Pinello N, Henry M, Wynne M, Santagostino SF, Brayton CF, Rasmussen L, Lisowski L,
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
Tay SS, Harris DC, Bertram JF, Dowling JP, Bertolino P, Lai JH, Wu W, Bachovchin WW,
Wong JJL, Gorrell MD, Shaban B, Holmes EC, Jolly CJ, Monette S, Weninger W. 2018. An
Atypical Parvovirus Drives Chronic Tubulointerstitial Nephropathy and Kidney Fibrosis.
Cell 175:530-543.
10.

Williams SH, Che X, Garcia JA, Klena JD, Lee B, Muller D, Ulrich W, Corrigan RM, Nichol S,
Jain K, Lipkin WI. 2018. Viral Diversity of House Mice in New York City. MBio 9:e01354-17.

11.

Palinski RM, Mitra N, Hause BM. 2016. Discovery of a novel Parvovirinae virus, porcine
parvovirus 7, by metagenomic sequencing of porcine rectal swabs. Virus Genes 52:564-7.

12.

Baker KS, Leggett RM, Bexfield NH, Alston M, Daly G, Todd S, Tachedjian M, Holmes CE,
Crameri S, Wang LF, Heeney JL, Suu-Ire R, Kellam P, Cunningham AA, Wood JL, Caccamo
M, Murcia PR. 2013. Metagenomic study of the viruses of African straw-coloured fruit
bats: detection of a chiropteran poxvirus and isolation of a novel adenovirus. Virology
441:95-106.

13.

Reuter G, Boros A, Delwart E, Pankovics P. 2014. Novel circular single-stranded DNA virus
from turkey faeces. Arch Virol 159:2161-4.

14.

de Souza WM, Romeiro MF, Fumagalli MJ, Modha S, de Araujo J, Queiroz LH, Durigon EL,
Figueiredo LTM, Murcia PR, Gifford RJ. 2017. Chapparvoviruses occur in at least three
vertebrate classes and have a broad biogeographic distribution. The Journal of General
Virology 98:225-229.

15.

Chong R, Shi M, Grueber CE, Holmes EC, Hogg CJ, Belov K, Barrs VR. 2019. Fecal Viral
Diversity of Captive and Wild Tasmanian Devils Characterized Using Virion-Enriched
Metagenomics and Metatranscriptomics. J Virol 93:e00205-19.

16.

Penzes JJ, de Souza WM, Agbandje-McKenna M, Gifford RJ. 2019. An Ancient Lineage of
Highly Divergent Parvoviruses Infects both Vertebrate and Invertebrate Hosts. Viruses 11.

17.

Fahsbender E, Altan E, Seguin MA, Young P, Estrada M, Leutenegger C, Delwart E. 2019.
Chapparvovirus DNA Found in 4% of Dogs with Diarrhea. Viruses 11.

18.

Reese MG, Eeckman FH, Kulp D, Haussler D. 1997. Improved Splice Site Detection in
Genie. 4:311-323.

19.

Ganesan LP, Mohanty S, Kim J, Clark KR, Robinson JM, Anderson CL. 2011. Rapid and
efficient clearance of blood-borne virus by liver sinusoidal endothelium. PLoS Pathog
7:e1002281.

20.

Yinda CK, Ghogomu SM, Conceicao-Neto N, Beller L, Deboutte W, Vanhulle E, Maes P, Van
Ranst M, Matthijnssens J. 2018. Cameroonian fruit bats harbor divergent viruses,
including rotavirus H, bastroviruses, and picobirnaviruses using an alternative genetic
code. Virus Evol 4:vey008.

21.

Yang S, Liu Z, Wang Y, Li W, Fu X, Lin Y, Shen Q, Wang X, Wang H, Zhang W. 2016. A novel
rodent Chapparvovirus in feces of wild rats. Virol J 13:133.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
22.

Lima DA, Cibulski SP, Tochetto C, Varela APM, Finkler F, Teixeira TF, Loiko MR, Cerva C,
Junqueira DM, Mayer FQ, Roehe PM. 2019. The intestinal virome of malabsorption
syndrome-affected and unaffected broilers through shotgun metagenomics. Virus Res
261:9-20.

23.

Wang Y, Yang S, Liu D, Zhou C, Li W, Lin Y, Wang X, Shen Q, Wang H, Li C, Zong M, Ding Y,
Song Q, Deng X, Qi D, Zhang W, Delwart E. 2018. The fecal virome of red-crowned cranes.
Arch Virol doi:10.1007/s00705-018-4037-x.

24.

Orkin JD, de Manuel M, Krawetz R, del Campo J, Fontsere C, Kuderna LFK, Lizano E, Tang
J, Marques-Bonet T, Melin AD. 2018. Unbiased whole genomes from mammalian feces
using fluorescence-activated cell sorting. bioRxiv doi:10.1101/366112:366112.

25.

Li H, Handsaker B, Wysoker A, Fennell T, Ruan J, Homer N, Marth G, Abecasis G, Durbin R,
Genome Project Data Processing S. 2009. The Sequence Alignment/Map format and
SAMtools. Bioinformatics 25:2078-9.

26.

Notredame C, Higgins DG, Heringa J. 2000. T-Coffee: A novel method for fast and accurate
multiple sequence alignment. J Mol Biol 302:205-17.

27.

Becerra SP, Koczot F, Fabisch P, Rose JA. 1988. Synthesis of adeno-associated virus
structural proteins requires both alternative mRNA splicing and alternative initiations
from a single transcript. J Virol 62:2745-54.

28.

Spanopoulou E, Roman CA, Corcoran LM, Schlissel MS, Silver DP, Nemazee D,
Nussenzweig MC, Shinton SA, Hardy RR, Baltimore D. 1994. Functional immunoglobulin
transgenes guide ordered B-cell differentiation in Rag-1-deficient mice. Genes Dev
8:1030-42.

29.

Mombaerts P, Iacomini J, Johnson RS, Herrup K, Tonegawa S, Papaioannou VE. 1992. RAG1-deficient mice have no mature B and T lymphocytes. Cell 68:869-877.

30.

Gabriel SI, Stevens MI, Mathias MdL, Searle JB. 2011. Of Mice and ‘Convicts’: Origin of the
Australian House Mouse, Mus musculus. PLOS ONE 6:e28622.

31.

Smith AL, Singleton GR, Hansen GM, Shellam G. 1993. A serologic survey for viruses and
Mycoplasma pulmonis among wild house mice (Mus domesticus) in southeastern
Australia. J Wildl Dis 29:219-29.

32.

Breed B, Ford F. 2007. Native Mice and Rats. CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria,
Australia.

33.

Ramos E, Drachenberg CB, Wali R, Hirsch HH. 2009. The decade of polyomavirus BKassociated nephropathy: state of affairs. Transplantation 87:621-30.

34.

Rani A, Ranjan R, McGee HS, Metwally A, Hajjiri Z, Brennan DC, Finn PW, Perkins DL. 2016.
A diverse virome in kidney transplant patients contains multiple viral subtypes with
distinct polymorphisms. Sci Rep 6:33327.

35.

van den Berg HM. 2017. A Cure for Hemophilia within Reach. N Engl J Med 377:25922593.
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephro-tropic chapparvoviruses
36.

SantaLucia Jr J. 1998. A unified view of polymer, dumbbell, and oligonucleotide DNA
nearest-neighbor thermodynamics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:1460-1465.

37.

Edgar RC. 2004. MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high
throughput. Nucleic Acids Res 32:1792-7.

38.

National Health and Medical Research Council. 2013. Australian code for the care and use
of animals for scientific purposes, 8th edition. Canberra: National Health and Medical
Research Council.

39.

Kearse M, Moir R, Wilson A, Stones-Havas S, Cheung M, Sturrock S, Buxton S, Cooper A,
Markowitz S, Duran C, Thierer T, Ashton B, Meintjes P, Drummond A. 2012. Geneious
Basic: an integrated and extendable desktop software platform for the organization and
analysis of sequence data. Bioinformatics 28:1647-9.

40.

Tamura K, Stecher G, Peterson D, Filipski A, Kumar S. 2013. MEGA6: Molecular
Evolutionary Genetics Analysis version 6.0. Mol Biol Evol 30:2725-9.

41.

Tamura K. 1992. Estimation of the number of nucleotide substitutions when there are
strong transition-transversion and G+C-content biases. Mol Biol Evol 9:678-87.

42.

Gnerre S, MacCallum I, Przybylski D, Ribeiro FJ, Burton JN, Walker BJ, Sharpe T, Hall G,
Shea TP, Sykes S, Berlin AM, Aird D, Costello M, Daza R, Williams L, Nicol R, Gnirke A,
Nusbaum C, Lander ES, Jaffe DB. 2011. High-quality draft assemblies of mammalian
genomes from massively parallel sequence data. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 108:1513-1518.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1
A

B

C

5' primer:

kb

4.0
3.0

2.0
1.5

1.0
0.8
0.6

0.2

0.4

3' primer:

transcripts
890

1

2a

2b

3

4

P2

905

DNA

p10

955
904

P1

902

947

88 bp

88 bp

p15

933

902

89
0
95
5
90
4
94
7
89
0
95
5
90
4
94
7
89
0
95
5
90
4
94
7

889

D

4.0

3.0

kb

2.0

1.5

1.0
0.8

0.6

0.2

0.4

904
947

RT+

890

RT+

955

RT+

904

RT+

947

RT+

890

RT+

955

RT+

904

RT+

947

RT+

1622 bp

RT-

934

955

RT+

NS1

890

1
2

RT+

902

RT+

RT-

1
2

2289 bp

935

1
2

RTRT-

RT-

2.
5

900

RNA

3

905

RT-

3

RT-

1 kb

NS2

3

NP-L/I

RT-

RT-

932

4

933

RT-

905

4

RT-

VP1

948

4

933

RT-

AATAAA (A)

E

1˚, 2˚ primer
± RT
+
–

940

902

1?
2a

2b

891

5' RACE

893

4

933, 948
+
–

AATAAA (B)

905, 900
+
–

3

CI
MSKCC
wild - NY

p10, p15, NS1 or NP

potential ORFs

p10, p15, NS1 or NP

B3?
B1 & B2

940,891
+
–

p15, NS1 or NP

p10 or NS2

–

3' RACE

932

p10 or VP1

+

A

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2
A

VP1

870

869

948

947

RNAscope® probe (978 nt)

DNA (869-870)

ns

108

***

**
***

106

ΔCt (Mkpv – Hprt)

**
***

109

C

(ii) caecum 16-1653

(i) kidney 16-1653

*

****
****
****
****

0

(iii) urinary bladder 16-1653

*

2
4

(iv) liver 16-1653

(v) lungs 16-1653

(vi) skeletal muscle 16-1653

6
ns

105

ND ND
e
sp r
le
ft en
rig kid
ht ne
ki y
dn
ey

sp

le

liv
er

le
ft en
rig kid
ht ne
ki y
dn
ey

8

le

107

RNA (947-948)

ns

1010

liv

viral genome copies
(per 20 ng tissue DNA)

B

100 bp
ladder

Figure 3
Bat 49

Bat 48

Bat 47

Bat 46

Bat 45

Bat 44

Bat 43

Figure 4
University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill USA (2016-2018)

869-870 PCR

+ve

-ve

MKPV
RNAscope®

PV2017-2

H&E

PV2017-1

16-3332-2
17-329-1
18-112-2
18-112-3
18-117-3
18-117-4
99-032-5
+ve
-ve

H&E

Israel (2017)

869-870 PCR

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5

0.04

77

40

49

63
79

98

99

88

99

57
40

56

Year-!
sample id.
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
faeces
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
faeces
faeces
faeces
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
liver
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
serum
faeces
liver
faeces
kidney
kidney
faeces
faeces
kidney
kidney
faeces
faeces
kidney
faeces
faeces
kidney
faeces
faeces
faeces
faeces
faeces
faeces
faeces
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
kidney
faeces
liver
liver
ND
faeces

NSG
NSG
NSG
NSG
TRP1-TCR
NSG
TRP1-TCR
TRP1-TCR
NSG
N/A
Swiss Webster Tac
Outbred athymic nude Crl
Outbred athymic nude Crl
Outbred athymic nude Crl
Outbred athymic nude Crl
Outbred athymic nude Crl
NSG
NSG
?
?
Swiss Webster
NSG
NSG
Outbred athymic nude Crl
?
?
?
WILD
C3.Cg-Prkdcscid
C3.Cg-Prkdcscid
C3.Cg-Prkdcscid
C3.Cg-Prkdcscid
C3.Cg-Prkdcscid
?
?
B6.Cg-Cxcr6tm1LittRag1tm1Bal
?
B10.BR.Cg-Rag1tm1BalTg(TcraTcrbH2-Kb)
?
WILD
?
?
?
?
ICR
?
?
?
?
WILD
CD1
WILD
?
CD1
CD1
?
nu/het
C3H
CD1
environmental swab
?
NSG
NSG
NSG
NSG
NSG
NSG
NSG
NSG
WILD
WILD
WILD
WILD
WILD

State Specimen
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
(NE)
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
(S)
(S)
(S)
NY
NY
NY
NC
NC
NC
NY
SA
SA
SA
SA
SA
SA
SA
NSW
SA
NSW
(S)
NY
?
Israel
Israel
?
Israel
(NE)
(NE)
(S)
(MW)
NY
(S)
(NE)
NC
(NE)
(MW)
(NE)
(W)
(W)
(MW)
(S)
MD
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
NY
Xinj.
TAS

A123S

Location
MSK-WCM
2016-2868-2-2
MSK-WCM
2016-5935-1-2
MSK-WCM
2015-3577-1-2_D
MSK-WCM
2015-3362-1-2_D
MSK-WCM
2015-3221-1-2
MSK-WCM
2015-3063-1-2
MSK-WCM
2015-2482-2-2
MSK-WCM
2015-2482-1-2
MSK-WCM
2011-5146-3-2
IDEXX (O)
15_USA_2018
MSK-WCM
2007-2420-1-2
MSK-WCM
2009-1876-1-2_D
MSK-WCM
2009-2708-5-1
MSK-WCM
2009-2708-6-1
MSK-WCM
2009-2708-7-1
MSK-WCM
2009-2708-8-1
MSK-WCM
2015-0233-1-2
MSK-WCM
2016-2469-1-2
IDEXX (R)
18_USA_2019
IDEXX (K)
11_USA_2019
IDEXX (L)
12_USA_2019
MSK-WCM
2008-1122-1-2
MSK-WCM
2009-1309-1-2
MSK-WCM
2009-2708-3-1
UNC
2018-112-2_D
UNC
2018-112-3
UNC
2018-117-3
NYC wild
2014 Q-055
Cerberus
2010-1298-1A
Cerberus
2010-1298-4A
Cerberus
2010-1300-6B
Cerberus
2010-1300-7B
Cerberus
2010-1300-9A
Cerberus
2010-EDU-5
Cerberus
2010-EDU-7
Centenary
2018-MH670587
Cerberus
2009-1072-2A
Centenary
2016-LA0806
IDEXX (S)
19_USA_2019
NYC wild
2014 M-040
IDEXX (N)
14_CANADA_2019
Israel
PV2017-1_D
Israel
PV2017-2
IDEXX (H)
8_Europe_2019
IDEXX (E)
5_Israel_2019
IDEXX (T)
20_USA_2019
IDEXX (T)
21_USA_2019
IDEXX (C)
3_USA_2019
IDEXX (D)
4_USA_2019
NYC wild
2015 M-118
IDEXX (J)
10_USA_2018
IDEXX (P)
16_USA_2019
UNC
2017-329-1
IDEXX (A)
1_USA_2018
IDEXX (B)
2_USA_2018
IDEXX (F)
6_USA_2019
IDEXX (G)
7_USA_2019
IDEXX (I)
9_USA_2018
IDEXX (M)
13_USA_2019
IDEXX (Q)
17_USA_2019
Johns Hopkins JH_58409
MSK-WMC
2016-3337
MSK-WCM
2017-2159
MSK-WCM
2015-3781-1-2_D
MSK-WCM
2016-1653-2-1
MSK-WCM
2016-3315-1-2
MSK-WCM
2016-3337-1-2
MSK-WCM
2017-2159-1-2
MSK-WCM
2017-2241-1-2
NYC wild
2014 Q-137
NYC wild
2014 Q-052
NYC wild
2015 Q-187
NYC wild
2014 Q-109
China wild
2016 MG679365
Tasmanian devil CPV2 MK513529

E187Q

E187D

E187D

38

12

96

T118I

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/732537; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6
A

Mus musculus MKPV

p15 130 aa

p10 89 aa

NP-L/I 240/213 aa

NS1 - 659 aa

AATAAA

AATAAA

NS2 295 aa

A

T

C G

T

A

T 140

C G

G C

A

A

A T

A T

T

C G

G C

G C

C G

10

A T

G C

G C 130

G C

C G

G C

C G

C G

C G

20

A 120

G C

T

G C

G C

A

T

G

A

A

T

G C

A

T

30 C

T

T

A

C G

C G

C G 110

C

G C

G C

G C

C G

G C

G C

40 G

G C

G C

G C 100

C G

A
T

C G

A
T

T

A
A
T

90

50

G C

A T

A
T

A

G C

T

C G

A

T

A

A

G C

A
T

80

T
C G

60

C G
G C

A

T

T
A

C

Cebus imitator CKPV

p15 129 aa

60

T C T G

G C

T

C G
70
A T

C

50

T

G

C

C G

p10 89 aa

G

T

A

A

C

A

3’
5’

C G 70

C G

G C

G C

C G

G C

G C

G

C G 80

40 C

C G

C G

A T

A

A T

G C

T

C G

A

C G

G C

30 T

A 90

A

C G

A

A T

T

C G

T

C G

G C

T

G C

A

A 100

G C

T

20 T

A

C G

T

C G

A T

A

A T

G

C G

C G 110

G C

A

C G

A

C G

T

C G

T

5’
3’

C G

T

A T

10 C

A T

G C
C G

T

T

VP1 496 aa

1 kb

NP-F 158 aa

NS1 - 659 aa

AATAAA

AATAAA

NS2 293 aa

A

C G

T

T
A

T

A

C G

G C

C G 130

G C

A
T

A
10

T

G C

G C

C G

C G

G C

C G

G C 120

C G

G C

20

C G

C G

G C

T
A

G C

A
T

A T

A 110
T

A
T

C G

A
30

T

A

T

C G

C G

A

T

C

A

T

C G

T
A

G C 100

G C

G C

G C
40

G C

G C

C G

G C

G C

G C

C G

G

A

G C

T

50 C

G C

A T
C G

G C
C G

G C 90

A

A

A

A

T

A
G C
C G

A T
C G

G T

C G

60

T

C

T A
C
G
C G

A

T

C

A

60

T

G

G C

G C 80

G C

G C

50 C

T

A

C G

G C

T

C G

A

T

T

3’
5’
C G

G C

C G

A

A 90

T

A

T

A

A

T

40 T

T

C G

A

A

C

T

T

G C 100

C G

G C

A

A

A

30 G

T

T

T

G C

G C

G

A

C G

T

C G

A

T

G C

A

A 110

20 C

T

C G

A

C G

G

A

C G

C G

T

C G

10 C

C G

C G

G C 120

T

T

A

A

C G

A

A

T

T

5’
3’

T

T

A

T

70

T

80

VP1 496 aa

G

G

**
**

80

Cebus imitator
Sarcophilus harrisii CPV2

Desmodus rotundus
Rattus norvegicus

60

Eidolon helvum
Protobothrops mucrosquamatus

40

Sus scrofa

20

Grus japonensis

Mesitornis unicolor

Gallus gallus

p15 131 aa

NS1

p15

Sarcophilus harrisii CPV-2

p10

NP 240 aa

1 kb

NS1 659 aa
NS2 295 aa

VP1 494 aa
p15 136 aa

Desmodus rotundus PV-1

NP 249 aa

NS1 668 aa
NS2 280 aa

VP1 484 aa
p15 132 aa

Rattus norvegicus PV2

NP 213 aa

NS1 654 aa

NS2 274 aa
VP1 472 aa
p15 135 aa

Eidolon helvum PV

NP 168 aa

NS1 681 aa
NS2 >257 aa

VP1 493 aa

Protobothrops sp. CPV

p15 139 aa

NP 182 aa

NS1 649 aa

1621 nt

NS2 >258 aa

VP1 >474 aa

F

2285 nt

N

Sus scrofa PV7

p15 133 aa

NS2? - 168 aa

NS1 672 aa
NS2 >273 aa

VP1 469 aa
p15 141 aa

Mesitornis unicolor CPV

NP? 188 aa

NS1 672 aa
NS2 280 aa

VP1 >503 aa
F
N

p10 >85 aa

NS2

VP1

F

0

Sarcophilus harrisii CPV6

N

% a.a. identity to MKPV

C

*
*

100

C 70

G

B

p15 140 aa

Grus japonicus PV yc-9

NP 236 aa

NS1 663 aa
NS2 279 aa

VP1 515 aa
p15 147 aa

Gallus gallus CPV-2

NP 236 aa

NS1 673 aa
NS2 262 aa

VP1 557 aa
p15 140 aa

Sarcophilus harrisii CPV-6

NP 187 aa

NS1 633 aa
NS2 300 aa

VP1 551 aa

