bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The Crk adapter protein is essential for Drosophila embryogenesis,
where it regulates multiple actin-dependent morphogenic events

Andrew J. Spracklen†, Emma M. Thornton-Kolbe‡, Alison N. Bonner‡, Alexandru Florea§, Peter
J. Compton‡, Rodrigo Fernandez-Gonzalez§, and Mark Peifer†‡||*

† Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA

‡ Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, CB#3280, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-3280, USA

§ Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, Ted Rogers Centre for Heart
Research, and Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto ON
M5G 1M1 CANADA

|| Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA

Abbreviations used: Abl, Abelson tyrosine kinase; Arp2/3, actin-related protein 2/3; Crk, CT10
regulator of kinase; CrkL, Crk-like; crkS-RNAi, strong crk RNAi; crkW-RNAi, weak crk RNAi; F-actin,
filamentous actin; FasII, Fasciclin II; Mbc, Myoblast city; mNG, monomeric Neon Green fluorescent
protein; MRLC, myosin regulatory light chain; pTyr, phosphotyrosine; RTK, receptor tyrosine kinase;
SCAR, suppressor of cAMP receptor; sGMCA, GFP fused to the F-actin binding domain of Moesin;
SH2, Src homology domain 2; SH3, Src homology domain 3; WASP, Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein

* To whom correspondence should be addressed
Email: peifer@unc.edu
Phone: (919) 962-2272

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Small SH2/SH3 adapter proteins regulate cell fate and behavior by mediating interactions between
cell surface receptors and downstream signaling effectors in many signal transduction pathways. The
Crk family has tissue-specific roles in phagocytosis, cell migration and neuronal development, and
mediates oncogenic signaling in pathways like that of Abelson kinase. However, redundancy among
the two mammalian family members and the position of the Drosophila gene on the fourth chromosome
precluded assessment of Crk’s full role in embryogenesis. We circumvented these limitations with
shRNA and CRISPR technology to assess Crk’s function in Drosophila morphogenesis. We found Crk
is essential beginning in the first few hours of development, where it ensures accurate mitosis by
regulating orchestrated dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton to keep mitotic spindles in syncytial embryos
from colliding. In this role, it positively regulates levels of the Arp2/3 complex, its regulator SCAR, and
F-actin in actin caps and pseudocleavage furrows. Crk loss leads to loss of nuclei and formation of
multinucleate cells. We also found roles for Crk in embryonic wound healing and in axon patterning in
the nervous system, where it localizes to the axons and midline glia. Thus, Crk regulates diverse
events in embryogenesis that require orchestrated cytoskeletal dynamics.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Cells have an incredible ability to receive a wide-array of environmental inputs and respond in
context-dependent manners during embryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis. Loss of
these responses results in developmental defects and contributes to cancer. Cells receive many
different signals, including growth factors, adhesion to neighbors, extracellular matrix engagement, or
bioactive lipids. These inputs lead to diverse cellular responses, including changes in transcription,
proliferation, cell shape, motility, or cell death. Despite the diversity of inputs and the responses they
evoke, different pathways often share an underlying logic. Signals are usually received by plasma
membrane receptors (e.g., receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), integrins, or cadherins), and information is
transduced throughout the cytoplasm by a cadre of downstream effectors, often initiated by formation of
multiprotein complexes associated with the cytoplasmic tails of transmembrane receptors.
Small adapter proteins, such as Grb2, Crk, or Nck, play critical roles in both signal amplification and
specificity (e.g. (Lettau et al., 2009; Belov and Mohammadi, 2012; Hossain et al., 2012; Martinez-Quiles
et al., 2014)). These adapters confer signal specificity by using Src homology domain 2 (SH2) and 3
(SH3) or other protein interaction domains to form physical links between activated cell surface
receptors and their downstream effectors. A particular small adapter protein only interacts with select
receptors and effectors, ensuring a specific response. Small adapters can also amplify cell signaling.
CT10 Regulator of Kinase (Crk) proteins are a conserved family of small modular adapters shared
by diverse animal lineages (reviewed in Feller, 2001; Birge et al., 2009; Hossain et al., 2012). In
vertebrates, there are two genes encoding three protein isoforms: CrkI, CrkII (alternative splice forms of
crk) and Crk-like (CrkL). An N-terminal SH2 domain allows them to bind tyrosine phosphorylated
proteins, while a canonical SH3 domain binds proline-rich motifs (“PXXP”). CrkII and CrkL have an
additional, non-canonical C-terminal SH3 domain that does not bind PXXP motifs, but serves important
regulatory roles. This organization allows Crk family adapters to link PXXP-containing downstream
effectors to upstream proteins containing phosphorylated tyrosines, like activated RTKs.
Our interest in Crk was initiated by our work on the developmental roles of the non-receptor tyrosine
kinase Abelson (Abl; reviewed in Khatri et al., 2016). Abl is the oncogene activated in chronic
myelogenous leukemia, and the target of the clinically effective kinase inhibitor imatinib (Greuber et al.,
2013). Drosophila Abl plays important roles in many processes, ranging from the cytoskeletal
rearrangements of syncytial development and cellularization (Grevengoed et al., 2003), to cell shape
changes during gastrulation and dorsal closure (Grevengoed et al., 2001; Fox and Peifer, 2007), to
roles in axon outgrowth and guidance in the central nervous system (e.g. Gertler et al., 1989; Bashaw
et al., 2000; Kannan and Giniger, 2017). When we examined Abl’s mechanisms of action, we found
that while kinase activity is important, an even more essential determinant of Abl function is a short,
conserved PXXP motif in the Abl linker known in mammals to bind Crk, Nck, and Abi (Rogers et al.,
2016). Crk is a known Abl substrate and a potential upstream activator (Hossain et al., 2012), and Crk

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

knockdown alleviates the effects of Bcr-Abl transformation (e.g. Seo et al., 2010). This stimulated our
interest in Crk as a potential Abl regulator or effector in Drosophila.
Crk family adapters modulate a wide-range of cell behaviors in cultured cell models, including cell
growth, migration, adhesion, and immune function (reviewed in Feller, 2001; Birge et al., 2009; Hossain
et al., 2012). For example, in fibroblasts, CrkI/II and CrkL play redundant roles in regulating cell growth
and proliferation (Park et al., 2016), cell morphology and motility (Park and Curran, 2014; Park et al.,
2016), and oncogene-mediated cell transformation (Koptyra et al., 2016). Crk proteins localize to focal
adhesions to promote their stability (Senechal et al., 1996; Li et al., 2003; Antoku and Mayer, 2009;
Watanabe et al., 2009; Park and Curran, 2014), as well as promote cell spreading and motility
(Chodniewicz and Klemke, 2004). Crk proteins also work downstream of integrins to coordinate motility
and substrate mechanosensing in T-cells (Roy et al., 2018). Not surprisingly, Crk family proteins also
appear to play important roles in cancer, promoting cell transformation and tumor growth (reviewed in
Sriram and Birge, 2010; Kumar et al., 2014).
While work in cultured cells provided numerous insights, Crk’s roles in normal development are less
well understood. CrkII is dispensable for normal development (Imaizumi et al., 1999). Mice lacking both
CrkI and CrkII are inviable and display multiple defects in cardiovascular and craniofacial development
(Park et al., 2006). CrkL knockout mice exhibit reduced viability and have multiple developmental
defects associated with cardiac and neural crest derivatives (Guris et al., 2001), at least in part through
effects on FGF signaling (Moon et al., 2006). Interestingly, CrkL maps to a chromosomal region
commonly deleted in DiGeorge syndrome patients, and phenotypic similarities suggest its loss may
contribute to this disease. Tissue specific knockouts revealed additional roles for Crk or CrkL in places
ranging from T cell migration (Huang et al., 2015; Roy et al., 2018) to Bcr-Abl transformation of mouse
hematopoietic progenitors (Seo et al., 2010). The two mammalian Crk family members have redundant
roles in some tissues. Simultaneous neural-specific knockout of both Crk and CrkL revealed essential
overlapping roles downstream of Disabled-1 in the Reelin pathway regulating neuronal positioning
(Park and Curran, 2008). Similar overlapping roles were seen in the kidney (George et al., 2014) and
lens (Collins et al., 2018). However, to our knowledge, there has been no analysis of mouse embryos
lacking both CrkI/II and CrkL from the onset of development.
In C. elegans and zebrafish Crk adapters play important developmental roles in cell migration, axon
outgrowth, phagocytosis, and myoblast fusion. The C. elegans Crk homolog Ced-2 is required for
phagocytic clearance of apoptotic cells, cell migration, and motor neuron development, as part of a
Crk/DOCK180/Rac pathway (Reddien and Horvitz, 2000; Gumienny et al., 2001; Wu et al., 2001; Wu et
al., 2002). In zebrafish, morpholino-mediated knockdown of either Crk or CrkL, both of which are
broadly expressed, impairs fusion of fast-twitch myoblasts (Moore et al., 2007), while overexpressing
Crk or CrkL enhances fusion.
Drosophila has a single Crk family member, thus providing a simplified model to define core
functions of Crk. In the fly, biochemical studies revealed Crk can directly bind potential upstream

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

regulators like the receptor tyrosine kinase PVR (Ishimaru et al., 2004) and the Ig-family receptor Sticks
and Stones (Kim et al., 2007), as well as potential downstream effectors like the DOCK-class Rac
Guanine-nucleotide exchange factor Myoblast City (Mbc; Drosophila DOCK180; (Galletta et al., 1999;
Balagopalan et al., 2006)), Verprolin 1 (Drosophila WASP-interacting protein (Kim et al., 2007)), and its
upstream regulator Blown fuse (Jin et al., 2011).
Much of this analysis has focused on roles of Crk in mediating Dock180/ELMO/Rac1 signaling to
the actin cytoskeleton via WASP, SCAR, and the Arp2/3 complex (reviewed in Deng et al., 2017).
Tissue-specific RNAi revealed a role for Crk upstream of Mbc/Elmo/Rac1 signaling in phagocytic
clearance of axonal debris (Ziegenfuss et al., 2012) and of pathogenic protein aggregates by glial cells
(Pearce et al., 2015). Crk also acts in the Mbc/Elmo/Rac1 engulfment pathway in developmental
pruning of larval neurites (Tasdemir-Yilmaz and Freeman, 2014), removal of apoptotic neurons
(Nakano et al., 2019), and salivary gland clearance by autophagy (McPhee et al., 2010). Drosophila
Crk also plays important roles in phagocytic uptake of pathogenic bacteria (Elwell et al., 2008; Pielage
et al., 2008), similar to roles Crk plays in mammalian cells (reviewed in Martinez-Quiles et al., 2014).
The Dock180/ELMO/Rac1 pathway also acts downstream of the RTK PVR during thorax closure and
border cell migration, and tissue-specific RNAi and use of a hypomorphic crk allele support roles for Crk
in these processes (Ishimaru et al., 2004; Geisbrecht et al., 2008). Another DOCK family GEF, the
DOCK3 relative Sponge, acts in parallel to Mbc in both processes (Bianco et al., 2007; Morishita et al.,
2014). Dock180/ELMO/Rac1 signaling also regulates the actin cytoskeleton during myoblast fusion,
but despite clear evidence that Crk directly binds several proteins essential for myoblast fusion, it is
unclear whether Crk is required for this event. Overexpressing a membrane-targeted form of Crk results
in myoblast fusion defects (Abmayr et al., 2003), but Mbc mutants lacking all Crk binding sites fully
restore myoblast fusion (Balagopalan et al., 2006). Crk may play a role in muscle development,
however, as a muscle-specific RNAi led to a flightless phenotype, with missing indirect flight muscles,
(Schnorrer et al., 2010). Thus, tissue specific Crk knockdown revealed several important
developmental roles, many involving DOCK/ELMO/Rac regulation of actin.
While informative, these analyses via tissue specific RNAi do not reveal the core, conserved roles
for Crk family adapters during embryogenesis. We sought to generate embryos devoid of Crk, and thus
analyze its full set of functions. Despite its identification nearly 20 years ago, there has been
surprisingly little genetic analysis of Drosophila crk, largely due to the fact that crk maps to the fourth
chromosome, which has been less genetically tractable. The only existing allele was a hypomorphic
mobile element insertion (Ishimaru et al., 2004). Modern tools allowed us to circumvent this issue. We
used second-generation shRNA lines and developed a suite of genetic tools, including a null allele, a
powerful gene replacement platform, and overexpression constructs. These tools allowed us to
manipulate Crk levels in ways not previously possible, revealing Crk is required for embryonic viability
and plays critical roles during actin-dependent morphogenic events.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results
Crk is required for embryonic viability
Despite Crk’s importance in oncogenic signaling and the known tissue specific roles of the two
mammalian family members, its full importance in normal development remains unclear. Drosophila
provides a superb model to examine this role, as there is only a single family member, thus avoiding
the partial redundancy of the mammalian proteins. However, the position of crk on the fourth
chromosome hindered the ability to examine its function, with previous studies limited to the use of a
probable hypomorphic allele derived from P-element insertion (Ishimaru et al., 2004) or tissue-specific
RNAi. New tools offered the opportunity to develop ways to reduce or eliminate Crk function.
We took two approaches: using CRISPR to generate tagged and null alleles, and RNAi to
knockdown function. We generated a crk null allele, crkDattP, using CRISPR to replace the entire crk
locus with a 50 base-pair attP phage recombination site and positive selectable marker (Fig 1A). This
allele was verified by PCR (Suppl. Figure 1A,B). Consistent with the previously characterized allele
crkKG00336 (Ishimaru et al., 2004), homozygous zygotic crk∆attP mutants were embryonic viable but died
as pupae, revealing crk to be an essential gene. We next created a series of rescue constructs, in
which either the complete genomic region or an mNeonGreen-tagged cDNA were targeted back into
the locus at the attP site (Fig 1B). The genomic rescue construct and one version of the cDNA rescue
constructed were flanked by FRT sites (Fig 1B; full descriptions are in Suppl. Fig. 1C), allowing deletion
via the FLP recombinase, to facilitate production of females whose germlines were homozygous
mutant. We also generated a Crk antibody, using the full-length protein as the antigen, which
recognize a single protein of molecular weight ~31 kDa (Fig 1C), consistent with the predicted size of
Crk (31kD). All three rescue constructs are expressed at essentially normal levels (Fig. 1C), and all
rescued viability and fertility.
While zygotic mutants were embryonic viable, we suspected this was due to maternally contributed
Crk, as crk mRNA is maternally loaded and broadly expressed (Galletta et al., 1999). We hypothesized
Crk would be broadly expressed and essential for embryonic morphogenesis; consistent with this, our
mNeonGreen-tagged construct targeted into the endogenous locus was expressed throughout
embryogenesis (Fig. 1D-I). After gastrulation we observed cortical enrichment in the ectoderm and
developing epidermis, along with a cytoplasmic pool (Fig 1D-G, arrows)—this continued until at least
the completion of dorsal closure (Fig 1G).
To directly test the hypothesis that Crk is essential for embryonic development, we used RNAi to
maternally and zygotically deplete crk. We used two independent UAS-driven shRNA lines targeting
different regions of crk, developed by the Transgenic RNAi Project (TRiP; Perkins et al., 2015). shRNA
constructs can mimic maternal/zygotic loss of gene products, when expressed using germline drivers
(Staller et al., 2013). We drove expression of shRNAs targeting crk using two copies of a strong
germline driver (maternal atubulin-GAL4; mata-GAL4) to knockdown maternal crk. Both RNAi lines
impair embryonic viability, but to differing extents. The stronger of the two lines, referred to below as

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

crkS-RNAi, severely impaired embryonic viability, reducing viability to 1.2% (Fig. 2A; n=922), while the
second line, referred to below as crkW-RNAi, resulted in weaker effects, reducing viability to 71.4%
(Fig. 2A; n=960), compared to UAS-shRNA only controls, which exhibited 97.9% (Fig. 2A; n=711) and
97.5% (Fig. 2A; n=770) viability, respectively.
To verify the shRNA constructs knocked down crk, and, in parallel, to test specificity of our
antibody, we examined Crk accumulation at two stages of embryogenesis by immunoblotting. Both
shRNAs strongly reduced Crk protein levels during early embryonic development, with crkS-RNAi
dropping levels to 2.6% and crkW-RNAi to 5.0% at 0-4hr (Fig. 2B; left), consistent with their differential
effects on embryonic lethality. Expression remained strongly reduced at 12-15 hrs (3.6% and 9.8%,
respectively; Fig 2B, right). We next tested whether simultaneous overexpression of Crk, using UASdriven mNeonGreen-tagged Crk, rescued effects of knockdown. Crk overexpression alone, even at
~10-fold endogenous levels (Fig. 2D), had no effect on embryonic viability (99.3%, n=376; Fig. 2C).
Simultaneously overexpressing Crk in the crkS-RNAi background restored viability to wild-type levels
(96.9% viability, n=385; Fig. 2C), supporting the idea that embryonic lethality of Crk knockdown was
due to on-target effects. Immunoblotting revealed that this restored total Crk levels (tagged plus
endogenous) to 11-15% of normal endogenous levels (Fig 2D). To verify this effect was due to Crk
overexpression and not due to titration of GAL4 by the presence of additional UAS-driven elements, we
overexpressed either GFP (Valium10 GFP) or a Golgi marker (UASp-GFP.Golgi) in the crkS-RNAi
background. Neither substantially rescued lethality (9.3% viability (n=387) and 9.0% viability (n=391)
respectively; Fig. 2C). We further verified the essential role of Crk in embryonic development using our
FRT-flanked allele, by expressing FLP recombinase in the female germline to delete the FRT-flanked
crk gene, creating females lacking maternally-contributed Crk. When these females were crossed to
crk heterozygous males, 78% of the embryos died (n=698), consistent with fully penetrant maternalzygotic lethality and only partial ability of the paternal zygotic gene to rescue viability. Thus, Crk is
essential for embryonic viability.
Loss of Crk disrupts embryonic morphogenesis and leads to formation of multinucleate
cells
As a first assessment of Crk’s role in embryonic development, we examined the cuticle secreted by
the epidermis to ask whether cell fates were properly determined, major morphogenetic movements like
head involution and dorsal closure successfully completed, and whether the epidermis remained intact
(Fig. 3A-G). crkS-RNAi and crkW-RNAi embryos exhibited certain characteristic defects, though at
different frequencies (Fig. 3A-H). crkS-RNAi embryos had stronger phenotypes, with substantial
disruption of epidermal integrity in most embryos. In 25% apparent cell loss occurred, leading to
deletion or fusion of denticle belts (Fig. 3B,G, red arrows, H). 20% had holes in the head, ventral or
dorsal cuticle (Fig 3C arrow, H), while 11% had more substantial pattern disruption (Fig. 3D arrows, H),
and 21% retained only fragments of cuticle (Fig. 3E arrow, H). In embryos in the first three categories,
we also noted mild to complete failure to complete germband retraction in 41% (Fig. 3F,G vs A,

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

magenta to black arrows). We suspect the phenotypic spectrum reflects the fact that embryos can
inherit one or two shRNA constructs. After crkW-RNAi most embryos secreted largely wildtype cuticles
(87%, including the 71% that hatched; Fig 3H). However, in 8% deletion or fusion of denticle belts was
observed (Fig 3H). 20% of the lethal embryos were also defective in germband retraction. We next
generated embryos maternally mutant for Crk, using FLP recombinase to excise the genomic rescue
construct in the female germline—half of these were also zygotically mutant. The spectrum of defects
was quite similar to those seen in crkS-RNAi. Roughly half, potentially those receiving a wildtype gene
zygotically, had wildtype cuticles or deletion or fusion of denticle belts (Fig. 3H). The other half had
more severe disruptions of the embryonic pattern or only fragments of cuticle (Fig 3H). Defects in head
involution, germband retraction and epidermal integrity are all shared with abl maternal/zygotic mutants
(Grevengoed et al., 2001; Rogers et al., 2016). The more severe pattern disruptions were similar to
those we observed in embryos maternally mutant for the septin protein Peanut (Adam et al., 2000),
suggesting the possibility that, as in peanut mutants, the underlying defects might occur very early,
when many cells were lost at or right after cellularization.
We extended this analysis by staining embryos with antibodies to phosphotyrosine (pTyr) to outline
cells, allowing rapid assessment of morphogenesis. We first examined embryos after morphogenesis
should largely be complete, at dorsal closure or later. We observed embryos with a range of defects
reflecting those seen in the cuticles (Fig 3I-N). Some were wildtype (Fig 3I), while others had mild
disruptions of the epidermal pattern or small holes in the epidermis (Fig 3J,K, arrows). In others
morphogenesis was more severely disrupted, with defects in head involution or more severe
disruptions in epidermal patterning (Fig. 3L, cyan arrow) or integrity (Fig 3L, red arrows: M). Embryos
with germband retraction defects were also observed (Fig 3N). Earlier stage mutants similarly exhibited
gaps in the embryonic pattern and holes in the ectoderm (Fig 3O-P). Most striking, we noted frequent
examples of multinucleate cells in the developing head (Fig 3O, box enlarged in S; Q) and at a lower
frequency in the thorax and abdomen (Fig 3P, box enlarged in T). Once again, these were defects we
had previously observed in both peanut (Adam et al., 2000) and abl maternal/zygotic mutants
(Grevengoed et al., 2003), both of which have defects in syncytial development and/or cellularization.
These results prompted us to begin a detailed analysis at these stages.
Loss of Crk disrupts the cytoskeletal events driving syncytial development
Our data suggested Crk knockdown or loss causes defects that precede the onset of
morphogenesis at gastrulation. Drosophila begins development as a syncytium with a series of nuclear
divisions without cytokinesis, and thus we examined these syncytial divisions to define the earliest role
of Crk. The last four rounds of nuclear division occur after nuclei have migrated to the embryo cortex,
thus setting the initial membrane and cytoskeletal polarity of the system (Mavrakis et al., 2009). The
nuclei become increasingly closely packed through these four rounds of mitosis and there is a dynamic
cycle of rearrangement of the actin and myosin cytoskeletons that prevents collision of adjacent mitotic
spindles, which could lead to aneuploidy. During interphase, actin forms “caps” at the cortex above

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

each nucleus. As spindle assembly begins, these actin caps expand, and when adjacent caps meet,
the cytoskeleton is driven inward into transient furrows that surround each mitotic spindle and insulate it
from its neighbors (Zhang et al., 2018). These pseudocleavage furrows recede as mitosis is completed
and caps re-form, beginning a new cycle. In mutants in which furrow formation is blocked or reduced
(e.g. Sullivan et al., 1993; Afshar et al., 2000; Zallen et al., 2002; Webb et al., 2009), spindles often
collide, leading to DNA damage and/or aneuploidy. This triggers a Chk2 -mediated response by which
aneuploid nuclei are removed from the embryo surface by “dropping” into the interior of the egg during
the next mitotic cycle (Takada et al., 2003). At the end of nuclear cycle 13, furrows form around each
nucleus and pull membranes downward, enclosing each nucleus in a cell, in a process called
cellularization. Actin rings stabilize yolk channels at the bottom of each new cell, connecting it to the
underlying yolk.
In wildtype the dynamic cycle of actin rearrangements ensures most syncytial mitoses occur without
errors. Nuclei are well spaced at cycle 10, not all caps encounter a neighbor, and furrows are relatively
shallow. Spindles assemble, and chromosomes segregate without errors (Fig. 4A). As each cycle
proceeds, nuclear density increases (Fig. 4C,E,G,J)—however, pseudocleavage furrows generally
succeed in maintaining spindle separation. In wildtype, occasional defects in spindle separation and
chromosome segregation occur in later cycles (1/8 and 4/19 cycle 11 and 12 embryos had 1-2 spindle
collisions per field of view; Fig. 4P). Defective nuclei are removed into the yolk in the next cycle. This
affects 2-3% of nuclei in wildtype (Sullivan et al., 1993). Centrosomes remain behind and continue to
organize the actin cytoskeleton into smaller caps and furrows (Fig. 4G, arrow). Nuclear loss tends to
affect small groups of neighboring nuclei. In wildtype, increasing numbers of cycle 11 or 12 embryos
had small patches of nuclear loss (4/8 and 13/19 at cycles 11 and 12, relative to 1/10 in cycle 10), but
there were only 1-4 patches per embryo and these included only a relatively small number of nuclei
(e.g. Fig 4G, arrow).
We first examined Crk localization during syncytial divisions, using our mNeonGreen-tagged
construct. Strikingly, Crk is enriched in both actin caps (Fig. 1H) and metaphase furrows (Fig. 1I),
consistent with the possibility that Crk plays a role in cytoskeletal regulation. We next examined the
effect of Crk knockdown. In crkS-RNAi embryos, nuclear cycle 10 proceeded relatively normally (Fig.
4B), though pseudocleavage furrows appeared less continuous (see below), and 2/7 embryos observed
had individual examples of spindles that had collided (quantified in Fig. 4P). However, by nuclear cycle
11, spindle defects became more frequent: in 7/8 embryos examined neighboring spindles collided (Fig.
4D,F, magenta arrows), often in places where pseudocleavage furrows were reduced or absent.
Embryos often had multiple examples in a single field of view (quantified in Fig. 4P). At cycle 11, the
frequency of embryos with regions of nuclear loss remained similar to that in wildtype (4/8 embryos
observed). However, by nuclear cycle 12 all crkS-RNAi embryos (33/33) had multiple spindle
collisions, and in the most severely affected these included a substantial fraction of the spindles in the
field of view (Fig 4H,I, arrowheads; K,M magenta arrows; quantified in Fig. 4P). The incidence of

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

nuclear loss increased (91% affected versus 68% in wildtype), and the fraction of nuclei involved was
much higher, with 71% having multiple groups of nuclei lost, including embryos in which this affected
much of the embryo surface (Fig. 4H-I, white arrows). We think the extensive nuclear loss likely
reflects the frequency of spindle collisions in the previous cycle. Spindle collisions and nuclear loss
were also observed in crk maternal mutants generated using our FRT flanked genomic constructs (Fig.
4N,O). These data reveal Crk plays an important role in regulating the intricate cytoskeletal
rearrangements of syncytial development.
At the end of the syncytial stage, cellularization forms the first cells (Lee and Harris, 2014; Schmidt
and Grosshans, 2018). An actomyosin ring assembles at the cortex above each nucleus—the rest of
the cortex is covered with actin-rich microvilli. Cofilin, Anillin, Septins, Rho-driven myosin contractility,
regulated actin assembly involving the formin Diaphanous, and regulation of membrane dynamics all
play roles (e.g., Grosshans et al., 2005; Padash Barmchi et al., 2005; Figard et al., 2016; Xue and
Sokac, 2016), driving the movement of these rings inward, enclosing each nucleus in a plasma
membrane (Fig. 5A-D, I). Both actin and myosin localize to the leading edge during this event (Fig. 5AD, cyan arrows). At the end of cellularization, the actomyosin rings constrict to partially close off each
cell, but this halts before completion, leaving an actin-lined “yolk channel” at the basal end of each cell
(Fig. 5K). Abl plays a role in this process (Grevengoed et al., 2003), and many genes involved in
syncytial divisions also play a role in cellularization. We thus examined cellularization after crk RNAi.
Several defects were readily apparent in most crkS-RNAi embryos. While in controls nuclei form a
uniform row of similar shape (Fig. 5A-C), in crkS-RNAi embryos nuclei were seen below this row (Fig.
5F,G, magenta arrows), likely representing nuclei removed from the surface in the previous syncytial
division. Nuclear shape was less uniform than in controls (Fig. 5E,F yellow arrows vs A,B), a
phenotype that can reflect premature closure of the actomyosin ring—the so-called bottleneck
phenotype (Schejter and Wieschaus, 1993). Viewed en face, actin rings in wildtype embryos are
largely uniform in shape and intensity, and each encloses a single nucleus (Fig. 5I). In contrast, after
crk RNAi, actin rings were less uniform, the actin staining at the border between two nuclear
compartments was sometimes less intense (Fig. 5J, magenta arrows), and in other cases it was
absent, leaving multiple nuclei in a single membrane compartment (Fig. 5J, yellow arrows). This
disruption of nuclear compartmentalization is a likely mechanism for the formation of multinucleate cells
we observed above. We also observed striking defects in yolk channels in Crk-depleted embryos.
While these are uniform in size and shape in wildtype (Fig. 5K), they varied dramatically in size and
shape following crkS-RNAi (Fig. 5L-N). Some channels were abnormally enlarged (Fig 5L, yellow
arrows), and others appeared to be separated by only a weak actin border (Fig. 5L, magenta arrows).
Other regions were devoid of yolk channels altogether—these often overlaid nuclei that had been
removed from the cortex (Fig. 5M, arrows). In the most severe cases, large regions of the embryo were
affected (Fig. 5N), as we had observed at the syncytial stages—these were prominent in the
presumptive head as gastrulation began (Fig. 5P, arrows). Defects in cellularization leading to variable

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

size yolk channels were also observed in crk maternal mutants generated using our FRT flanked
genomic construct (Fig. 5O). Intriguingly, live imaging revealed the ability of embryos to “repair” the
regions devoid of nuclei (Suppl. Movie 1), helping explain the embryos with pattern deletions we
observed at later stages. Together, these data reveal Crk is important for proper regulation of the
dynamic behavior of the actomyosin cytoskeleton during syncytial divisions and cellularization.
Crk is important for actin cap expansion and the resulting establishment of pseudocleavage
furrows
In some mutants with similar phenotypes, the primary defect is in proper formation of
pseudocleavage furrows, which form as expanding actomyosin caps collide (Zhang et al., 2018). We
thus focused our attention on this event, measuring maximum furrow depth at metaphase. We drew
lines across furrows separating neighboring nuclei (e.g., Fig. 6 A-F), reconstructed z-axis projections
from z-stacks, and used these to measure furrow depth. In wildtype, pseudocleavage furrows first form
during cycle 10, and then become sequentially deeper in the subsequent cycles. We compared furrow
depths in wildtype to those in crkS-RNAi embryos, choosing pairs of nuclei without spindle collisions to
avoid events biased by earlier furrow failure. As our en face views had suggested (Fig. 6 A vs B),
pseudocleavage furrows invagination was significantly shallower at cycle 10 (Fig. 6G, mean 1.96 µm in
wildtype versus 1.09µm in crkS-RNAi). This defect remained significant at cycles 11 (Fig. 6H, mean
2.42 µm in wildtype versus 1.89µm in crkS-RNAi) and 12 (Fig. 6I, mean 2.69 µm in wildtype versus
2.06 µm in crkS-RNAi). While remaining furrows were similar in depth at nuclear cycle 13 (Fig. 6J;
mean 3.18 µm in wildtype versus 3.26 µm in crkS-RNAi), by that stage spindle collisions were so
frequent in crkS-RNAi embryos that we could only measure furrows in the least affected embryos.
We also examined cap expansion directly, by using imaging of GFP fused to the F-actin binding
domain of Moesin (sGMCA; Edwards et al., 1997) to visualize the actin cytoskeleton in living embryos.
Our movies suggested cap expansion was less extensive in mutants (Suppl. Movie 2); this was
particularly striking in the early cycles in crkS-RNAi embryos. To quantify cap expansion, we focused
on cycle 10, when increased cap spacing allowed more accurate measurement of individual cap area.
We measured cap area both when caps first appeared at the surface of the embryo (Fig. 6K1,L1) and
again when they reached maximal expansion (Fig. 6K2,L2; see Methods for details). While starting cap
area was similar between wildtype and crkS-RNAi embryos, maximum cap area was significantly
reduced after crkS-RNAi (Fig 6M). We calculated the cap expansion rate by plotting the change in cap
area over time and found it was reduced following crkS-RNAi (Fig 6N), partially due to premature
termination of cap expansion (Fig 6O). However, overall length of nuclear cycle 10 (measured from
first cap appearance to the next cap appearance) was not significantly changed (Fig. 6P).
As actin caps collide, myosin becomes enriched at the cap borders and furrows (Zhang et al.,
2018). We visualized myosin live through the syncytial cycles using a GFP-tagged form of Myosin
Regulatory Light Chain (MRLC=Sqh::GFP; Suppl. Movie 3). Stills from the end of cap expansion
during nuclear cycles 10 and 11 are shown in Fig. 6Q-T. In wildtype myosin is clearly enriched at cap

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

margins at both nuclear cycles (Fig. 6Q,S, arrows). In contrast, myosin enrichment at cap margins
appeared substantially reduced in crkS-RNAi embryos (Fig. 6R,T, arrows). Together, these data
suggest the defects in syncytial divisions in crkS-RNAi embryos result from defects in actin dynamics,
with reduced cap expansion leading to shorter pseudocleavage furrows and subsequent spindle
collisions and nuclear loss.
Crk knockdown reduces levels of Arp2/3 and its activator SCAR in actin caps and
pseudocleavage furrows
The reduced expansion of actin caps and impaired establishment of pseudocleavage furrows,
suggested the possibility that the localization and/or activity of actin cytoskeletal regulators was altered
by loss of Crk. The Arp2/3 complex (Stevenson et al., 2002) and its upstream activator SCAR (Zallen et
al., 2002) are both required for actin cap expansion and pseudocleavage furrow formation during
syncytial development. Since Crk regulates Arp2/3-dependent actin remodeling in other cellular
contexts (e.g., myoblast fusion, phagocytosis, and immune synapse maturation), we hypothesized
localization and/or activity of the Arp2/3 complex or SCAR might be altered by loss of Crk. We tested
this hypothesis using quantitative imaging of Arp3 and SCAR localization to actin caps and
pseudocleavage furrows. To directly compare fluorescence intensity between genotypes, we stained
crkS-RNAi embryos together with embryos marked with Histone::RFP as internal, wild-type controls.
Compared to controls, SCAR intensity in both actin caps (Fig. 7B compared to A) and pseudocleavage
furrows (Fig. 7D compared to C) was significantly decreased following crkS-RNAi (Fig. 7F,H). Arp3
localization to both actin caps (Fig. 7J compared to I) and pseudocleavage furrows (Fig. 7L compared
to K) was also significantly reduced by crkS-RNAi (Fig. 7N,P). Quantification of phalloidin intensity
revealed F-actin levels were, on average, significantly reduced in both actin caps (Fig. 7B and J
compared to A and I, respectively; quantified in E,M) and pseudocleavage furrows (Fig. 7D and L
compared to C and K, respectively; quantified in G, O). Taken together, these data suggest the altered
actin cap dynamics and impaired pseudocleavage furrow formation observed after crkS-RNAi result
from altered localization and thus activity of the Arp2/3 complex and its upstream activator, SCAR.
Loss of Crk leads to defects in axon patterning in the central nervous system similar to
those seen in abl mutants
Based on Crk’s multiple roles in mammalian cells, we suspected Crk likely played additional roles in
Drosophila embryogenesis. We initiated work on Crk because we suspected it was a regulator or
effector of Abl kinase, as the PXXP motif within Abl that can bind Crk is essential for Abl function
(Rogers et al., 2016). Abl plays many roles in embryonic morphogenesis, but the best characterized
are its roles in the central nervous system (CNS), where it regulates axon outgrowth and pathfinding
(e.g. Gertler et al., 1989; Wills et al., 1999a; Wills et al., 1999b; Bashaw et al., 2000; Liebl et al., 2000;
Crowner et al., 2003; Forsthoefel et al., 2005). We first examined whether Crk was expressed in the
CNS, using our mNeonGreen-tagged rescue construct. Crk localized to the axon tracks of the CNS
(Fig 8A, cyan arrow), as well as to midline glia (Fig 8A, magenta arrow), suggesting Crk may play a role

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

in axon patterning. We thus examined the nervous systems of Crk knockdown embryos, using both our
strong and weak shRNA lines. We visualized axons using antibodies to BP102, which labels all CNS
axons (Seeger et al., 1993), and Fasciclin II (FasII), an adhesion molecule expressed on a subset of
CNS axons (Grenningloh et al., 1991).
In wildtype, CNS axons form a ladder-like array (Fig. 8F), with axons extending longitudinally on
either side of the midline (Fig 8F, cyan arrows) and crossing the midline at two commissures per body
segment (Fig 8F, magenta arrows). FasII-positive axons follow three parallel longitudinal tracks on
each side of the midline, and do not normally cross the midline (Fig. 8F”). Embryos maternally and
zygotically mutant for null alleles of abl exhibit a range of CNS defects (Rogers et al., 2016). Roughly
half have moderate defects in axon patterning, with frequent loss of commissures (Fig 8B). The other
half have more severe defects in axon patterning (Fig. 8C). Embryos mutant for abl∆CR1, in which the
PXXP motif is deleted, exhibit a similar range of defects (Fig 8D,E), though the penetrance is less
complete—22% are wildtype while 70% have commissural defects (Rogers et al., 2016). We thus
compared these defects to the effects of knocking down Crk.
crkS-RNAi led to substantial and highly penetrant defects in axon pattern (Fig 8F-H; quantified in I).
In 52% of embryos, there was severe disruption of nervous system patterning (e.g., Fig. 8H). 37% of
embryos had milder defects in axon patterning (Fig 8G), with inappropriate midline crossing of FasIIpositive axons (Fig. 8G, L magenta arrows), as well as loss of commissural (Fig 8J, arrow) or
longitudinal (Fig. 8G,K,L yellow arrows) axons in some segments (quantified in Fig 8M). 11% of
embryos had a normal CNS, consistent with the embryonic viability data after strong knockdown. This
range of defects was similar to what we previously observed in abl maternal/zygotic mutants or after
mutation of Abl’s PXXP motif (Fig 8B-E; (Grevengoed et al., 2001; Rogers et al., 2016), though total
loss of commissures was less frequent after Crk knockdown. crkW-RNAi produced weaker and less
penetrant defects (quantified in Fig. 8I,M). Only 7% of embryos had severe CNS disruption, once again
consistent with the reduced embryonic lethality. However, 39% had milder but still significant CNS
defects, once again ranging from loss of longitudinal or commissural axons in some segments to
inappropriate midline crossing of FasII-positive axons.
Because crkS-RNAi leads to major defects in cellularization, including cell loss at gastrulation
onset, we suspected many of the severe CNS defects might be a secondary consequence of these
earlier defects, with loss of ectodermal cells that should have become neuroblasts. However, crkWRNAi results in fewer major morphogenesis defects (Fig. 3), suggesting some of the milder defects we
observed might be due to effects of Crk knockdown in the CNS itself. To assess this, we examined
epidermal integrity and CNS patterning in the same embryos, using an antibody to phosphotyrosine
(pTyr) to outline epidermal cells and antibodies to BP102 and FasII to examine the underlying nervous
system (Suppl. Fig. 3). As we suspected, most embryos with strong defects in the CNS also had strong
defects in the overlying epidermis, ranging from epidermal holes to strong disruptions to the epidermal
pattern (Suppl. Fig. 3A, B arrows), consistent with early cell loss. In other cases, more subtle epidermal

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

defects, such as denticle belt fusions, also correlated with underlying CNS defects (Suppl. Fig. 3C,
arrow). However, we also observed mild CNS defects in some embryos in which the overlying
epidermis was intact Suppl. Fig. 3D,E arrows), keeping open the possibility that Crk also plays
important CNS-intrinsic roles.
Crk is not essential for the patterns of expression of the guidance cues Slit and Robo, but
may play more subtle roles in Slit/Robo signaling
A variety of axon guidance cues shape the pattern of the CNS. Among these is Slit-Robo signaling.
The Robo receptor is expressed on a subset of CNS axons (Fig. 9A, cyan arrows). Slit is expressed by
midline glial cells (Fig 9D, magenta arrows), and acts as a repulsive ligand for the Robo receptor, so
that axons expressing Robo strictly follow longitudinal axon pathways (Fig. 9A, cyan arrows) and do not
cross the midline (Fig. 9A, magenta arrows; Blockus and Chedotal, 2016). Slit/Robo signaling requires
Abl function (Bashaw et al., 2000). The midline crossing defects seen following Crk knockdown could
reflect defects in Slit or Robo expression or function. We assessed this by examining expression
patterns of both proteins. In wildtype, Robo is expressed in a subset of axons that all follow the
longitudinal axon tracks (Fig. 9A, cyan arrows), and is not expressed on axons that cross the midline
(Fig. 9A, magenta arrows). Slit is expressed in glial cells along the midline (Fig. 9D, magenta arrows),
where the commissural axons cross. We examined Slit and Robo expression patterns in a subset of
Crk knockdown embryos in which the CNS was not totally disrupted. Most Crk knockdown embryos
retained clear enrichment of Robo expression in the longitudinal tracts (Fig 9B,C, cyan arrows), though
these were often displaced laterally. The fact that most Robo-positive axons remained restricted to
longitudinal tracks suggested midline repulsion was not completely inactivated. However, while some
axons crossing the midline were Robo-negative (Fig. 9B,C, magenta arrows), a subset of Roboexpressing axons did cross the midline (Fig. 9C, green arrows), suggesting Slit/Robo signaling may be
impaired following Crk loss. In Crk knockdown embryos in which the nervous system was only mildly
disrupted, Slit expression remained confined to the midline glia (Fig. 9E, magenta arrows). However, in
embryos with more severely disrupted nervous systems, Slit-expressing cells were sometimes
displaced (Fig. 9F, yellow arrows). Thus, Crk does not appear to be required for the basic expression
pattern of Robo or Slit, and its knockdown does not fully abrogate midline repulsion. However, the
severity of the CNS disruptions observed made it impossible to definitively determine whether Crk plays
more subtle roles in Slit-Robo signaling. Together, this work suggests Crk may play two roles in CNS
patterning: one indirect, via maintaining the survival of neural precursors just following cellularization,
and one CNS intrinsic in axon patterning. However, this latter role remains speculative.
Crk is required for timely wound healing in the embryonic epidermis
Another embryonic process requiring coordinated regulation of adhesion and actin dynamics is
embryonic wound healing (e.g. Martin and Lewis, 1992; Wood et al., 2002; Abreu-Blanco et al., 2012;
Fernandez-Gonzalez and Zallen, 2013). Embryonic wounds are repaired through the collective
movements of the cells around the wound. Upon wounding, the cells immediately adjacent to the

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

wound polarize their actin cytoskeleton and assemble a supracellular actin cable that coordinates cell
movements. This process is tightly coordinated with dynamic changes in cell-cell adhesion (reviewed in
Hunter and Fernandez-Gonzalez, 2017). Abl is required for efficient wound closure, via effects on the
organization of filamentous actin and the reorganization of cell-cell junctions at the wound margin
(Zulueta-Coarasa et al., 2014).
We thus investigated whether Crk plays a role in the collective movements that drive embryonic
wound closure, by quantifying wound healing dynamics in control versus crkS-RNAi embryos (Figure
10A,B). We used laser ablation to induce wounds in the ventral epidermis of stage 14-15 embryos
expressing E-cadherin::GFP, which outlines cells and allows us to visualize cell behavior during wound
closure. In wildtype embryos, wounds close rapidly, with almost complete closure after 45 minutes (Fig
10A). Wounds closed more slowly in crkS-RNAi embryos (Figure 10B, quantified in C). The rate of
wound closure (measured as the decay constant of an exponential fit to the wound area vs. time curve
of each wound) decreased by 43% in crkS-RNAi embryos with respect to controls (2.5 ± 0.3 hr1 versus.
4.4 ± 0.5 hr1, respectively) (mean ± SEM). Consistent with this, when we previously measured the rate
of closure during the fast phase of wound repair in abl maternal/zygotic mutants, it was 37% slower
than in wildtype embryos (Zulueta-Coarasa et al., 2014). Thus, wound closure provides another
example of a morphogenetic process requiring both Abl and Crk.
Discussion
Small adapter proteins play key roles in assembling multiprotein signaling complexes, mediating the
interface between cell surface receptors and downstream effectors. The Crk family provides an
example. We developed new genetic tools that allowed us to fully assess the role of Crk in embryonic
development, revealing novel roles in the cytoskeletal events of syncytial development and
cellularization, in central nervous system development, and in embryonic wound healing.
Crk is an important regulator of actin dynamics during syncytial development and
cellularization, acting via SCAR and the Arp2/3 complex
The Drosophila syncytial and cellularizing blastoderm provides a superb model for studying
dynamic cytoskeletal rearrangements. During each of the last four nuclear cycles, the actin
cytoskeleton undergoes a dynamic set of rearrangements. The sequential formation of actin caps and
pseudocleavage furrows are critical to allow the underlying nuclei to accurately segregate
chromosomes. The subsequent coordinated movement of actin rings around each nucleus and their
incomplete closure during cellularization leads to the formation of the initial polarized epithelium. Our
data reveal that these coordinated events require Crk function and suggest that defects in actin cap
expansion and pseudocleavage furrow invagination after Crk knockdown lead to defects in separation
of mitotic spindles and subsequent nuclear loss.
During the normal syncytial division cycles actin caps expand and collide, with collision driving
furrow ingression (Zhang et al., 2018). Growth of the actin caps requires the DOCK-family guanine

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

nuclear exchange factor Sponge (Postner et al., 1992), the Arp2/3 regulator SCAR (Zallen et al., 2002),
and the Arp2/3 complex (Stevenson et al., 2002). Data also support a role for the small GTPase Rac,
downstream of Sponge and upstream of SCAR (Zhang et al., 2018). The known physical interactions
of Crk with DOCK family members and its role in DOCK/ELMO/Rac1 pathways in phagocytic
clearance, nervous system remodeling, thoracic closure, and border cell migration are thus intriguing in
this regard. The roles for Crk we documented in enhancing cap expansion and furrow invagination are
consistent with it playing a role in this pathway, as are the effects of Crk knockdown on levels of SCAR,
Arp3, and branched F-actin in actin caps and furrows. Thus, Crk may act upstream of SCAR, although
roles in regulating other important players like the formin Diaphanous, Anillin, or the septin Peanut have
not been ruled out (Fares et al., 1995; Field and Alberts, 1995; Adam et al., 2000; Afshar et al., 2000;
Field et al., 2005). Our data are also consistent with a role for Crk in cellularization, though at this
stage the exact mechanisms involved and the extent to which this is a primary role or a secondary
effect of defects in syncytial divisions remain unclear.
Much work remains to clearly define the pathways and mechanistic connections driving actin
rearrangements during syncytial development. For example, the upstream, initiating regulators of this
process have yet to be identified. Unlike in myoblast fusion or in RTK-dependent actin remodeling,
there is no known role for transmembrane receptors in actin remodeling during syncytial development.
Centrosomes play an important role, and can continue to organize actin cap and furrow dynamics even
in the absence of nuclei (Raff and Glover, 1989; Stevenson et al., 2001), but the mechanisms by which
they communicate with the DOCK-family GEF Sponge and ultimately activate SCAR remain unknown.
While recent data is consistent with Rac being a downstream effector (Zhang et al., 2018), other data
suggest Rap1 acts downstream of Sponge during cellularization (Schmidt et al., 2018), as it does in
later embryonic events (Biersmith et al., 2015). Intriguingly, C3G, a Rap1 guanine-nucleotide exchange
factor, was the first Crk SH3-domain interacting protein identified (Knudsen et al., 1994; Tanaka et al.,
1994). Src/Crk/C3G/Rap1 signaling is involved in activation of Cdc42 during nectin-induced adherens
junction formation (Fukuyama et al., 2005). In T-cells, Rap1 activation and integrin-dependent adhesion
downstream of T-cell receptor engagement is dependent on both Abl activity and CrkL/C3G recruitment
to the plasma membrane (Nolz et al., 2008). It will be exciting to explore these mechanistic
connections further, and to examine potential roles of other pathway members like Verprolin 1 (Kim et
al., 2007), and its upstream regulator Blown fuse (Jin et al., 2011).
Crk plays additional roles in the central nervous system and in wound healing
We suspected Crk’s roles would not be restricted to early events, but the major defects in syncytial
development and cellularization posed a challenge in determining whether defects in later events were
a primary or secondary consequence. For example, we suspect the major disruption of the central
nervous system seen in a subset of Crk knockdown embryos reflects early cell loss of both epidermal
and neural precursors. This is supported by the strong, though not complete, correlation between
defects in the central nervous system (CNS) and defects in the overlying epidermis. In the future it will

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

be important to directly examine stages when neuroblasts invaginate to test this hypothesis. However,
our range of knockout and RNAi tools helped circumvent this difficulty. Another subset of embryos,
particularly those in the crkW-RNAi background, had more mild CNS defects even when the overlying
epidermis was intact. These data are consistent with Crk playing a more direct role in axon guidance.
Intriguingly, abl (Rogers et al., 2016), SCAR (Zallen et al., 2002), and sponge/mbc loss (Biersmith et
al., 2011) all can lead to CNS defects similar to those seen after Crk knockdown. Crk knockdown also
modifies photoreceptor axon targeting defects arising from overexpression of Eyes absent (Hoi et al.,
2016), an event also regulated by Abl (Xiong et al., 2009). Our data also suggest that not all Robopositive axons respect the normal midline repulsive signals after Crk knockdown, although basic Robo
and Slit expression patterns are intact. Future work should directly explore the role of Crk in axon
guidance and examine genetic interactions between crk and known players in this process.
Development of tools to target Crk for proteasomal destruction in specific tissues (e.g., Caussinus and
Affolter, 2016)) would be particularly valuable. For example, tissue-specific degradation of Crk could
provide new insight into its potential roles in myoblast fusion or axon patterning.
Our examination of embryonic wound healing provided a second place where Crk plays a role postgastrulation. Wound healing requires a complex interplay between cell adhesion and the actomyosin
cytoskeleton (reviewed in Hunter and Fernandez-Gonzalez, 2017). Actin and myosin rapidly
accumulate at the wound edge, forming a supracellular contractile cable that coordinates cell
movements to help drive rapid wound closure. In parallel, cell-cell junctions are re-modeled, with
concentration of the cadherin-catenin complex at tricellular junctions along the wound edge. Our
analysis revealed that Crk knockdown slows wound healing. Intriguingly, Abl loss has a similar effect,
and in the case of Abl its loss impairs both actin organization at the wound edge and enrichment of the
cadherin-catenin complex at tricellular junctions (Zulueta-Coarasa et al., 2014). SCAR is also critical
for embryonic wound healing (Matsubayashi et al., 2015). In the future it will be important to explore
which cell biological events required for wound healing are regulated by Crk. Germband retraction is a
third post-gastrulation event our data suggest requires Crk. Cell-matrix adhesion plays a key role in
this process, in which different tissues exert mechanical force upon one another (reviewed in Lacy and
Hutson, 2016). Once again, Abl loss has a parallel effect (Grevengoed et al., 2001) to that of loss of
Crk. This will provide another place where the cell biological roles of Crk can be explored.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Methods and Materials
Fly husbandry and cuticle preparation
All stocks were maintained on standard cornmeal agar media at room temperature or 25°C. All
RNAi crosses and controls were maintained at 25°C. Stocks used are described in Table 1. We used
RNAi to generate embryos with reduced maternal and zygotic Crk as follows. We used two
independent UAS-driven shRNA lines targeting different regions of crk, developed by the Transgenic
RNAi Project (TRiP; (Perkins et al., 2015))—HMC03964 (use of which is referred to as crkS-RNAi) and
HMJ22995 (use of which is referred to as crkW-RNAi). Both shRNA constructs are in a VALIUM20
backbone and are inserted in the same genomic locus (attP40) using PhiC31-mediated integration,
making them directly comparable. We generated females carrying two copies of mata-tubulin-GAL4
(one copy on the second and one on the third chromosome) and a single copy of the indicated UASshRNA construct. These females were setup in cups with males either homozygous (crkS-RNAi) or
heterozygous (crkW-RNAi) for the indicated UAS-shRNA and allowed to lay eggs for the appropriate
period. For mNG::3XFLAG::Crk overexpression, we generated females carrying two copies of matatubulin GAL4 and a single copy of UASp-mNG::3XFLAG::dCrk. These females were mated to
homozygous UASp-mNG::3XFLAG::dCrk males and allowed to lay eggs for the appropriate period. For
simultaneous knockdown/overexpression, we generated a second chromosome bearing both UASpmNG::3XFLAG::dCrk and UAS-crkS-RNAi using standard recombination and generated embryos as
described above. To generate crk germline clones, we generated females that were heterozygous for
the indicated FRT-flanked rescue construct over crkΔattP and were simultaneously carrying a single copy
of ovo-FLP. These females were crossed to y, w; crkΔattP/In(4) ciD ciD panciD males in cups and allowed
to lay eggs for the appropriate period. Cuticle preparations were performed as described in Wieschaus
and Nüsslein-Volhard (1986)
Generation of Crk antibody
The ORF from crk isoform RA was PCR-amplified from a gBlocks Gene Fragment (IDT, Coralville,
IA, USA) using the primers listed below and cloned into the NdeI/EcoRI sites of pET28P (6XHis-dCrk)
or the BamHI/EcoRI sites of pGEX-6P-2 (GST-dCrk). Resulting clones were screened by restriction
digest and verified using Sanger sequencing.
PCR Primers (restriction sites in bold, target sequence underlined)
pET28P

Forward: 5’-ACTGCATATGGATACATTTGACGTTTCTGA-3’

Reverse: 5’-ACTGGAATTCTTAGCATATTTCTGTGGAGTTTTTG-3’
pGEX-6-P2

Forward: 5’-ACTGGGATCCATGGATACATTTGACGTTTCTGA-3’

Reverse: 5’-ACTGGAATTCTTAGCATATTTCTGTGGAGTTTTTG-3’
Recombinant protein was expressed in BL21 Star (DE3) cells and purified using standard affinity
chromatography techniques. Pocono Rabbit Farm & Laboratory, Inc. (Canadensis, PA, USA) raised
antisera against 6XHIS-dCrk in two rabbits. Antisera were affinity-purified against GST-dCrk using
standard techniques prior to use for Western blot analysis.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Generation of a crk null allele
The crk null allele, crkDattP, was generated by using CRISPR to replace the entire crk locus
(beginning 110bp upstream of transcription start site and ending 99bp beyond the 3’UTR) with a 50
base-pair attP phage recombination site and positive marker (a loxP-flanked 3xP3-DsRed cassette) as
described in (Gratz et al., 2014). Briefly, guide RNAs flanking the crk locus were selected using
flyCRISPR Target Finder (http://tools.flycrispr.molbio.wisc.edu/targetFinder/) to identify 19-20bp
CRISPR targets with NGG PAM sites and zero predicted off-target effects using maximum stringency.
Annealed gRNA oligo nucleotides were cloned into the BbsI site of pU6-BbsI-chiRNA. We generated a
dsDNA donor template for homology-directed repair by cloning upstream and downstream flanking
regions of the crk locus into the AarI and SapI sites of pHD-DsRed-attP, respectively. An 815bp
upstream homology region, extending from 5’-CTTGAGCATGCAAAGGAATG-… to
…GCTGACAGTACGTCCT-3’ and flanked by AarI sites was synthesized as a gBlocks Gene Fragment
(IDT, Coralville, IA, USA). A 1kb downstream homology region was PCR amplified from genomic DNA
using the primers described below. An injection mixture containing both U6-gRNA plasmids (75ng/ul
each) and the dsDNA template (250ng/ul) was injected into y1, M{vas-Cas9.RFP-}ZH-2A, w1118 flies.
Injections performed by BestGene, Inc. (Chino Hills, CA, USA). Surviving G0 animals were outcrossed
to y w and CRISPR edited lines were identified by the presence of DsRed eye fluorescence. DsRed
positive G1 animals were further outcrossed to y w to remove M{vas-Cas9.RFP-}ZH-2A and
subsequently established as stocks over In(4) ciD, ciD panciD. Deletion of the crk locus was verified by
PCR using the primers described below.
Oligo nucleotides for gRNA1:
Target (PAM underlined): GCTGACAGTACGTCCTAAAGGG
Sense oligo: 5’-CTTCGCTGACAGTACGTCCTAAA-3’
Antisense oligo: 5’-AAACTTTAGGACGTACTGTCAGC -3’
Oligo nucleotides for gRNA2:
Target (PAM underlined): GAATTGTGTAACTAAACGGTAGG
Sense oligo: 5’-CTTCGAATTGTGTAACTAAACGGT-3’
Antisense oligo: 5’-AAACACCGTTTAGTTACACAATTC-3’
Primers for PCR amplification of downstream homology region (Sap1 site in bold, target sequence
underlined):
Forward: 5’-GACTGCTCTTCATATTGCTACAGAAAACCCTTTGG -3'
Reverse: 5’- GACTGCTCTTCAGACGAACATAGACAGCACAAGTTTGTTG -3'
Primers for PCR verification of crk locus deletion:
Detection of DsRed:
Forward: 5’-CGAGGACGTCATCAAGGAGT-3’
Reverse: 5’-GGTGATGTCCAGCTTGGAGT-3’
Flanking upstream HR:

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Forward: 5’-AATTGCGCGCTGTTAAAAAT-3’
Reverse: 5’-GCTTCGAGCCGATTGTTTAG-3’
Flanking Downstream HR:
Forward: 5’-GTGGACTCCAAGCTGGACAT-3’
Reverse: 5’-TAACAGGCAAAAACGCTTCC-3’
Generation of rescue constructs for PhiC31 integrase-mediated targeting into crk∆attP
The following rescue constructs were generated by introducing the indicated PCR amplified
fragments into EcoRI/KpnI linearized pGE-attBGMR ((Huang et al., 2009) using NEBuilder HiFi DNA
Assembly (New England Biolabs). We generated a genomic rescue construct by PCR amplifying a
3,151bp fragment of the crk locus, extending from 5’-AAAGGGGTTTACCACCACAG-3’… to …5’TTGTGTAACTAAACGGTAGG-3’ from genomic DNA—this rescue construct corresponds to the exact
sequence deleted in generation of crk∆attP.
Primers used (overlap with pGE-attBGMR in lowercase, target sequence underlined):
Forward: 5’-gctccccgggcgcgtactccacgaattcAAAGGGGTTTACCACCAC-3’
Reverse: 5’-attatacgaagttatggtacCCTACCGTTTAGTTACACAATTC-3’
We generated a cDNA-based rescue construct using the ORF from crk isoform RA by assembling
the following PCR amplified fragments into EcoRI/KpnI linearized pGE-attBGMR:
5’ deleted region (includes 5’UTR and 110bp upstream of the transcription start site):
Primers used (overlap with neighboring fragment in lowercase, target sequence underlined):
Forward: 5’- gggctccccgggcgcgtactccacgaattcAAAGGGGTTTACCACCAC-3'
Reverse: 5’- tgtcttcttcacctttggaaaccatTTCCGTTTAAGGTTTATCTTAGAC-3'
mNG::3XFLAG::dCrk (synthesized as a gBlocks Gene Fragment (IDT, Coralville, IA, USA),
3XFLAG sequence in bold, dCrk-RA sequence underlined):
ATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAGGAGGATAACATGGCCTCTCTCCCAGCGACACATGAGTTACACAT
CTTTGGCTCCATCAACGGTGTGGACTTTGACATGGTGGGTCAGGGCACCGGCAATCCAAATGATG
GTTATGAGGAGTTAAACCTGAAGTCCACCAAGGGTGACCTCCAGTTCTCCCCCTGGATTCTGGTC
CCTCATATCGGGTATGGCTTCCATCAGTACCTGCCCTACCCTGACGGGATGTCGCCTTTCCAGGC
CGCCATGGTAGATGGCTCCGGCTACCAAGTCCATCGCACAATGCAGTTTGAAGATGGTGCCTCCC
TTACTGTTAACTACCGCTACACCTACGAGGGAAGCCACATCAAAGGAGAGGCCCAGGTGAAGGGG
ACTGGTTTCCCTGCTGACGGTCCTGTGATGACCAACTCGCTGACCGCTGCGGACTGGTGCAGGTC
GAAGAAGACTTACCCCAACGACAAAACCATCATCAGTACCTTTAAGTGGAGTTACACCACTGGAAA
TGGCAAGCGCTACCGGAGCACTGCGCGGACCACCTACACCTTTGCCAAGCCAATGGCGGCTAAC
TATCTGAAGAACCAGCCGATGTACGTGTTCCGTAAGACGGAGCTCAAGCACTCCAAGACCGAGCT
CAACTTCAAGGAGTGGCAAAAGGCCTTTACCGATGTGATGGGCATGGACGAGCTGTACAAGATGG
ACTACAAAGACCATGACGGTGATTATAAAGATCATGACATCGATTACAAGGATGACGATGACAA
GATGGATACATTTGACGTTTCTGATAGGAACAGCTGGTACTTTGGTCCCATGTCTAGACAGGATGC
TACTGAAGTTTTGATGAACGAACGCGAGCGGGGAGTGTTTTTAGTCCGTGATAGTAACTCGATAGC

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

AGGGGATTATGTACTTTGTGTAAGAGAAGATACAAAAGTTAGCAACTACATCATTAACAAAGTTCAA
CAACAGGATCAAATCGTTTACCGCATTGGGGATCAGTCTTTTGACAATCTACCGAAACTCTTAACTT
TTTACACTCTTCATTATTTGGATACAACCCCTTTAAAACGGCCTGCGTGTAGAAGGGTGGAAAAAG
TAATAGGAAAGTTCGATTTCGTTGGCAGCGATCAAGATGATTTACCTTTTCAAAGAGGTGAAGTTTT
AACAATAGTTCGAAAAGACGAGGATCAATGGTGGACTGCGCGTAACTCCTCGGGGAAAATTGGTC
AAATACCGGTTCCCTATATACAACAGTATGACGATTATATGGATGAAGATGCTATTGATAAAAACGA
ACCTTCCATTTCGGGATCTAGCAATGTATTTGAAAGTACTCTTAAAAGGACAGATTTAAATCGAAAA
CTACCTGCATACGCCCGCGTAAAACAGTCAAGGGTCCCTAACGCATACGATAAGACTGCATTAAAA
TTGGAAATAGGTGACATTATTAAAGTCACTAAAACAAACATTAATGGGCAATGGGAGGGAGAATTA
AATGGAAAAAATGGTCATTTTCCCTTCACGCACGTTGAATTTGTCGATGATTGTGATTTAAGCAAAA
ACTCCACAGAAATATGCTAA
3’ deleted region (includes 3’UTR and 99bp downstream):
Primers used (overlap with neighboring fragment in lowercase, target sequence underlined):
Forward: 5’- caaaaactccacagaaatatgctaaATAGGAAGGAATGGAAGG-3'
Reverse: 5’- catacattatacgaagttatggtacCCTACCGTTTAGTTACACAATTC-3'
For our FRT-flanked rescue constructs, we introduced flanking FRT sites 104bp upstream of the
transcription start site and 99bp downstream of the end of the 3’UTR using a Q5 Site-Directed
Mutagenesis kit (New England Biolabs) and the following primers:
Upstream FRT (FRT sequence in lowercase, target sequence underlined):
Forward: 5’-tagagaataggaacttcGTTTACCACCACAGAGCAG-3’
Reverse: 5’-gaaagtataggaacttcaCCCTTTGAATTCGTGGAG-3’
Downstream FRT (FRT sequence in lowercase, target sequence underlined):
Forward: 5’-tagagaataggaacttcGTACCATAACTTCGTATAATG-3’
Reverse: 5’-gaaagtataggaaCTTCACCTACCGTTTAGTTACAC-3’
All rescue constructs were verified by a combination of PCR, restriction digest, and Sanger
sequencing prior to injection. Transgenic lines were generated by co-injecting rescue constructs and
PhiC31 helper plasmid into y, w; crkDattP/ In(4) ciD, ciD panciD embryos. Injections performed by
BestGene, Inc. (Chino Hills, CA, USA).
Generation of Crk overexpression constructs
We generated two constructs for overexpressing fluorescent protein-tagged Crk using the
UAS/GAL4 system—mNG-3XFLAG-Crk and tdTomato-3XFLAG-Crk. mNG-3XFLAG-Crk was
generated by cloning PCR amplified mNG-3XFLAG-dCrk into the KpnI/SphI sites of pTIGER (Ferguson
et al., 2012; Scott Ferguson, Fredonia University). Similarly, tdTomato-3XFLAG-Crk was generated by
sequentially cloning PCR amplified tdTomato and 3XFLAG-Crk sequences into the KpnI/NotI and
NotI/SphI sites of pTIGER, respectively. Constructs were verified using both restriction digest and
Sanger sequencing. Transgenic lines were generated using PhiC31 integrase-mediated site-specific

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

integration into attP16 on 2R (Bloomington Stock #53C4; y1, w67c23; P{CaryP}attP16). Injections were
performed by BestGene, Inc. (Chino Hills, CA, USA).
Primers used:
mNG::3XFLAG::Crk (restriction sites in bold, Kozac consensus sequence in lowercase, target
sequence underlined)
Forward: 5’-GACTGGTACCcaccATGGTTTCCAAAGGTGAAGAA-3'
Reverse: 5’-ACTGGCATGCTTAGCATATTTCTGTGGAGTTTTTG-3'
3XFLAG::Crk (restriction sites in bold, target sequence underlined)
Forward: 5’- GACTGCGGCCGCAATGGACTACAAGGATCATGACGG-3'
Reverse: 5’-ACTGGCATGCTTAGCATATTTCTGTGGAGTTTTTG-3'
tdTomato (restriction sites in bold, Kozac consensus sequence in lowercase, target sequence
underlined)
Forward: 5’-GACTGGTACCcaccATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAG -3'
Reverse: 5’-ACTGGCGGCCGCCTTGTACAGCTCGTCCATGC -3'
Western blotting
Flies were allowed to lay eggs on apple juice agar plates with yeast paste for the indicated time.
Dechorionated embryos were lysed by manual homogenization in ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer [1% NP-40;
0.5% Na deoxycholate; 0.1% SDS; 50mM Tris, pH 8; 300mM NaCl; 1X Halt protease and phosphatase
inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific)]. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 21,000g at 4°C for 1
min and protein concentration determined using Bio-Rad Protein Assay Dye. Normalized samples were
mixed 1:1 with 2X SDS Sample Buffer and boiled for 5 min. Samples were either run immediately or
stored at -20°C and boiled 5 min prior to running on 10% SDS-PAGE and transferring to nitrocellulose.
Blots were blocked in 5% milk in TBST (0.1% Tween20 in Tris-buffered saline, pH 7.6). Western blots
were probed with mouse anti-gTubulin (1:2,500) (GTU-88, Sigma Aldrich), and Rabbit anti-dCrk
(1:10,000). Secondary antibodies used were IRDye-conjugated donkey anti-mouse (1:5,000) and goat
anti-rabbit (1:5,000). Blots were imaged using Odyssey CLx infrared imaging system (LI-COR
Biosciences). Band densitometry performed using ImageStudio software version 4.0.21 (LI-COR
Biosciences). Statistical comparisons were made using unpaired t-tests in Prim8 (GraphPad).
Immunofluorescence and image analysis
Flies were allowed to lay eggs for the appropriate time for the desired stages of development on
apple juice/agar plates with yeast paste. Embryos were dechorionated in 50% bleach, washed 3X in
0.1% Triton-X, and fixed at room temperature in 1:1 heptane/formaldehyde diluted in phosphatebuffered saline (PBS). For phalloidin staining, syncytial embryos were fixed for 30min using 18.5%
formaldehyde and devitellinized by either hand peeling or shaking in 1:1 heptane/90% ethanol. In all
other instances, embryos were fixed for 20min using 4% formaldehyde and devitellinized by shaking in
1:1 heptane/methanol. Embryos were blocked in PNT (PBS, 0.1% Triton-X100, and 1% normal goat
serum) for ≥30 min followed by incubation with primary antibodies diluted in PNT at room temperature

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

for 4 h or overnight at 4°C. Following washing three times with PBT (PBS, 0.1% Triton-X100), embryos
were incubated in secondary antibodies diluted in PNT at room temperature for 2 h or overnight at 4°C.
Embryos were washed three times with PBT and mounted on glass slides using Aquapolymount
(Polysciences, Warrington, PA). Imaging was done on a Zeiss (Oberkochen, Germany) LSM-5 Pascal,
a Zeiss 710, or a Zeiss 880 scanning confocal microscope. Primary antibodies used were: anti-BP102
(1:200), anti-FasII (1:100), anti-Robo (1:100), anti-SCAR (1:50), anti-Slit (1:10; all from the
Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA); anti-Arp3 (1:500; (Stevenson et al., 2002)),
anti-pTyr (1:1,000; 4G10 clone; EMD Millipore); and anti-aTubulin (1:2,000; DM1A clone; Sigma).
Secondary antibodies used were: Alexa Fluor 488, 568, and 647 conjugated Goat anti-mouse (pan or
isotype-specific as required), Goat anti-rat, or Goat anti-rabbit secondaries (1:500; Life Technologies).
Other stains used: Alexa Fluor 488, 568, or 647 conjugated phalloidin (1:500; Life Technologies),
DRAQ7 (1:500; BD Biosciences), and AF647 wheat germ agglutinin (1:1,000; Life Technologies).
Analysis of SCAR and Arp3 localization
To be able to directly compare fluorescent intensity levels, wild-type control (Histone::RFP) and
crkS-RNAi embryos were collected and processed in the same tube. Embryo fixation and staining
carried out as described above in Immunofluoresence and image analysis. Embryos were fixed in
18.5% formaldehyde diluted in PBS for 30min at room temperature and devitellinized using 1:1
heptane/90% ethanol. Images were acquired as 8-bit, single plane confocal sections using a Zeiss
(Oberkochen, Germany) LSM-5 Pascal. All images within a given experiment were acquired using the
same settings (i.e., laser power, gain, offset, etc.). These confocal sections were taken at the level in
which actin caps or pseudocleavage furrows appeared most obvious for each embryo. To measure
fluorescent intensity in caps, we used the Fiji distribution of ImageJ (version 1.52N; (Schindelin et al.,
2012; Rueden et al., 2017)) to draw 30 pixel diameter circles, centered over 10 randomly selected caps
for each embryo analyzed and recorded mean gray values at each position. To measure fluorescent
intensity in pseudocleavage furrows, we freehand drew 3-pixel wide lines over 10 randomly selected
pseudocleavage furrows and recorded mean gray values at each position. We compared fluorescent
intensity levels for SCAR, Arp3, and phalloidin between genotypes by plotting the mean gray values for
each individual cap or pseudocleavage furrow measured. Statistical comparisons made using unpaired
t-tests in Prism8 (GraphPad).
Wound healing assays
Crk knockdown was achieved by crossing mat67, endo-D-E-cadherin:GFP; mat15 virgins to crkSRNAi/CyO; Pri/TM3 males. mat67, endo-DE-cadherin:GFP/crkS-RNAi; mat15/(Pri or TM3) virgins were
subsequently crossed to crkS-RNAi males, and their progeny were wounded and imaged. The progeny
of mat67, endo-DE-cadherin:GFP/CyO; mat15/(Pri or TM3) virgins crossed to y, w males were used as
controls. For wound healing assays, stage 14-15 embryos were dechorionated for two minutes in 50%
bleach. Embryos were arranged on an apple juice-agar pad with the ventral side down and transferred
to a coverslip coated with heptane glue. Embryos were then covered with a 1:1 mix of halocarbon oil

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

27:700 (Sigma Aldrich). Embryos were imaged using a Revolution XD spinning disk confocal
microscope (Andor Technology) with an iXon Ultra 897 camera (Andor Technology), a 60X (NA 1.35;
Olympus) oil-immersion lens, and Metamorph software (Molecular Devices). Wounding was performed
using a Micropoint nitrogen dye cell laser (Andor Technology) tuned to 365 nm. To wound the embryos,
10 laser pulses were delivered at spots 2 μm apart along a 14 μm line. 16-bit Z-stacks consisting of 16
slices at 0.2 μm steps were acquired every 30 seconds after wounding. Maximum intensity projections
of time-lapse images were analyzed using SIESTA (Fernandez-Gonzalez and Zallen, 2011), custom
software written in MATLAB (Mathworks) using the DIPImage toolbox (Delft University of Technology).
The wound margin was segmented using the semi-automated LiveWire tool at every time point within
the time-lapse image. A two-parameter exponential function was fitted to individual wound healing
curves:
𝐴(𝑡) = 𝐴' 𝑒 )*+ ,
where A(t) represents the area of the wound at time t, A0 is the maximum wound area, and k is the
decay constant of the exponential. A least-squares fit by the Gauss-Newton method was done starting
at the point of maximum wound area. The decay constant of the exponential was used to quantify the
rate of wound closure.
Live imaging
Embryos with Crk knockdown and carrying live imaging constructs were produced by crossing
either crkS-RNAi / CyO; His2av mRFP, sGMCA or crkS-RNAi / CyO; MRLC::GFP males to mata tub GAL4 II; mata tub -GAL4 III females. crkS-RNAi/ mata tub -GAL4 II; His2av mRFP, sGMCA/mata tub
GAL4 III or crkS-RNAi/ mata tub -GAL4 II; MRLC::GFP/mata tub GAL4 III female progeny were then
crossed to crkS-RNAi males and the progeny were imaged. CyO/mata tub -GAL4 II; His2av mRFP,
sGMCA/mata tub-GAL4 III females crossed to y w males were used as controls. Flies were allowed to
lay on apple juice agar plates with yeast for 2 hours. Embryos were dechorionated in 50% bleach for 3
minutes, washed 3X with .01% Triton-X and transferred to a fresh apple juice/agar plate where they
were immersed in halocarbon oil 27(Apex Bioresearch Products). 7-10 embryos were then transferred
to halocarbon oil on the gas permeable membrane of a Lumox dish (Sarstedt) and covered with a glass
coverslip. Imaging was done on a Zeiss LSM-5 Pascal scanning confocal microscope (Oberkochen,
Germany). Embryos were imaged at the apical cortex where the tops of actin caps were visible.
Frames were taken at 10 second intervals for about 2 hours or until cellularization began.
Furrow Analysis
The length of 5 metaphase furrows per embryo were measured using the Fiji distribution of ImageJ
(version 1.52N; (Schindelin et al., 2012; Rueden et al., 2017)). Furrows were selected by drawing a
perpendicular line between two unique spindles that had not collided with another, such that the line
passed through the middle of the dividing furrow. The ImageJ Stacks>Reslice function was used to
construct a Z-axis projection along that line. The resulting projected image was binarized using the Max
Entropy Auto Threshold feature (Kapur et al., 1985) to improve visibility of the furrow. Furrows were

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

then measured by drawing a line from the top of the furrow to the bottom. In some cases when not
enough of a furrow could be discerned to be effectively measured but some pixels were still visible, a
value of 0.54μm was recorded as this is the step length between slices of the z stack.
Cap Expansion Analysis
Cap expansion during nuclear cycle 10 was quantified in 3 non-adjacent caps per embryo live
imaged as above. ImageJ was used for the analysis. Videos were binarized using the Default Auto
Threshold feature and processed to remove some noise using Process>Noise> Despeckle to improve
visibility of cap borders. Cap area was measured by freehand outlining the cap at each frame, from
when they first appear at the cortex to when they began to break up to enter the next nuclear cycle.
Expansion time was reported as the time in seconds between when the cap first was measurable to
when it was maximally expanded. Maximum expansion was defined as the maximum area of the cap
before expansion plateaued or decreased. Expansion rate was calculated as the difference in area
between when the cap was first measured to when it was maximally expanded divided by the
expansion time. Cycle length was measured as the seconds between when caps first reappear to when
they appear in the next cycle
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Victoria Deneke and Stefano Di Talia for advice and guidance in live imaging,
Yixie Zhang, Tony Harris, Steve Rogers and Kevin Slep for advice and helpful discussions, to the
Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center, the Transgenic RNAi Project (TRiP) and the Developmental
Studies Hybridoma Bank for reagents, to Andrew Hudson and Lynn Cooley for the Arp3 antisera, to
Scott Ferguson for pTIGER vectors, to Tony Perdue of the Biology Imaging Center, and to members of
the Peifer lab for helpful discussions and reading the manuscript. The work was supported by NIH R35
GM118096 to M.P. A.S. was supported by T32 CA009156 and F32 GM117803. A.B. was supported by
the UNC Science and Math Achievement and Resourcefulness Track (SMART), in partnership with the
North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (NC-SLSAMP; supported by NSF HRD1202467), and by the William W. and Ida W. Taylor fellowship through the UNC Summer
Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF) program. R.F.G. and A. F. are supported by grants from
the Canada Foundation for Innovation (#30279) and the Canadian Institutes for Health Research
(#156279). RFG is the Tier II Canada Research Chair in Quantitative Cell Biology and Morphogenesis.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References

Abmayr SM, Balagopalan L, Galletta BJ, Hong SJ. (2003). Cell and molecular biology of myoblast
fusion. Int Rev Cytol 225, 33-89.
Abreu-Blanco MT, Verboon JM, Liu R, Watts JJ, Parkhurst SM. (2012). Drosophila embryos close
epithelial wounds using a combination of cellular protrusions and an actomyosin purse string. J
Cell Sci 125, 5984-5997.
Adam JC, Pringle JR, Peifer M. (2000). Evidence for functional differentiation among Drosophila
septins in cytokinesis and cellularization. Molecular Biology of the Cell 11, 3123-3135.
Afshar K, Stuart B, Wasserman SA. (2000). Functional analysis of the Drosophila diaphanous FH
protein in early embryonic development. Development 127, 1887-1897.
Antoku S, Mayer BJ. (2009). Distinct roles for Crk adaptor isoforms in actin reorganization induced by
extracellular signals. J Cell Sci 122, 4228-4238.
Balagopalan L, Chen MH, Geisbrecht ER, Abmayr SM. (2006). The CDM superfamily protein MBC
directs myoblast fusion through a mechanism that requires phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5triphosphate binding but is independent of direct interaction with DCrk. Mol Cell Biol 26, 94429455.
Bashaw GJ, Kidd T, Murray D, Pawson T, Goodman CS. (2000). Repulsive axon guidance: Abelson
and Enabled play opposing roles downstream of the roundabout receptor. Cell 101, 703-715.
Belov AA, Mohammadi M. (2012). Grb2, a double-edged sword of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling.
Sci Signal 5, pe49.
Bianco A, Poukkula M, Cliffe A, Mathieu J, Luque CM, Fulga TA, Rorth P. (2007). Two distinct modes
of guidance signalling during collective migration of border cells. Nature 448, 362-365.
Biersmith B, Liu ZC, Bauman K, Geisbrecht ER. (2011). The DOCK protein sponge binds to ELMO
and functions in Drosophila embryonic CNS development. PLoS One 6, e16120.
Biersmith B, Wang ZH, Geisbrecht ER. (2015). Fine-Tuning of the Actin Cytoskeleton and Cell
Adhesion During Drosophila Development by the Unconventional Guanine Nucleotide
Exchange Factors Myoblast City and Sponge. Genetics 200, 551-567.
Birge RB, Kalodimos C, Inagaki F, Tanaka S. (2009). Crk and CrkL adaptor proteins: networks for
physiological and pathological signaling. Cell Commun Signal 7, 13.
Blockus H, Chedotal A. (2016). Slit-Robo signaling. Development 143, 3037-3044.
Caussinus E, Affolter M. (2016). deGradFP: A System to Knockdown GFP-Tagged Proteins. Methods
Mol Biol 1478, 177-187.
Chodniewicz D, Klemke RL. (2004). Regulation of integrin-mediated cellular responses through
assembly of a CAS/Crk scaffold. Biochim Biophys Acta 1692, 63-76.
Collins TN, Mao Y, Li H, Bouaziz M, Hong A, Feng GS, Wang F, Quilliam LA, Chen L, Park T,
Curran T, Zhang X. (2018). Crk proteins transduce FGF signaling to promote lens fiber cell
elongation. eLife 7.
Crowner D, Le Gall M, Gates MA, Giniger E. (2003). Notch steers Drosophila ISNb motor axons by
regulating the Abl signaling pathway. Curr Biol 13, 967-972.
Deng S, Azevedo M, Baylies M. (2017). Acting on identity: Myoblast fusion and the formation of the
syncytial muscle fiber. Semin Cell Dev Biol 72, 45-55.
Edwards KA, Demsky M, Montague RA, Weymouth N, Kiehart DP. (1997). GFP-moesin illuminates
actin cytoskeleton dynamics in living tissue and demonstrates cell shape changes during
morphogenesis in Drosophila. Developmental Biology 191, 103-117.
Elwell CA, Ceesay A, Kim JH, Kalman D, Engel JN. (2008). RNA interference screen identifies Abl
kinase and PDGFR signaling in Chlamydia trachomatis entry. PLoS Pathog 4, e1000021.
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fares H, Peifer M, Pringle JR. (1995). Loclaization and possible functions of Drosophila septins.
Molecular Biology of the Cell 6, 1843-1859.
Feller SM. (2001). Crk family adaptors-signalling complex formation and biological roles. Oncogene
20, 6348-6371.
Ferguson SB, Blundon MA, Klovstad MS, Schupbach T. (2012). Modulation of gurken translation by
insulin and TOR signaling in Drosophila. J Cell Sci 125, 1407-1419.
Fernandez-Gonzalez R, Zallen JA. (2011). Oscillatory behaviors and hierarchical assembly of
contractile structures in intercalating cells. Phys Biol 8, 045005.
Fernandez-Gonzalez R, Zallen JA. (2013). Wounded cells drive rapid epidermal repair in the early
Drosophila embryo. Mol Biol Cell 24, 3227-3237.
Field CM, Alberts BM. (1995). Anillin, a contractile ring protein that cycles from the nucleus to the cell
cortex. J Cell Biol 131, 165-178.
Field CM, Coughlin M, Doberstein S, Marty T, Sullivan W. (2005). Characterization of anillin mutants
reveals essential roles in septin localization and plasma membrane integrity. Development 132,
2849-2860.
Figard L, Wang M, Zheng L, Golding I, Sokac AM. (2016). Membrane Supply and Demand Regulates
F-Actin in a Cell Surface Reservoir. Dev Cell 37, 267-278.
Forsthoefel DJ, Liebl EC, Kolodziej PA, Seeger MA. (2005). The Abelson tyrosine kinase, the Trio
GEF and Enabled interact with the Netrin receptor Frazzled in Drosophila. Development 132,
1983-1994.
Fox DT, Peifer M. (2007). Abelson kinase (Abl) and RhoGEF2 regulate actin organization during cell
constriction in Drosophila. Development 134, 567-578.
Fukuyama T, Ogita H, Kawakatsu T, Fukuhara T, Yamada T, Sato T, Shimizu K, Nakamura T, Matsuda
M, Takai Y. (2005). Involvement of the c-Src-Crk-C3G-Rap1 signaling in the nectin-induced
activation of Cdc42 and formation of adherens junctions. J Biol Chem 280, 815-825.
Galletta BJ, Niu XP, Erickson MR, Abmayr SM. (1999). Identification of a Drosophila homologue to
vertebrate Crk by interaction with MBC. Gene 228, 243-252.
Geisbrecht ER, Haralalka S, Swanson SK, Florens L, Washburn MP, Abmayr SM. (2008). Drosophila
ELMO/CED-12 interacts with Myoblast city to direct myoblast fusion and ommatidial
organization. Dev Biol 314, 137-149.
George B, Fan Q, Dlugos CP, Soofi AA, Zhang J, Verma R, Park TJ, Wong H, Curran T, Nihalani D,
Holzman LB. (2014). Crk1/2 and CrkL form a hetero-oligomer and functionally complement
each other during podocyte morphogenesis. Kidney Int 85, 1382-1394.
Gertler F, Bennett R, Clark M, Hoffmann F. (1989). Drosophila abl tyrosine kinase in embryonic CNS
axons: a role in axonogenesis is revealed through dosage-sensitive interactions with disabled.
Cell 58, 103-113.
Gratz SJ, Ukken FP, Rubinstein CD, Thiede G, Donohue LK, Cummings AM, O'Connor-Giles KM.
(2014). Highly specific and efficient CRISPR/Cas9-catalyzed homology-directed repair in
Drosophila. Genetics 196, 961-971.
Grenningloh G, Rehm EJ, Goodman CS. (1991). Genetic analysis of growth cone guidance in
Drosophila: fasciclin II functions as a neuronal recognition molecule. Cell 67, 45-57.
Greuber EK, Smith-Pearson P, Wang J, Pendergast AM. (2013). Role of ABL family kinases in cancer:
from leukaemia to solid tumours. Nat Rev Cancer 13, 559-571.
Grevengoed EE, Fox DT, Gates J, Peifer M. (2003). Balancing different types of actin polymerization at
distinct sites: roles for Abelson kinase and Enabled. J. Cell Biol. 163, 1267-1279.
Grevengoed EE, Loureiro JJ, Jesse TL, Peifer M. (2001). Abelson kinase regulates epithelial
morphogenesis in Drosophila. J Cell Biol 155, 1185-1198.
Grosshans J, Wenzl C, Herz HM, Bartoszewski S, Schnorrer F, Vogt N, Schwarz H, Muller HA. (2005).
RhoGEF2 and the formin Dia control the formation of the furrow canal by directed actin
assembly during Drosophila cellularisation. Development 132, 1009-1020.
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Gumienny TL, Brugnera E, Tosello-Trampont AC, Kinchen JM, Haney LB, Nishiwaki K, Walk SF,
Nemergut ME, Macara IG, Francis R, Schedl T, Qin Y, Van Aelst L, Hengartner MO,
Ravichandran KS. (2001). CED-12/ELMO, a novel member of the CrkII/Dock180/Rac pathway,
is required for phagocytosis and cell migration. Cell 107, 27-41.
Guris DL, Fantes J, Tara D, Druker BJ, Imamoto A. (2001). Mice lacking the homologue of the human
22q11.2 gene CRKL phenocopy neurocristopathies of DiGeorge syndrome. Nat Genet 27, 293298.
Hoi CS, Xiong W, Rebay I. (2016). Retinal Axon Guidance Requires Integration of Eya and the Jak/Stat
Pathway into Phosphotyrosine-Based Signaling Circuitries in Drosophila. Genetics 203, 12831295.
Hossain S, Dubielecka PM, Sikorski AF, Birge RB, Kotula L. (2012). Crk and ABI1: binary molecular
switches that regulate abl tyrosine kinase and signaling to the cytoskeleton. Genes & cancer 3,
402-413.
Huang J, Zhou W, Dong W, Watson AM, Hong Y. (2009). From the Cover: Directed, efficient, and
versatile modifications of the Drosophila genome by genomic engineering. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 106, 8284-8289.
Huang Y, Clarke F, Karimi M, Roy NH, Williamson EK, Okumura M, Mochizuki K, Chen EJ, Park TJ,
Debes GF, Zhang Y, Curran T, Kambayashi T, Burkhardt JK. (2015). CRK proteins selectively
regulate T cell migration into inflamed tissues. J. Clin. Invest. 125, 1019-1032.
Hunter MV, Fernandez-Gonzalez R. (2017). Coordinating cell movements in vivo: junctional and
cytoskeletal dynamics lead the way. Curr Opin Cell Biol 48, 54-62.
Imaizumi T, Araki K, Miura K, Araki M, Suzuki M, Terasaki H, Yamamura K. (1999). Mutant mice
lacking Crk-II caused by the gene trap insertional mutagenesis: Crk-II is not essential for
embryonic development. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 266, 569-574.
Ishimaru S, Ueda R, Hinohara Y, Ohtani M, Hanafusa H. (2004). PVR plays a critical role via JNK
activation in thorax closure during Drosophila metamorphosis. EMBO J 23, 3984-3994.
Jin P, Duan R, Luo F, Zhang G, Hong SN, Chen EH. (2011). Competition between Blown fuse and
WASP for WIP binding regulates the dynamics of WASP-dependent actin polymerization in
vivo. Dev Cell 20, 623-638.
Kannan R, Giniger E. (2017). New perspectives on the roles of Abl tyrosine kinase in axon patterning.
Fly (Austin) 11, 260-270.
Kapur JN, Sahoo PK, Wong AKC. (1985). A New Method for Gray-Level Picture Thresholding Using
the Entropy of the Histogram. Comput Vision Graph 29, 273-285.
Khatri A, Wang J, Pendergast AM. (2016). Multifunctional Abl kinases in health and disease. J Cell Sci
129, 9-16.
Kim S, Shilagardi K, Zhang S, Hong SN, Sens KL, Bo J, Gonzalez GA, Chen EH. (2007). A critical
function for the actin cytoskeleton in targeted exocytosis of prefusion vesicles during myoblast
fusion. Dev Cell 12, 571-586.
Knudsen BS, Feller SM, Hanafusa H. (1994). Four proline-rich sequences of the guanine-nucleotide
exchange factor C3G bind with unique specificity to the first Src homology 3 domain of Crk. J
Biol Chem 269, 32781-32787.
Koptyra M, Park TJ, Curran T. (2016). Crk and CrkL are required for cell transformation by v-fos and vras. Molecular carcinogenesis 55, 97-104.
Kumar S, Fajardo JE, Birge RB, Sriram G. (2014). Crk at the quarter century mark: perspectives in
signaling and cancer. J Cell Biochem 115, 819-825.
Lacy ME, Hutson MS. (2016). Amnioserosa development and function in Drosophila embryogenesis:
Critical mechanical roles for an extraembryonic tissue. Dev Dyn 245, 558-568.
Lee DM, Harris TJ. (2014). Coordinating the cytoskeleton and endocytosis for regulated plasma
membrane growth in the early Drosophila embryo. Bioarchitecture 4, 68-74.
Lettau M, Pieper J, Janssen O. (2009). Nck adapter proteins: functional versatility in T cells. Cell
Commun Signal 7, 1.
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Li L, Guris DL, Okura M, Imamoto A. (2003). Translocation of CrkL to focal adhesions mediates
integrin-induced migration downstream of Src family kinases. Mol Cell Biol 23, 2883-2892.
Liebl EC, Forsthoefel DJ, Franco LS, Sample SH, Hess JE, Cowger JA, Chandler MP, Shupert AM,
Seeger MA. (2000). Dosage-sensitive, reciprocal genetic interactions between the Abl tyrosine
kinase and the putative GEF trio reveal trio's role in axon pathfinding. Neuron 26, 107-118.
Martin P, Lewis J. (1992). Actin cables and epidermal movement in embryonic wound healing. Nature
360, 179-183.
Martinez-Quiles N, Feuerbacher LA, Benito-Leon M, Hardwidge PR. (2014). Contribution of Crk
adaptor proteins to host cell and bacteria interactions. Biomed Res Int 2014, 372901.
Matsubayashi Y, Coulson-Gilmer C, Millard TH. (2015). Endocytosis-dependent coordination of
multiple actin regulators is required for wound healing. J Cell Biol 210, 677-679.
Mavrakis M, Rikhy R, Lippincott-Schwartz J. (2009). Plasma membrane polarity and
compartmentalization are established before cellularization in the fly embryo. Dev Cell 16, 93104.
McPhee CK, Logan MA, Freeman MR, Baehrecke EH. (2010). Activation of autophagy during cell
death requires the engulfment receptor Draper. Nature 465, 1093-1096.
Moon AM, Guris DL, Seo JH, Li L, Hammond J, Talbot A, Imamoto A. (2006). Crkl deficiency disrupts
Fgf8 signaling in a mouse model of 22q11 deletion syndromes. Dev Cell 10, 71-80.
Moore CA, Parkin CA, Bidet Y, Ingham PW. (2007). A role for the Myoblast city homologues Dock1
and Dock5 and the adaptor proteins Crk and Crk-like in zebrafish myoblast fusion. Development
134, 3145-3153.
Morishita K, Ozasa F, Eguchi K, Yoshioka Y, Yoshida H, Hiai H, Yamaguchi M. (2014). Drosophila
DOCK family protein sponge regulates the JNK pathway during thorax development. Cell Struct
Funct 39, 113-124.
Nakano R, Iwamura M, Obikawa A, Togane Y, Hara Y, Fukuhara T, Tomaru M, Takano-Shimizu T,
Tsujimura H. (2019). Cortex glia clear dead young neurons via Drpr/dCed-6/Shark and
Crk/Mbc/dCed-12 signaling pathways in the developing Drosophila optic lobe. Dev Biol.
Nolz JC, Nacusi LP, Segovis CM, Medeiros RB, Mitchell JS, Shimizu Y, Billadeau DD. (2008). The
WAVE2 complex regulates T cell receptor signaling to integrins via Abl- and CrkL-C3Gmediated activation of Rap1. J Cell Biol 182, 1231-1244.
Padash Barmchi M, Rogers S, Hacker U. (2005). DRhoGEF2 regulates actin organization and
contractility in the Drosophila blastoderm embryo. J Cell Biol 168, 575-585.
Park T, Koptyra M, Curran T. (2016). Fibroblast Growth Requires CT10 Regulator of Kinase (Crk) and
Crk-like (CrkL). J Biol Chem 291, 26273-26290.
Park TJ, Boyd K, Curran T. (2006). Cardiovascular and craniofacial defects in Crk-null mice. Mol Cell
Biol 26, 6272-6282.
Park TJ, Curran T. (2008). Crk and Crk-like play essential overlapping roles downstream of disabled-1
in the Reelin pathway. J Neurosci 28, 13551-13562.
Park TJ, Curran T. (2014). Essential roles of Crk and CrkL in fibroblast structure and motility.
Oncogene 33, 5121-5132.
Pearce MMP, Spartz EJ, Hong W, Luo L, Kopito RR. (2015). Prion-like transmission of neuronal
huntingtin aggregates to phagocytic glia in the Drosophila brain. Nat Commun 6, 6768.
Perkins LA, Holderbaum L, Tao R, Hu Y, Sopko R, McCall K, Yang-Zhou D, Flockhart I, Binari R,
Shim HS, Miller A, Housden A, Foos M, Randkelv S, Kelley C, Namgyal P, Villalta C, Liu LP,
Jiang X, Huan-Huan Q, Wang X, Fujiyama A, Toyoda A, Ayers K, Blum A, Czech B,
Neumuller R, Yan D, Cavallaro A, Hibbard K, Hall D, Cooley L, Hannon GJ, Lehmann R, Parks
A, Mohr SE, Ueda R, Kondo S, Ni JQ, Perrimon N. (2015). The Transgenic RNAi Project at
Harvard Medical School: Resources and Validation. Genetics 201, 843-852.
Pielage JF, Powell KR, Kalman D, Engel JN. (2008). RNAi screen reveals an Abl kinase-dependent host
cell pathway involved in Pseudomonas aeruginosa internalization. PLoS Pathog 4, e1000031.
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Postner MA, Miller KG, Wieschaus EF. (1992). Maternal effect mutations of the sponge locus affect
actin cytoskeletal rearrangements in Drosophila melanogaster embryos. Journal of Cell Biology
119, 1205-1218.
Raff JW, Glover DM. (1989). Centrosomes, and not nuclei, initiate pole cell formation in Drosophila
embryos. Cell 57, 611-619.
Reddien PW, Horvitz HR. (2000). CED-2/CrkII and CED-10/Rac control phagocytosis and cell
migration in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Cell Biol 2, 131-136.
Rogers EM, Spracklen AJ, Bilancia CG, Sumigray KD, Allred SC, Nowotarski SH, Schaefer KN,
Ritchie BJ, Peifer M. (2016). Abelson kinase acts as a robust, multifunctional scaffold in
regulating embryonic morphogenesis. Mol Biol Cell 27, 2613-2631.
Roy NH, MacKay JL, Robertson TF, Hammer DA, Burkhardt JK. (2018). Crk adaptor proteins mediate
actin-dependent T cell migration and mechanosensing induced by the integrin LFA-1. Sci Signal
11.
Rueden CT, Schindelin J, Hiner MC, DeZonia BE, Walter AE, Arena ET, Eliceiri KW. (2017).
ImageJ2: ImageJ for the next generation of scientific image data. BMC Bioinformatics 18, 529.
Schejter ED, Wieschaus E. (1993). bottleneck acts as a regulator of the microfilament network
governing cellularization of the Drosophila embryo. Cell 75, 373-385.
Schindelin J, Arganda-Carreras I, Frise E, Kaynig V, Longair M, Pietzsch T, Preibisch S, Rueden C,
Saalfeld S, Schmid B, Tinevez JY, White DJ, Hartenstein V, Eliceiri K, Tomancak P, Cardona
A. (2012). Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat Methods 9, 676-682.
Schmidt A, Grosshans J. (2018). Dynamics of cortical domains in early Drosophila development. J Cell
Sci 131.
Schmidt A, Lv Z, Grosshans J. (2018). ELMO and Sponge specify subapical restriction of Canoe and
formation of the subapical domain in early Drosophila embryos. Development 145.
Schnorrer F, Schonbauer C, Langer CC, Dietzl G, Novatchkova M, Schernhuber K, Fellner M, Azaryan
A, Radolf M, Stark A, Keleman K, Dickson BJ. (2010). Systematic genetic analysis of muscle
morphogenesis and function in Drosophila. Nature 464, 287-291.
Seeger M, Tear G, Ferres-Marco D, Goodman CS. (1993). Mutations affecting the growth cone
guidance in Drosophila : genes necessary for guidance toward or away from the midline. Neuron
10, 409-426.
Senechal K, Halpern J, Sawyers CL. (1996). The CRKL adaptor protein transforms fibroblasts and
functions in transformation by the BCR-ABL oncogene. J Biol Chem 271, 23255-23261.
Seo JH, Wood LJ, Agarwal A, O'Hare T, Elsea CR, Griswold IJ, Deininger MW, Imamoto A, Druker
BJ. (2010). A specific need for CRKL in p210BCR-ABL-induced transformation of mouse
hematopoietic progenitors. Cancer Res 70, 7325-7335.
Sriram G, Birge RB. (2010). Emerging roles for crk in human cancer. Genes & cancer 1, 1132-1139.
Staller MV, Yan D, Randklev S, Bragdon MD, Wunderlich ZB, Tao R, Perkins LA, Depace AH,
Perrimon N. (2013). Depleting gene activities in early Drosophila embryos with the "maternalGal4-shRNA" system. Genetics 193, 51-61.
Stevenson V, Hudson A, Cooley L, Theurkauf WE. (2002). Arp2/3-dependent pseudocleavage furrow
assembly in syncytial Drosophila embryos. Curr. Biol. 12, 705-711.
Stevenson VA, Kramer J, Kuhn J, Theurkauf WE. (2001). Centrosomes and the Scrambled protein
coordinate microtubule- independent actin reorganization. Nature Cell Biology 3, 68-75.
Sullivan W, Fogarty P, Theurkauf W. (1993). Mutations affecting the cytoskeletal organization of
syncytial Drosophila embryos. Development 118, 1245-1254.
Takada S, Kelkar A, Theurkauf WE. (2003). Drosophila checkpoint kinase 2 couples centrosome
function and spindle assembly to genomic integrity. Cell 113, 87-99.
Tanaka S, Morishita T, Hashimoto Y, Hattori S, Nakamura S, Shibuya M, Matuoka K, Takenawa T,
Kurata T, Nagashima K, et al. (1994). C3G, a guanine nucleotide-releasing protein expressed
ubiquitously, binds to the Src homology 3 domains of CRK and GRB2/ASH proteins. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 91, 3443-3447.
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Tasdemir-Yilmaz OE, Freeman MR. (2014). Astrocytes engage unique molecular programs to engulf
pruned neuronal debris from distinct subsets of neurons. Genes Dev 28, 20-33.
Watanabe T, Tsuda M, Makino Y, Konstantinou T, Nishihara H, Majima T, Minami A, Feller SM,
Tanaka S. (2009). Crk adaptor protein-induced phosphorylation of Gab1 on tyrosine 307 via Src
is important for organization of focal adhesions and enhanced cell migration. Cell Res 19, 638650.
Webb RL, Zhou MN, McCartney BM. (2009). A novel role for an APC2-Diaphanous complex in
regulating actin organization in Drosophila. Development 136, 1283-1293.
Wieschaus E, Nüsslein-Volhard C. (1986). Looking at embryos. In: Drosophila, A Practical Approach,
ed. D.B. Roberts, Oxford, England: IRL Press, 199-228.
Wills Z, Bateman J, Korey CA, Comer A, Van Vactor D. (1999a). The tyrosine kinase Abl and its
substrate enabled collaborate with the receptor phosphatase Dlar to control motor axon guidance.
Neuron 22, 301-312.
Wills Z, Marr L, Zinn K, Goodman CS, Van Vactor D. (1999b). Profilin and the Abl tyrosine kinase are
required for motor axon outgrowth in the Drosophila embryo. Neuron 22, 291-299.
Wood W, Jacinto A, Grose R, Woolner S, Gale J, Wilson C, Martin P. (2002). Wound healing
recapitulates morphogenesis in Drosophila embryos. Nat Cell Biol 4, 907-912.
Wu YC, Cheng TW, Lee MC, Weng NY. (2002). Distinct rac activation pathways control
Caenorhabditis elegans cell migration and axon outgrowth. Dev Biol 250, 145-155.
Wu YC, Tsai MC, Cheng LC, Chou CJ, Weng NY. (2001). C. elegans CED-12 acts in the conserved
crkII/DOCK180/Rac pathway to control cell migration and cell corpse engulfment. Dev Cell 1,
491-502.
Xiong W, Dabbouseh NM, Rebay I. (2009). Interactions with the Abelson tyrosine kinase reveal
compartmentalization of eyes absent function between nucleus and cytoplasm. Dev Cell 16, 271279.
Xue Z, Sokac AM. (2016). -Back-to-back mechanisms drive actomyosin ring closure during Drosophila
embryo cleavage. J Cell Biol 215, 335-344.
Zallen JA, Cohen Y, Hudson AM, Cooley L, Wieschaus E, Schejter ED. (2002). SCAR is a primary
regulator of Arp2/3-dependent morphological events in Drosophila. J Cell Biol 156, 689-701.
Zhang Y, Yu JC, Jiang T, Fernandez-Gonzalez R, Harris TJC. (2018). Collision of Expanding Actin
Caps with Actomyosin Borders for Cortical Bending and Mitotic Rounding in a Syncytium. Dev
Cell 45, 551-564 e554.
Ziegenfuss JS, Doherty J, Freeman MR. (2012). Distinct molecular pathways mediate glial activation
and engulfment of axonal debris after axotomy. Nat Neurosci 15, 979-987.
Zulueta-Coarasa T, Tamada M, Lee EJ, Fernandez-Gonzalez R. (2014). Automated multidimensional
image analysis reveals a role for Abl in embryonic wound repair. Development 141, 2901-2911.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure legends
Figure 1. Generation of a crk null allele and a gene replacement platform. A. Schematic
representation, crk locus before and after CRISPR/Cas9-mediated deletion of crk to generate crkΔattP.
We used two guide RNAs (gRNAs) to introduce double-strand breaks 110bp upstream of the
transcription start site and 99bp downstream of the end of the 3’UTR. Using a double-stranded donor
repair template containing flanking homology regions (indicated by shaded grey bars), we replaced the
crk coding sequence with an attP recombination site and a loxP-flanked, positive visual marker (3xP3DsRed expressed in the eye). B. Schematic representation, rescue alleles targeted into crkΔattP. The
three constructs include: cDNA-based constructs containing a tandem N-terminal tag (monomeric
NeonGreen (mNG; green) and a 3XFLAG tag (orange)), with or without flanking FRT sites (orange
triangles), and an FRT-flanked genomic rescue construct carrying the exact sequence removed in
generating crkΔattP. C. Representative Western blot and quantification of Crk levels in wildtype and
crkΔattP-targeted rescue lines. Rescue constructs restore endogenous levels of Crk; n=4, error
bars=SEM, ns=not statistically significant. D-I. Representative images, Crk localization throughout
embryonic development. Embryos expressing mNeonGreen-tagged Crk (mNG::Crk ) inserted at
endogenous locus. The tagged protein was imaged using mNG fluorescence. H and I were also
stained to reveal DNA. D. Stage 9. E. Stage 10. F. Stage 11. G. Stage 14. After gastrulation Crk
localized to a cytoplasmic pool with enrichment at the cell cortex (arrows). H,I. Syncytial blastoderm.
Crk is enriched in actin caps that overlie nuclei (H, arrow) and at pseudocleavage furrows (I, arrow).
Scale bars= 50µm.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. Crk is required for embryonic viability. A. Quantification of embryonic viability following
shRNA-mediated knockdown of Crk. Compared to shRNA-only controls (crkS-RNAi Control and crkWRNAi Control), Crk knockdown using either of two shRNA lines driven by a pair of strong maternal
GAL4 drivers reduces embryonic viability. B. Representative Western blot and quantification, Crk levels
in Crk knockdown embryos compared to controls. crkS-RNAi embryos have a stronger reduction in Crk
levels compared to crkW-RNAi embryos; n=4, error bars=SEM. C. Quantification of embryonic viability
following overexpression of Crk or simultaneous knockdown/overexpression of Crk. Simultaneous
overexpression of Crk fully restores embryonic viability in crkS-RNAi embryos. Crk overexpression (Crk
OE; ~10 fold higher than endogenous) alone has no impact on embryonic viability. Expressing two
different extraneous GFP-tagged proteins to control for effects of two UAS promotors does not
substantially rescue lethality. D. Representative Western blot and quantification of Crk levels in
embryos overexpressing Crk (lane one), wildtype (lane four, note lanes two and three intentionally left
empty), crkS-RNAi emrbyos (lane five), undergoing simultaneous knockdown/overexpression (lane six),
or in crkS-RNAi embryos simultaneously expressing GFP-tagged proteins to control for effects of two
UAS promotors (lanes seven and eight), n=3, error bars-SEM.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Crk loss disrupts embryonic morphogenesis and leads to the formation of multinucleate
cells. A-G. Embryonic cuticles, anterior at top. Range of phenotypes in crk maternal-zygotic mutants
or after crkS-RNAi or crkW-RNAi. A. Wildtype. Note intact, correctly patterned epidermis, and correct
completion of germband retraction with head skeleton at anterior (magenta arrow) and spiracles at
posterior (black arrow). B. Some mutant or knockdown embryos had deletion or fusion of denticle
belts (arrow), though epidermis remained intact. C. Others had holes in anterior, dorsal, or ventral
cuticle (arrow). D. In severe cases there were multiple segmental deletions or epidermal holes
(arrows). E. In the most severe cases only fragments of cuticle remained (arrow). F. Embryo with a
wildtype pattern but in which germband retraction failed, leaving the spiracles (black arrow) curled
around the dorsal side. G. Embryo combining denticle belt deletion (red arrow) and germband
retraction failure (black arrow). H. Frequencies of defects illustrated. crk maternal-zygotic mutants and
crkS-RNAi lead to a similar range of defects while those caused by crkW-RNAi are generally milder. IN. Stage 15 embryos stained with an antibody to phosphotyrosine (pTyr), revealing cell outlines.
Defects in morphogenesis mirror those seen later in the cuticle, including denticle belt fusions (J, arrow)
and epidermal holes (K,L red arrows). O-T. Embryos stained for pTyr and a DNA dye. O,P. Stage 1314. Note pattern disruptions or epidermal holes (arrows). Boxed areas are enlarged in S and T. Q.
Stage 11. Note large multinucleate cells in the head (arrow). R. Stage 9. Many large multinucleate
cells are seen in the ectoderm (arrows). S,T. Closeups from embryos in O and P, contrasting normal
cells (yellow arrows) with larger multinucleate cells (cyan arrows). Scale bars = 30µm.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Crk knockdown disrupts the cytoskeletal events driving syncytial development. A-O.
Embryos in metaphase to anaphase of indicated syncytial nuclear cycle, stained to visualize F-actin,
tubulin, and DNA. A,B. Nuclear cycle 10. A. Wildtype. Each spindle and its associated chromosomes
(yellow arrows) are surrounded by a pseudocleavage furrow (magenta arrows), separating nuclear
compartments and preventing spindle collisions. B. crkS-RNAi. Spindles remain separated from one
another (yellow arrows), though pseudocleavage furrows were often less apparent (magenta arrows).
C-F. Nuclear cycle 11. C,E. Wildtype. Spindles remain well separated (yellow arrows) and
pseudocleavage furrows continue to separate nuclear compartments (magenta arrows). D,F. crkSRNAi. Most embryos have multiple spindle collisions (magenta arrows). These usually occur in places
where pseudocleavage furrows are discontinuous or absent. G-O. Nuclear cycle 12. G. Most
wildtype embryos have a small amount of nuclear loss, revealed by small actin rings, usually only
involving a few nuclei (arrow). Spindle collisions remain very rare. H,I. crkS-RNAi. Most embryos
have multiple regions of nuclear loss (white arrows), and in severe cases these occupy a significant
fraction of the embryo surface (I, arrows). Spindle collisions (yellow arrowheads) occur in regions
adjacent to and distant from regions of nuclear loss. J,L. Wildtype. Spindles (yellow arrows) remain
separated by pseudocleavage furrows (magenta arrows). K,M. crkS-RNAi. All embryos have multiple
spindle collisions (magenta arrows), sometimes leading to tripolar spindles (cyan arrows). Spindle
collisions occur in regions where pseudocleavage furrows are weak or absent. N,O. crk maternal
mutants exhibiting spindle collisions (arrows) and nuclear loss. P. Quantification, number of spindle
collisions per embryo in wildtype and crkS-RNAi in nuclear cycles 10-12. Spindle collisions are
elevated in cycle 11 and highly elevated in cycle 12. Scale bars=20µm.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. Crk knockdown leads to defects in cellularization. Cellularizing control, crkS-RNAi and
crk maternal mutant embryos stained with phalloidin to visualize F-actin and either WGA to visualize
the nuclear lamina or a DNA dye. A-H. Cross section views during early (A,E), mid- (B vs, F,C vs G,)
and late cellularization (D,H). A-D. In controls, as in wildtype, actin localizes to cellularization front
(cyan arrows). moving basally as a ring around each nucleus and then partially closing, leaving the yolk
channel. Apical actin-rich microvilli gradually disappear during this process. Nuclei are uniform in
shape (e.g. A, yellow arrow) and positioned in a regular row. E-H. crkS-RNAi. Actin can assemble at
the front and move basally (cyan arrows). However, nuclear shape is irregular (E, F yellow arrows),
possibly reflecting premature ring closure. Some nuclei reside below the cortex (F,G, magenta arrows),
likely a result of nuclear loss in syncytial cycles. I,J. en face views, mid-cellularization. I. Wildtype.
Actin rings are uniform in size and actin intensity and enclose single nuclei. J. crkS-RNAi. Note
multinucleate actin compartments (yellow arrows) and examples of weak actin localization to a subset
of compartment boundaries (magenta arrows). K-O. Late cellularization at level of forming yolk
channels. K. Wildtype. Rings partially close, leaving actin-lined yolk channels of uniform size. L,M.
Examples of milder defects after crkS-RNAi. Yolk channels are uneven in size (L, yellow arrows) and
sometimes two channels are separated only by a weak actin border (L, magenta arrows). Regions
without yolk channels are also seen (M, yellow arrows), some of which coincide with places where
nuclei lie below the cortex. N. Severe example of crkS-RNAi defects with a large region of nuclear
loss. O. crk maternal mutant exhibiting similar variability in yolk channel size. P. Cross section, crkSRNAi embryo at gastrulation onset. Many embryos have severe cellularization defects in the
presumptive head (arrows). Scale bars=20µm.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. Crk knockdown reduces pseudocleavage furrows depth and cap expansion. A-F.
Representative images, wildtype and crkS-RNAi embryos at nuclear cycles 10, 11 and 12. Embryos
fixed and stained to visualize actin, tubulin and DNA, selected for those in metaphase to anaphase, and
binned by nuclear density into the respective cycles. Furrows were selected, avoiding those involved in
apparent mitotic spindle collisions. Lines were drawn perpendicular to the spindle (examples in yellow),
z-axis projections were made, and metaphase furrow depth was measured (see Methods for details).
G-J. Quantification of furrow depth. Furrows were significantly less deep in nuclear cycles 10-12 in
crkS-RNAi embryos. K-L. Movie stills, illustrating examples of wildtype embryos at first appearance of
actin caps and at the point when caps were maximally expanded—outlines are examples of caps
measured for the analysis. Full movie=Suppl. Movie 2. M-P. Quantification of cap dynamics (see
Methods for definitions). Q-T. Stills from movies of wildtype and crkS-RNAi embryos expressing
MRLC::GFP, visualized at the peak of cap expansion in nuclear cycles 10 and 11. Note reduction in
myosin accumulation at cap margins after crkS-RNAi. Full movie = Suppl. Movie 3. Scale bars=20µm.

37

aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 7. Crk knockdown leads to reduced localization of the Arp2/3 activator SCAR, Arp3, and Factin to caps and pseudocleavage furrows. A-D. Representative images, wildtype and crkS-RNAi
embryos stained with phalloidin (visualizing F-actin) and an antibody against SCAR. E-H.
Quantification, fluorescence intensity of F-actin or SCAR in actin caps (E,F) and pseudocleavage
furrows (G,H). In wildtype, SCAR localizes to both actin caps (A-A’) and pseudocleavage furrows (CC’). SCAR still localizes to actin caps (B-B”) and pseudocleavage furrows (D-D”) following Crk
knockdown, but levels of F-actin and SCAR in both structures is significantly reduced after crkS-RNAi
(E-H). I-L. Representative images, wildtype and crkS-RNAi embryos stained with phalloidin and an
antibody against Arp3. M-P. Quantification, fluorescence intensity of F-actin and Arp3 in actin caps
(M,N) and pseudocleavage furrows (O,P). Arp3 also localizes to actin caps and pseudocleavage
furrows in both wildtype (I-I’’, K-K’’) and crkS-RNAi (J-J’’, L-L’’) embryos. Like SCAR, Arp3 localization
to both actin caps (N) and pseudocleavage furrows (P) is significantly reduced after crkS-RNAi. F-actin
levels in actin caps (M) and pseudocleavage furrows (O) is also significantly reduced after crkS-RNAi.
In all graphs, mean=black bar; error bars=standard deviation; n=6 wildtype and 14 crkS-RNAi embryos
in E,F; n=3 wildtype and 7 crkS-RNAi embryos in G,H; n=5 wildtype and 22 crkS-RNAi embryos in M,N;
n=9 wildtype and 9 crkS-RNAi embryos in O,P. All scale bars=50µm.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 8. Crk is required for proper patterning of the embryonic central nervous system. A-H, J-L.
Stage 15 embryos, antigens and genotypes indicated. I,M. Quantification of penetrance of phenotypes
depicted. A. mNG::Crk expressed at endogenous levels. Crk is enriched in CNS axons (cyan arrow)
and midline glia (magenta arrow), suggesting Crk may play a role in axon pathfinding or function. B-C.
Representative images, CNS phenotypes, abl maternal and zygotic null mutants. D-E. CNS
phenotypes, abl mutants expressing a form of Abl (AblΔCR1) that cannot bind to PXXP-dependent
partners. Both can lead to loss of commissures (B,D) or severe disruption of CNS patterning (C,E). F-I.
Representative images, range of CNS phenotypes in crkS-RNAi and crkW-RNAi embryos and
quantification of their prevalence (I). In wildtype, axons form a stereotypical ladder-like pattern with
longitudinal axon bundles running anterior to posterior (cyan arrows, F-F’’) and commissural axon
bundles crossing the midline at defined points in each body segment (magenta arrows, F-F’’). FasIIpositive axons run in three parallel bundles on either side of the midline and do not normally cross the
midline (F’’). Crk knockdown results in a range of CNS phenotypes, including milder axon patterning
defects and severe disruption of CNS patterning (G-H’’,I). J-M. Representative images, different axon
patterning defects observed after Crk knockdown and quantification of their prevalence. These include
aberrant midline crossing (magenta arrows, G-G’’, L-L”), loss of longitudinal axons (yellow arrows, GG’’, K-K”, L-L”), and loss of commissural axon bundles (white arrow, J-J’’). All scale bars=50µm.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 9. Crk is not required for proper expression of Robo and Slit but may play a more subtle role
in Slit/Robo signaling. A-F. Stage 15 embryos, antigens and genotypes indicated. A-C. Representative
images of Robo localization in control and Crk knockdown embryos. A. In wild-type, Robo is strongly
enriched in longitudinal axon bundles (A-A”, cyan arrows) and excluded from commissural axon
bundles crossing the midline (A-A”, magenta arrows). B,C. Following Crk knockdown, Robo expression
is still largely restricted to longitudinal axon tracks (B-C’’, cyan arrows). In most cases, midline-crossing
axon bundles are Robo-negative (B-C’’, magenta arrows); however, a subset of Robo-positive axons
appear to cross the midline in Crk knockdown embryos (C-C’’, green arrows), suggesting Slit/Robo
signaling may be impaired following Crk loss. D-F. Representative images, Slit localization in control
and Crk knockdown embryos. D. In wildtype, Slit expression is confined to the midline glia along the
ventral midline (magenta arrows). E,F. In Crk knockdown embryos, Slit expression remains confined to
midline glia, generally forming a stereotypical line along the ventral midline (E=E”’, magenta arrows).
However, Crk knockdown embryos with more severely disrupted CNS patterning defects can have
mispositioned Slit-expressing midline glia (F-F”, yellow arrows). Scale bars=50µm.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 10. Crk knockdown slows embryonic wound healing. A-B. Wound closure in control (A)
and crkS-RNAi embryos (B) expressing endo-DE-cadherin::GFP. Red lines indicate wound sites, yellow
dotted lines outline the wounds. Anterior, left; ventral, down. Scale bar=10μm. C-D. Mean wound area
over time (C) and closure rate constant (D) for controls (blue, n = 11 wounds) and crkS-RNAi embryos
(red, n = 11). **, P < 0.01 (Mann-Whitney test).

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/654558; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplemental Movie 1. Crk knockdown often leads to wide-spread nuclear loss but embryos can largely
repair the epithelium before gastrulation. Time-lapse movies showing actin dynamics in control and crkSRNAi embryos expressing Moesin::GFP to label F-actin. The Movie begins during the last syncytial
nuclear division and extends until the onset of gastrulation. In the crkS-RNAi embryo, large patches of
nuclear loss are apparent following the last nuclear division. During cellularization, cells at the margins of
these patches can be seen exhibiting protrusive cell behavior and migrating into areas of cell loss to
enclose the blastoderm embryo prior to the onset of gastrulation. Images acquired at 10 s intervals and
displayed at 10 frames per second. Time between frames varies between genotypes due to different sizes
of region scanned. Scan time was 2.82 seconds for the control embryo and 2.30 seconds for the crkSRNAi embryo.
Supplemental Movie 2. Crk knockdown leads to reduced actin cap expansion and less apparent
pseudocleavage furrows during syncytial nuclear cycles. Time-lapse movies showing actin dynamics in
control and crkS-RNAi embryos expressing Moesin::GFP to label F-actin during nuclear cycles 10-14. In
both control and crkS-RNAi embryos, actin caps form, expand, and merge into pseudocleavage furrows.
However, in crkS-RNAi conditions, actin cap expansion is reduced compared to controls, leading to
impaired pseudocleavage furrow formation. Images acquired every 10 s and displayed at 10 frames per
second. Time between frames varies between genotypes due to different sizes of region scanned. Scan
time was 2.30 seconds for the control embryo and 2.93 seconds for crkS-RNAi embryo. Focal plane was
occasionally adjusted to maintain a clear view of the furrows. This video is related to figure 6K,L.
Supplemental Movie 3. Crk loss impairs actin cap expansion and myosin remodeling during syncytial
nuclear cycles. Time-lapse movies showing myosin dynamics in control and crkS-RNAi embryos during
nuclear cycles 10-14, via MRLC::GFP (=Sqh). In control embryos, inter-cap myosin zones are remodeled
during actin cap expansion, resulting in an enrichment of myosin in pseudocleavage furrows. In crkS-RNAi
embryos, this remodeling is impaired, resulting in broader inter-cap myosin zones and reduced enrichment
of myosin in pseudocleavage furrows. Images acquired every 10 s and displayed at 10 frames per
second. Time between frames varies between genotypes due to different sizes of region scanned. Scan
time was 2.01 seconds for the control embryo and 2.43 seconds for the crkS-RNAi embryo. Focal plane
was occasionally adjusted to maintain a clear view of the furrows. This video is related to figure 6Q-T.

42

