bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/630806; this version posted May 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Predicting patient-specific radiotherapy responses in head and neck
cancer to personalize radiation dose fractionation
Heiko Enderling, Enakshi Sunassee, Jimmy J. Caudell

Abstract— Human papillomavirus
(HPV)
related
oropharyngeal cancer (OPC) is one of the few types of cancers
increasing in incidence. HPV+ OPC treatment with
radiotherapy (RT) provides 75-95% five-year locoregional
control (LRC). Why some but not all patients with similar
clinical stage and molecular profile are controlled remains
unknown. We propose the proliferation saturation index, PSI, as
a mathematical modeling biomarker of tumor growth and RT
response. The model predicts that patients with PSI<0.75 are
likely to be cured by radiation, and that hyperfractionated
radiation could improve response rates for patients with higher
PSI that are predicted to fail standard of care RT. Prospective
evaluation is currently ongoing.

I. INTRODUCTION
Radiotherapy (RT) is one of the single most commonly
delivered oncologic treatments, utilized in over half of all
cancer patients at some point in their care. In head and neck
cancer, over 80% of patients receive RT, either as curative
therapy alone or in combination with surgery and/or
chemotherapy [1]. Human papillomavirus related (HPV+)
oropharyngeal cancer (OPC) are one of the few types of
cancers increasing in incidence. Treatment of OPC patients
almost always includes radiotherapy (RT) either as curative
therapy alone or in combination with surgery and/or
chemotherapy. Standard RT delivers 2 Gy daily fractions for
a total of 66-70 Gy (6-7 weeks), providing five-year
locoregional control (LRC) for 75-95% of HPV+ OPC
patients. Total RT dose and dose fractionation are based on
clinical outcome data from large clinical trials testing
intensification methods prior to the HPV era, resulting in a
"one size fits all" approach. In current radiation oncology
practice, there exists no explanation for why two patients with
similar histology, primary site, and clinical stage would have
different responses and outcomes. Reliable biomarkers and
frameworks are needed to predict responses to personalized
dose and fractionation of RT based on individual tumor
features. Despite a long history of medical physics and
physical concepts centered around radiation dose delivery
technology and safety, few inroads have been made to
synergize biological and quantitative approaches with
radiation biology and radiation oncology methodologies to
optimize RT and treatment personalization.
Precision medicine tools such as genomics, radiomics, and
mathematical modeling could help personalize and adapt RT
for each patient to improve cancer outcomes [2]. Prior work
This project was supported in part by a pilot award from the NIH/NCI
U54CA193489 “Cancer as a complex adaptive system”.

by our group suggests that a robust mid-treatment nodal
response is prognostic for ultimate outcome in OPC patients.
Patients with a nodal volume regression of > 32% at week 4
(20 fractions of RT) have 100% disease-free survival at 4years follow up, compared with 77.3% (p = 0.02) for those
with regression ≤ 32% (Fig. 1A,B)[3]. To prospectively
predict RT response on a per-patient basis, our group has
pioneered the development of the non-invasive imagingderived proliferation saturation index (PSI) that can be
calculated from routinely collected radiological images prior
to therapy at diagnosis and RT planning session [4,5]. PSI
provides an estimation of the tumor microenvironmentmodulated radiosensitive proliferating subpopulation in solid
tumors, and could predict RT responses and identify
individual patient candidates for alternate RT fractionation
protocols.

Figure 1. A. Change in volume during RT for N=49 patients.
Median volume reduction by mid-RT (week 4) is 32%. Red
trajectories: locoregionally controlled (LRC) patients. Blue:
locoregional failure (LRF). B. Disease free survival by midRT volume reduction. C. Distribution of PSI for all patients.
II. METHODS
Based on established logistic tumor growth dynamics
concepts, we introduced a patient-specific proliferation
saturation index (PSI) [4] to derive the fraction of radiationsensitive proliferating population of cancer cells within an
imaging-derived tumor volume prior to treatment:
!"
!#

"

= 𝜆𝑉 '1 − + ,
*

𝑃𝑆𝐼 = 𝑉1 /𝐾.

(1)

PSI is denoting the tumor volume prior to therapy (V0) to
carrying capacity ratio. The carrying capacity denotes the
tumor-extrinsic tissue-environmental properties of the patient
that influence tumor growth dynamics, including the
established oxygen and nutrients supply through tissue
vascularization, removal of metabolic waste products, and
evasion of immune surveillance.
H.E., E.S., and J.J.C. are with the Integrated Mathematical Oncology and
Radiation Oncology Department, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 33612
USA (e-mail: heiko.enderling@moffitt.org or jimmy.caudell@moffitt.org).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/630806; this version posted May 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Radiation response is modeled as decrease in tumor
volume such that the volume after irradiation (VpostIR) is the
volume prior to radiation reduced by cell death of proliferating
cells at rate:
VpostIR = VpreIR - 𝛾 VpreIR (1-VpreIR / K).

(2)

From radiation-induced volume reduction rate 𝛾 we can
derive the OPC specific linear-quadratic radiation sensitivity
parameters ⍺ and β with 𝛾 = 1 - exp(-⍺d-βd2), where d is the
radiation dose. In this model, tumor growth rate (or volume
doubling time) and radiation sensitivity are assumed uniform
across patients, and tumor carrying capacity is modeled as the
only patient-specific parameter that yields a patient-specific
pre-treatment PSI. It follows from that larger PSI reflect a low
proliferating cell fraction and, thus, potentially treatment
refractory tumors, whereas tumors with low PSI are more
proliferative and potentially radiosensitive. As such, two
patients that present with similar tumor volume could have a
different PSI, which results in different responses to the same
RT protocol (Fig. 2A).
III. RESULTS
PSI as the sole patient-specific marker of RT response was
able to fit the data of N=49 OPC patients during RT with high
accuracy (R2=0.93, Fig. 2B, C) with λ=0.02 day-1 and 𝛾=0.14.
The distribution of patient-specific PSI is shown in Fig. 1C.
Patients with >32% tumor volume reduction by week 4 had
PSI<0.75.

Figure 3: Model of tumor response at 4 weeks by initial
pretreatment PSI.
IV. CONCLUSION
Personalization of radiation fractionation using PSI and
mathematical modeling may improve on treatment response
and ultimately outcomes in OPC. Validation of the model in
additional data sets and ultimately a prospective clinical trial
is warranted. PSI can be calculated from delineated volumes
on two routinely collected radiological scans (PET/CT at
diagnosis and treatment simulation):
(3)
For the analyzed OPC cohort, the PSI-dependent
recommended radiation fractionation are as follows:
PSI < 0.75: 2 Gy/fraction ; 5 fx / week
PSI ≥ 0.75: 1.2 Gy/fraction BID; 10 fx / week.

Figure 2: A. Conceptual PSI framework. Two patients
with identical tumor volume at time of RT simulation (RT sim)
can have different PSI due to different radiographic volumes
at diagnosis. Higher PSI value predicts lower tumor volume
reduction during RT. B. Representative examples of PSI
model fit to clinical data. Red circles: radiographic volumes,
blue curves: model fit. Patient-specific initial tumor volume
(V0) and PSI shown in green. C. High correlation of simulated
vs. actual weekly measured tumor volumes of N=49 OPC
patients during RT (R2=0.93).

These model predictions are currently evaluated in a
prospective clinical trial (NCT03656133).
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

RT with standard of care 2 Gy daily yielded a midtreatment tumor volume reduction >32% in 24 of 49 patients
(49%). Simulations of the PSI model suggest that 31 of 49
patients (63.3%) would achieved tumor volume reductions >
32% by week four with 1.2 Gy twice daily (B.I.D., Fig. 3).
Patients with PSI = (0.75,0.85) are most likely to achieve the
32% mid-treatment response with hyperfractionation
compared to standard of care.

[4]

[5]

J. F. Torres-Roca, “A molecular assay of tumor radiosensitivity: a
roadmap towards biology-based personalized radiation therapy.,”
Per Med, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 547–557, Jul. 2012.
J. J. Caudell, J. F. Torres-Roca, R. J. Gillies, H. Enderling, S.
Kim, A. Rishi, E. G. Moros, and L. B. Harrison, “The future of
personalised radiotherapy for head and neck cancer.,” Lancet
Oncol., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. e266–e273, May 2017.
K. Latifi, A. Rishi, H. Enderling, E. G. Moros, J. Heukelom, A. S.
R. Mohamed, C. D. Fuller, L. B. Harrison, J. J. Caudell, Caudell,
“Mid-treatment Nodal Response is Associated with Outcome in
Head and Neck Squamous Cell Cancer ,” International Journal of
Radiation Oncology*Biology*Physics, vol. 99, no. 2, p. E683.
S. Prokopiou, E. G. Moros, J. Poleszczuk, J. Caudell, J. F. TorresRoca, K. Latifi, J. K. Lee, R. J. Myerson, L. B. Harrison, and H.
Enderling, “A proliferation saturation index to predict radiation
response and personalize radiotherapy fractionation.,” Radiat
Oncol, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 159, 2015.
J. Poleszczuk, R. Walker, E. G. Moros, K. Latifi, J. J. Caudell,
and H. Enderling, “Predicting Patient-Specific Radiotherapy
Protocols Based on Mathematical Model Choice for Proliferation
Saturation Index.,” Bull. Math. Biol., vol. 80, no. 5, pp. 1195–
1206, May 2018.

