bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Stability of Two-quartet G-quadruplexes and Their
Dimers in Atomistic Simulations
Barira Islam,1 Petr Stadlbauer,1,2 Michaela Vorlíčková,1 Jean-Louis Mergny,1,

3, 4

Michal

Otyepka1,2,5 and Jiří Šponer1*
1

Institute of Biophysics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Královopolská 135, 612 65

Brno, Czech Republic
2

Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Faculty of Science, Palacký

University, tř. 17 listopadu 12, 771 46, Olomouc, Czech Republic
3

Institut Curie, PSL Research University, CNRS-UMR 9187, INSERM U1196, F-91405 Orsay,

France
4

-Saclay, CNRS-UMR 9187, INSERM U1196, F-91405

Université Paris Sud, Université Paris

Orsay, France
5

Department of Physical Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Palacký University, tř. 17 listopadu 12,

771 46, Olomouc, Czech Republic
KEYWORDS. G-quadruplex, two-quartet stem, quadruplex stability, MD simulations

ABSTRACT

G-quadruplexes (GQ) are four-stranded non-canonical DNA and RNA architectures that can be
formed by guanine-rich sequences. The stability of GQs increases with the number of G-quartets
and three G-quartets generally form stable GQs. However, stability of two-quartet GQs is an
open issue. To understand the intrinsic stability of two-quartet GQ stems, we have carried out a

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

series of unbiased molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (~470 µs in total) of two- and fourquartet DNA and RNA GQs, with attention paid mainly to parallel-stranded arrangements. We
used AMBER DNA parmOL15 and RNA parmOL3 force fields and tested different ion and
water models. DNA two-quartet parallel-stranded GQs unfolded in all the simulations while the
equivalent RNA GQ was stable in most of the simulations. GQs composed of two stacked units
of two-quartet GQs were, however, stable for both DNA and RNA. The simulations suggest that
a minimum of three quartets are needed to form an intrinsically stable all-anti parallel-stranded
DNA GQ in the presence of Na+ or K+ ions. Parallel two-quartet DNA GQ may exist if
substantially stabilized by another molecule/structural element (including multimerisation). On
the other hand, we predict that isolated RNA two-quartet parallel GQs may form, albeit being
weakly stable. We also show that ionic parameters and water models should be chosen with
caution, because some parameter combinations can cause spurious instability of GQ stems in
simulations. Some in-so-far unnoticed limitations of force-field description of multiple ions
inside the GQs are discussed, which appear to compromise capability of simulations to fully
capture the effect of the increase of the number of quartets on the GQ stability.
INTRODUCTION
DNA and RNA can form diverse stable secondary structures depending on their sequence and
environment.1,

2

Guanine-rich sequences can adopt G-quadruplex (GQ) structures by forming

guanine-guanine Hoogsteen base pairing.3 Potential GQ-forming sequences have been found at
telomeres, gene promoters, immunoglobulin heavy chain switch regions, hypervariable repeats
and in genomically unstable and recombination-prone regions.4 The abundance of GQ-forming
sequences at functional and gene controlling sites suggests their potential role in gene

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

expression.5 Therefore, there is considerable interest in studying and modulating the formation of
GQs as a means for controlling gene expression and other cellular processes.6
GQs are formed by stacking of planar guanine quartets, creating the G-stem. The O6 atoms of all
the guanines face to form a central electron-rich channel within the GQ where cations bind and
coordinate with the O6 atoms. This coordination is essential for GQ stability.7 Bases not
involved in G-stem belong to bulges, flanking nucleotides or participate in the loops linking the
G-strands of the GQs.3
The GQs can be monomolecular, bimolecular or tetramolecular depending on the number of
DNA or RNA molecules that form the GQ.8, 9 The topologies of GQs are highly variable as the
G-strand orientation can be parallel or antiparallel and based on that GQs can fold into parallel,
antiparallel or hybrid topology.10,
orientation.10,

12, 13

11

The guanines in the DNA GQs can adopt syn or anti

In the RNA GQs, the 2 -hydroxyl group in ribose allows for more

interactions with the bases, cations and water molecules thereby increasing their stability, as
common in RNA molecules.14-19 It also restricts the orientation of the guanine bases favouring
the anti-orientation.14 Therefore, the majority of the RNA GQs have been observed in the
parallel-stranded topology with all bases in the anti-orientation. 15-18
The loops further add to the diversity as the GQs can have propeller, lateral or diagonal loops.8,
20-27

The parallel-stranded GQ have propeller (double-chain reversal) loops as they are necessary

to orient the following and preceding G-strands in a parallel arrangement.8 The antiparallel and
hybrid GQs can have various combinations of the three loop types.20-27 The overall GQ topology
dictates the loop combination as well as the allowable syn-anti patterns of the guanines. Na+ ions
tend to coordinate within the plane while K+ ions coordinate between the planes of the G-

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

quartets.28, 29 The cation-quadruplex interactions can induce kinetic and equilibrium differences
between the different topologies.28, 30, 31
Stability of GQs is affected by the number of G-quartets in the stem.14,

32-34

It is commonly

accepted that increasing the number of G-quartets usually stabilizes the GQ structure.12, 14, 34, 35 In
DNA, stable GQ structures generally involve three quartets or more, although stable antiparallel
two-quartet GQs with loop alignments or stacked triads have also been observed.21, 36 27 In such
GQs, additional interactions formed by the loops or triads above and/or below the G-stems
contribute to their stabilization.21, 27, 36 The solution structure of a two-quartet stacked dimer of
RNA GQs has been solved, arguing that stabilization is provided by the dimerization of the two
GQ units.37 Various experiments have suggested increased stability of RNA GQs over their DNA
counterparts.14, 38 On the other hand, it was shown that substitution of even one guanine in the
three-quartet telomere DNA quadruplex by abasic site or by any non-G base prevents its parallel
folding under dehydrating conditions.39, 40 However, the intrinsic stability of isolated two-quartet
G-stems cannot be fully clarified by the experiments, due to difficulty to separate the G-stem
stability from the influence of additional interactions as well as due to structural resolution limits
of the experiments. Still, understanding stability of two-quartet G-stems is important. They may
for example transiently occur during folding processes of larger GQs, in the initial fast phase of
folding as well as in later transitions between different GQ folds.41 Thus, they can have impact
on the folding processes. They also may provide regulatory functions due to possible equilibrium
between folded and unfolded state at physiological temperatures. In addition, the existence of
these two-quartet GQs is of fundamental importance for all bioinformatics searches as their
inclusion greatly increases the number of putative GQ-forming sequences in the genome.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The goal of this study was to assess the stability of the smallest two-quartet G-stems, with a
special emphasis on the parallel arrangement. We have carried out series of unbiased explicitsolvent molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (total of 470 μs). The two-quartet DNA and RNA
G-stems are studied in isolation as well as in the context of GQ dimers. MD methodology, when
wisely applied, can provide useful insights into various aspects of GQ structural dynamics and
folding.42 While the contemporary MD is not robust enough to quantitatively evaluate the
absolute stability of the GQs in a thermodynamic sense, the simulations should fairly well reflect
different relative structural stabilities of GQ arrangements, provided the simulation time scale is
sufficiently long to see structural perturbations and unfolding in the simulations, i.e., to assess
the lifetimes (1/koff) of the studied arrangements. We have carried out the simulations with both
Na+ and K+ as the stabilizing cations to analyse and compare the cation dynamics. We suggest
that the all-anti parallel stranded two-quartet DNA G-stem is not stable per se, and explain the
reason for this behaviour. Nevertheless, such G-stems may still be involved in the formation of
larger GQ structures. We also suggest that the RNA two-quartet G-stem is more stable.
Simulations were further done for two-quartet DNA antiparallel G-stem to explain the difference
in stability of various two-quartet G-stems. To obtain additional insights into the balance of
forces in the G-stems and the consequences of the force-field approximations, we have also
carried out simulations of tetrameric parallel stranded all-anti DNA three and four-quartet Gstem. We compared performance of several water models and ionic parameters. Strikingly, our
simulations show that several water-ion combinations lead to visible destabilization of G-stems.
Together with our previous study on three-quartet G-stems,29 these results illustrate the
complexity of the choice of water models and ionic parameters in simulations of nucleic acids; it
appears that no combination could be generally recommended as the best one. In addition, our

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

simulations indirectly suggest that the pair-additive molecular mechanics (MM) description
generally does not properly capture the stabilizing effect due to increasing the number of Gquartets in the stem.
METHODS
Starting structures
We took the 28-mer two-quartet stacked DNA GQ (PDB id 2N3M43, first model; Figure 1a),
which is a solution structure of a synthetic construct d[(TGG)3TTGTTG(TGG)4T] that exhibits
anti-proliferative activity in vitro. It consists of a dimer of two-quartet parallel-stranded GQ units
stacked by their 3-5 interface and connected by a linker nucleotide. The simulations were
carried out with the whole 2N3M structure, 2N3M with no bond between G15 and T16 of first
and second GQ unit and also for its individual two-quartet GQ units (Figure 1a, 1b and 1c). The
individual GQ units are called first and second GQ starting from the 5'-end of 2N3M. The model
of parallel-stranded DNA G-stem d[GG]4 was made using the first two quartets of PDB structure
1KF1 (Figure 1d). The model of parallel-stranded DNA G-stem d[GG]4 with all 5'-guanines in
syn orientation (Figure 1e) was made using the first two quartets of PDB structure 3TVB.44 The
antiparallel DNA G-stem d[GG]4 was obtained from the solution structure of the thrombin
binding aptamer (TBA) sequence d[(GGTTGGTGTGGTTGG)] GQ (PDB id 148D, first frame;
Figure 1f).21
The coordinates for parallel- and antiparallel-stranded three-quartet system d[GGG]4 were
obtained from the human telomeric DNA quadruplex (PDB ids 1KF1, chain A and 143D, model
1; Figure 1g and 1h).8, 22 For four-quartet tetramolecular DNA G-stem d[GGGG]4 simulations,
we took the coordinates of guanine core from the X-ray structure of the d(TGGGGT) sequence

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(PDB id 4R44, chains A-D; Figure 1i).45 It is a tetramolecular GQ with three K+ in the GQ as the
stabilizing ions; the structure is virtually identical to other available d[TGGGGT]4 structures.46
The coordinates for the dimer and monomer of two-quartet RNA GQ were taken from a solution
structure of a dimer of two-RNA GQ units formed by the sequence 5'-r(GGA)4-3' stacked
through the 5'-5' interface (PDB id 2RQJ, first model; Figure 1j).37 The head-to-head stacking
means that quartets of the two subunits are of opposite directionality. For simulations of the
monomer, we took the first GQ unit (Figure 1k). The antiparallel RNA G-stem r[GG]4 was
prepared directly from the DNA variant d[GG]4 (extracted from TBA, see above) by changing
deoxyribose into ribose.
MD simulations
The GQs were solvated in a truncated octahedral box with a minimal distance of 10 Å of solute
from the box border, mostly in either SPC/E47 or OPC48 water model; some simulations were
carried out in TIP4P-D water model.49 The simulations were carried out in 0.15 M excess NaCl
or KCl, using mostly SPC/E specific (for SPC/E water model) or TIP4Pew specific (for OPC and
TIP4P-D) Joung and Cheatham (JC) parameters.50 A minority of simulations was performed with
Amber-adapted CHARMM22 parameters51 (for TIP4P-D), SPC/E specific (for SPC/E) and HFE
or IOD OPC specific (for OPC) 12-6 LJ parameters developed by Li, Merz and coworkers
(LM).52 The channel cations, when intended, were manually placed between the quartets and in
the cavity between the stacked GQs. System preparation was done in xleap module of
AMBER16.53 The list of structures and specific conditions of each simulation are presented in
Table 1 and Tables S1 and S2 in the Supporting Information.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We used OL1554 and OL3 (known also as

χOL3)

55

AMBER force field for DNA and RNA GQ,

respectively. These force-field versions include also earlier essential DNA56-58 and RNA56
modifications of the original AMBER Cornell et al. nucleic acids force-field;59 for more details
see refs.42, 60
The starting structures were equilibrated using standard protocols described in the Supporting
Information. The simulations were performed with PMEMD CUDA version of AMBER16.53
The electrostatic interactions were calculated using Particle mesh Ewald method.61 The cut-off
distance for non-bonded interactions was set to 9 Å. Covalent bonds involving hydrogen atoms
were constrained using the SHAKE algorithm with a tolerance of 0.0001 Å.62 Hydrogen mass
repartitioning of solute atoms was utilized allowing for an integration time step of 4 fs.63
Berendsen weak coupling thermostat and barostat were used to maintain constant temperature
and pressure of 300 K and 1 atm, respectively.64 Langevin thermostat with a friction coefficient
of 2 ps-1 was used in a few simulations. The final production runs without restraints were carried
out for continuous length specified in Tables 1-3. Analyses of trajectory were performed using
cpptraj65 module of AMBER and VMD66 program was used for visualization. Grace (version
5.1.22) program was used to produce the graphs.
Justification of the sampling strategy
We have carried out 114 individual simulations. Rather than trying to repeat small number of
equivalent simulations multiple times to get standard statistics of events, we performed as
diverse set of simulations as possible. We suggest that although a few individual simulations in
the dataset may exhibit some rare behaviour (though we have no indication of that), all the

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

reported trends consistently emerge from the overall set of simulations and are backed up by
multiple simulations.
RESULTS
Dimer of DNA GQs is stable in simulations (Simulations 1a - 1e)
We first performed simulations of the complete 2N3M structure. The sequence
d[(TGG)3TTGTTG(TGG)4T] forms a dimer of two-quartet parallel-stranded DNA GQs that are
stacked by their 3'-5' region (Figure 1a). The residues G2:G5:G8:G12 and G3:G6:G9:G15 form
the guanine quartets of the first GQ unit. T4 and T7 form single nucleotide propeller loops and
T10 and T11 form a dinucleotide propeller loop. The residues T13 and T14 form a bulge
between the two quartets, while T16 links the two GQ units. In the second GQ unit,
G17:G20:G23:G26 and G18:G21:G24:G27 form the guanine quartets and T19, T22 and T25
form single-nucleotide propeller loops. Three cation binding sites in between the subsequent
quartets are described further as Site 1, 2 and 3 starting from the 5'-end. We carried out 10 μs
long simulations of 2N3M in SPC/E and OPC water models with both Na+ and K+ as the
stabilizing ions (see Figure S1 for the RMSD developments). The simulations were initiated with
three ions inside the GQ.
The structure of 2N3M was maintained in the 10 μs SPC/E simulations with both Na+ and K+
(Simulations 1a and 1b). In the Simulation 1a, the Na+ ions were present in the three sites (Figure
2a). Two ion exchange events were observed at 9.25 and 9.55 μs. In both events Na+ ion entered
from the solvent through the bottom of the stem (the fourth quartet) into the Site 3 (Figure S2a).
Specifically, the approach of new cation below the quartet was followed by a linear concerted
upward movement of internal ions leading to escape of Na+ ion through the first quartet into the

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

solvent and movement of the approaching cation into the channel. In the Simulation 1b, the K+
ion from Site 1 moved up at 1.2 μs and stayed on the top of the first quartet for further 300 ns
and then escaped into the solvent. K+ from Site 2 moved to Site 1. Subsequently, Site 2 remained
vacant and no ion intake from the solvent was observed in this simulation (Figure S2b).
Transient ion sites were formed just above and below the GQ during the simulation (Figure 2b).
The 2N3M structure was also maintained in the simulation carried out in the Na+ ions with OPC
water model (Simulation 1c). An ion exchange event was observed at 80 ns as a new Na+ ion
entered from the bottom and occupied the Site 3 causing linear movement of cations within the
GQ expelling the cation from the top quartet. The second ion exchange event was observed at
6.71 μs as a new Na+ ion entered into the Site 1 concurrently with linear movement of cations
and escape of a cation through the bottom quartet. Within 70 ns of this event, Na+ ion escaped
from Site 3 and Na+ ion from Site 2 moved to occupy Site 3. No further ion entered the G-stem
and only two Na+ ions remained in the GQ (Figure S2c). However, in one simulation carried out
with K+ as the stabilizing ion (Simulation 1d) the ion from Site 1 escaped into the solvent at 350
ns which was accompanied by perturbation of the first quartet (Figure S2d). There was no
concerted linear movement of K+ ions. At 1.45 μs, the first quartet was disrupted as G5 oriented
in the solvent and the top quartet had only three guanines remaining (Figure S1f). The Site 1
remained vacant during the 10

μs

long simulation. We carried out additional 10

μs

long

simulation of 2N3M in OPC/K+ condition (Simulation 1e). The K+ ion from Site 1 moved to
align in plane with the first quartet within few ns of the start of the simulation and escaped into
the solvent at 1.1 μs. This was followed by a subsequent movement of K+ ion from Site 2 to Site
1. The GQ was stable and Site 2 remained vacant till the simulation end (Figures S1 and S2e).

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The results show several things. MD simulations with K+, at least with the used pair-additive
force fields, tend to leave the ion-binding cavity between the two stacked GQs empty.
Consistently with literature data,29, 67 observed ion exchanges with Na+ are typically concerted,
i.e., an ion approach from the bulk to the channel entrance facilitates ion expulsion on the other
side of GQ stem accompanied with a concerted shift of all ions. Loss of one quartet in the K+
OPC simulation, although not confirmed by the second simulation, is consistent with our recent
tests showing, for model d[GGG]4 systems, that the OPC water model may understabilize the
GQs.29 In the present case we observe perturbation of GQ core of an experimentally determined
structure, which is exceptionally rare in AMBER GQ simulations. 68-72
Cations can quickly enter the two-quartet dimer through both top and bottom of GQ
(Simulations 2a and 2b)
We also carried out 1 μs long simulations of 2N3M in the SPC/E water model with K+ and Na+
ions, but initially with no internally bound ions. In the simulation with Na+ ions in the bulk, an
ion was trapped at Site 2 during equilibration. A new ion entered Site 1 after 6 ns of the start of
the simulation and pushed ion from Site 2 to Site 3. No further ion exchange was observed. In
the K+ simulation, two K+ ions positioned near both ends of the G-stem during the equilibration.
These ions entered the G-stem within the first ns of the simulation and no further ion exchange
was observed. The G-stem was stable in both simulations. While Sites 1 and 3 were occupied,
Site 2 remained ion-free (Figure S3).
The linker is not required for the stability of GQ dimer (Simulations 3a-3b)
We carried out Na+ and K+ SPC/E simulations of 2N3M upon cutting the bond between the G15
and T16, with standard 3'-OH and 5'-OH chain termini and with initially three bound ions. The

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

GQ dimer stacking was stable. As for the simulations of the complete 2N3M structure, Na+ ions
were more dynamic than K+ (Figure S4).29, 68-70, 73 In the Simulation 3a, three Na+ ion exchange
events were observed from 440 ns - 2.28 μs (Figure S4a). These ion exchanges were linked to the
entry of cation from the bottom quartet concurrent with a concerted movement leading to the
escape of ion from the top quartet. All three sites remained occupied (Figure S4a). In the
Simulation 3b, the K+ ion initially resided just below the fourth quartet rather than in Site 3. At
1.08 μs, this ion escaped into the solvent followed by the movement of ion from Site 2 into Site 3
(Figure S4b) and Site 2 remained unoccupied till the end of the simulation. The behaviour of
cations was similar thus as in the complete 2N3M GQ.
DNA two-quartet monomer GQs are unstable in simulations (Simulations 4a - 4h)
We carried out simulations of both the GQ units. The two-quartet GQs were unstable and
unfolded in both the SPC/E and OPC water models between 80 ns - 7 μs (Table 1). Several
unfolding pathways were observed. This may be partly caused by the differences in the ions and
water models, though most likely it primarily reflects the known multidimensionality of the freeenergy landscape.42 The first GQ unit unfolded by strand slippage and rotation leading to the
formation of cross like structure in Na+ and K+ ions in SPC/E water model and K+ ions in OPC
water model (Table 1 and Figure 3). Strand slippage is a movement of a strand by one step up or
down, reducing the number of full quartets by one.74,

75

By cross-like structure we mean a

perpendicular or at least significantly inclined arrangement of the G-strands.74-76 In the
simulation with Na+ and OPC water model, unfolding was initiated by disintegration of the
second quartet after excessive buckling. The first quartet then disintegrated within 2-3 ns leading
to the complete unfolding of GQ.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

In the simulations of second GQ unit as well, unfolding was marked by strand slippage and
strand rotation in all the simulations (Table 1, Figures S5 and S6). Further details of the
simulations are presented in the Supporting Information.
These simulations reflected that parallel two-quartet DNA GQs are unstable per se as they
unfolded in all the ion (K+ or Na+) and water conditions. Obviously, the result can be affected by
the force-field approximations (see the Discussion). Still, the unfolding seen in our simulations is
so decisive that we predict that all-anti parallel-stranded two-quartet DNA GQs are intrinsically
unstable in K+ and Na+. Hallmarks of the initial stages of unfolding events have been strand
slippage and strand rotations.
Tetramolecular two-quartet DNA GQs with 5’-syn guanines are more stable than all-anti
two-quartet DNA GQ (Simulations 5a - 5d, 6a - 6d and 7a - 7k)
We carried out two independent SPC/E simulations of two-quartet parallel stranded d[GG]4 Gstems with all guanines in anti orientation in both Na+ and K+ ion conditions. The G-stems were
highly unstable as strand slippage events followed by structure loss were observed at 5 and 6 ns
in the Na+ ion simulations and at 76 and 228 ns in the two K+ ion simulations (Figure S7). The
strand slippage events were not linked to any ion exchange events.
Simulations were then carried out for parallel-stranded d[GG]4 G-stems with all four 5'-guanines
in syn orientation (Simulations 6a - 6d). The GQ was maintained in all the simulations (Figure
4a). As many as twenty ion exchange events were observed in the simulations in Na+ ions while
there was no cation exchange in the K+ ions simulations (Figures 4b-4e). The terminal synspecific 5'-OH – G(N3) H-bond was dominantly sampled in all the simulations (Figure S8), as
expected.12, 77, 78

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We also carried out simulations of two-quartet antiparallel d[GG]4 G-stem which maintained its
structure in all five 5 μs long simulations in Na+ ions and SPC/E water model (Simulations 7a 7e), although there were several (>10 per microsecond) ion-exchange events (Figure 5). The
bases in the quartets were staggered for most of the simulation time but the two-quartet
arrangement was maintained. In the two 5 μs long simulations in K+ ions and SPC/E water model
(Simulations 7f-7g), no cation exchange was observed and GQ was maintained although the
quartets were again not entirely planar (Simulations 7a- 7e) (Figure S9).
The two-quartet antiparallel G-stem was also stable in simulations in OPC water model
(Simulations 7h-7k). In the 5 μs long simulation in Na+ ions there were continuous ion exchange
events (Figure S10) but in the 2 μs long simulation in K+ ions no ion exchange was observed
(Figure S11). This behaviour of Na+ and K+ ions was thus consistent across SPC/E and OPC
water models (Figures 5, S9-S11).
In summary, all-anti parallel-stranded GQs unfolded in all the simulations (Simulations 4a-4h,
5a-5d). The greater stability of both parallel and antiparallel d[GG]4 G-stem with 5-syn bases
(Simulations 6a-6d and 7a-7k) suggests that the intramolecular 5-OH – G(N3) H-bond and the
opposite directionality of quartets, hindering the strand slippage stabilize the G-stem.
Dimer of RNA two-quartet GQs is stable (Simulations 8a - 8f, 9a - 9b, 10)
We have carried out six 6-10 µs SPC/E K+ simulations, two SPC/E Na+ simulations and one OPC
Na+ simulation (the latter is the potentially least stable combination of parameters) of dimer of
two-quartet RNA GQ represented by 2RQJ. Various initial ion positions were considered (Table
S1). Universally, all simulations were stable, the ions quickly occupied the Sites 1 and 3, Site 2
was vacant, and no ion exchanges occurred in the whole dataset once the final distribution of the

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ions was obtained (Figures S12 - S16). The results are in details described in Supporting
Information.
Two-quartet all-anti RNA GQ is more stable than the equivalent DNA GQ (Simulations
11a -11d, 12a-12d, 13, 14a-14c, 15a-15c and 16a-16d)
We carried out four 5.5 - 10 μs K+ SPC/E simulations of a monomer of 2RQJ (Simulations 11a11d). The two-quartet RNA GQ was stable in all the simulations and no ion exchange was
observed (Figure 6). The terminal adenine (A12) was stacked below the strand 4 of the GQ as in
the starting structure. The loop bases showed some dynamics but could not form any stable
alignment with the G-stem. They either aligned in the groove of the GQ by forming transient
hydrogen bonds with the G-stem bases or were exposed to the solvent.
We also carried out simulations of a monomer of 2RQJ without the 3' flanking base in Na+ and
K+ ions and in both SPC/E and OPC water models (simulation series 12 - 15). The GQ was
maintained in three out of four 5 μs long Simulations 12a-12d which included Na+ and SPC/E
water model (Figure S17). The GQ unfolded in one simulation at 4.27 μs (Figure S17b). The

χ

angle of G1 attained syn orientation at 4.27 μs and G2 moved towards the solvent. The first
propeller loop was lost as G2 moved to stack over G1 but G1 could not re-attain anti orientation
till the end of the simulation. G1 also sampled the terminal syn-specific 5'-OH – G(N3) H-bond
when it was in syn orientation. More than 20 ion exchange events were observed in all four of
these simulations (Figure S18). The GQ also was stable in the 1 μs long K+ SPC/E simulation
(Simulation 13). No ion exchange was observed in this simulation and the loop bases showed
similar dynamics as in the Simulations 11a-11d (Figure S19).

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We carried out three 1 μs long simulations of RNA GQ in Na+ ions and OPC water model. In
Simulation 14a, GQ was stable and loop bases behaved similarly to the equivalent stable SPC/E
simulations (Figure S20). An ion exchange event was observed at 750 ns. However, the GQ
unfolded in Simulations 14b and 14c (Figure S20). In Simulation 14b, a cross-like structure was
formed due to the buckling and rotation of strands 1 and 4 at 400 ns. In Simulation 14c, strand 4
formed a cross-like structure at 130 ns leading to the unfolding of GQ. The unfolding was not
linked to any cation exchange movement in these simulations. In contrast, the RNA GQ was
stable in three 1 μs K+ OPC simulations and no cation exchange event was observed (Figure
S21).
In brief, simulation series 11-15 suggests universally enhanced stability of parallel-stranded all
anti two-quartet RNA GQs over DNA GQs. Previous works have shown that 2-hydroxyl group
in ribose sugar allows for more interactions with the bases, cations and water molecules thereby
increasing the stability of the RNA GQ.14, 18 The GQ was stable in all K+ simulations. The twoquartet RNA GQ was able to maintain its structure in Na+ SPC/E simulations despite the multiple
ion exchange events. The simulations nevertheless reveal that the combination of OPC water
model with JC TIP4Pew Na+ ions destabilizes the RNA GQ compared to the other water-ion
combinations. The cation exchange events may alter the energy of GQ due to change in
solvation, ion-coordination and structural rearrangements within the GQ.79 However, the
unfolding of GQs in the present OPC Na+ simulations could not be linked to any cation
movements.
The two-quartet RNA GQ represented by monomer of 2RQJ was also a good test system for the
TIP4P-D water model. It was stable in three out of four TIP4P-D Simulations 16a-16d (Figure
S22). Multiple cation exchanges were observed in the Simulation 16a carried out in JC Na+ ions

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

but GQ was maintained throughout the 5

μs

simulation (Figures S22a and S23a). The GQ

completely unfolded in the Simulation 16b carried out with CHARMM22 Na+ ions (Figure
S22b). Excessive buckling of quartets was observed in this simulation from the start. One cation
escaped through the first quartet at 1.8 μs and the GQ then completely unfolded within few ns
(Figure S23b). In the Simulations 16c and 16d carried out in JC and CHARMM22 K+ ions,
respectively the GQ was stable and no cation exchange with the solvent was observed (Figures
S22c-S22d and S23c-S23d).
Substitution of thymine by adenine loop bases does not stabilize the two-quartet DNA GQ
(Simulation 17)
To confirm that the difference in structural stability of DNA and RNA two-quartet GQ was not
due to the loop bases, we substituted the thymine by adenine bases in the second GQ monomer
of 2N3M and carried out one simulation in K+, SPC/E simulation (Simulation 17). The GQ
unfolded at 450 ns (Figure S24).
Tetramolecular antiparallel RNA G-stem model was unstable in the simulations
(Simulations 18a - 18d)
The model of hypothetical tetramolecular two-quartet antiparallel RNA G-stem unfolded in all
the simulations in Na+ and K+ ions in SPC/E water model. The quartets were not planar and the
guanines were buckled from the start of the simulations. The GQ unfolded in the two Na+
simulations at 10 and 50 ns by strand slippage followed by strand rotation (Figure S25a and
S25b).The GQ unfolded at ~180 ns and ~510 ns in the two K+ simulations (Figures S25c and
S25d).

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Tetramolecular three-quartet antiparallel DNA G-stem is more stable than parallelstranded G-stem (Simulations 19a - 19b, 20a - 20b and 21a - 21d)
In order to see the effect on adding one quartet (and ion), we have carried out a set of parallelstranded d[GGG]4 simulations. In the two Na+ SPC/E simulations, strand slippage was observed
at 1.6 μs and 530 ns, respectively (Figures S26a and S26b). However, the G-stem was entirely
stable in the two 5 μs long K+ SPC/E simulations (Figures S26c and S26d). In Simulation 20a, a
channel K+ was exchanged at the 5'-end at 4.8 μs while in the Simulation 20b it was exchanged
at the 3'-end at 273 ns (Figures S27b). In both cases, the cation-leaving site was vacant for ~2530 ns followed by entry of new cation from the bulk at the same site. Thus, using the SPC/E
water model the G-stem was stable in K+ ions but have shown a strand slippage in Na+ ion
simulations.
The d[GGG]4 antiparallel G-stem was fully stable in SPC/E simulations with both ion types
(Figure S28). Four ion exchange events were observed in the Na+ simulation while no ion
exchange was observed in the K+ simulation (Figure S29). In the Na+ OPC simulation
(Simulation 21c), ion between the middle and top quartet escaped into the solvent at 65 ns. This
resulted in instability of the quartets and G12 from the first quartet moved towards the solvent at
185 ns (Figure S28a). However, the G-stem was maintained in the Simulation 21d with K+ ions
in OPC water model (Figure 28b).
To summarize the simulations, the all-anti parallel stranded three-quartet G-stem was more
stable than similar two-quartet G-stem as no structural change was observed in the K+ SPC/E
simulations of d[GGG]4 compared to the rapid complete unfolding of all the parallel d[GG]4
simulations. There is, however, a tendency for strand slippage in presence of Na+. The

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

antiparallel d[GGG]4 is evidently

more stable than the all-anti parallel-stranded d[GGG]4.

Additional 30 µs of simulations of the all parallel all-anti [GGG]4 can be found in ref.;29 the
results are consistent with the present simulations.
Simulations of tetramolecular DNA four-quartet parallel stranded all-anti G-stem show
excessive ion dynamics (Simulations 22a - 22e, 23a - 23e, 24a - 24e, 25a - 25e and 26a - 26g)
In order to obtain more insights into the balance of forces in GQs and also to better understand
the force-field limitations, we have carried out a series of simulations of parallel stranded all-anti
d[GGGG]4 tetrameric G-stem with three ions in the channel. The d[GGGG]4 simulations can be
compared with the 2N3M simulations (simulation series 1-3) and with d[GGG]4 simulations
(simulation series 19-21). The d[GGGG]4 all parallel all-anti G-stem has not been studied
extensively before by long time-scale MD and, intuitively, one would expect it to be very stable.
However, the results show a surprisingly complex picture.
The G-stem was maintained in all ten 1 μs long simulations in the SPC/E water model with
either Na+ (Simulations 22a-22e) or K+ (Simulations 23a-23e) ascertaining that four quartets
provide sufficient stabilization, consistently with the literature. However, in four out of five Na+
simulations, three to seven ion exchange events were observed (Figure S30a and S30c-30d)
while no ion exchange was seen in one simulation (Figure S30b). All the ion movements were
concerted. The Na+ ions in the channel were mobile, confirming that the stems sample diverse
subtly different heterogeneous substates, interconnecting the detailed ion dynamics/distribution
with modest differences in the internal G-stem conformation.77 The Na+ ions were mostly
residing close to the quartet planes rather than in between the quartet planes (Figure S31).

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Although the G-stems were stable, in all the SPC/E simulations with K+ there has been a visible
tendency to reduce the number of the ions in the channel to two, indicating a structural stress
associated with the three closely-spaced cations (see Discussion). This has not been observed in
the above (simulation series 19-21) and earlier simulations of the d[GGG]4 with the same forcefield parameters,29 i.e., two K+ are stable in d[GGG]4. In early stages of the d[GGGG]4 K+
simulations, the ion between quartet 1 and 2 (Site 1) was pushed above the stem (above its 5'end). After the first loss of cation from the Site 1, K+ ion could re-occupy Site 1 in only one
simulation out of five (Figure S32e). Otherwise the cations stayed above the first quartet
throughout the simulations (Figures 7 and S32). As this newly formed “outer” ion-binding site
was exposed to the solvent, four to >20 cation exchanges with bulk ions were observed in the
simulations (Figure S32). Additionally, in two simulations, the bottom ion was lost to the
solvent. Then the ion from the central cavity Site 2 moved to Site 3 and the middle site remained
vacant for most of the Simulations 23d and 23e (Figures S32d and S32e), thus resulting in only
two ions in the stem. The K+ ions that remained within the G-stems were stable and stayed in the
cavities between two quartets, as expected for the K+ ions.
We also carried out five 1 μs long simulations of d[GGGG]4 in OPC with Na+ as the stabilizing
cation (Figure S33). The systems were visibly distorted in three out of five simulations as strand
slippage events were observed. In one simulation the GQ was stable and no ion exchange event
was observed while in the last simulation, four cation exchange events were observed but the
stem was stable. The strand slippage events in this series of simulations were initiated by melting
of the terminal quartet. One guanine left the quartet, stacked on the remaining G-triad, and it
eventually enforced strand slippage, as the lone stacked guanine pulled the whole G-strand by
one level (Figure S34). Substantially non-planar G-quartets were sampled from the onset of the

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

simulations (because of the apparently imbalanced G(O6)-Na+ attraction resulting in buckling of
Gs), but that was likely a prelude to the described strand slippage. Considering the short
simulation time scale, the simulations thus suggest a substantial volatility of the d[GGGG]4
system compared to what one would expect for a four-quartet G-stem (see Discussion).
In the 1 μs long simulations of d[GGGG]4 in K+ and OPC water model, the G-stem was stable in
only two out of five simulations (Figure S35). In the Simulations 25a - 25c, Site 1 became vacant
and transient cation binding site over the first quartet was observed. The first (5’-end) quartet in
these simulations was disrupted at 180 ns, 280 ns and 350 ns, respectively by movement of one
or two guanines over the remaining bases of the quartet. The other three quartets of the G-stem
did not fully disintegrate but exhibited substantial fluctuations. The cations at Sites 2 and 3 were
retained in these simulations (Figure S36a - S36c). In the Simulation 25d, the number of ions in
the stem was reduced to two, the Site 2 became vacant and additional transient cation binding
sites were formed above and below the G-stem (Figure S36d). In the Simulation 25e, the ion
from Site 1 was pushed above the first quartet. Re-entry of this cation back into the Site 1 pushed
the cation from Site 3 below the G-stem and when the latter ion returned back to the Site 3 the
ion from Site 1 moved again above the stem (Figure 36e). An ion exchange was also observed at
Site 3. This all indicates difficulty to stable incorporate three ions in the channel.
We also tested LM Na+ and K+ ions in the SPC/E water model in the Simulations 26a-26c for the
d[GGGG]4 G-stem. The G-stem was stable in the Na+ ion simulation but disruption of a quartet
was observed in one of the two simulations in K+ ions, (Simulation 26b, Figure S37a). The
SPC/E adapted LM Na+ ions showed similar behaviour as the JC Na+ ions as three ions stabilized
the G-stem and ~20 ion exchange events were observed (Figure S38a). In the Simulation 26b
with the SPC/E adapted LM K+ ions, ion from Site 3 was lost to the solvent at 90 ns and guanine

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

from the last quartet moved towards the solvent, disrupting the quartet. The other three quartets
were maintained albeit with substantial fluctuations. In the second simulation in SPC/E adapted
LM K+ ions (Simulation 26c), ion from Site 1 was pushed over the first quartet until the
movement of ion from Site 2 to Site 1 at 0.7 μs (Figure S38b). Cations at Sites 1 and 3 stabilized
the G-stem and no cation was present in Site 2 for the remaining of the simulation time. Thus,
the LM Na+ and K+ ions in Simulations 26a and 26c behaved similarly to JC ions.
In the Simulation 26d with OPC water model and HFE Na+ ions, GQ was stable but various ion
exchange events were observed (Figures S37b and S38c) and the fourth quartet was buckled. In
the OPC water model and HFE K+ ions (Simulation 26e), 5'-quartet was disrupted at 1.7 μs
(Figures S37b and S38d). Disruption of 5'-quartet was also observed in the Simulations 26f and
26g with OPC water model and IOD Na+ and K+ ions at 1.0 μs and 400 ns, respectively (Figure
S37c).
Additional simulations for testing various parameters (Simulations 27a-27d and 28a-28f)
Further parallel-stranded d[GGGG]4 simulations were carried out with TIP4P-D water with JC
and CHARMM22 Na+ and K+ ions (simulation series 27). The d[GGGG]4 G-stem was fully
stable in only two out of four simulations in TIP4P-D water model. Strand slippage was observed
in the Simulation 27a in JC Na+ ions at ~3 μs (Figure S39). However, the G-stem was stable in
the Simulations 27b and 27c in CHARMM22 Na+ ions and JC K+ ions, respectively. In the
simulation with CHARMM22 Na+ ions, cations were present in all the three sites and ion
exchanges were observed while in the simulation with JC K+ ions, cations were retained at Sites
1 and 3 and Site 2 was vacant for majority of the simulation time. Disruption of 5'-quartet was
observed in the Simulation 27d with CHARMM22 K+ ions at ~1.3 μs as cation escaped from the

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

top quartet (Figure S40d). The quartet reassembled at 3.6 μs and full four-quartet G-stem was
formed again (Figure S39d). Na+ ions were more dynamic than K+ ions (Figure S40). The
perturbation of quartets and excessive ion dynamics suggest that combination of cations and
TIP4P-D water parameter tested here is probably less suitable for GQ simulations than SPC/E
with JC ions.
We also carried out additional simulations of two quartet parallel and antiparallel GQ
(Simulations 28a -28f) using the Langevin thermostat. The GQ system behaved similarly as with
the Berendsen thermostat, within the limits of sampling (Figure S41 and S42). Further details of
these simulations are presented in the Supporting Information.
Complex dynamics of water molecules inside the channel of four-quartet GQs (Simulation
series 1-3, 8-10, 22-27)
The trajectories of both RNA and DNA four-quartet GQs showed that water molecules may enter
the channel via its 5' or 3' end. These waters may then be pushed further into the channel by an
incoming cation. Then they may leave the channel concurrently with another ion exchange
through the channel ends. In case of four-quartet GQs with discontinuous strands (2RQJ, 2N3M),
we rarely observed that waters could escape from Site 2 (the middle one) into the groove. This
process is facilitated by incorporation of the leaving water molecule into a G-quartet, which then
hosts one water-mediated G:G base pair (Figure S43). Such a G-quartet perturbation may last for
microseconds, but it apparently does not destabilize the GQ. In one case we saw the process in
reverse, a water molecule penetrated into the channel from the groove. In tetramolecular GQs
with continuous strands (d[GGGG]4), water molecules could escape the channel via
incorporation into a quartet, but only the terminal ones; we did not see escape through the middle

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

quartets into the groove. The analysis again confirms that the ensembles of the simulated G-stem
structures are not homogeneous77 and contain diverse long-living substates. Interaction of longresidency water molecules in G-triads participating in a G-stem core has been characterized by
NMR and MD simulations.80 However, incorporation of water molecules into a G-quartet
appears to be a new observation. It may lead to rare conformational substates of the G-stems
which might affect their interactions with other molecules.
DISCUSSION
Potential roles of two-quartet GQs
GQs are often assumed to need three consecutive G-quartets for stabilization. On the other hand,
the formation of stable two-quartet DNA or RNA GQs would imply that GQs could be far more
widespread in the genome.81 In addition, RNA is single-stranded and in principle could form GQ
whenever the right conditions are met.82-88 It has been shown that RNA GQs formed by 5'untranslated regions of genes and mRNA could modulate translation in vitro.89-93 The stability of
two-quartet RNA GQs would implicate that shorter RNA molecules such as microRNAs may
form GQs under physiological conditions and modulate the cellular functions.94 In addition,
these less stable GQs could have interesting dynamic properties, as they can quickly fold and
unfold, and sensitively respond to the changes in cellular conditions. Various two-quartet GQs
could be transiently formed during folding of larger GQs. The current experimental data are not
sufficient to unambiguously assess the intrinsic stability of two-quartet GQs, albeit they show
that very stable two-quartet GQs can form if stabilized by additional structural features such as
favourable loop alignments or adjacent G-triads. Two most known cases are the DNA Thrombin
binding aptamer (TBA) stabilized by the loops and the two-quartet form of the DNA human

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

telomeric GQ stabilized by a G-triad,21, 27 both being anti-parallel GQs. More recent two-quartet
DNA GQs have also been discovered in anti-parallel conformation.36, 95
Stability of two-quartet GQs as captured by MD simulations
In the present work, we investigated the potential to form two-quartet GQs with minimal or no
support by additional stabilizing elements. We have performed series of standard 1-10 μs long
atomistic explicit solvent MD simulations assessing the intrinsic structural stability of twoquartet DNA and RNA GQs starting from the folded state. Such computations aim to capture the
unfolding process, i.e., the lifetime (1/koff) of a given GQ when folded, as described by the
simulation force field. Although the computations do not address directly the thermodynamic
stability, it is plausible to assume that species with too short lifetimes cannot significantly
contribute to the folding landscape. Due to many force-field approximations discussed below we
assume that the simulations underestimate the lifetimes of the studied species, but should provide
fairly good estimate of their relative structural stabilities. Most of our efforts were devoted to the
more elusive parallel-stranded all-anti arrangements.
Our simulations predict that two-quartet parallel stranded all-anti DNA G-stems are intrinsically
very unstable, and cannot be formed (except of being very transient) without extensive support
by other structural elements (Simulations 4a-4h and 5a-5d, Figures 3, S5 and S7). Parallelstranded G-stems with 5'-syn bases and antiparallel two-quartet DNA G-stem are evidently more
stable (Simulations 6a-6d and 7a-7k, Figures 4, 5 and S9-S11). This is consistent with the fact
that the solution structures of antiparallel two-quartet DNA GQs with alignments on both sides
of the G-stems are known.21 Similarly, the two-quartet RNA GQ is predicted to be more stable
than the parallel DNA two-quartet GQ, which is consistent with experiments suggesting larger

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

stability of RNA over DNA GQs (simulation series 11 -15, Figure 6 and S17-S21).38, 82, 85, 96
Mergny and colleagues studied the kinetics and thermodynamics of tetramolecular DNA and
RNA quadruplexes, and concluded that RNA quadruplexes are more stable than their DNA
counterparts as a result of both faster association and slower dissociation.34 Note, however, that
all these comparisons were based on tetramolecular structures involving at least three quartets.
The simulations clearly reveal the origin of short lifetimes of unsupported two-quartet all-anti
DNA G-stems (Table 1). They are volatile due to the ability of unobstructed vertical movements
(slippage) of the strands caused by common thermal fluctuations.74, 75 In contrast to longer stems,
for two-quartet stems any strand slippage leads to a weak structure with only one quartet that is
prone to immediate disintegration. In case of antiparallel G-stems, mutual vertical movements of
the strands are hindered by the mixture of syn and anti residues in the stem. Additionally, the
terminal syn-specific 5'-OH – G(N3) H-bond may also provide stability to the antiparallel Gstem. In case of RNA GQs, we suggest that their larger rigidity due to the presence of the 2

-

OH hydroxyl group reduces their propensity to vertical strand slippage.
Force-field approximations and their effect on G-stem simulations
The simulations are influenced by diverse force-field imbalances.60 Generally, outcomes of
simulation studies of fully folded cation-stabilized GQ structures are often unaffected by these
imbalances, due to the extraordinary stability and stiffness of GQs.42 Simulations with
appropriate force fields starting from fully folded cation-stabilized GQs are usually entirely
stable, as their life-times, even as described by the force field, extend far beyond the simulation
time scale. In contrast, any larger perturbation of the quartets in simulations of GQ structures
derived from experiments indicate that an inadequate force field has been used.42, 97 Still, even

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

with appropriate force fields, subtle details of the structures (details of quartet’s H-bonds,29, 72
cation distribution,29 backbone substates57 and loop conformations

68, 69, 71

) may be sampled

imperfectly.
Force-field imbalances may impact considerably more simulations of GQ folding
intermediates42, 76 and other weak structures such as the two-quartet stems studied here. Such
simulations may be already visibly affected by force-field approximations. Our above-presented
analysis of different stabilities of two-quartet GQ stems has been made based on primary MD
data with consideration of the known systematic errors in the force-field description. Thus, we
suggest that our interpretation of the simulation data is justified. Let us now explicitly comment
on the imbalances, explain how they influence the presented primary simulation results and what
new insights were learnt from the simulations about force-field limitations.
i) Stability of the GG H-bonding is generally assumed to be underestimated42 with the presentlyused non-bonded terms.60 This problem can be partly corrected, for example, by adding a
specific term to stabilize the H-bonds.98 Note that it does not mean that the H-bonding is
uniformly underestimated in MD simulations of nucleic acids; there are other H-bonds which are
over-stabilized by the force field, especially in RNA.60, 98 No means to enhance stability of the
GG base pairing was used in this study.
ii) There are many indications that the base stacking is often over-stabilized in simulations of
nucleic acids with the presently-used non-bonded terms, though this effect is likely contextdependent and non-uniform (reviewed in ref.60). For GQs, some over-stabilization of G-quartet
stacking may be helpful since it compensates for some other force-field deficiencies. Stability of

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

H-bonding and stacking in nucleic acids simulations is determined not only by the solute-solute
interactions, but mainly by the balance with the water model.99-101
iii) The force fields are suspected to provide inaccurate description of the propeller loops.68, 70, 71
They are unable to sample the experimentally-determined (if known unambiguously)68 propeller
loop geometries in otherwise stable simulations of fully folded GQs and are assumed to
excessively destabilize the parallel G-hairpins and G-triplexes which affects simulations of
folding intermediates.41, 76 The exact origin and magnitude of this imbalance remains unknown.68
The description of lateral and diagonal loops appears to be more realistic. 69
iv) With commonly used force-field parameters, the pair additive force field underestimates the
strength of the O6-cation interaction and thus also direct cation binding to the G-quartets.71, 102 In
addition, when using monovalent cations that have parameters optimized to reproduce solvation
energies with current water models, the cations inside the G-stem channel appear as too large
(having a too large radius or too steep onset of the van der Waals repulsion).71,

102

These

inaccuracies, together with approximate description of the base-base H-bonds, probably
contribute to common sampling of bifurcated GG H-bonds in the simulated G-stems.29, 72
v) When two or more cations are lining up in the G-stem, yet another and likely severe
imbalance arises, which has been noticed only quite recently.103 It is manifested as an excessive
inter-cation repulsion, because the ions are modelled as having fixed +1 charges. In real GQs, the
inter-cation repulsion is weakened due to a complex interplay of polarization effects between the
ions and the G-quartets, which is strongly geometry-dependent.103 This problem thus cannot be
fixed when using the formalism of pair-additive force fields.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Due to the latter two imbalances, we remain rather sceptical with respect to MD simulation
studies aiming at quantitative (free-energy) description of ion binding inside GQs, including
studies attempting to explain the Na+ vs. K+ stabilization difference. In addition, as shown here
and elsewhere,77 binding of ions in GQs includes diverse local substates which have a dramatic
impact on results of free-energy calculations using the approximate MM-PBSA (or similar)
methods. These methods magnify the free-energy differences among the substates while the
simulation time scale is not sufficient to provide their converged populations.77 Recent literature
data suggest that polarizable force fields could substantially improve the description of ions in
GQs,97 though they may still require a careful calibration and it is not yet clear if they do not
introduce other hitherto not identified problems. However, G-stems stabilized by cations are
genuine systems for application of the polarizable force fields.
The above-listed imbalances explain why we suggest that the structural stability of the twoquartet GQs is underestimated by the present simulations. It is affected by under-stabilization of
the ion-quartet interactions and the GG base pairs, which is only partly compensated for by the
likely overestimated stacking. Further, the intra- and bimolecular parallel GQs may be
destabilized by the description of the propeller loops.
Our simulations of the larger systems are further affected by the imbalanced description of the
inter-cation repulsion. This can contribute to the observation that in the simulations of the 2N3M
structure, the ion Site 2 is often not occupied (Table 1). This specific prediction should thus be
taken with care.
Consideration of the excessive inter-cation repulsion also explains the quite frequent and likely
excessive exchanges and ion shifts seen in simulations of the d[GGGG]4 all parallel tetrameric

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

GQ (Figure 7). It also explains why the ion exchanges are not attenuated in the present
d[GGGG]4 simulations compared to the earlier simulations of d[GGG]4.29 While at first sight one
might expect a major stabilization/rigidification of the system when moving from three quartets
to four quartets, the force-field imbalance of the inter-cation interaction is getting more severe
for the latter system. In other words we suggest that the fact that we see more ion dynamics,
exchanges and expulsions for the d[GGGG]4 than for d[GGG]4 is a simulation artefact. Note
that in some of our simulations we have even seen modest perturbations of the stems. It indicates
that simulations with pair-additive force-fields do not properly capture the increase of stability of
GQs upon the increase of the number of G-quartets.34, 104 Although direct calculation of freeenergy differences between GQs with different number of quartets are not realistic due to
sampling limitations, even structural-dynamics simulations can be affected when smooth lining
up of the multiple ions in the channel is disturbed, as evidenced above. Fortunately, there are
indications that the ion dynamics is attenuated in simulations of complete GQs compared to
simulations of just the G-stems.29, 77 We did not see any preference for cation exchanges through
the 5’-end and 3’-end quartets. Previous MD studies also indicated that in all-anti parallelstranded GQ, the energy barriers for cations escaping the G-stem is approximately equal for both
the 5'- and 3'-end.105
The above-noted imbalances also provide clues about the less satisfactory performance of the
four-site OPC and TIP4P-D water models in our simulations. The OPC water model is becoming
very popular in simulations of RNA molecules, since it appears to weaken the base stacking and
also spurious H-bonds in RNA simulations;60,

98-100

overstabilization of these interactions is a

result of the balance of solute-solvent and solvent-solvent interactions. TIP4P-D enhances
dispersion interactions and it was developed to balance the populations of compacted and loosely

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ordered states of disordered proteins, because the widely used three-site TIP3P model
overstabilizes the compacted state.49 However, as shown in the present work, the OPC and
TIP4P-D water models (at least with most of the used ion parameters) are risky for GQ
simulations and we do not recommend them. They can lead to severe destabilization of at least
some GQ systems, probably due to the loss of fortunate compensation of errors present with
some more simple water models such as SPC/E. It appears that finding a universal water model
for nucleic acids simulations is a complex problem and that the SPC/E water model with JC ions
is a reasonable albeit not ideal compromise for GQ simulations.
CONCLUSIONS
Nearly 250 GQ structures are currently accessible in the PDB database. The majority of the
crystallised GQs are parallel-stranded and have three quartets. Solution structures of antiparallel
two-quartet DNA GQs have also been observed.21,

36

The antiparallel two-quartet DNA GQs

have extensive loop alignments above and below the guanine quartets or other stabilizing factors
which could provide stability to the GQ. However, it remains to be explored if independent
parallel-stranded two-quartet DNA GQs are unstable per se or are yet to be discovered.
Various experimental evidences suggest larger stability of RNA over DNA GQs. The 2 hydroxyl group in ribose sugar allows for more interactions with the bases, cations and water
molecules thereby increasing the stability of the RNA GQ.14 It also restricts the orientation of the
base favouring the anti-orientation. Therefore, the majority of the RNA GQs have been observed
in the parallel-stranded topology with all bases in the anti-orientation.
Based on the simulations we suggest that parallel-stranded all-anti two-quartet DNA G-stems are
intrinsically very unstable due to the propensity of strand slippage, leading to very short life-

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

times. Such stems can be stably formed only with the help of additional stabilizing interactions,
such as dimerization and linked two-quartet parallel-stranded DNA GQs.43 Nevertheless, it does
not preclude occurrence of parallel-stranded two-quartet stems in transitory ensembles during
folding processes. Antiparallel DNA two-quartet stems as well as RNA two-quartet stems are
structurally considerably more stable than the parallel DNA two-quartet stems, although even
these species likely require additional stabilizing elements to achieve a detectable
thermodynamic stability.
On the methodological side, we identify a visible consequence of exaggerated inter-cation
repulsion in the G-stems. This leads to enhanced rate of cation exchanges and even expulsions of
ions in the d[GGGG]4 parallel all-anti stem compared to the d[GGG]4. This has been an entirely
unexpected and counterintuitive result, considering the experimentally known sharp increase of
GQ stability with the number of G-quartets.34 Although there is no direct experimental evidence
of ion dynamics in these constructs, we assume that on µs time scale the ion-exchange dynamics
in d[GGGG]4 should be minimal and the stem should be fully occupied by ions. The simulations
also show differences among the tested water and ion parameters, confirming earlier
observation29 that improved water models such as OPC may be non-optimal for simulations of
GQs.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. Starting structures used in the simulations. (a) 2N3M GQ with nucleotide numbering
of guanines, (b) two-quartet GQ extracted from upper half of 2N3M, (c) two-quartet GQ
extracted from lower half of 2N3M, (d) all anti parallel-stranded d[GG]4 G-stem, (e) parallelstranded d[GG]4 with 5'-guanines in syn orientation, (f) antiparallel d[GG]4 extracted from 148D,
(g) parallel-stranded d[GGG]4 from 1KF1, (h) antiparallel d[GGG]4 from 143D and (i) parallelstranded d[GGGG]4 from 4R44 with cation binding sites 1, 2 and 3 shown by red, blue and

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

green circles, respectively. The RNA simulations were carried out using the dimer of (j) 2RQJ
with nucleotide numbering of guanines and (k) monomer of 2RQJ GQ. The anti and syn
guanines are shown in yellow and orange, respectively. The 5'-end of RNA structures is shown
in tan. The loops are shown in thin lines while dark arrows show the backbone of GQ. The
yellow, magenta and orange circles show guanine, thymine and adenine bases, respectively. The
solid red lines represent characteristic Hoogsteen base pairing.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. Cation binding sites (densities) observed in the MD simulations of 2N3M. (a) Three
Na+ ions stabilized the GQ in the Simulation 1a while (b) two K+ ions stabilized the GQ for the
majority of the Simulation 1b. The Na+ and K+ binding sites are shown in orange and pink,
respectively. The backbone of the GQ is shown in tan tube. The guanine nucleotides of GQ are
shown in silver ribbons and blue lines. The backbone of 5'-end of the GQ is shown in cyan. In
the simulation in K+ ions, transient cation binding sites were developed above and below the GQ.
A 2500 Å-3 threshold was used for density representation.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Simulations of the first GQ unit of 2N3M. The two-quartet structure unfolded in all the
Simulations 4a-4d irrespective of the water model and stabilizing ion suggesting the instability of
this two-quartet DNA GQ. The (a) starting structure and main transient structure occurring
during the unfolding in (b) Na+/SPC/E, (c) K+/SPC/E, (d) Na+/OPC and (e) K+/OPC are shown.
See legend to Figure 1 for further details. The solid red lines represent characteristic Hoogsteen
base pairing while dash red lines indicate any other hydrogen bonds.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Backbone RMSD (a) and distance plots monitoring the ion binding (d-e) in parallelstranded d[GG]4 with all 5'- bases in syn configuration in the Simulations 6a - 6d. Simulations 6a

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and 6b were carried out with Na+ ions and SPC/E water model while Simulations 6c and 6d were
carried out with K+ ions and SPC/E water model. The distances were measured between centre
of mass of G-stem and the cations in Simulations (b) 6a, (c) 6b, (d) 6c and (e) 6d. In the panels
(b)-(e) each color represents different cation in the simulations. The centrally bound cation
shows < 1 Å distance from the centre of mass of the G-stem. Frequent cation exchange events
were observed in the simulations carried out with Na+ ions while there was no cation exchange in
the simulations carried out with K+ ions. In the panels b and c cations around 3 Å represent
cations just above or below the G-stem.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. Backbone RMSD (a) and distance plots monitoring ion binding (b-f) of antiparallel
d[GG]4 G-stem in the Simulations 7a – 7e in the presence of Na+ ions and the SPC/E water

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

model. Distance plot between cations and centre of mass of the G-stem reveal very fast cation
exchanges in all the simulations. The cation within < 1 Å represents the internally bound cation.
Each color represents a different cation within the plot. In the panels b - f cations around 3 Å
represent cations just above or below the G-stem.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. Distance/backbone RMSD plots showing stability of two-quartet RNA GQ 2RQJ in
the Simulations 11a - 11d carried out in the presence of K+ and SPC/E water model. The
backbone RMSD of the GQ is shown in black while the red graph indicates distance between the
centre of mass of the GQ and the channel cation between the two quartets. No significant
fluctuation in RMSD and no exchange of channel cation were observed. In panel a, the minor
fluctuation observed in backbone RMSD at ~4.5 μs is due to the movement of the loops.

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 7. Cation binding sites (densities) observed in the Simulations (a) 23a, (b) 23b, (c) 23c,
(d) 23d and (e) 23e of d[GGGG]4 in the presence of K+ ions and SPC/E water model. The
backbone of the GS is shown in tan tube and the 5'-end of the GQ backbone is shown in cyan.
The guanine nucleotides are shown in silver lines and the K+ binding sites within the G-stem are
shown in blue. The cation densities were developed above the GS due to the movement of cation
from Site 1 to above the 5'-quartet. Cation densities were also developed below the GS as solvent
cations were transiently trapped below the 3'-quartet. The figure shows that mostly two cations
were present in the channel due to repulsion between closely spaced cations. A 300 Å-3 threshold
was used for density representation.

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table 1. List of 2N3M and two-quartet DNA GQ simulations carried out in the present study
Simulation

Structure

Length of
simulation
(μs)

Conditions

10

OL15/Na+/SPC/E

three ions stabilized the GQ, two
ion exchange events seen after 9
μs.

b

10

OL15/K+/SPC/E

two ions stabilized the GQ, the
middle ion is missing

c

10

OL15/Na+/OPC

three ions stabilized GQ from 06.71 μs and two ions from 6.71-10
μs (middle ion missing)

d

10

OL15/K+/OPC

first quartet was disrupted as there
was no ion in between quartets 1
and 2 and therefore a guanine
from the first quartet moved
towards the solvent at 1.45 μs.

e

10

OL15/K+/OPC

K+ from Site 1 escaped into the
solvent at 1.1 μs and ion from Site
2 moved to Site 1. Two ions
stabilized GQ for remaining time,
middle ion missing.

1

OL15/Na+/SPC/E;
initially no ions
inside

Ion trapped at Site 2 during
equilibration. New ion entered at
Site 1 at 6 ns of the simulation and
pushed ion from Site 2 to Site 3.
No further ion exchange was
observed; Site 2 remained vacant.

1

OL15/K+/SPC/E;
initially no ions
inside

Ions positioned near the G-stem
(both above and below) during the
equilibration. These two ions
entered the G-stem within the first
ns of the simulation and no further
ion exchange was observed. Site 2
remained vacant.

5

OL15/Na+/SPC/E

GQ stable; three Na+ ion exchange
events were observed from 440 ns
- 2.28 μs.

Number

subcategory

1

a

2

a

2N3M

2N3M

b

3

a

2N3M without
linker

Summary

(force field /ion/
water model,
initial ion
position)a

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

5

OL15/K+/SPC/E

GQ stable; no ion exchange. Two
K+ ions stabilized the GQ for
majority of the simulation time.

10

OL15/Na+/SPC/E

unfolded at ~400 ns

b

10

OL15/K+/SPC/E

unfolded at 1.83 μs

c

10

OL15/Na+/OPC

unfolded at 1.75 μs

d

10

OL15/K+/OPC

unfolded at 6.58 μs

10

OL15/Na+/SPC/E

unfolded at ~880 ns

f

10

OL15/K+/SPC/E

unfolded at ~4.65 μs

g

10

OL15/Na+/OPC

unfolded at ~85 ns

h

10

OL15/K+/OPC

unfolded at ~1.3 μs

2 (2x
simulations)

OL15/Na+/SPC/E

strand slippage at 5 ns and 6 ns,
then structure loss

2 (2x
simulations)

OL15/K+/SPC/E

strand slippage at 76 ns and 228
ns, then structure loss

1 (2x
simulations)

OL15/Na+/SPC/E

G-stem was stable but frequent
ion exchanges were observed in
both the simulations

1 (2x
simulations)

OL15/K+/SPC/E

G-stem was
exchange

5 (5x
simulations)

OL15/Na+/SPC/E

Several ion exchange events but
G-stem was stable.

5 (2x
simulations)

OL15/K+/SPC/E

G-stem stable; no ion exchange

5 (2x
simulations)

OL15/Na+/OPC

Several ion exchange events but
G-stem was stable.

2 (2x
simulations)

OL15/K+/OPC

G-stem stable; no ion exchange

b

a

4

e

a-d

5

a-d

6

a-k

7

a

first GQ unit of
2N3M

second GQ unit
of 2N3M

parallel stranded
all anti d[GG]4

parallel stranded
d[GG]4 with 5'syn

antiparallel
d[GG]4 (from
PDB 148D)

stable;

no

ion

fully occupied channel at the beginning if not mentioned otherwise. JC ions used in all simulations.

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ASSOCIATED CONTENT
Supporting Information. Equilibration protocol, detailed results of Simulations 4a - 4h,
simulation series 8 - 10 and Simulations 28a - 28f are presented in the Supporting Information.
Tables S1 - S2 and Figures S1 - S43 supporting the results are also presented in the Supporting
Information.

The

following

files

are

available

free

of

charge.

Supporting_Information.pdf
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
*Prof. Jiri Sponer. Tel: 420 541 517 133; Fax: +420 541 212 179; Email: sponer@ncbr.muni.cz
Author Contributions
The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval
to the final version of the manuscript.
Funding Sources
This

work

was

supported

by

the

project

SYMBIT

reg.

number:

CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000477 financed by the ERDF. JS also acknowledges support by
Praemium Academiae.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
B.I. and P.S. greatly appreciate access to storage facilities owned by parties and projects
contributing to the National Grid Infrastructure MetaCentrum, provided under the programme

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

"Projects of Large Research, Development, and Innovations Infrastructures" (CESNET
LM2015042).
REFERENCES
1.
Bochman, M. L.; Paeschke, K.; Zakian, V. A., DNA secondary structures: stability and
function of G-quadruplex structures. Nature reviews. Genetics 2012, 13, 770-80.
2.
Gilbert, D. E.; Feigon, J., Multistranded DNA structures. Current opinion in structural
biology 1999, 9, 305-14.
3.
Burge, S.; Parkinson, G. N.; Hazel, P.; Todd, A. K.; Neidle, S., Quadruplex DNA:
sequence, topology and structure. Nucleic acids research 2006, 34, 5402-15.
4.
Sen, D.; Gilbert, W., Formation of parallel four-stranded complexes by guanine-rich
motifs in DNA and its implications for meiosis. Nature 1988, 334, 364-6.
5.
Mao, S. Q.; Ghanbarian, A. T.; Spiegel, J.; Martinez Cuesta, S.; Beraldi, D.; Di Antonio,
M.; Marsico, G.; Hansel-Hertsch, R.; Tannahill, D.; Balasubramanian, S., DNA G-quadruplex
structures mold the DNA methylome. Nature structural & molecular biology 2018, 25, 951-957.
6.
Guilbaud, G.; Murat, P.; Recolin, B.; Campbell, B. C.; Maiter, A.; Sale, J. E.;
Balasubramanian, S., Local epigenetic reprogramming induced by G-quadruplex ligands. Nature
chemistry 2017, 9, 1110-1117.
7.
Gellert, M.; Lipsett, M. N.; Davies, D. R., Helix formation by guanylic acid. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1962, 48, 2013-8.
8.
Parkinson, G. N.; Lee, M. P.; Neidle, S., Crystal structure of parallel quadruplexes from
human telomeric DNA. Nature 2002, 417, 876-80.
9.
Sket, P.; Plavec, J., Tetramolecular DNA quadruplexes in solution: insights into structural
diversity and cation movement. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2010, 132, 12724-32.
10.
Webba da Silva, M., Geometric formalism for DNA quadruplex folding. Chemistry 2007,
13, 9738-45.
11.
Phan, A. T., Human telomeric G-quadruplex: structures of DNA and RNA sequences.
The FEBS journal 2010, 277, 1107-17.
12.
Cang, X.; Sponer, J.; Cheatham, T. E., 3rd, Explaining the varied glycosidic
conformational, G-tract length and sequence preferences for anti-parallel G-quadruplexes.
Nucleic acids research 2011, 39, 4499-512.
13.
Dvorkin, S. A.; Karsisiotis, A. I.; Webba da Silva, M., Encoding canonical DNA
quadruplex structure. Science advances 2018, 4, eaat3007.
14.
Sacca, B.; Lacroix, L.; Mergny, J. L., The effect of chemical modifications on the thermal
stability of different G-quadruplex-forming oligonucleotides. Nucleic acids research 2005, 33,
1182-92.
15.
Xu, Y.; Kaminaga, K.; Komiyama, M., G-quadruplex formation by human telomeric
repeats-containing RNA in Na+ solution. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2008, 130,
11179-84.
16.
Martadinata, H.; Phan, A. T., Structure of propeller-type parallel-stranded RNA Gquadruplexes, formed by human telomeric RNA sequences in K+ solution. Journal of the
American Chemical Society 2009, 131, 2570-8.
17.
Martadinata, H.; Phan, A. T., Structure of human telomeric RNA (TERRA): stacking of
two G-quadruplex blocks in K(+) solution. Biochemistry 2013, 52, 2176-83.

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

18.
Collie, G. W.; Haider, S. M.; Neidle, S.; Parkinson, G. N., A crystallographic and
modelling study of a human telomeric RNA (TERRA) quadruplex. Nucleic acids research 2010,
38, 5569-80.
19.
Sweeney, B. A.; Roy, P.; Leontis, N. B., An introduction to recurrent nucleotide
interactions in RNA. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: RNA 2015, 6, 17-45.
20.
Dai, J.; Punchihewa, C.; Ambrus, A.; Chen, D.; Jones, R. A.; Yang, D., Structure of the
intramolecular human telomeric G-quadruplex in potassium solution: a novel adenine triple
formation. Nucleic acids research 2007, 35, 2440-50.
21.
Schultze, P.; Macaya, R. F.; Feigon, J., Three-dimensional solution structure of the
thrombin-binding DNA aptamer d(GGTTGGTGTGGTTGG). Journal of molecular biology
1994, 235, 1532-47.
22.
Wang, Y.; Patel, D. J., Solution structure of the human telomeric repeat
d[AG3(T2AG3)3] G-tetraplex. Structure 1993, 1, 263-82.
23.
Lim, K. W.; Ng, V. C.; Martin-Pintado, N.; Heddi, B.; Phan, A. T., Structure of the
human telomere in Na+ solution: an antiparallel (2+2) G-quadruplex scaffold reveals additional
diversity. Nucleic acids research 2013, 41, 10556-62.
24.
Dai, J.; Carver, M.; Punchihewa, C.; Jones, R. A.; Yang, D., Structure of the Hybrid-2
type intramolecular human telomeric G-quadruplex in K+ solution: insights into structure
polymorphism of the human telomeric sequence. Nucleic acids research 2007, 35, 4927-40.
25.
Luu, K. N.; Phan, A. T.; Kuryavyi, V.; Lacroix, L.; Patel, D. J., Structure of the human
telomere in K+ solution: an intramolecular (3 + 1) G-quadruplex scaffold. Journal of the
American Chemical Society 2006, 128, 9963-70.
26.
Phan, A. T.; Kuryavyi, V.; Luu, K. N.; Patel, D. J., Structure of two intramolecular Gquadruplexes formed by natural human telomere sequences in K+ solution. Nucleic acids
research 2007, 35, 6517-25.
27.
Lim, K. W.; Amrane, S.; Bouaziz, S.; Xu, W.; Mu, Y.; Patel, D. J.; Luu, K. N.; Phan, A.
T., Structure of the human telomere in K+ solution: a stable basket-type G-quadruplex with only
two G-tetrad layers. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2009, 131, 4301-9.
28.
Schultze, P.; Hud, N. V.; Smith, F. W.; Feigon, J., The effect of sodium, potassium and
ammonium ions on the conformation of the dimeric quadruplex formed by the Oxytricha nova
telomere repeat oligonucleotide d(G(4)T(4)G(4)). Nucleic acids research 1999, 27, 3018-28.
29.
Havrila, M.; Stadlbauer, P.; Islam, B.; Otyepka, M.; Šponer, J., Effect of Monovalent Ion
Parameters on Molecular Dynamics Simulations of G-Quadruplexes. Journal of chemical theory
and computation 2017, 13, 3911-3926.
30.
Marchand, A.; Gabelica, V., Folding and misfolding pathways of G-quadruplex DNA.
Nucleic acids research 2016, 44, 10999-11012.
31.
Hardin, C. C.; Henderson, E.; Watson, T.; Prosser, J. K., Monovalent cation induced
structural transitions in telomeric DNAs: G-DNA folding intermediates. Biochemistry 1991, 30,
4460-4472.
32.
Payet, L.; Huppert, J. L., Stability and structure of long intramolecular G-quadruplexes.
Biochemistry 2012, 51, 3154-61.
33.
Bardin, C.; Leroy, J. L., The formation pathway of tetramolecular G-quadruplexes.
Nucleic acids research 2008, 36, 477-88.
34.
Mergny, J.-L.; De Cian, A.; Ghelab, A.; Saccà, B.; Lacroix, L., Kinetics of tetramolecular
quadruplexes. Nucleic acids research 2005, 33, 81-94.

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

35.
Lee, J. Y.; Yoon, J.; Kihm, H. W.; Kim, D. S., Structural diversity and extreme stability
of unimolecular Oxytricha nova telomeric G-quadruplex. Biochemistry 2008, 47, 3389-96.
36.
Lenarčič Živković, M.; Rozman, J.; Plavec, J., Adenine-Driven Structural Switch from a
Two- to Three-Quartet DNA G-Quadruplex. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2018,
57, 15395-15399.
37.
Mashima, T.; Matsugami, A.; Nishikawa, F.; Nishikawa, S.; Katahira, M., Unique
quadruplex structure and interaction of an RNA aptamer against bovine prion protein. Nucleic
acids research 2009, 37, 6249-58.
38.
Arora, A.; Maiti, S., Differential biophysical behavior of human telomeric RNA and
DNA quadruplex. The journal of physical chemistry. B 2009, 113, 10515-20.
39.
Kejnovska, I.; Bednarova, K.; Renciuk, D.; Dvorakova, Z.; Skolakova, P.; Trantirek, L.;
Fiala, R.; Vorlickova, M.; Sagi, J., Clustered abasic lesions profoundly change the structure and
stability of human telomeric G-quadruplexes. Nucleic acids research 2017, 45, 4294-4305.
40.
Bednářová, K.; Kejnovská, I.; Vorlíčková, M.; Renčiuk, D., Guanine Substitutions
Prevent Conformational Switch from Antiparallel to Parallel G-Quadruplex. Chemistry – A
European Journal 2019, 0.
41.
Stadlbauer, P.; Kührová, P.; Vicherek, L.; Banáš, P.; Otyepka, M.; Trantírek, L.; Šponer,
J., Parallel G-triplexes and G-hairpins as potential transitory ensembles in the folding of parallelstranded DNA G-Quadruplexes. Nucleic acids research 2019, 47, 7276-7293.
42.
Šponer, J.; Bussi, G.; Stadlbauer, P.; Kührová, P.; Banáš, P.; Islam, B.; Haider, S.;
Neidle, S.; Otyepka, M., Folding of guanine quadruplex molecules–funnel-like mechanism or
kinetic partitioning? An overview from MD simulation studies. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
(BBA) - General Subjects 2017, 1861, 1246-1263.
43.
Do, N. Q.; Chung, W. J.; Truong, T. H. A.; Heddi, B.; Phan, A. T., G-quadruplex
structure of an anti-proliferative DNA sequence. Nucleic acids research 2017, 45, 7487-7493.
44.
Clark, G. R.; Pytel, P. D.; Squire, C. J., The high-resolution crystal structure of a parallel
intermolecular DNA G-4 quadruplex/drug complex employing syn glycosyl linkages. Nucleic
acids research 2012, 40, 5731-8.
45.
Mandal, P. K.; Collie, G. W.; Kauffmann, B.; Huc, I., Racemic DNA crystallography.
Angewandte Chemie 2014, 53, 14424-7.
46.
Laughlan, G.; Murchie, A. I.; Norman, D. G.; Moore, M. H.; Moody, P. C.; Lilley, D. M.;
Luisi, B., The high-resolution crystal structure of a parallel-stranded guanine tetraplex. Science
1994, 265, 520-4.
47.
Berendsen, H. J. C.; Grigera, J. R.; Straatsma, T. P., The missing term in effective pair
potentials. The Journal of Physical Chemistry 1987, 91, 6269-6271.
48.
Izadi, S.; Anandakrishnan, R.; Onufriev, A. V., Building Water Models: A Different
Approach. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2014, 5, 3863-3871.
49.
Piana, S.; Donchev, A. G.; Robustelli, P.; Shaw, D. E., Water Dispersion Interactions
Strongly Influence Simulated Structural Properties of Disordered Protein States. The Journal of
Physical Chemistry B 2015, 119, 5113-5123.
50.
Joung, I. S.; Cheatham, T. E., 3rd, Determination of alkali and halide monovalent ion
parameters for use in explicitly solvated biomolecular simulations. The journal of physical
chemistry. B 2008, 112, 9020-41.
51.
MacKerell, A. D.; Bashford, D.; Bellott, M.; Dunbrack, R. L.; Evanseck, J. D.; Field, M.
J.; Fischer, S.; Gao, J.; Guo, H.; Ha, S.; Joseph-McCarthy, D.; Kuchnir, L.; Kuczera, K.; Lau, F.
T. K.; Mattos, C.; Michnick, S.; Ngo, T.; Nguyen, D. T.; Prodhom, B.; Reiher, W. E.; Roux, B.;

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Schlenkrich, M.; Smith, J. C.; Stote, R.; Straub, J.; Watanabe, M.; Wiórkiewicz-Kuczera, J.; Yin,
D.; Karplus, M., All-Atom Empirical Potential for Molecular Modeling and Dynamics Studies of
Proteins. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 1998, 102, 3586-3616.
52.
Li, P.; Song, L. F.; Merz, K. M., Systematic Parameterization of Monovalent Ions
Employing the Nonbonded Model. Journal of chemical theory and computation 2015, 11, 16451657.
53.
Case, D.; Betz, R.; Cerutti, D. S.; Cheatham, T.; Darden, T.; Duke, R.; Giese, T. J.;
Gohlke, H.; Götz, A.; Homeyer, N.; Izadi, S.; Janowski, P.; Kaus, J.; Kovalenko, A.; Lee, T.-S.;
LeGrand, S.; Li, P.; Lin, C.; Luchko, T.; A. Kollman, P., Amber 16, University of California, San
Francisco. 2016.
54.
Zgarbova, M.; Sponer, J.; Otyepka, M.; Cheatham, T. E., 3rd; Galindo-Murillo, R.;
Jurecka, P., Refinement of the Sugar-Phosphate Backbone Torsion Beta for AMBER Force
Fields Improves the Description of Z- and B-DNA. Journal of chemical theory and computation
2015, 11, 5723-36.
55.
Zgarbová, M.; Otyepka, M.; Sponer, J.; Mládek, A.; Banáš, P.; Cheatham, T. E., 3rd;
Jurečka, P., Refinement of the Cornell et al. Nucleic Acids Force Field Based on Reference
Quantum Chemical Calculations of Glycosidic Torsion Profiles. Journal of chemical theory and
computation 2011, 7, 2886-2902.
56.
Perez, A.; Marchan, I.; Svozil, D.; Sponer, J.; Cheatham, T. E., 3rd; Laughton, C. A.;
Orozco, M., Refinement of the AMBER force field for nucleic acids: improving the description
of alpha/gamma conformers. Biophysical journal 2007, 92, 3817-29.
57.
Krepl, M.; Zgarbova, M.; Stadlbauer, P.; Otyepka, M.; Banas, P.; Koca, J.; Cheatham, T.
E., 3rd; Jurecka, P.; Sponer, J., Reference simulations of noncanonical nucleic acids with
different chi variants of the AMBER force field: quadruplex DNA, quadruplex RNA and ZDNA. Journal of chemical theory and computation 2012, 8, 2506-2520.
58.
Zgarbova, M.; Luque, F. J.; Sponer, J.; Cheatham, T. E., 3rd; Otyepka, M.; Jurecka, P.,
Toward Improved Description of DNA Backbone: Revisiting Epsilon and Zeta Torsion Force
Field Parameters. Journal of chemical theory and computation 2013, 9, 2339-2354.
59.
Cornell, W. D.; Cieplak, P.; Bayly, C. I.; Gould, I. R.; Merz, K. M.; Ferguson, D. M.;
Spellmeyer, D. C.; Fox, T.; Caldwell, J. W.; Kollman, P. A., A Second Generation Force Field
for the Simulation of Proteins, Nucleic Acids, and Organic Molecules. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1995,
117, 5179-5197.
60.
Sponer, J.; Bussi, G.; Krepl, M.; Banas, P.; Bottaro, S.; Cunha, R. A.; Gil-Ley, A.;
Pinamonti, G.; Poblete, S.; Jurecka, P.; Walter, N. G.; Otyepka, M., RNA Structural Dynamics
As Captured by Molecular Simulations: A Comprehensive Overview. Chemical reviews 2018,
118, 4177-4338.
61.
Darden, T.; York, D.; Pedersen, L., Particle mesh Ewald: An N⋅log(N) method for Ewald
sums in large systems. J. Chem. Phys. 1993, 98, 10089-10092.
62.
Ryckaert, J.-P.; Ciccotti, G.; Berendsen, H. J. C., Numerical integration of the cartesian
equations of motion of a system with constraints: molecular dynamics of n-alkanes. Journal of
Computational Physics 1977, 23, 327-341.
63.
Hopkins, C. W.; Le Grand, S.; Walker, R. C.; Roitberg, A. E., Long-Time-Step
Molecular Dynamics through Hydrogen Mass Repartitioning. Journal of chemical theory and
computation 2015, 11, 1864-74.

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

64.
Berendsen, H. J. C.; Postma, J. P. M.; van Gunsteren, W. F.; DiNola, A.; Haak, J. R.,
Molecular dynamics with coupling to an external bath. The Journal of Chemical Physics 1984,
81, 3684-3690.
65.
Roe, D. R.; Cheatham, T. E., 3rd, PTRAJ and CPPTRAJ: Software for Processing and
Analysis of Molecular Dynamics Trajectory Data. Journal of chemical theory and computation
2013, 9, 3084-95.
66.
Humphrey, W.; Dalke, A.; Schulten, K., VMD: Visual molecular dynamics. Journal of
Molecular Graphics 1996, 14, 33-38.
67.
Akhshi, P.; Wu, G., Umbrella sampling molecular dynamics simulations reveal concerted
ion movement through G-quadruplex DNA channels. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics
2017, 19, 11017-11025.
68.
Islam, B.; Stadlbauer, P.; Gil-Ley, A.; Pérez-Hernández, G.; Haider, S.; Neidle, S.; Bussi,
G.; Banas, P.; Otyepka, M.; Sponer, J., Exploring the Dynamics of Propeller Loops in Human
Telomeric DNA Quadruplexes Using Atomistic Simulations. Journal of chemical theory and
computation 2017, 13, 2458-2480.
69.
Islam, B.; Stadlbauer, P.; Krepl, M.; Havrila, M.; Haider, S.; Sponer, J., Structural
Dynamics of Lateral and Diagonal Loops of Human Telomeric G-Quadruplexes in Extended MD
Simulations. Journal of chemical theory and computation 2018, 14, 5011-5026.
70.
Islam, B.; Stadlbauer, P.; Krepl, M.; Koca, J.; Neidle, S.; Haider, S.; Sponer, J., Extended
molecular dynamics of a c-kit promoter quadruplex. Nucleic acids research 2015, 43, 8673-93.
71.
Fadrna, E.; Spackova, N.; Sarzynska, J.; Koca, J.; Orozco, M.; Cheatham, T. E., 3rd;
Kulinski, T.; Sponer, J., Single Stranded Loops of Quadruplex DNA As Key Benchmark for
Testing Nucleic Acids Force Fields. Journal of chemical theory and computation 2009, 5, 251430.
72.
Špačková, N. a.; Berger, I.; Šponer, J., Nanosecond Molecular Dynamics Simulations of
Parallel and Antiparallel Guanine Quadruplex DNA Molecules. Journal of the American
Chemical Society 1999, 121, 5519-5534.
73.
Akhshi, P.; Mosey, N. J.; Wu, G., Free-Energy Landscapes of Ion Movement through a
G-Quadruplex DNA Channel. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2012, 51, 2850-2854.
74.
Stadlbauer, P.; Krepl, M.; Cheatham, T. E., III; Koča, J.; Šponer, J., Structural dynamics
of possible late-stage intermediates in folding of quadruplex DNA studied by molecular
simulations. Nucleic acids research 2013, 41, 7128-7143.
75.
Stefl, R.; Cheatham, T. E., 3rd; Spacková, N. a.; Fadrná, E.; Berger, I.; Koca, J.; Sponer,
J., Formation pathways of a guanine-quadruplex DNA revealed by molecular dynamics and
thermodynamic analysis of the substates. Biophysical journal 2003, 85, 1787-1804.
76.
Havrila, M.; Stadlbauer, P.; Kührová, P.; Banáš, P.; Mergny, J.-L.; Otyepka, M.; Šponer,
J., Structural dynamics of propeller loop: towards folding of RNA G-quadruplex. Nucleic acids
research 2018, 46, 8754-8771.
77.
Islam, B.; Stadlbauer, P.; Neidle, S.; Haider, S.; Sponer, J., Can We Execute Reliable
MM-PBSA Free Energy Computations of Relative Stabilities of Different Guanine Quadruplex
Folds? The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2016, 120, 2899-2912.
78.
Sponer, J.; Mladek, A.; Spackova, N.; Cang, X.; Cheatham, T. E., 3rd; Grimme, S.,
Relative stability of different DNA guanine quadruplex stem topologies derived using large-scale
quantum-chemical computations. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2013, 135, 9785-96.
79.
Largy, E.; Mergny, J. L.; Gabelica, V., Role of Alkali Metal Ions in G-Quadruplex
Nucleic Acid Structure and Stability. Metal ions in life sciences 2016, 16, 203-58.

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

80.
Heddi, B.; Martín-Pintado, N.; Serimbetov, Z.; Kari, Teuku Mahfuzh A.; Phan, A. T., Gquadruplexes with (4n - 1) guanines in the G-tetrad core: formation of a G-triad·water complex
and implication for small-molecule binding. Nucleic acids research 2015, 44, 910-916.
81.
Kwok, C. K.; Marsico, G.; Sahakyan, A. B.; Chambers, V. S.; Balasubramanian, S., rG4seq reveals widespread formation of G-quadruplex structures in the human transcriptome. Nature
Methods 2016, 13, 841.
82.
Fay, M. M.; Lyons, S. M.; Ivanov, P., RNA G-Quadruplexes in Biology: Principles and
Molecular Mechanisms. Journal of molecular biology 2017, 429, 2127-2147.
83.
Malgowska, M.; Czajczynska, K.; Gudanis, D.; Tworak, A.; Gdaniec, Z., Overview of
the RNA G-quadruplex structures. Acta biochimica Polonica 2016, 63, 609-621.
84.
Ji, X.; Sun, H.; Zhou, H.; Xiang, J.; Tang, Y.; Zhao, C., Research Progress of RNA
Quadruplex. Nucleic Acid Therapeutics 2011, 21, 185-200.
85.
Zhang, D. H.; Fujimoto, T.; Saxena, S.; Yu, H. Q.; Miyoshi, D.; Sugimoto, N.,
Monomorphic RNA G-quadruplex and polymorphic DNA G-quadruplex structures responding
to cellular environmental factors. Biochemistry 2010, 49, 4554-63.
86.
Pandey, S.; Agarwala, P.; Maiti, S., Effect of Loops and G-Quartets on the Stability of
RNA G-Quadruplexes. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2013, 117, 6896-6905.
87.
Biffi, G.; Di Antonio, M.; Tannahill, D.; Balasubramanian, S., Visualization and selective
chemical targeting of RNA G-quadruplex structures in the cytoplasm of human cells. Nature
chemistry 2014, 6, 75-80.
88.
Malgowska, M.; Gudanis, D.; Kierzek, R.; Wyszko, E.; Gabelica, V.; Gdaniec, Z.,
Distinctive structural motifs of RNA G-quadruplexes composed of AGG, CGG and UGG
trinucleotide repeats. Nucleic acids research 2014, 42, 10196-10207.
89.
Kumari, S.; Bugaut, A.; Huppert, J. L.; Balasubramanian, S., An RNA G-quadruplex in
the 5' UTR of the NRAS proto-oncogene modulates translation. Nature chemical biology 2007,
3, 218-221.
90.
Murat, P.; Marsico, G.; Herdy, B.; Ghanbarian, A. T.; Portella, G.; Balasubramanian, S.,
RNA G-quadruplexes at upstream open reading frames cause DHX36- and DHX9-dependent
translation of human mRNAs. Genome biology 2018, 19, 229.
91.
Wolfe, A. L.; Singh, K.; Zhong, Y.; Drewe, P.; Rajasekhar, V. K.; Sanghvi, V. R.;
Mavrakis, K. J.; Jiang, M.; Roderick, J. E.; Van der Meulen, J.; Schatz, J. H.; Rodrigo, C. M.;
Zhao, C.; Rondou, P.; de Stanchina, E.; Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Kelliher, M. A.; Speleman, F.;
Porco, J. A., Jr.; Pelletier, J.; Rätsch, G.; Wendel, H.-G., RNA G-quadruplexes cause eIF4Adependent oncogene translation in cancer. Nature 2014, 513, 65-70.
92.
Patel, D. J.; Phan, A. T.; Kuryavyi, V., Human telomere, oncogenic promoter and 5'-UTR
G-quadruplexes: diverse higher order DNA and RNA targets for cancer therapeutics. Nucleic
acids research 2007, 35, 7429-7455.
93.
Beaudoin, J.-D.; Perreault, J.-P., 5'-UTR G-quadruplex structures acting as translational
repressors. Nucleic acids research 2010, 38, 7022-7036.
94.
Chan, K. L.; Peng, B.; Umar, M. I.; Chan, C.-Y.; Sahakyan, A. B.; Le, M. T. N.; Kwok,
C. K., Structural analysis reveals the formation and role of RNA G-quadruplex structures in
human mature microRNAs. Chemical Communications 2018, 54, 10878-10881.
95.
Kotar, A.; Rigo, R.; Sissi, C.; Plavec, J., Two-quartet kit* G-quadruplex is formed via
double-stranded pre-folded structure. Nucleic acids research 2018, 47, 2641-2653.
96.
Kankia, B., Stability Factors of the Parallel Quadruplexes: DNA Versus RNA. The
journal of physical chemistry. B 2019, 123, 1060-1067.

51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

97.
Salsbury, A. M.; Lemkul, J. A., Molecular Dynamics Simulations of the c-kit1 Promoter
G-Quadruplex: Importance of Electronic Polarization on Stability and Cooperative Ion Binding.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2019, 123, 148-159.
98.
Kuhrova, P.; Mlynsky, V.; Zgarbova, M.; Krepl, M.; Bussi, G.; Best, R. B.; Otyepka, M.;
Sponer, J.; Banas, P., Improving the Performance of the Amber RNA Force Field by Tuning the
Hydrogen-Bonding Interactions. Journal of chemical theory and computation 2019, 15, 32883305.
99.
Bergonzo, C.; Cheatham, T. E., Improved Force Field Parameters Lead to a Better
Description of RNA Structure. Journal of chemical theory and computation 2015, 11, 39693972.
100. Bergonzo, C.; Henriksen, N. M.; Roe, D. R.; Cheatham, T. E., 3rd, Highly sampled
tetranucleotide and tetraloop motifs enable evaluation of common RNA force fields. Rna 2015,
21, 1578-90.
101. Hase, F.; Zacharias, M., Free energy analysis and mechanism of base pair stacking in
nicked DNA. Nucleic acids research 2016, 44, 7100-8.
102. Sponer, J.; Spackova, N., Molecular dynamics simulations and their application to fourstranded DNA. Methods 2007, 43, 278-90.
103. Gkionis, K.; Kruse, H.; Platts, J. A.; Mládek, A.; Koča, J.; Šponer, J., Ion Binding to
Quadruplex DNA Stems. Comparison of MM and QM Descriptions Reveals Sizable Polarization
Effects Not Included in Contemporary Simulations. Journal of chemical theory and computation
2014, 10, 1326-1340.
104. Gros, J.; Rosu, F.; Amrane, S.; De Cian, A.; Gabelica, V.; Lacroix, L.; Mergny, J.-L.,
Guanines are a quartet's best friend: impact of base substitutions on the kinetics and stability of
tetramolecular quadruplexes. Nucleic acids research 2007, 35, 3064-3075.
105. Zhu, H.; Xiao, S.; Wang, L.; Liang, H., Communication: Asymmetrical cation
movements through G-quadruplex DNA. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2014, 141, 041103.

52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820852; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

For Table of Contents Use Only
Synopsis: We have carried out extended unbiased atomistic simulations using different ion and
water parameters to study the stability of two and four quartet G-quadruplexes (GQs). The allanti parallel-stranded two-quartet DNA GQs are highly unstable compared to their RNA
counterpart in all the ion and water conditions. GQs composed of two stacked units of twoquartet GQs were, however, stable for both DNA and RNA.

53

