bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Genomic features of asexual
animals
Kamil S. Jaron1, 2, †, Jens Bast1, †, Reuben W. Nowell3, ‡, T. Rhyker Ranallo-Benavidez4,
Marc Robinson-Rechavi1, 2 & Tanja Schwander1

1

Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland

2

Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland

3

Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Silwood Park Campus, Ascot,

Berkshire, United Kingdom
4

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA

†

Equal contributions

‡

Current address: Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, 11a Mansfield Rd,

Oxford OX1 3SZ, UK

Corresponding Author: Correspondence to Kamil S. Jaron (kamiljaron@gmail.com)
Data Availability: The code of the pipeline for gathering data, calculating and plotting
results is available at https://github.com/KamilSJaron/genomic-features-of-asexualanimals; the majority of sequencing reads are available in public databases under the
accessions listed in Supplementary Table 1. The data without publicly available
sequencing reads were obtained via personal communication with the corresponding
authors.
Abbreviations: TE, transposable element; HGT, horizontal gene transfer

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Evolution under asexuality is predicted to impact genomes in numerous ways, but
empirical evidence remains unclear. Case studies of individual asexual animals have
reported peculiar genomic features which were suggested to be caused by asexuality,
including high heterozygosity, a high abundance of horizontally acquired genes, a low
transposable element load, or the presence of palindromes. We systematically
characterized these genomic features in published genomes of 26 asexual animals
representing at least 18 independent transitions to asexuality. Surprisingly, not a single
feature is systematically replicated across a majority of these transitions, suggesting that
no genomic feature is characteristic of asexuality and that previously reported patterns
were lineage specific rather than caused by asexuality. We found that only asexuals of
hybrid origin were characterized by high heterozygosity levels. Asexuals that were not of
hybrid origin appeared to be largely homozygous, independently of the cellular
mechanism underlying asexuality. Overall, despite the importance of recombination rate
variation for the evolution of sexual animal genomes, the genome-wide absence of
recombination does not appear to have had the dramatic effects which are expected
from classical theoretical models. The reasons for this are probably a combination of
lineage-specific patterns, impact of the origin of asexuality, and a survivorship bias of
asexual lineages.

Introduction
Sex: What is it good for? The reason why most eukaryotes take a complicated detour to
reproduction, when straightforward options are available, remains a central and largely
unanswered question in evolutionary biology [1,2]. The species in which asexual
reproduction is the sole form of replication typically occur at the tips of phylogenies and
only a few of them have succeeded as well as their sexually reproducing relatives [3]. In

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

other words, most asexual lineages may eventually be destined for extinction. These
incipient evolutionary failures, however, are invaluable because, by understanding the
evolutionary fate of asexual species, something may be learned about the adaptive
value of sex.

An increasing number of studies have sequenced the genomes of individual asexually
reproducing animals, often with the aim of identifying features that distinguish them from
sexual species (Figure 1). In asexual animals, females produce daughters from
unfertilized eggs via thelytokous parthenogenesis (hereafter asexuality) [4]. Asexuality is
predicted to have many consequences for genome evolution, since gamete production
via meiosis and the restoration of somatic ploidy levels via fertilization no longer take
place. Predicted consequences include, for example, the accumulation of deleterious
mutations [5–7], as well as changes in intragenomic heterozygosity levels [8,9] and
transposable element (TE) dynamics [10]. In the present study, we evaluate whether
asexual reproduction indeed generates these predicted genomic signatures by
reanalyzing and comparing the published genomes of 26 asexual animal species
(Figure 1). Previous genome studies were unable to address the question of how
asexuality affects genome evolution because they focused on individual asexual
lineages. Yet because asexuality is a lineage-level trait, disentangling causes of
asexuality from lineage-level characteristics requires replication across independently
evolved instances of asexuality. Our study includes species from at least 18
independently evolved asexual lineages, providing us with the unique opportunity to
detect universal consequences of asexuality that are not confounded by lineage-specific
patterns. Furthermore, we study the same features in all genomes, whereas many of the
original studies focused on different genomic features (Figure 1), which thus far
precluded broad comparisons across different asexual groups. Finally, our dataset
includes four species of bdelloid rotifers, a group that likely persisted and diversified in
the absence of canonical sex for over 40 million years [11]. Bdelloids have thus far

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

overcome the predicted dead-end fate of asexuality, which raises the question of what
mechanisms protect them from extinction, and whether these mechanisms are visible in
specific characteristics of their genomes.

Because the predicted consequences of asexuality are strongly affected by how
asexuality evolved from the sexual ancestor (Box 1) as well as by the cellular
mechanisms underlying asexuality (Box 2), we include biological differences among
asexual species in our comparisons. For example, some asexual species have evolved
via hybridization (Box 1), which generates incipient asexuals with high intragenomic
heterozygosity and can result in increased activity of transposable elements [12–14]. In
such instances, it can be difficult to disentangle consequences of hybridization from
those of asexuality. Similarly, some cellular mechanisms underlying asexuality involve
meiotic divisions, with a secondary restoration of somatic ploidy levels, while others do
not. In the former case, heterozygosity in the asexual species is expected to decay
rapidly, while in the latter case, it could be maintained or even increase over time [15].
Finally, because the genome studies differed in their focus and in the methods used, we
reanalyzed the published genomes with standardized approaches. Whenever possible,
we conducted quantitative comparisons between groups of asexual species. However,
for interpretation, it is important to consider that the available genomes are neither a
random nor a representative sample of asexual animals.

We uncovered a number of unusual features in the genomes of asexual animals that
were not reported in the original genome studies, including extreme loads of
transposable elements and asymmetric divergence among haplotypes in polyploid
species of hybrid origin. However, none of these were systematically replicated across
even a majority of analyzed species, let alone all of them, suggesting that there is no
universal genomic feature specific to asexual species. Unexpectedly, we found that the
cellular mechanism underlying asexuality has little or no impact on intragenomic

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

heterozygosity. Asexual species of hybrid origin are highly heterozygous even when the
cellular mechanism underlying their asexuality should generate homozygous genomes.
Asexuals that are not of hybrid origin are largely homozygous. We argue that lineagespecific patterns as well as a survivorship bias of asexual lineages are the main drivers
of genome features in the studied asexual animals.

Figure 1: Genome features studied in asexual animal species. The phylogeny
displays the taxonomic relationships of the 26 sequenced asexual animal species
considered here, representing at least 18 independent transitions to asexuality. Species
that might derive from the same original transition are grouped in triangles. The color of
the circle indicates the cellular mechanism of asexuality and the number inside the circle
the ploidy of the species (see Supplemental Table 1 for details). We note M. floridensis
as triploid, as shown by our analyses, even though it is reported as diploid in the original
paper; see Supplementary Materials S1 for details [16]. Each original genome paper
explored a given set of genome features: the green cells represent cases where the
genomic feature was quantified (values are indicated); the grey cells represent studies
where the genomic features were addressed with respect to asexuality, but the results
we quantitatively incomparable to other studies. Heterozygosity, palindromes,
transposable elements, and horizontal gene transfer were reanalysed in this study; the
discussion of the remaining features is based on the analyses reported in the individual

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

genome studies [17–40]. Findings for mutation accumulation and adaptive evolution
refer to comparisons between sexual and asexual species and are reported with respect
to theoretical predictions (yes: as predicted, no: opposite to predictions, inconclusive: no
difference). e/(g*nt): event per generation per nucleotide; l/s: number of lost genes
among the studied genes related to sexual reproduction.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Box 1: Transitions to asexuality
Meiotic sex and recombination evolved once in the common ancestor of eukaryotes [41].
Asexual animals therefore derive from a sexual ancestor, but how transitions from
sexual to asexual reproduction occur can vary and have different expected
consequences for the genome [13].
Hybrid origin:
Hybridization between sexual species can generate hybrid females that reproduce
asexually [13,42]. Asexuality caused by hybridization can generate a highly
heterozygous genome, depending on the divergence between the parental sexual
species prior to hybridization. Hybridization can also result in a burst of transposable
element activity [12].

Intraspecific origins:
Endosymbiont infection. Infection with intracellular endosymbionts (such as
Wolbachia, Cardinium or Rickettsia) can cause asexuality, a pattern that is frequent in
species with haplodiploid sex determination [43]. This type of transition often (but not
always) results in fully homozygous lineages because induction of asexuality frequently
occurs via gamete duplication (see Box 2).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Spontaneous mutations/Contagious asexuality. Spontaneous mutations can also
underlie transitions from sexual to asexual reproduction. In addition, asexual females of
some species produce males that mate with females of sexual lineages, and thereby
generate new asexual strains (contagious asexuality). In both cases, the genomes of
incipient asexual lineages are expected to be very similar to those of their sexual
relatives and subsequent changes should be largely driven by the cellular mechanism
underlying asexuality (Box 2).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Box 2: Cellular mechanisms of asexuality
In sexual species offspring are generated through the fusion of male and female
gametes. In asexuals, females generate diploid (or polyploid) offspring from unfertilized
oocytes via different cellular mechanisms. The mechanism is predicted to affect genome
evolution and especially heterozygosity levels. For details see [4,15].
Mitotic asexuality (Apomixis). Under mitotic asexuality, no ploidy reduction occurs and
offspring are clones of their mother.
Meiotic asexuality (Automixis). Under meiotic asexuality, meiotic divisions occur
partially or completely, but somatic ploidy levels are maintained via different
mechanisms. Some of these mechanisms have similar genomic consequences as
mitotic asexuality, even though meiosis is involved (for example, endoduplication in
hybrid asexuals results in offspring that are clones of their mother). Such mechanisms
are often referred to as “functionally mitotic” (or functionally apomictic), especially when
the cellular mechanisms are not known in detail but genotyping data suggest that
offspring are clones of their mother.
Endoduplication. A duplication of the entire chromosome set occurs before
normal meiosis, during which ploidy is reduced again. If recombination occurs
between identical chromosome copies rather than between chromosome
homologs, endoduplication produces offspring that are clones of their mother.
Central fusion and terminal fusion. Under these two mechanisms, somatic
ploidy levels are restored through the fusion of two of the four meiotic products
(products separated during the first meiotic division merge under central fusion,
products separated during the second division merge under terminal fusion). In
the absence of recombination, central fusion generates offspring that are clones
of their mother. The consequences for heterozygosity are opposite under
inverted meiosis, where chromatids are separated during meiosis I and
chromosomes during meiosis II. For example, terminal fusion with an inverted

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

sequence of meiosis and no recombination (not shown here) generates offspring
that are clones of their mother (see [44] for a recent review).
Gamete duplication. After a full meiosis, a haploid meiotic product undergoes
duplication. This results in a diploid, but fully homozygous offspring.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Results and discussion
We studied nine genomic features that were proposed to be affected by asexuality
(Figure 1). Four of them represent classical theoretical predictions for consequences of
asexuality on genome evolution (mutation accumulation, positive selection, transposable
elements, and intragenomic heterozygosity). The five remaining ones are unusual
genomic features that were observed in individual asexual species and suggested to be
linked to asexuality (horizontal gene transfers, palindromes, gene conversion, gene
family expansions, and gene losses). We quantified the four features (heterozygosity,
palindromes, transposable elements, and horizontal gene transfer) for which the relevant
genomic data are available for all or most sequenced asexual species. The remaining
five genomic features require data that are not available for the majority of the asexual
species. Specifically, the theoretical predictions pertaining to mutation accumulation,
positive selection, gene family expansions, and gene loss are always relative to sexual
species (e.g., selection is less effective in asexual than sexual species, leading to
increased rates of deleterious mutation accumulation and reduced rates and strengths of
positive selection) and cannot be independently quantified in asexuals. For these four
genome features we synthesize the available information from the literature, including
studies that are not based on whole-genome data.

Overview of species and genomes studied
We reanalyzed the published genomes of 26 asexual animal species with the aim of
identifying general genomic signatures of asexualilty. The 26 species correspond to at
least 18 independent transitions to asexuality and cover a broad taxonomic range,
including chordates, rotifers, arthropods, nematodes, and tardigrades. In addition to
covering this taxonomic range, these asexual species vary in the cellular mechanisms
underlying asexuality, in the mechanisms that caused the transition to asexuality, as well
as in other biological aspects (Figure 1, Supplementary Tables 1 & 2). This variation

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

allows us to assess whether asexuality generates universal genomic signatures
independently of species-specific traits.

The cellular mechanisms underlying asexuality have been reported in 24 of the 26
species. Ten of them involve (functionally) mitotic asexuality, while the 14 remaining
species have different types of meiotic asexuality (Figure 1). All but one of the ten
species with mitotic asexuality are polyploid, the amazon molly being the only diploid
studied. Conversely, all but one species with meiotic asexuality are diploid. This is
expected given that polyploidy can generate problems during meiosis (reviewed in [45]).
Nevertheless, the nematode Panagrolaimus davidi is characterized by both meiotic
asexuality and triploidy [33] (see Supplementary Table 1 for details).

Information on how asexuality evolved is available for 16 of the 26 sequenced species
(Supplementary Table 1). A hybrid origin has been suggested for ten of these, based
on identification of parental species. Endosymbionts are the most likely cause of
asexuality in four species (the springtail, both wasps, and the thrips), and spontaneous
mutation in two (the ant and the cape honey bee). Across the 26 species, a hybrid origin
is correlated with polyploidy. Six of the 11 polyploids in our sample are of hybrid origin,
while for the five others a hybrid origin is supported by our results (see below), even
though it was not suggested previously. It is important to note however that many
polyploid asexual animals are not of hybrid origin, including several well studied asexual
species such as the New Zealand mudsnail Potamopyrgus antipodarum, the bush
cricket Saga pedo, or the bagworm moth Dahlica triquetrella. None of these has a
published genome yet, which precludes their inclusion in our study.

Most if not all predicted consequences of asexuality are expected to accumulate over
time, meaning that their effect size as well as the power to detect them is increased in
old asexual lineages. However, estimating the age of asexual lineages is difficult and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

always associated with large uncertainties [46,47]. Therefore we did not include
quantitative comparisons among asexuals with respect to their age. However, because
our set of species comprises some asexuals believed to be ‘ancient’ (i.e., several million
years old, see Supplementary Table 1), we discuss, where appropriate, potential age
effects in a qualitative manner.

Mutation accumulation and positive selection
One of the classical predictions linked to asexuality is that it reduces the efficacy of
selection [5–7,48–50]. This reduction occurs because linkage among loci in asexual
species prevents selection from acting individually on each locus. This can allow
deleterious mutations to accumulate over time, because they are linked to other sites
under selection. It can also reduce the rate of adaptation, because beneficial mutations
cannot reach fixation in a population as easily as under sexual reproduction.

Analyzing mutation accumulation and positive selection requires comparisons of
homologous gene sets in sexual and asexual relatives, which are only available in six of
the 26 asexual species (Figure 1). It was therefore not possible to analyze these
genome features in the present study. However, the prediction that deleterious
mutations accumulate more rapidly in asexual than sexual lineages has been tested in
over twenty different groups of asexual species (reviewed in [51], plus four additional
studies published since [17,23,52,53]), with results generally supporting the prediction.
However, in only eight studies were the tests conducted genome-wide, while tests in the
remaining studies were based on only one or a few genes. Note that four [52,54–56] of
the genome-wide studies were based on transcriptomes and are therefore not included
in our systematic reanalysis. Among the genome-wide tests, results are much more
mixed than among the studies on few genes, raising the question whether the latter are
representative of the genome as a whole. Specifically, only two of the eight genomewide studies support deleterious mutation accumulation in asexuals (stick insects and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

evening-primroses) [52,54]. Moreover, two studies found more deleterious mutation
accumulation in sexual than asexual taxa (parasitoid wasps and oribatid mites) [21,55],
while the four remaining ones found no differences between sexual and asexual taxa
[17,23,27,56]. In the case of the water flea D. pulex, the study specifically reported that
earlier inferences of deleterious mutation accumulation under asexuality were incorrect,
as the deleterious mutations detected in asexual strains were inherited from the sexual
ancestor and not accumulated after the transition to asexuality [27].

In summary, results from genome-wide studies addressing the prediction of deleterious
mutation accumulation in asexual species are equivocal. More studies are therefore
needed. A major constraint for studying deleterious mutation accumulation, and the
reason why it was not studied in most genome studies of asexuals species (Figure 1), is
that it requires homologous gene sets from sexual outgroups for comparison. These
species are either unknown or not included in most published genome studies of
asexuals.

The same constraints likely explain why no study has thus far directly addressed
adaptive evolution in the genome of an asexual species. The question of adaptive
evolution was addressed indirectly in the amazon molly, by studying the amount of
segregating variation at immune genes (where variation is known to be beneficial). The
authors found very high diversities at immune genes [17]. However, these were difficult
to interpret because standing variation was not compared to that in sexual relatives, and
because the amazon molly is a hybrid species. Hence the high diversity could be a
consequence of the hybrid origin rather than of asexuality.

Heterozygosity
Intragenomic (individual-level) heterozygosity is the nucleotidic divergence between the
haploid genome copies of an individual. In a panmictic sexual population, the level of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

intragenomic heterozygosity corresponds to the level of genetic diversity in a population
(the amount of variation observed between DNA sequences from different individuals).
This is however not the case in asexual populations, which are, by definition, not
panmictic. Heterozygosity in asexuals is therefore a property of individuals, not of
populations.

Intragenomic heterozygosity in asexual organisms is expected to depend on three major
factors: (1) the mechanism of transition to asexuality (which determines the initial level of
heterozygosity; Box 1), (2) the cellular mechanism underlying asexuality (which
determines whether heterozygosity will increase or decrease over time; Box 2), and (3)
how long a species has been reproducing asexually (because the effect of asexuality
accumulates over time).

In diploid species, genome-wide heterozygosity can correspond to the divergence
between alleles (homolog heterozygosity), or if the species has a history of hybridization,
to the divergence of gene copies derived from different species (hereafter homoeologs,
following the terminology of Glover et al [57]). In polyploid species, heterozygosity can
be a combination of homolog and homoeolog divergence.

To compare intragenomic heterozygosity among species with different ploidy levels we
estimate heterozygosity as the proportion of sites with more than one allele present
among all homologous genome regions (consistent with [58]). For the 26 asexual
genomes in our study, we distinguish homolog and homoeolog heterozygosity whenever
possible, or infer a “composite heterozygosity” (the sum of the two) when the distinction
is not possible. To avoid biases stemming from variable genome assembly qualities, we
estimated heterozygosity directly from sequencing reads using kmer spectra analysis
[16], except for bdelloid rotifers where the heterozygosity levels between homoeologs

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

exceeded the range quantifiable by this method (see Supplementary Materials S2).

Species with an intraspecific origin of asexuality show low heterozygosity levels (0.03% 0.83%), while all of the asexual species with a known hybrid origin display high
heterozygosity levels (1.73% - 8.5%, Figure 2). Although the elevated heterozygosity
levels are intuitively expected in species of hybrid origin, it is surprising that the pattern
holds regardless of the cellular mode of asexuality.

The heterozygosity levels present at the inception of asexuality should decay over time
for most forms of meiotic asexuality [15,59]. Under mitotic asexuality, heterozygosity is
expected to increase over time as haplotypes can accumulate mutations independently
of each other (generating the so-called ‘Meselson effect’) [8]. However, gene conversion
can strongly reduce haplotype divergence and, if high enough, can even result in a net
loss of heterozygosity over time, even under mitotic asexuality [8,18]. In spite of the
prediction that the cellular mechanism of asexuality should affect heterozygosity, it
appears to have no detectable effect on heterozygosity levels once we control for the
effect of hybrid origins (Figure 2). However, we have very little power to detect such
effects, especially because our dataset does not include any asexual species that uses
mitotic asexuality but is not of hybrid origin. It is interesting to note that species with
different forms of meiotic asexuality (including gamete duplication and central fusion)
have similarly low heterozygosity levels. This suggests that although the rate of
heterozygosity loss is expected to vary according to mechanisms of asexuality, this
variation is only relevant very recently after transitions to asexuality, and no longer
affects heterozygosity among established asexual species. Alternatively, variation in
heterozygosity caused by different forms of meiotic asexuality may be too small to be
detected with our methods.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 2: Hybrid origin is the main driver of high heterozygosity in asexual
species. Heterozygosity estimates with respect to hybrid origin (x axis) and cellular
mechanism of asexuality (color code). Whenever possible, heterozygosity is
decomposed into heterozygosity between alleles of intra-specific origin versus
heterozygosity between homoeologs of hybrid origin (shapes). Composite
heterozygosity covers the cases where the two cannot be distinguished. Functional
mitosis refers to cellular mechanisms that are expected to maintain heterozygosity
across generations (e.g., mitosis or endoduplication; Box 2). Species with a possible
shared origin of asexuality are grouped in gray ellipses. Nematode genus abbreviations:
Pl: Plectus, Mes: Mesorhabditis, D: Diploscapter, Pa: Panagrolaimus, A: Acrobeloides,
Mel: Meloidogyne. We were unable to generate heterozygosity estimates for two of the
26 asexual species for different reasons: in the tardigrade H. dujardini because of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

extensive contamination in the sequencing reads, and in the water flea Daphnia pulex
samples because of too low coverage (see Methods).

Heterozygosity structure in polyploids
Heterozygosity is estimated as the proportion of sites that differ in at least one of the
homologous regions (see above). This means that in polyploids the estimated genomewide heterozygosity could be generated by a single haplotype that is highly divergent
while others are similar, or by homogeneous divergence across all copies present, or a
combination of these. With the exception of bdelloid rotifers, we are not able to directly
compare the divergence of individual haplotypes (because such a comparison requires
phased genomes). However, we are able to measure the haplotype structure on a perlocus basis using k-mer based approaches implemented in GenomeScope 2.0 [16].
These approaches notably allow us to distinguish biallelic from triallelic loci in triploid
organisms.

The heterozygosity of two of the five triploid species in our dataset (the crayfish P.
virginalis and nematode M. floridensis) are composed mostly of biallelic loci, while the
remaining triploid species show a relatively higher fraction of triallelic heterozygosity
(Figure 3, Supplementary Materials S3). The low proportion of triallelic loci suggests
an AAB structure of the two genomes, where two of the haploid genome copies (A) are
nearly identical and the last copy (B) is the carrier of the observed heterozygosity. This
AAB model is in agreement with the previous genomic analysis of the asexual crayfish
P. virginalis [30]. This previous analysis suggested that P. virginalis has a non-hybrid
origin, which would imply that the divergence between the A and B haploid genomes
corresponds to the heterozygosity present in the sexual ancestor P. fallax from which P.
virginalis derived only 30 years ago. However, our estimation of the divergence of the
third genome copy B (1.8%) exceeds by far our estimation of the heterozygosity in P.
fallax (0.76%; Supplementary Materials S4). We therefore suggest a hybrid origin of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

the crayfish B genome copy, similar to the well established hybrid origins of the other
polyploid asexuals in our dataset. The second triploid species in our dataset with an AAB
genome structure is the root knot nematode M. floridensis, which was previously
mistaken for diploid (Supplementary Materials S1). This genome structure
distinguishes M. floridensis from the other triploid Meloidogyne species (whose genomes
are comprised of a larger portion with an ABC structure, Figure 3), which might suggest
that the origin of triploidy in M. floridensis is independent of the origin of triploidy in the
other Meloidogyne species.

In the tetraploid species, the biallelic loci can be sorted into those where one genome
copy carries the alternative allele (yellow portions in Figure 3), and those where two
genomic copies carry the alternative allele (pink portions). The genomes of the two
tetraploid Meloidogyne species contain high proportions of all heterozygosity structures
(Figure 3) suggesting a complex genomic structure, such as AABC or ABCD.
Alternatively, this signal could be also caused by partial aneuploidy, which is common
among Meloidogyne species [60].

Haplotype divergence can provide information on the origin of asexuality in polyploid
species: in asexual polyploids of hybrid origin we expect, and indeed observe, highly
heterogeneous divergences among haplotypes, while in those of intra-specific origin we
expect homogeneous divergences. Notably, divergence between the haplotypes of the
four bdelloid rotifers is highly asymmetric (Figure 3). When tetraploidy was first
discovered in bdelloids, it was proposed that it stemmed from either a whole genome
duplication or a hybridization event in their ancestor [61]. Studies of bdelloid rotifers
traditionally refer to the divergent haplotypes as “ohnologs” (e.g., [18,19]), which,
following the unified vocabulary of Glover et al [57] would imply that the diverged
haplotypes are products of a whole genome duplication. However, the most
parsimonious explanation for the highly asymmetric divergence of the different bdelloid

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

haplotypes is a hybrid origin. Referring to the diverged haplotypes as homoeologs
therefore appears more appropriate. Our analyses also indicate that the allelic
heterozygosity varies extensively among bdelloid rotifer genera. Divergence is very low
in Rotaria (0.49% in R. magnacalcarata and 0.125% R. macrura) but relatively high in
Adineta vaga (2.4% ) and in A. ricciae (5.5%). There is currently no good explanation for
the higher allelic heterozygosity in A. ricciae compared to A. vaga, but kmer spectra
analysis of the A. ricciae sequencing reads suggests that different ploidy levels in the
two species could play a role (Supplementary Materials S2). Additionally, variable
mitotic gene conversion and mutation rates could also contribute to the different allelic
heterozygosities. In A. vaga it has been suggested that gene conversion reduces
divergence between homologs in some genome regions [18] but there are currently no
direct estimates for gene conversion rates in rotifers. Independently of the mechanisms
causing the differences between bdelloids, it is important to note that with such low
levels of divergence between homologs, there can be no strong genome-wide ‘Meselson
effect’ in bdelloid rotifers (see also [18]). It remains possible that the subset of genomic
regions with divergence between homologs in Adineta features allele phylogenies as
expected under the ‘Meselson effect’. This is the case in the asexual unicellular
eukaryote Trypanosoma brucei gambiense: some genome regions feature high
heterozygosity and allele phylogenies as expected under the ‘Meselson effect’, while
others are largely homozygous [62]. Again, it remains unknown why there is such
extensive heterogeneity in divergence across the genome in this species. A possible
explanation is that the heterozygous genome regions are the consequence of ancient
introgression, and that gene conversion rates are low in such regions because of their
very high heterozygosity (see Conclusions).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3: The relative heterozygosity structure in polyploids. Biallelic loci are
indicated in yellow or pink: yellow when the alternative allele is carried by a single
haplotype (AAB or AAAB), and pink when both alleles are represented twice (AABB).
Loci with more than two alleles are indicated in blue. The homoeolog divergences in
bdelloid species were estimated using genome assemblies, while the remaining values
were estimated using kmer spectra analysis (see Methods for details).

Palindromes and gene conversion
Palindromes are duplicated regions on a single chromosome in reverse orientation.
Because of their orientation, palindromes can align and form hairpins, which allows for

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

gene conversion within duplicated regions (Supplementary Figure 6). Palindromemediated gene conversion was shown to play a major role in limiting the accumulation of
deleterious mutations for non-recombining human and chimpanzee Y chromosomes
[63–65]. Indeed, approximately one third of coding genes on these Y chromosomes
occur in palindromes, and the highly concerted evolution of palindromic regions indicates
that the rates of gene conversion are at least two orders of magnitude higher in the
palindromes than between homologous chromosomes [63]. The reports of palindromes
in the genomes of the bdelloid rotifer A. vaga [18] and of the springtail Folsomia candida
[26] led to the hypothesis that palindromes could play a similar role in asexual organisms
by reducing deleterious mutation accumulation in the absence of recombination.
However, the potential benefit of palindrome-mediated gene conversion depends on the
portion of genes in palindromic regions [64]. In addition to identifying palindromes, it is
therefore important to also quantify the number of genes affected by palindromemediated gene conversion.

Methods for palindrome identification depend on genome assemblies (unlike the other
genome features we re-analysed in our study). Palindromes are less likely to be
detected in highly fragmented assemblies, and artificial palindromes can be generated
by erroneous scaffolding (see also [19]). Our analyses assume that there are no
systematic scaffolding errors in the published assemblies, meaning that our list of
palindromes includes false positives that are generated by mis-assemblies in the
published reference genomes. Palindrome identification methods rely on genome
annotations, which are available for 23 of the 26 asexual species (all except D. pulex, A.
mellifera capensis, and A. rufus). We screened these 23 genomes for the presence of
palindromic arrangements (See Methods and Supplementary Materials S2 for details).
We identified 19 palindromes in A. vaga, 16 in F. candida, and one to four palindromes
in eight additional genomes (Table 1). Not a single palindrome was detected in the
remaining 13 species. The frequency of palindromes had no phylogenetic signal; for

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

example, although we found 19 palindromes in A. vaga, we found no palindromes in the
three other bdelloid rotifers (in agreement with [19]). There is also no indication for major
rearrangements being present solely in very old asexuals; among the very old asexuals,
the non-A. vaga rotifers along with the Diploscapter nematodes have either zero or only
a single palindrome.

Adineta vaga and F. candida are the only two species with more than 100 genes
potentially affected by palindrome-mediated gene conversion, but even for these two
species, the overall fraction of genes in palindromes is very small (1.23% and 0.53%
respectively). The fraction of genes in the other seven species ranges between 0.01%
and 0.16%, suggesting that palindromes do not play a major role in the genome
evolution of any of the asexual lineages analyzed. Our findings substantiate the
conclusion of a previous study [19] that major genomic rearrangements and the breaking
of gene syntenies do not occur at high rates in asexual organisms. They appear to occur
at rates similar to those known in recombining genome portions of sexual species
[66,67].

Table 1: Palindromes in asexual genomes. Only species with at least one palindrome
detected are listed in the table. Rows in bold highlight species with more than 100 genes
detected in palindromes.

Species

Palindromes

Potentially

Fraction of genes

detected

affected

[%]

genes
P. formosa

1

2

0.01

A. vaga

19*

636

1.29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

O. biroi

2

6

0.04

F. candida

15*

152

0.53

M. belari

2

6

0.02

D. pachys

1

2

0.01

M. incognita

1

26

0.06

M. arenaria

3

38

0.04

H. dujardini

1

8

0.04

R. varieornatus

4

22

0.16

* The detected number of palindromes in these species exceeds the number reported in
the corresponding genome articles (17 in A. vaga and 11 in F. candida). This is because
we included individual genes in palindromic arrangements, whereas the original genome
studies only included genes if they were in palindromic synteny blocks of at least five
genes. See also Supplementary Materials S5.

Mitotic gene conversion can also occur outside of palindromic regions, for example when
double-stranded DNA breaks are repaired using the homologous chromosome as a
template [68,69]. This can, in theory, contribute to the loss of heterozygosity under all
forms of asexuality, but mitotic gene conversion rates have only rarely been studied in
asexual species – or sexual ones for that matter. Gene conversion rates are estimated
differently in different studies and are therefore difficult to compare: in the water flea D.
pulex, they were estimated to amount to approximately 10−6 locus−1 generation−1
[27,28,70], in the amazon molly P. formosa to 10−8 [17]. Up to 11% of the genome of the
nematode D. pachys [32] is suggested to be homozygous as a consequence of gene

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

conversion, and studies have also argued for an important role of gene conversion for
genome evolution in root-knot nematodes [37] and rotifers [18,19], although no
quantitative estimates are available for these groups.

Transposable elements
Transposable elements (TEs) are DNA sequences that can autonomously change
positions in a genome via various ‘cut-and-paste’ and ‘copy-and-paste’ mechanisms
[71,72]. TEs can invade genomes even though they generally provide no adaptive
advantage to the individual carrying them [73–75]. To the contrary, new TE insertions in
coding or regulatory sequences disrupt gene functions and cause deleterious effects in
the host; only very rarely can specific insertions be co-opted to acquire novel, adaptive
functions for the host [75]. In sexual organisms, TEs can spread through panmictic
populations because of their ability to rapidly colonize new genomes [10,76]. At the
same time, sexual reproduction facilitates the purging of deleterious TE insertions,
because recombination, segregation, and genetic exchange among individuals improve
the efficacy of selection [77,78]. In the absence of sex, TEs could therefore accumulate
indefinitely, which led to the prediction that TEs could frequently drive the extinction of
asexual lineages. Only asexual lineages without active TEs, or with efficient TE
suppression mechanisms, would be able to persist over evolutionary timescales [78,79].
Consistent with this view, initial investigations in bdelloid rotifers reported extremely low
TE loads [80]. This prompted the authors to suggest that bdelloid rotifers could have
been able to persist in the absence of sex for over 40 million years thanks to their largely
TE-free genomes.

Our analysis of asexual animal genomes does not support the view that bdelloid rotifers
have unusually low TE contents, even though our methods tend to underestimate TE
content in bdelloids relative to other asexual species (Supplementary Material S7). The
estimated TE content of bdelloid rotifers (0.7% to 9.1%) is comparable to other asexual

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

animal taxa (median 6.9%, Figure 4), all of which are considerably younger than the
bdelloids. Across the 26 genomes, there was large variation in total TE content, overall
ranging from 0.7% to 17.9%, with one species, the marbled crayfish, reaching 34.7%.
The extreme repetitive content in the latter is largely inherited from its sexual ancestor,
as the TE loads we estimated for the close sexual relative P. fallax are nearly identical
(32.5%). Nevertheless, the abundance of TEs in asexual animal genomes appears to be
generally lower than in sexual species, which range typically from 8.5-37.6% (median:
24.3%) [81]. These low abundances could stem from the evolution of reduced TE activity
in asexual species [82,83], and/or appear if successful asexual taxa generally derive
from sexual ancestors with largely inactive TEs and low TE contents. However, whether
the apparently lower TE content in the 26 genomes is indeed linked to asexuality
remains an open question as TE loads are known to be highly lineage-specific
[22,38,84,85].

In addition to other lineage-specific characteristics, the cellular mechanisms underlying
asexuality could also affect TE loads. For example, most forms of meiotic asexuality can
allow for the purging of heterozygous TE-insertions, given the loss of heterozygosity
between generations (Box 2). However, in the genomes analyzed here, we did not find
any effect of cellular mechanisms on TE loads (Supplementary Figure 7), likely
because the expected effect of the cellular mechanisms is small relative to lineagespecific mechanisms. Moreover, host TE suppression mechanisms can contribute to the
inactivation and subsequent degeneration of TE copies over time, independently of the
cellular mechanism of asexuality [75,86]. Similarly, we did not find any difference in TE
content according to hybrid versus intraspecific origin of asexuals (Supplementary
Figure 7), even though mismatches between species-specific TEs and silencing

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

machineries can result in increased TE activity in hybrids [12,14,87–89].

Figure 4: Percentage of transposable elements (TEs) in asexual genomes. Both the TE
load and frequency of TE classes vary substantially between individual asexual lineages.
The TE classes are: class I “cut-and-paste” DNA transposons (DNA), and class II “copyand-paste” long interspersed nuclear elements or autonomous non-LTR elements
(LINEs), short interspersed nuclear elements or non-autonomous non-LTR elements
(SINEs), long terminal repeat elements (LTR), and rolling-circle elements (Helitron).

Horizontal gene transfer
Asexual species could harbour many genes acquired via horizontal gene transfer (HGT)
as a consequence of relaxed selection on pairing of homologous chromosomes (see
also section Gene family expansions). It has also been proposed that HGTs might
represent an adaptive benefit which allows for the long-term maintenance of asexuality
[90]. Indeed, bdelloid rotifers encode an unusually large proportion (6.2% - 9.1%; Figure
1) of horizontally acquired genes compared to sexual spiralian genomes (0.08% - 0.7%)
[19,91]. Many of these have been reported to have contributed to adaptive divergence
between bdelloid rotifer species [92]. However, there are no other ancient asexuals

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

sequenced and evaluating the role of HGTs in the long-term persistence of asexuality is
therefore not possible. In more recent asexuals, reported levels of HGT appear mostly
low, e.g. in Panagrolaimus (0.63% - 0.66%) and in two tardigrade species (0.8% 0.97%) [19,33,39]. The only genome with a high reported fraction of HGT (2.8%) outside
of the rotifers is the springtail F. candida [26].

We systematically estimated the percentage of non-metazoan HGT candidates (HGTC)
in the 23 of the 26 asexual species with available gene annotations using a sequence
comparison based approach, following [19]. For each species we compared the set of
annotated genes to the UniRef90 database to identify genes of likely non-metazoan
origin [93]. We considered non-metazoan genes as HGT candidates only if they were on
a scaffold that also encoded at least one gene of unambiguous metazoan origin, to
control for potential contamination in the genome assemblies (see Methods for details).

We found no evidence for asexuality favoring the retention of HGTs. The majority of
species (16 out of 23) showed a low proportion of HGTC genes, with ~1% HGTC
(Supplementary Table 4). In agreement with previous findings, we identified elevated
levels of HGTC in the four bdelloid rotifer species A. ricciae (10%), A. vaga (10.6%), R.
macrura (8.4%) and R. magnacalcarata (7.2%) and the springtail F. candida (6.3%).
However, we also detected unexpectedly high levels of HGTC in the ant O. biroi and the
wasp T. pretiosum (Supplementary Table 4). To evaluate a potential link between
elevated HGTC levels and asexuality in hexapods we additionally quantified HGTC in a
number of published genomes of sexual species from the same order or superfamily as
the asexual species. This revealed a similarly high proportion of HGTC in these sexual
relatives, suggesting that whatever the cause of high HGTC in these taxa is a general
characteristic of hexapods and not linked to the switch to asexual reproduction. Finally, it
is important to note that the level of detected HGTC is heavily dependent on the
parameters used in the pipeline and on the database used to distinguish between

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

metazoan and non-metazoan genes (Supplementary Materials S6). While our
analyses show that asexuality is most likely not associated with high levels of HGTC, the
apparently high number of genes marked as HGTC (when compared to the UniProt90
database) in hexapods requires further investigation that is outside of the scope of this
study.

Gene family expansions
Most genome papers scan for expansions of specific gene families. Such expansions
are then discussed in the light of the focal species’ biology. The expansion of specific
gene families per se is thus generally a species-specific trait [94] that is not related to
asexuality. To our knowledge, the only example of a gene family expansion that could be
directly associated with asexuality is the diversification of the RNA silencing machinery
of TEs in bdelloid rotifers [18]. TEs are expected to evolve reduced activity rates in
asexual hosts (see section Transposable elements), and an improved RNA silencing
machinery could be the mechanism underlying such reduced activity rates.

Mitotic asexuality might facilitate variation in gene copy numbers between homologous
chromosomes as a consequence of relaxed constraints on chromosome pairing. Gene
family expansions (and contractions) could therefore be more extensive and be retained
more frequently in asexual than sexual species. To test this hypothesis, an overall
comparison of gene family expansions in sexual and asexual sister species is needed
(see Supplementary Materials S8). Four studies have surveyed gene family
expansions in asexual species as well as in (sometimes distantly related) sexual
counterparts, but these studies found no differences between reproductive modes
[17,23,26,34]. However, only two of the four studies are based on asexuals with
functionally mitotic asexuality (i.e., where chromosome pairing is not required), and
additional studies are therefore needed to address the question of whether asexuality
affects gene family expansions.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Gene loss
Asexual animals are predicted to lose genes underlying sexual reproduction traits,
including male-specific traits and functions (e.g. male-specific organs, spermatogenesis),
as well as female traits involved in sexual reproduction (e.g., pheromone production,
sperm storage organs) [95]. In the absence of pleiotropic effects, gene loss is expected
due to mutation accumulation in the absence of purifying selection maintaining sexual
traits, as well as to directional selection to reduce costly sexual traits [96]. Some gene
loss consistent with these predictions is documented. For example, the sex
determination genes xol-1 and tra-2 are missing in the nematode D. coronatus [31].
Furthermore, genes believed to be involved in male functions harbour an excess of
deleterious mutations in the wasp Leptopilina clavipes [21], which could represent the
first step towards the loss of these genes. However, a similar excess of deleterious
mutations in genes with (presumed) male-specific functions was not detected in the
amazon molly P. formosa [17].

Species reproducing via mitotic asexuality are further predicted to lose genes specific to
meiotic processes [97]. The genes involved in meiosis have been studied in three of
eight mitotic parthenogens (the amazon molly and the two Adineta bdelloid rotifers), as
well as in Rotaria bdelloid rotifers and Diploscapter nematodes, whose cellular
mechanisms of asexuality are unknown. There was no apparent loss of meiosis genes in
the amazon molly P. formosa [17]. The majority of meiosis genes was recovered in
bdelloid rotifers [18,19], and furthermore nearly all genes were also absent in the sexual
species, indicating that meiosis gene loss is not associated with the evolution of
asexuality [98]. Diploscapter nematodes also lack certain meiosis genes, but it is
unknown whether these genes are also missing in sexual relatives [31,32]. As much as
the idea is appealing, there does not seem to be any support for the predicted loss of
meiotic genes in mitotic asexuals. We note that the lack of our understanding of meiosis

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

on the molecular level outside of a few model organisms (particularly yeast and C.
elegans) makes the interpretation of gene loss (or absence thereof) difficult. This is best
illustrated by the fact that losses of presumed “core” meiosis genes have also been
reported in different sexual species, where meiosis is clearly functional [99].

In summary, some gene loss consistent with the loss of different sexual functions has
been reported in several asexual species. However, there is no striking pattern relative
to sexuals, and a clear interpretation of gene loss in asexual species is problematic
because the function of the vast majority of genes is unknown in these non-model
organisms.

Conclusions
We re-analyzed 26 published genomes of asexual animals to identify genomic features
that are characteristic of asexual animals in general. Many of the original genome
studies highlighted one or a few specific features in their focal asexual species, and
suggested that they might be linked to asexuality. However, our analyses combined with
reviewing published studies show that none of these genome features appear to be a
general consequence of asexuality, given that none of them was systematically
replicated across even a majority of analyzed species.

The variation among genomes of asexual species is at least in part due to species- or
lineage-specific traits. But variation among the features detected in the published singlegenome studies is also generated by differences in the methods used. Such differences
are often less obvious, yet they can be critical in our assessment of genome diversity
among animals. In this work we thus re-analyzed several key genome features with
consistent methods. To minimize the potentially confounding effects of differences in
assembly quality, we have utilised methods that analyse directly sequencing reads. For

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

example, re-estimating heterozygosity levels directly from reads of each species allowed
to show a strong effect of hybrid origin, but not of cellular mechanism of asexuality
(Figure 2). Another advantage of using the same methods for each species is that it
diminishes the "researcher degrees of freedom" [100–102]. For example, the analysis of
polyploid genomes requires choosing methods to call heterozygosity and ploidy. By
providing a common framework among species, we have shown that homoeolog
divergence is very diverse among polyploid asexuals.

We have identified hybrid origin as the major factor affecting heterozygosity levels
across all asexual animal species with available genomic data. This is consistent with
the conclusions of two studies that focussed on individual asexual lineages: hybridization
between diverse strains explains heterozygosity in Meloidogyne root knot nematodes
and in Lineus ribbon worms [37,56]. This rule applies more generally to all the species
analysed with known transitions to asexuality, but it is important to highlight that all the
non-hybrid species in our dataset are hexapods. Thus in principle the low heterozygosity
could be a hexapod specific pattern, for example due to high mitotic gene conversion
rates in hexapods. The taxonomic range of the sequenced species is wide but we are
missing several clades rich in asexual species, such as mites or annelids [103,104].
These clades would be useful foci for future genomic studies of asexual species.
Independently of the findings of such future studies, our results suggest that
heterozygosity loss via meiosis and/or mitotic gene conversion plays a significant and
highly underappreciated role in the evolution of asexual species of intraspecific origin
and support the theoretical argumentthat one of the main benefits of sex could be the
masking of recessive deleterious mutations (referred to as “complementation”)
[105,106]. Conversely, high rates of heterozygosity loss could also allow for the purging
of deleterious mutations, as in highly selfing species (e.g. [107,108]). Such purging could
help explain why most of the genome scale studies did not find support for the
theoretical expectation that asexual reproduction should result in increased rates of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

deleterious mutation accumulation (see section Mutation accumulation and positive
selection). More generally, given the major differences in genome evolution for
asexuals of intra-specific vs. hybrid origin, our study calls for future theoretical
approaches on the maintenance of sex that explicitly consider the loss vs. the
maintenance of heterozygosity in asexuals.

In our evaluation of the general consequences of asexuality, we were not able to take
two key aspects into account: survivorship bias of asexual lineages, and characteristics
of sexual ancestors. How often new asexual lineages emerge from sexual ancestors is
completely unknown, but it has been speculated that in some taxa asexual lineages
might emerge frequently, and then go extinct rapidly because of negative consequences
of asexuality. In other words, asexuals that would exhibit the strongest consequences of
asexuality, as predicted by theoretical models, are expected to go extinct the fastest.
Such transient asexuals remain undetected in natural populations, because research
focuses on asexual species or populations, and not on rare asexual females in sexual
populations. Indeed, most of the species included in our study have persisted as
asexuals for hundreds of thousands to millions of years. They might thus be mostly
representative of the subset of lineages that suffer weaker consequences of asexuality.
Finally, the key constraint for identifying consequences of asexuality is that almost none
of the published genome studies of asexual animals included comparisons to close
sexual relatives. This prevents the detection of specific effects of asexuality, controlling
for the variation among sexual species – which is extensive for all of the genome
features we analyzed and discussed in our study. Overall, despite the importance of
recombination rate variation for understanding the evolution of sexual animal genomes
(e.g., [109,110]), the genome-wide absence of recombination does not appear to have
the dramatic effects which are expected from classical theoretical models. The reasons
for this are probably a combination of lineage-specific patterns, differences according to
the origin of asexuality, and survivorship bias of asexual lineages.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Methods
We combined different methods into a complete pipeline that collects published
assemblies, sequencing reads, and genome annotation data from online databases, and
automatically computes the genome features discussed here. The methods for the
different steps in the pipeline are detailed below. The pipeline is available at
https://github.com/KamilSJaron/genomic-features-of-asexual-animals. We used this
pipeline to gather and analyze the data for 31 sequenced individuals from 26 asexual
species (accessions are in Supplementary Table 1) and the sexual species P. fallax
(SAMN06115719). For some species, additional genomes to the ones we used were
available, but we did not include them because of low data quality and/or unavailable
Illumina reads (this was the case for one sample of M. incognita, M. floridensis and
multiple samples of D. pulex [27,35,111] ). Overall, the genome features computed were:
ploidy, genome size, heterozygosity, haplotype divergence structure, transposable
elements/ repeat content, conserved gene content (see Supplementary Materials S8),
horizontal gene transfer, and palindrome abundance.

Core genome features (ploidy, haploid genome size, heterozygosity, repetitive fraction of
the genome, and characterisation of TE content) were estimated directly from
sequencing reads to avoid potential assembly biases in reference genome-based
approaches. The raw reads were publicly available for 29 samples and for three more
samples shared by authors on request. We cleaned the raw reads by removing adaptors
and low quality bases using Skewer (parameters “-z -m pe -n -q 26 -l 21”) [112].

We used smudgeplot v0.1.3 to estimate ploidy levels [16]. This method extracts from the
read set unique kmer pairs that differ by one SNP from each other. These kmer pairs are
inferred to derive from heterozygous genome regions. The sum of coverages of the kmer
pairs is then compared against their coverage ratio. This comparison separates different

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

haplotype structures (Supplementary Figure 2b). The most prevalent structure is then
indicative of the overall ploidy of the genome. We used this ploidy estimate in all
species, except A. vaga. The most prevalent structure suggested that this species is
diploid. A. vaga is well-characterized as tetraploid [61], but we were unable to detect
tetraploidy because homoeologs are too diverged to be identified as such by the kmerbased smudgeplot method.

Using the inferred ploidy levels, we then estimated genome size and heterozygosity
using GenomeScope 2.0 [16]. GenomeScope estimates genome wide heterozygosity via
kmer spectra analysis, by directly analyzing kmers within the raw sequencing reads. A
mixture model of evenly spaced negative binomial distributions is fit to the kmer
spectrum, where the number of fitted distributions is determined by the input ploidy.
Each distribution corresponds to kmers that occur a given time (e.g. once, twice, etc.) in
the genome. Fits are then used to estimate heterozygosity, the fraction of repeats in the
genome, as well as the 1n sequencing coverage. The latter is subsequently used for
estimation of genome size. The definition of heterozygosity for polyploids is not well
established, but GenomeScope 2.0 distinguishes different types of heterozygous loci in
polyploids (as shown in Figure 3). Specifically, GenomeScope 2.0 utilizes a
combinatorial mathematical model to account for how particular nucleotide haplotype
structures are related to kmer haplotype structures. Assuming that mutations are
randomly distributed across the genome, three equidistant haplotypes will generate the
highest fraction of triallelic loci. Conversely, if the divergence is carried by the divergence
of a single haplotype, very few or no triallelic loci will be detected.

Kmer spectra analysis is affected by the choice of kmer length. Longer kmers require
higher sequencing coverage, but lead to more informative kmer spectra. We have
chosen the default kmer size 21 nt for all species except the marbled crayfish, where we

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

chose kmer length 17 nt due to low sequencing coverage.

We quantified transposable elements using DnaPipeTE v1.2 [113]. The method uses the
haploid genome size (parameter -genome_size) to subsample sequencing reads to a
low coverage of 0.5x (parameter -genome_coverage). We merged all trimmed
sequencing reads available for each species for the input of this analysis. These
subsampled reads are then assembled using an assembler (Trinity) that can deal with
uneven coverages and is able to split assembled regions with few differences (including
different TE families). The assembled sequences largely correspond to repetitions as
non-repetitive genome regions present in the subsampled reads drop out at this stage,
because the coverage of such regions is too low for assembling. The assembled
sequences are annotated by homology using a database of known TEs. This
subsampling process is repeated three times (parameter -sample_number), and the
union of results represents the repeat library. The third sampling round is used to map
overrepresented reads back to the identified TE library to calculate the overall TE
abundance based on the fraction of reads mapping to TEs (for details see [113]). The
output of the method is the number of sampled nucleotides assembled and annotated as
different types of repeats and fractions are calculated as the numbers divided by the
total number of sampled nucleotides. Our reported values of TE loads include only
repeats that were annotated as TEs, i.e., we did not include ‘unknown’ repeats which
consist of tandem repeats (satellite repeats), duplications or very divergent/unknown
TEs.

The palindrome analysis was based on genome assemblies and their published
annotations, from 27 samples of 22 species (annotations were not available for D. pulex
and A. rufus). We performed collinearity analysis using MCScanX (untagged version
released 28.3.2013) [114], allowing even a single gene to form a “collinear bloc”
(parameter -s) if there were fewer than 100 genes in between (parameter -m). The

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

output was then filtered to contain only blocs on the same scaffold in reverse order.
Furthermore we filtered all homologous gene pairs that have appeared on the same
strand. All the remaining blocks are palindromes, blocs built of reverse complementary
genes on the same scaffold. See Supplementary Materials S5 for more details.

We assessed the impact of HGT on each asexual genome using a sequence
comparison based approach, following [19]. For each species, the published set of
predicted proteins were aligned to the UniRef90 (analysis presented in the main text)
and UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (Supplementary Materials S6) protein databases
downloaded on 04/07/2019 and 14/08/2019, respectively [93,115]. The alignment was
performed using DIAMOND “blastp” v0.9.21 [116] (“--sensitive -k 500 -e 1e-10”). For
each protein, the HGT Index (hU) was then calculated as hU = BOUT − BIN, where BOUT is
the bitscore of the best hit to a protein of non-metazoan origin within UniRef90 and BIN is
the bitscore of the best hit to a metazoan protein [92]. The proportion of secondary hits
that agreed with the designation (metazoan vs non-metazoan) was also recorded as the
“consensus hit support” (CHS) [19,39]. To account for the confounding effects of
database entries from closely related species contributing to hU, hits from taxa within the
same phylum as the focal taxon were excluded from further analysis. Analyses were
also run excluding such hits at the class, order and family level for each species, to test
the robustness of the results given this partitioning of the target databases
(Supplementary Materials S6). In each case, a focal protein was designated as a
putative HGT candidate (HGTC) if hU > 30, CHSOUT > 90%, and the protein was found on
a scaffold that also encoded at least one gene of unambiguous metazoan origin (i.e., hU
< 30 and CHSIN > 90%).

Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Deborah Charlesworth, Daniel Wegmann,
Philipp H. Schiffer, Jean-Francois Flot, Dave Lunt, Yuko Ulrich, Sean McKenzie, Julian

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Gutekunst, Mark Blaxter, Andrés G. de la Filia and anonymous reviewers for comments
and discussions. We would also like to thank all the authors who deposited their data in
public databases with correct metadata and all the authors who were helpful when we
asked for data or clarifications.
Funding: This study was supported by funding from Swiss SNF grants PP00P3_170627
and CRSII3_160723 to T.S. and by DFG fellowships BA 5800/1–1 and BA 5800/2–1 to
JB).
Author contributions: K.S.J. and T.S. conceived the study, K.S.J. and J.B. collected
the data; K.S.J., R.W.N. and T.R.R.B. performed the analyses; K.S.J., J.B. and T.S.
reviewed the literature; K.S.J., T.S., J.B., M.R.R. and R.W.N. wrote the manuscript; All
authors were involved in discussions about results and interpretations.
Competing interests: None declared.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References
1. Neiman M, Lively CM, Meirmans S. Why sex? A pluralist approach revisited. Trends
Ecol Evol. 2017;32:589–600.
2. Sharp NP, Otto SP. Evolution of sex: Using experimental genomics to select among
competing theories. Bioessays. 2016;38:751–7.
3. Bell G. The Masterpiece of Nature: The Evolution and Genetics of Sexuality. Los
Angeles: Univ of California Press; 1982.
4. Suomalainen E, Saura A, Lokki J. Cytology and evolution in parthenogenesis. CRC
Press; 1987.
5. Muller HJ. The relation of recombination to mutational advance. Mutat Res. 1964;1:2–
9.
6. Felsenstein J. The evolutionary advantage of recombination. Genetics. 1974;78:737–
56.
7. Keightley PD, Otto SP. Interference among deleterious mutations favours sex and
recombination in finite populations. Nature. 2006;443:89–92.
8. Birky CW Jr. Heterozygosity, heteromorphy, and phylogenetic trees in asexual
eukaryotes. Genetics. 1996;144:427–37.
9. Balloux F, Lehmann L, de Meeûs T. The population genetics of clonal and partially
clonal diploids. Genetics. 2003;164:1635–44.
10. Hickey DA. Selfish DNA: a sexually-transmitted nuclear parasite. Genetics.
1982;101:519–31.
11. Fontaneto D, Tang CQ, Obertegger U, Leasi F, Barraclough TG. Different
diversification rates between sexual and asexual organisms. Evol Biol. 2012;39:262–70.
12. Arkhipova IR, Rodriguez F. Genetic and epigenetic changes involving
(retro)transposons in animal hybrids and polyploids. Cytogenet Genome Res.
2013;140:295–311.
13. Neiman M, Sharbel TF, Schwander T. Genetic causes of transitions from sexual
reproduction to asexuality in plants and animals. J Evol Biol. 2014;27:1346–59.
14. Rodriguez F, Arkhipova IR. Transposable elements and polyploid evolution in
animals. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2018;49:115–23.
15. Engelstädter J. Asexual but not clonal: evolutionary processes in automictic
populations. Genetics. 2017;206:993–1009.
16. Ranallo-Benavidez TR, Jaron KS, Schatz MC. GenomeScope 2.0 and Smudgeplots:
Reference-free profiling of polyploid genomes [Internet]. bioRxiv. 2019 [cited 2019 Aug
27]. p. 747568. Available from: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/747568v1
17. Warren WC, García-Pérez R, Xu S, Lampert KP, Chalopin D, Stöck M, et al. Clonal
polymorphism and high heterozygosity in the celibate genome of the Amazon molly. Nat
Ecol Evol. Nature Publishing Group; 2018;2:669–79.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

18. Flot J-F, Hespeels B, Li X, Noel B, Arkhipova I, Danchin EGJ, et al. Genomic
evidence for ameiotic evolution in the bdelloid rotifer Adineta vaga. Nature.
2013;500:453–7.
19. Nowell RW, Almeida P, Wilson CG, Smith TP, Fontaneto D, Crisp A, et al.
Comparative genomics of bdelloid rotifers: Insights from desiccating and nondesiccating
species. PLoS Biol. 2018;16:e2004830.
20. Arkhipova IR, Yushenova IA, Rodriguez F. Giant reverse transcriptase-encoding
transposable elements at telomeres. Mol Biol Evol. 2017;34:2245–57.
21. Kraaijeveld K, Anvar SY, Frank J, Schmitz A, Bast J, Wilbrandt J, et al. Decay of
sexual trait genes in an asexual parasitoid wasp. Genome Biol Evol. 2016;8:3685–95.
22. Bast J, Schaefer I, Schwander T, Maraun M, Scheu S, Kraaijeveld K. No
accumulation of transposable elements in asexual arthropods. Mol Biol Evol.
2016;33:697–706.
23. Lindsey ARI, Kelkar YD, Wu X, Sun D, Martinson EO, Yan Z, et al. Comparative
genomics of the miniature wasp and pest control agent Trichogramma pretiosum. BMC
Biol. 2018;16:54.
24. Oxley PR, Ji L, Fetter-Pruneda I, McKenzie SK, Li C, Hu H, et al. The genome of the
clonal raider ant Cerapachys biroi. Curr Biol. 2014;24:451–8.
25. Smith NMA, Wade C, Allsopp MH, Harpur BA, Zayed A, Rose SA, et al. Strikingly
high levels of heterozygosity despite 20 years of inbreeding in a clonal honey bee. J Evol
Biol. 2019;32:144–52.
26. Faddeeva-Vakhrusheva A, Kraaijeveld K, Derks MFL, Anvar SY, Agamennone V,
Suring W, et al. Coping with living in the soil: the genome of the parthenogenetic
springtail Folsomia candida. BMC Genomics. bmcgenomics.biomedcentral.com;
2017;18:493.
27. Tucker AE, Ackerman MS, Eads BD, Xu S, Lynch M. Population-genomic insights
into the evolutionary origin and fate of obligately asexual Daphnia pulex. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2013;110:15740–5.
28. Xu S, Omilian AR, Cristescu ME. High rate of large-scale hemizygous deletions in
asexually propagating Daphnia: implications for the evolution of sex. Mol Biol Evol.
2011;28:335–42.
29. Jiang X, Tang H, Ye Z, Lynch M. Insertion polymorphisms of mobile genetic
elements in sexual and asexual populations of Daphnia pulex. Genome Biol Evol.
2017;9:362–74.
30. Gutekunst J, Andriantsoa R, Falckenhayn C, Hanna K, Stein W, Rasamy J, et al.
Clonal genome evolution and rapid invasive spread of the marbled crayfish. Nat Ecol
Evol. 2018;2:567–73.
31. Hiraki H, Kagoshima H, Kraus C, Schiffer PH, Ueta Y, Kroiher M, et al. Genome
analysis of Diploscapter coronatus: insights into molecular peculiarities of a nematode
with parthenogenetic reproduction. BMC Genomics. 2017;18:478.
32. Fradin H, Kiontke K, Zegar C, Gutwein M, Lucas J, Kovtun M, et al. Genome
architecture and evolution of a unichromosomal asexual nematode. Curr Biol.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

2017;27:2928–39.e6.
33. Schiffer PH, Danchin EGJ, Burnell AM, Creevey CJ, Wong S, Dix I, et al. Signatures
of the Evolution of Parthenogenesis and Cryptobiosis in the Genomes of Panagrolaimid
Nematodes. iScience. 2019;21:587–602.
34. Schiffer PH, Polsky AL, Cole AG, Camps JIR, Kroiher M, Silver DH, et al. The gene
regulatory program of Acrobeloides nanus reveals conservation of phylum-specific
expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018;115:4459–64.
35. Abad P, Gouzy J, Aury J-M, Castagnone-Sereno P, Danchin EGJ, Deleury E, et al.
Genome sequence of the metazoan plant-parasitic nematode Meloidogyne incognita.
Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26:909–15.
36. Blanc-Mathieu R, Perfus-Barbeoch L, Aury J-M, Da Rocha M, Gouzy J, Sallet E, et
al. Hybridization and polyploidy enable genomic plasticity without sex in the most
devastating plant-parasitic nematodes. PLoS Genet. 2017;13:e1006777.
37. Szitenberg A, Salazar-Jaramillo L, Blok VC, Laetsch DR, Joseph S, Williamson VM,
et al. Comparative genomics of apomictic root-knot nematodes: hybridization, ploidy,
and dynamic genome change. Genome Biol Evol. 2017;9:2844–61.
38. Szitenberg A, Cha S, Opperman CH, Bird DM, Blaxter ML, Lunt DH. Genetic drift,
not life history or RNAi, determine long-term evolution of transposable elements.
Genome Biol Evol. 2016;8:2964–78.
39. Koutsovoulos G, Kumar S, Laetsch DR, Stevens L, Daub J, Conlon C, et al. No
evidence for extensive horizontal gene transfer in the genome of the tardigrade
Hypsibius dujardini. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2016. p. 5053–8.
40. Hashimoto T, Horikawa DD, Saito Y, Kuwahara H, Kozuka-Hata H, Shin-I T, et al.
Extremotolerant tardigrade genome and improved radiotolerance of human cultured cells
by tardigrade-unique protein. Nat Commun. 2016;7:12808.
41. Cavalier-Smith T. Origins of the machinery of recombination and sex. Heredity .
Nature Publishing Group; 2002;88:125–41.
42. Schultz RJ. Unisexual fish: laboratory synthesis of a “species.” Science. American
Association for the Advancement of Science; 1973;179:180–1.
43. van der Kooi CJ, Matthey-Doret C, Schwander T. Evolution and comparative ecology
of parthenogenesis in haplodiploid arthropods. Evol Lett. 2017;1:304–16.
44. Lenormand T, Engelstädter J, Johnston SE, Wijnker E, Haag CR. Evolutionary
mysteries in meiosis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2016;371.
45. Cifuentes M, Grandont L, Moore G, Chèvre AM, Jenczewski E. Genetic regulation of
meiosis in polyploid species: new insights into an old question. New Phytol.
2010;186:29–36.
46. Schurko AM, Neiman M, Logsdon JM. Signs of sex: what we know and how we
know it. Trends Ecol Evol. 2009;24:208–17.
47. Neiman M, Meirmans S, Meirmans PG. What can asexual lineage age tell us about
the maintenance of sex? Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009;1168:185–200.
48. Hill WG, Robertson A. The effect of linkage on limits to artificial selection. Genet

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Res. Cambridge Univ Press; 1966;8:269–94.
49. Fisher RA. The genetical theory of natural selection. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 1930.
50. Muller HJ. Some genetic aspects of sex. Am Nat. JSTOR; 1932;118–38.
51. Neiman M, Meirmans PG, Schwander T, Meirmans S. Sex in the wild: How and why
field-based studies contribute to solving the problem of sex. Evolution. 2018;72:1194–
203.
52. Bast J, Parker DJ, Dumas Z, Jalvingh KM, Tran Van P, Jaron KS, et al.
Consequences of asexuality in natural populations: insights from stick insects. Mol Biol
Evol. 2018;35:1668–77.
53. Brandt A, Bast J, Scheu S, Meusemann K, Donath A, Schütte K, et al. No signal of
deleterious mutation accumulation in conserved gene sequences of extant asexual
hexapods. Sci Rep. 2019;9:5338.
54. Hollister JD, Greiner S, Wang W, Wang J, Zhang Y, Wong GK-S, et al. Recurrent
loss of sex is associated with accumulation of deleterious mutations in Oenothera. Mol
Biol Evol. 2015;32:896–905.
55. Brandt A, Schaefer I, Glanz J, Schwander T, Maraun M, Scheu S, et al. Effective
purifying selection in ancient asexual oribatid mites. Nat Commun. Nature Publishing
Group; 2017;8:873.
56. Ament-Velásquez SL, Figuet E, Ballenghien M, Zattara EE, Norenburg JL,
Fernández-Álvarez FA, et al. Population genomics of sexual and asexual lineages in
fissiparous ribbon worms (Lineus, Nemertea): hybridization, polyploidy and the Meselson
effect. Mol Ecol. Wiley Online Library; 2016;25:3356–69.
57. Glover NM, Redestig H, Dessimoz C. Homoeologs: what are they and how do we
infer them? Trends Plant Sci. 2016;21:609–21.
58. Lokki J. Genetic polymorphism and evolution in parthenogenetic animals. VIII.
Heterozygosity in relation to polyploidy. Hereditas. 1976;83:65–72.
59. Schön I, Martens K, van Dijk P. Lost sex: the evolutionary biology of
parthenogenesis. Berlin: Springer; 2009.
60. Triantaphyllou AC. Oogenesis and the Chromosomes of the Parthenogenic Rootknot Nematode Meloidogyne incognita. J Nematol. 1981;13:95–104.
61. Mark Welch DB, Mark Welch JL, Meselson M. Evidence for degenerate tetraploidy in
bdelloid rotifers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105:5145–9.
62. Weir W, Capewell P, Foth B, Clucas C, Pountain A, Steketee P, et al. Population
genomics reveals the origin and asexual evolution of human infective trypanosomes.
Elife. 2016;5:1–14.
63. Rozen S, Skaletsky H, Marszalek JD, Minx PJ, Cordum HS, Waterston RH, et al.
Abundant gene conversion between arms of palindromes in human and ape Y
chromosomes. Nature. 2003;423:873–6.
64. Marais GAB, Campos PRA, Gordo I. Can intra-Y gene conversion oppose the
degeneration of the human Y chromosome? A simulation study. Genome Biol Evol.
2010;2:347–57.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

65. Trombetta B, Cruciani F. Y chromosome palindromes and gene conversion. Hum
Genet. 2017;136:605–19.
66. Fan S, Meyer A. Evolution of genomic structural variation and genomic architecture
in the adaptive radiations of African cichlid fishes. Front Genet. 2014;5:163.
67. Chen L, Chamberlain AJ, Reich CM, Daetwyler HD, Hayes BJ. Detection and
validation of structural variations in bovine whole-genome sequence data. Genet Sel
Evol. 2017;49:13.
68. Hum YF, Jinks-Robertson S. Mitotic gene conversion tracts associated with repair of
a defined double-strand break in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics. Genetics;
2017;207:115–28.
69. Lee PS, Greenwell PW, Dominska M, Gawel M, Hamilton M, Petes TD. A finestructure map of spontaneous mitotic crossovers in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. PLoS Genet. Public Library of Science; 2009;5:e1000410.
70. Keith N, Tucker AE, Jackson CE, Sung W, Lucas Lledó JI, Schrider DR, et al. High
mutational rates of large-scale duplication and deletion in Daphnia pulex. Genome Res.
2016;26:60–9.
71. Wicker T, Sabot F, Hua-Van A, Bennetzen JL. A unified classification system for
eukaryotic transposable elements. Nat Rev Genet. Nature Publishing Group;
2007;8:973–82.
72. Burt A, Trivers R. Genes in conflict: the biology of selfish genetic elements.
Cambridge: Belknapp Press; 2006.
73. Doolittle WF, Sapienza C. Selfish genes, the phenotype paradigm and genome
evolution. Nature. 1980;284:601–3.
74. Le Rouzic A, Boutin TS, Capy P. Long-term evolution of transposable elements.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104:19375–80.
75. Hua-Van A, Le Rouzic A, Boutin TS, Filée J, Capy P. The struggle for life of the
genome’s selfish architects. Biol Direct. BioMed Central Ltd; 2011;6:19.
76. Zeyl C, Bell G, Green DM. Sex and the spread of retrotransposon Ty3 in
experimental populations of Saccharomyces cerevisiae [Internet]. Genetics. 1996. p.
1567–77. Available from: http://www.genetics.org/content/143/4/1567.short
77. Nuzhdin SV, Petrov DA. Transposable elements in clonal lineages: lethal hangover
from sex. Biol J Linn Soc Lond. 2003;79:33–41.
78. Wright S, Finnegan D. Genome evolution: Sex and the transposable element. Curr
Biol. Elsevier; 2001;11:R296–9.
79. Dolgin ES, Charlesworth B. The fate of transposable elements in asexual
populations. Genetics. 2006;174:817–27.
80. Arkhipova I, Meselson M. Transposable elements in sexual and ancient asexual
taxa. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000;97:14473–7.
81. Canapa A, Barucca M, Biscotti MA, Forconi M, Olmo E. Transposons, genome size,
and evolutionary insights in animals. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2015;147:217–39.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

82. Bast J, Jaron KS, Schuseil D, Roze D, Schwander T. Asexual reproduction reduces
transposable element load in experimental yeast populations. Elife. 2019;8:e48548.
83. Charlesworth B, Langley CH. The evolution of self-regulated transposition of
transposable elements. Genetics. 1986;112:359–83.
84. Kofler R, Betancourt AJ, Schlötterer C. Sequencing of pooled DNA samples (PoolSeq) uncovers complex dynamics of transposable element insertions in Drosophila
melanogaster. PLoS Genet. 2012;8:e1002487.
85. Agren JA, Greiner S, Johnson MT, Wright SI. No evidence that sex and transposable
elements drive genome size variation in evening primroses. Evolution. 2015;69:1053–
62.
86. Aravin A a., Hannon GJ, Brennecke J. The Piwi-piRNA pathway provides an
adaptive defense in the transposon arms race. Science. 2007;318:761–4.
87. Agren JA, Wright SI. Co-evolution between transposable elements and their hosts: a
major factor in genome size evolution? Chromosome Res. 2011;19:777–86.
88. Romero-Soriano V, Modolo L, Lopez-Maestre H, Mugat B, Pessia E, Chambeyron S,
et al. Transposable element misregulation is linked to the divergence between parental
piRNA pathways in Drosophila hybrids. Genome Biol Evol. 2017;9:1450–70.
89. Fontdevila A. Hybrid genome evolution by transposition. Cytogenet Genome Res.
2005;110:49–55.
90. Danchin EGJ, Rosso M-N, Vieira P, de Almeida-Engler J, Coutinho PM, Henrissat B,
et al. Multiple lateral gene transfers and duplications have promoted plant parasitism
ability in nematodes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107:17651–6.
91. Gladyshev EA, Meselson M, Arkhipova IR. Massive horizontal gene transfer in
bdelloid rotifers. Science. 2008;320:1210–3.
92. Boschetti C, Carr A, Crisp A, Eyres I, Wang-Koh Y, Lubzens E, et al. Biochemical
Diversification through Foreign Gene Expression in Bdelloid Rotifers. Zhang J, editor.
PLoS Genet. 2012;8:e1003035.
93. Suzek BE, Wang Y, Huang H, McGarvey PB, Wu CH, UniProt Consortium. UniRef
clusters: a comprehensive and scalable alternative for improving sequence similarity
searches. Bioinformatics. 2015;31:926–32.
94. Lespinet O, Wolf YI, Koonin EV, Aravind L. The role of lineage-specific gene family
expansion in the evolution of eukaryotes. Genome Res. 2002;12:1048–59.
95. van der Kooi CJ, Schwander T. On the fate of sexual traits under asexuality. Biol
Rev Camb Philos Soc. 2014;89:805–19.
96. Schwander T, Crespi BJ, Gries R, Gries G. Neutral and selection-driven decay of
sexual traits in asexual stick insects. Proc Biol Sci. 2013;280:20130823.
97. Schurko AM, Logsdon JM. Using a meiosis detection toolkit to investigate ancient
asexual “scandals” and the evolution of sex. Bioessays. 2008;30:579–89.
98. Hanson SJ, Schurko AM, Hecox-Lea B, Welch DBM, Stelzer C-P, Logsdon JM Jr.
Inventory and phylogenetic analysis of meiotic genes in monogonont rotifers. J Hered.
2013;104:357–70.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

99. Tvedte ES, Forbes AA, Logsdon JM Jr. Retention of core meiotic genes across
diverse Hymenoptera. J Hered. 2017;108:791–806.
100. Wallach JD, Boyack KW, Ioannidis JPA. Reproducible research practices,
transparency, and open access data in the biomedical literature, 2015-2017. PLoS Biol.
2018;16:e2006930.
101. Simmons JP, Nelson LD, Simonsohn U. False-positive psychology: undisclosed
flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant.
Psychol Sci. 2011;22:1359–66.
102. Gelman A, Loken E. The garden of forking paths: Why multiple comparisons can be
a problem, even when there is no “fishing expedition” or “p-hacking” and the research
hypothesis was posited ahead of time. 2013; Available from:
http://www.stat.columbia.edu/~gelman/research/unpublished/p_hacking.pdf
103. Veresoglou SD, Halley JM, Rillig MC. Extinction risk of soil biota. Nat Commun.
2015;6:8862.
104. Norton RA, Palmer SC. The distribution, mechanisms and evolutionary significance
of parthenogenesis in oribatid mites. In: Schuster R, Murphy PW, editors. The Acari:
Reproduction, development and life-history strategies. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands;
1991. p. 107–36.
105. Archetti M. Complementation, genetic conflict, and the evolution of sex and
recombination. J Hered. 2010;101:21–33.
106. Archetti M. Recombination and loss of complementation: a more than two-fold cost
for parthenogenesis. J Evol Biol. Wiley Online Library; 2004;17:1084–97.
107. Szövényi P, Devos N, Weston DJ, Yang X, Hock Z, Shaw JA, et al. Efficient
purging of deleterious mutations in plants with haploid selfing. Genome Biol Evol.
2014;6:1238–52.
108. Glémin S, Ronfort J. Adaptation and maladaptation in selfing and outcrossing
species: new mutations versus standing variation. Evolution. 2013;67:225–40.
109. Stapley J, Feulner PGD, Johnston SE, Santure AW, Smadja CM. Recombination:
the good, the bad and the variable. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2017;372.
110. Bachtrog D. Y-chromosome evolution: emerging insights into processes of Ychromosome degeneration. Nat Rev Genet. Nature Publishing Group; 2013;14:113–24.
111. Lunt DH, Kumar S, Koutsovoulos G, Blaxter ML. The complex hybrid origins of the
root knot nematodes revealed through comparative genomics. PeerJ. 2014;2:e356.
112. Jiang H, Lei R, Ding S-W, Zhu S. Skewer: a fast and accurate adapter trimmer for
next-generation sequencing paired-end reads. BMC Bioinformatics. 2014;15:182.
113. Goubert C, Modolo L, Vieira C, ValienteMoro C, Mavingui P, Boulesteix M. De novo
assembly and annotation of the Asian tiger mosquito (Aedes albopictus) repeatome with
dnaPipeTE from raw genomic reads and comparative analysis with the yellow fever
mosquito (Aedes aegypti). Genome Biol Evol. 2015;7:1192–205.
114. Wang Y, Tang H, Debarry JD, Tan X, Li J, Wang X, et al. MCScanX: a toolkit for
detection and evolutionary analysis of gene synteny and collinearity. Nucleic Acids Res.
2012;40:e49.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

115. Consortium TU, The UniProt Consortium. UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein
knowledge. Nucleic Acids Research. 2019. p. D506–15.
116. Buchfink B, Xie C, Huson DH. Fast and sensitive protein alignment using
DIAMOND. Nature Methods. 2015. p. 59–60.
117. Handoo ZA, Nyczepir AP, Esmenjaud D, van der Beek JG, Castagnone-Sereno P,
Carta LK, et al. Morphological, molecular, and differential-host characterization of
Meloidogyne floridensis n. sp. (Nematoda: Meloidogynidae), a root-knot nematode
parasitizing peach in Florida. J Nematol. 2004;36:20–35.
118. Lahl V, Sadler B, Schierenberg E. Egg development in parthenogenetic nematodes:
variations in meiosis and axis formation. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50:393–8.
119. Pouchkina-Stantcheva NN, McGee BM, Boschetti C, Tolleter D, Chakrabortee S,
Popova A, Meersman F, et al. Functional Divergence of Former Alleles in an Ancient
Asexual Invertebrate. Science. 2007;318(5848):268-71
120. Martin P, Kohlmann K, Scholtz G. The parthenogenetic Marmorkrebs (marbled
crayfish) produces genetically uniform offspring. Naturwissenschaften. 2007;94:843–6.
121. Colbourne JK, Pfrender ME, Gilbert D, Thomas WK, Tucker A, Oakley TH, et al.
The ecoresponsive genome of Daphnia pulex. Science. 2011;331:555–61.
122. Waterhouse RM, Seppey M, Simão FA, Manni M, Ioannidis P, Klioutchnikov G, et
al. BUSCO applications from quality assessments to gene prediction and
phylogenomics. Mol Biol Evol. 2017;35:543–8.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary materials

Supplementary Figure 1: Genomic features studied in asexual genomes. The figure
mirrors the data from Figure 1, but with references to specific studies added (numbers
correspond to the references cited in the main text).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S1 Ploidy and reproductive mode of M. floridensis
The nematode M. floridensis was reported as a diploid species with a mechanism of
asexuality functionally equivalent to terminal fusion (absence of the 2nd meiotic division),
based on cytological analyses by Handoo et al. [117]. Our analyses indicate that M.
floridensis is triploid rather than diploid (Supplementary Figure 2), and the
heterozygosity detected in our and previous studies [117] is inconsistent with classical
terminal fusion (which should result in largely homozygous genomes, see Box 2 and
Figure 2). Terminal fusion can be associated with high heterozygosity under inverted
meiosis (which is most likely the case in nematodes of the genus Acrobeloides [118]).
However, inverted meiosis in M. floridensis is rather unlikely given that all other meiotic
species in the genus have regular meiosis. We therefore believe that the study of
Handoo et al. [117] is either based on an unusual M. floridensis strain that has not been
used in any genome study thus far or that the cytology inferred by Handoo et al is not
correct. These interpretations are further supported by the fact that Handoo et al report
on analyses of large numbers of males of M. floridensis, while males are
unknown/unusual for the strains used in the genome studies. Unfortunately, it is
impossible to evaluate the evidence that supported diploidy and terminal fusion in M.
floridensis as the study by Handoo et al does not include images of karyotypes or egg
cells at the basis of their conclusions. Given the genomic evidence is very clear, we
consider M. floridensis to be triploid for all our analyses and the cellular mechanism of
asexuality as “unknown”.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 2: Genomic evidence of triploidy in M. floridensis. a | the
smudgeplot shows dominance of a triploid (AAB) genome structure. The smudges
corresponding to higher ploïdies are likely originating from paralogs. The diploid kmer
pairs (AB) represent situations where the third allele is diverged from the two more than
one nucleotide. b | kmer spectra analysis of M. floridensis shows a typical triploid
genome structure with haploid, diploid and triploid peaks and expected distances from
each other.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S2 Haplotype structure of Adineta ricciae
The diploid genome assembly (i.e., where haplotypes are largely separated and present
in the assembly) of Adineta ricciae spans 201 Mbp and carries approximately 63,000
genes [19]. Analyses of assembled genome sections suggested a tetraploid genome
structure AABB similar to other bdelloid rotifers [19,61]. However, our reanalyses of the
A. ricciae sequencing reads with kmer spectra appear to be better consistent with an
octoploid structure, rather than tetraploid. The interpretation of kmer spectra in rotifers is
complicated by the fact that the A and B genomes are very highly diverged (in A. ricciae,
the average divergence between A and B is 33.21%, while the divergence within AA and
BB is 5.55%; Figure 2). Given this extreme divergence, A and B share practically no
kmers and therefore the kmer spectrum is expected to miss the homozygous peak at 4n
and therefore resemble the spectrum of a diploid species (with high heterozygosity).
However, if A. ricciae was indeed characterized by a tetraploid AABB genome structure,
the kmer spectrum should show a big haploid (n) peak at 124x coverage (as calculated
from the genome size and total sequencing reads), generated from variation within A
and B haplotypes. A second (2n) peak at ~248x would then be generated by
homozygous regions within A and B. However, the kmer spectrum of A. ricciae does not
follow these predictions (Supplementary Figure 3a). Instead, we observe three peaks:
a haploid peak at 71x coverage (partially overlapping with variation generated by
sequencing error), a diploid peak at 142x and a third, tetraploid peak at ~284x
(Supplementary Figure 3b). We verified that the 1n peak indeed contains
complementary kmers and therefore is not generated by sequencing errors or
contamination (Supplementary Figure 3c). If it is the case that homoeologous kmers
are entirely excluded from the kmer analyses, the resultant spectrum with three peaks
(n=71x, 2n~142x and 4n~284x) is incompatible with the proposed degenerate tetraploid
structure based on the current interpretation of the genome assembly [19]. Rather, these
patterns are better explained by a 2x higher ploidy level, i.e., to octoploidy. A simple

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

doubling in chromosome number in A. ricciae is not supported by the observation of 12
chromosomes in this species, the same as for A. vaga [119], and thus any increase in
ploidy level in A. ricciae would seem to be either complex or very recent. Alternatively,
the kmer peak at ~284x might be caused by collapse across all four subgenomes,
creating regions of the genome with 0% divergence across both homologous and
homoeologous copies. However, this hypothesis is at odds with observations of readand SNP-coverage from [19], that indicate the majority of the diploid assembly (~81%) is
twofold covered, consistent with the idea of large-scale increases in ploidy level. Finally,
it is not entirely precluded that the raw data itself, or the methods used to generate it,
contains some stratification that might produce a false signal of increased ploidy. Further
investigation of these alternative hypotheses will likely require additional data, such as
long-read sequencing technology, which is beyond the scope of the present study.
However, the likely differences in ploidy levels between A. vaga and A. ricciae preclude
a clear interpretation of the strikingly different allele divergences between these two
species.

Supplementary Figure 3: Genome profiling of A. ricciae. a | Genome model used in
our study. b | The best fit genome model supporting degenerate tetraploidy, which,
assuming homoeologs have no shared kmers in the rotifers, corresponds to degenerate
octoploidy (for a more detailed interpretation see Supplementary Material S2) c |

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

smudgeplot of A. ricciae indicating a 70x haploid coverage, and supporting the genome
model shown on panel b.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S3 Expected fraction of triallelic loci in triploid species
The observed biallelic and triallelic heterozygous loci can be indicative of the genome
structure only when compared to an expectation. Assuming heterozygous alleles are
randomly distributed across the genome we can generate a naive expectation of the
fraction of triallelic loci in triploid species (in the absence of fitness effects linked to
heterozygosity). This expectation is dependent on two variables: 1) how symmetric the
pairwise divergences between the three genomic copies are, and 2) the total
heterozygosity levels. In the main text (Figure 3) we report variation among triploid
species in the frequency of bi- and triallelic loci. To verify that this variation is not solely
generated by different total heterozygosity levels, we compared the observed proportion
of triallelic loci among species while taking the bias generated by total heterozygosity
levels into account. Consider a reference genome copy and two genome copies with
divergences to the reference d1 and d2. The total heterozygosity (h), as defined in Box 3,
of the genome is h = d1 + d2 - d1d2 and can be further decomposed into biallelic
heterozygosity (d1 + d2 - 2d1d2), and the triallelic heterozygosity (d1d2) as the overlap
between the divergences d1 and d2. Note that the overlap is the highest in a genome with
equidistant divergence of the genomic copies (d1 = d2). Given a heterozygosity h, the
expected triallelic heterozygosity can be expressed as dtri = (1 - sqrt(1 - h))2.
This expectation does not correspond to the biological reality as genomes contain many
regions with elevated or reduced heterozygosity but it allows us to compare genomes
while correcting for the bias generated by different total heterozygosity levels. The
frequencies of triallelic loci remain highly variable among the five triploid species even
after correcting for this bias (Supplementary Figure 4), meaning the conclusions in the
main text are supported even when we correct for total heterozygosity levels.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 4: Fraction of triallelic loci according to the total
heterozygosity. We observe two distinct groups of triploid species. The crayfish (Pvir1)
and M. floridensis (Mflo1) have a much smaller proportion of triallelic loci than the three
other species, even when values are adjusted for a bias generated by total
heterozygosity. The expectation was calculated as the overlap of heterozygosity in a
genome with equidistant divergence (See Supplementary Materials S3)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S4 Suggestive hybrid origin of the marbled crayfish
Previously it has been suggested that the triploid asexual crayfish Procambarus
virginalis is an autopolyploid linage derived from diploid sexual P. fallax [120]. The main
arguments for autopolyploidy (instead of allopolyploidy) are that P. virginalis and P. fallax
are morphologically very similar and that P. virginalis does not carry any morphological
trait of any other closely related crayfish. Our analysis revealed two nearly identical
genome copies (Figure 3) supporting endoduplication (i.e., autopolyploidy) as a source
of triploidy. However, it also revealed the presence of a highly diverged genome copy,
suggesting hybridization between at least highly diverged strains or populations, if not
species.

Specifically, the heterozygosity estimate for the asexual triploid P. virginalis is ~1.8%
(Supplementary Figure 5a). Assuming endoduplication, this heterozygosity is
generated by the third haplotype, diverged from the two identical copies. If so, we expect
~1.8% to also be the heterozygosity of sexual P. fallax individuals, the sexual sister
species of P. virginalis. The heterozygosity of P. fallax is, however, much lower (~0.76%;
Supplementary Figure 5b). This suggests that at least one of the haplotypes was
acquired from a more diverged population via hybridization. However, to conclusively
determine the origin of P. virginalis, we would need to better understand the population
genetic diversity of sexual P. fallax and haplotype structures in P. virginalis.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 5: Genome profiling in crayfishes. a | A triploid genome
model in asexual P. virginalis estimates heterozygosity to 1.79%. b | A diploid genome
model in its sexual sister species P. fallax estimates a similar genome size, but
substantially lower heterozygosity (0.76%). However, the quality of fit is less conclusive
as the error peak (red) and haploid peak (leftmost black) largely overlap.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S5 Palindrome detection
Palindromes are formed of two homologous reverse complementary sequences on the
same chromosome (Supplementary Figure 6). Palindromes can facilitate gene
conversion and therefore help to escape mutational meltdown via Muller’s ratchet
[64,65]. To test if they play such a role in asexual organisms we identified palindromes
using colinearity analysis imlplemented in the program MCScanX [114]. The default
parameters of the software (used in the genome studies of asexual species, personal
communication of the authors of [18,26]) define a collinear block as a sequence of at
least 5 genes that are no more than 25 genes apart from each other and then search for
such blocks with palindromic arrangement. We have reanalysed the genomes allowing
for short palindromes of a single gene, because a palindrome could carry fewer than five
genes and still be biologically relevant. Detected collinear blocks were filtered to contain
only reverse complementary collinear blocks on the same chromosome, since only such
structures have the capacity to form a hairpin (Supplementary Figure 6).

We note that it is important to check consistency between the biological interpretation of
results, and the methods used to infer them. The bioinformatics pipelines used to detect
palindromes are geared towards detecting large repeated blocks with large gaps. We
argue that small blocks (as small as one gene), but with no gaps within the inverted
repeat may also generate gene conversion. Thus, re-screening the published genomes
for palindromes allowed us to provide a more robust and unbiased view of the
importance of palindromes for the evolution of asexual species.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 6: Palindrome structure. The two homologous reverse
complementary regions (arms) of a palindrome are located on the same chromosome.
This organisation allows for the formation of a hairpin and can facilitate gene conversion
between the palindrome arms.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 7: Transposable elements with respect to reproduction
mode and hybrid origin. Neither hybrid origin (p-value = 1) nor cellular mechanism of
asexuality (p-value = 0.84) are strong drivers of the TE content in asexual animals.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S6 Impact of databases on detection of HGT detection
To ascertain the robustness of the detected high levels of HGTC in the seven species
presented in the main text, we also computed hU based on alignments to the manually
curated UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (i.e., highly conservative) database. The proportion of
HGTC based on comparisons to UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot was substantially lower in F.
candida (3.15%), O. biroi (0.74%) and T. pretiosum (2.36%) than that for UniRef90 (but
higher for some other taxa, see Supplementary Table S4), highlighting the sensitivity of
such analyses on the sequence databases used. The proportion of HGTC observed in
bdelloid rotifers also dropped, relative to comparisons against UniRef (3.64 - 5.11%), but
remain high relative to other taxa. The impact of the specific database used for HGT
detection may be driven by potential taxonomic misclassifications and/or contamination
in one or both public databases, or biases in the representative taxa contained within
particular databases (e.g., UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot is biased towards a relatively small
number of model species). A full investigation of the true composition of public sequence
repositories is a major piece of work that is beyond the scope of the current work.

Overall our analysis showed that high levels of HGT are not a general feature linked to
asexuality but a clade specific trait of bdelloid rotifers and perhaps of hexapods.
However, it is important to note that our analysis does not quantify absolute levels of
HGT in any of the taxa; instead, we show the dependency of such estimates on the
chosen methodology.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S7 Variation in estimated TE loads
We estimated the TE loads in each genome via assembly of overrepresented (i.e.,
repetitive) genomic sequences and subsequent annotation via homology searches in
general databases (see methods). This can result in an underestimation of TE loads in
species with many TE types with very low copy numbers (as is the case in A. ricciae and
A. vaga [18–20]) and in phylogenetically isolated lineages such as rotifers and
tardigrades which may comprise divergent TEs not represented in general databases.
However, this is unlikely to be the sole reason behind the low TE content of asexuals
reported in our study since the methods we used allowed us to identify similar or higher
TE loads in all species without manually curated TE libraries (Figures 1 and 4). Manual
curation (available for D. pulex and A. vaga among the species in Figure 1) generally
increases TE load estimations. For example, manual curation of TEs in the Daphnia
genome increased estimated TE loads from approximately 9.6% to 17-27% [121]. In A.
vaga, the recent discovery of a new TE family during manual curation increased the
latest TE load estimate to nearly 4% [20].

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S8 Conserved gene content
We aimed to provide insights into gene duplications and losses by quantifying conserved
single copy orthologs (BUSCO genes) [122]. BUSCO genes are defined as a set of
genes that are present as a single copy in at least 90% of species inventoried in a
curated database. All of the species used to build this database are sexual, and we
initially hypothesised that both higher duplication rates and gene losses in asexual as
compared to sexual species could be reflected in the percentages of missing and
duplicated BUSCO genes in the analyzed asexual genomes. However, organisms that
are highly heterozygous are prone to generating separate assembly of homologous
haplotypes. In such split genome assemblies, BUSCO genes will falsely appear to be
duplicated. To investigate whether split haplotype assemblies are of concern in the
analyzed asexual genomes, we deduced the level of haplotype splitting in the
assembled genomes by dividing the length of each assembly by the haploid genome
size estimated from the read data with genomescope (higher frequencies of separate
haplotype assemblies result in higher assembly length to haploid genome size ratios).
We indeed found that BUSCO genes appear to be duplicated in genome assemblies
consisting of split haplotypes, with the highest level of “artificial duplication” found in
polyploid species of hybrid origin (Supplementary Figure 8a).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 8: Conserved single copy orthologs. a | the fraction of
duplicated BUSCO genes is correlated to the ratio of assembly length to haploid genome
size. b I yellow bars show a proportion of BUSCO genes found in individual genomes.
The dashed line indicates the expected level.

Supplementary table 1: Overview of analysed species. This information was collected directly from the cited literature. References include information
regarding cellular mode of reproduction, origin of asexuality and/or the age of asexuality.
species

common name

NCBI accesion

reproduction mode

evidence

Poecilia formosa

amazon molly

SAMN01797685

sperm-dependent
apomixis
apomixis
apomixis
apomixis
apomixis

cytology, genetics

SAMN02047179
SAMN02439301

gamete duplication2
gamete duplication1

cytology
cytology, genetic markers

SAMN02428046
SAMN10245904
SAMN10245905
SAMN10245906

central fusion automixis
central fusion automixis

Adineta vaga
Adineta ricciae
Rotaria macrura
Rotaria
magnacalcarata
Leptopilina clavipes
Trichogramma
pretiosum
Ooceraea biroi 3
Apis mellifera
capensis

bdelloid
bdelloid
bdelloid
bdelloid

rotifer
rotifer
rotifer
rotifer

parasitoid wasp
trichogramma
wasp
raider ant
cape honey bee

Aptinothrips rufus
Folsomia candida

thrip
springtail

Daphnia pulex

water flea

Procambarus
virginalis
Plectus sambesii

marbled
crayfish
nemotode

Mesorhabditis belari

nemotode

1

SAMEA2043852
SAMEA104393659
SAMEA104393678
SAMEA104393684

SAMN03964753
SAMN03964750
SAMN07142640

gamete duplication4
terminal fusion
automixis3
central fusion automixis
equivalent
apomixis

SAMN07227113

endoduplication

SAMEA5150020

unknown automixis

SAMN04196550

cytology
cytology
no direct evidence1
no direct evidence1

age of
asexuality [y]
100 k

[1]
[2, 3]
[3, 4]

no
no

6-43 k
”few”

[5]
[6, 7]

cytology, RAD seq
cytology

no
no

20

[8]
[9]

no
no

150-200 k

cytology

[10]
[11]

yes

1-170 k

[12]

less than 30

[13–15]

No separation at meiosis I;
abortive meiosis
microsat study, histological
evidence
2 meiotic divisions, 2 polar
bodies, but no fusions were
observed
cytology; 2 meiotic divisions
observed

46
46
46
46

references

M
M
M
M

Meiosis was not observed in any of the bdelloid rotifers including Philodina roseola, a member of Philodinidae, the same family as Rotaria.
induced
3 formerly Cerapachys biroi
4 suggested that it’s endosymbiont induced
2 Wolbachia

hybrid
origin
yes

[16]

[17]

Diploscapter
coronatus

nemotode

SAMD00025087

automixis central fusion

Diploscapter pachys

nematode

SAMN03456257

central fusion automixis
equivalent

Panagrolaimus
davidi
Acrobeloides nanus

nemotode

SAMN02741088

unknown automixis

nemotode

SAMN06041019

Meloidogyne
incognita
Meloidogyne
javanica
Meloidogyne
arenaria

root-knot
nematode
root-knot
nematode
root-knot
nematode

yes

”recently”

[21–23]

apomixis

yes

”recently”

[23]

apomixis

yes

”recently”

[23]

Meloidogyne
floridensis
Meloidogyne
enterolobii
Hypsibius dujardini

peach root-knot
nematode
root-knot
nematode
tardigrade;
water bear
tardigrade;
water bear;
Kumamushi

SAMEA104032784
SAMN05712521
SAMEA3298191
SAMN05712519
SAMEA3298190
SAMN05712513
SAMN08721831
SAMN05712529

terminal fusion
equivalent
apomixis

yes

”recently”

[23, 24]

yes

”recently”

[23]

Ramazzottius
varieornatus

5 Assuming
6 personal

unknown automixis

SAMN05712528

apomixis

SAMEA3679301

automixis terminal
fusion equivalent

SAMD00054187

non-hybrid origin suggested by Hiraki at al. 2017.
communication with Mark Blaxter

Only 1 meiotic division,
given heterozygosity, must
be separation of chromatids
(would probably mean
meiosis is inverted)
meiosis I skipped, no
recombination, only sister
chromatid separation - a
model
cytology; polar body
produced

yes

[16, 18]

yes

18 M5

[19]

yes

1.3-8.5 M

[20]
[16]

cytology; mismatch in
ploidy (see S1)

meiosis II suppressed
no males have been found

[25]
6

References
[1] Lamatsch DK, Steinlein C, Schmid M, Schartl M. Noninvasive determination of genome size and ploidy level in fishes by flow cytometry: detection of triploid
Poecilia formosa. Cytometry. 2000 feb;39(2):91–95. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1097-0320(20000201)39:2<91::aid-cyto1>3.0.
co;2-4.
[2] Welch JLM, Meselson M. Karyotypes of bdelloid rotifers from three families. Hydrobiologia. 1998;387/387:403–407. Available from: https://doi.org/10.
1023/a:1017007131386.
[3] Welch DBM, Meselson M. Oocyte nuclear DNA content and GC proportion in rotifers of the anciently asexual Class Bdelloidea. Biological Journal of the
Linnean Society. 2003 may;79(1):85–91. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1095-8312.2003.00180.x.
[4] Pouchkina-Stantcheva NN, McGee BM, Boschetti C, Tolleter D, Chakrabortee S, Popova AV, et al. Functional Divergence of Former Alleles in an Ancient
Asexual Invertebrate. Science. 2007 oct;318(5848):268–271. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1144363.
[5] Pannebakker BA, Pijnacker LP, Zwaan BJ, Beukeboom LW. Cytology of Wolbachia-induced parthenogenesis in Leptopilina clavipes (Hymenoptera: Figitidae). Genome. 2004 apr;47(2):299–303. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1139/g03-137.
[6] Ardila-Garcia AM, Umphrey GJ, Gregory TR. An expansion of the genome size dataset for the insect order Hymenoptera, with a first test of parasitism
and eusociality as possible constraints. Insect Molecular Biology. 2010 feb;19(3):337–346. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2583.2010.
00992.x.
[7] Gokhman VE, Pereira FF, Costa MA. A cytogenetic study of three parasitic wasp species (Hymenoptera, Chalcidoidea, Eulophidae, Trichogrammatidae)
from Brazil using chromosome morphometrics and base-specific fluorochrome staining. Comparative Cytogenetics. 2017 mar;11(1):179–188. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.3897/compcytogen.v11i1.11706.
[8] Oxley PR, Ji L, Fetter-Pruneda I, McKenzie SK, Li C, Hu H, et al. The Genome of the Clonal Raider Ant Cerapachys biroi. Current Biology. 2014
feb;24(4):451–458. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.01.018.
[9] Verma S, Ruttner F. Cytological analysis of the thelytokous parthenogenesis in the Cape honeybee (Apis mellifera capensis Escholtz). Apidologie.
1983;14(1):41–57.
[10] Fontcuberta Garcı́a-Cuenca A, Dumas Z, Schwander T. Extreme genetic diversity in asexual grass thrips populations. Journal of evolutionary biology.
2016;29(5):887–899.
[11] Riparbelli MG, Giordano R, Callaini G. Centrosome inheritance in the parthenogenetic egg of the collembolan Folsomia candida. Cell and Tissue Research.
2006 aug;326(3):861–872. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00441-006-0253-x.
[12] Hiruta C, Nishida C, Tochinai S. Abortive meiosis in the oogenesis of parthenogenetic Daphnia pulex. Chromosome Research. 2010;18(7):833–840.
[13] Vogt G, Tolley L, Scholtz G. Life stages and reproductive components of the Marmorkrebs (marbled crayfish), the first parthenogenetic decapod crustacean.
Journal of Morphology. 2004;261(3):286–311. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1002/jmor.10250.

[14] Martin P, Thonagel S, Scholtz G. The parthenogenetic Marmorkrebs (Malacostraca: Decapoda: Cambaridae) is a triploid organism. Journal of Zoological
Systematics and Evolutionary Research. 2015 nov;54(1):13–21. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1111/jzs.12114.
[15] Vogt G, Falckenhayn C, Schrimpf A, Schmid K, Hanna K, Panteleit J, et al. The marbled crayfish as a paradigm for saltational speciation by autopolyploidy
and parthenogenesis in animals. Biology open. 2015;p. bio–014241.
[16] Lahl V, Sadler B, Schierenberg E. Egg development in parthenogenetic nematodes: variations in meiosis and axis formation. The International Journal of
Developmental Biology. 2006;50(4):393–397. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1387/ijdb.052030vl.
[17] Grosmaire M, Launay C, Siegwald M, Brugière T, Estrada-Virrueta L, Berger D, et al. Males as somatic investment in a parthenogenetic nematode. Science.
2019;363(6432):1210–1213.
[18] Hiraki H, Kagoshima H, Kraus C, Schi↵er PH, Ueta Y, Kroiher M, et al. Genome analysis of Diploscapter coronatus: insights into molecular peculiarities
of a nematode with parthenogenetic reproduction. BMC Genomics. 2017 jun;18(1). Available from: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-017-3860-x.
[19] Fradin H, Kiontke K, Zegar C, Gutwein M, Lucas J, Kovtun M, et al. Genome Architecture and Evolution of a Unichromosomal Asexual Nematode. Current
Biology. 2017 oct;27(19):2928–2939.e6. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.08.038.
[20] Schi↵er PH, Danchin E, Burnell AM, Schi↵er AM, Creevey C, Wong S, et al. Signatures of the evolution of parthenogenesis and cryptobiosis in panagrolaimid
nematodes. bioRxiv. 2018;Available from: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2018/06/27/159152.
[21] Triantaphyllou A. Oogenesis and the Chromosomes of the Parthenogenic Root-knot Nematode Meloidogyne incognita. Journal of nematology. 1981;13(2):95.
[22] Van der Beek JG, Los JA, Pijnacker LP. Cytology of parthenogenesis of five Meloidogyne species. Fundamental and applied nematology. 1998;21(4):393–399.
[23] Lunt DH, Kumar S, Koutsovoulos G, Blaxter ML. The complex hybrid origins of the root knot nematodes revealed through comparative genomics. PeerJ.
2014;2:e356.
[24] Handoo Z, Nyczepir A, Esmenjaud D, Van der Beek J, Castagnone-Sereno P, Carta L, et al. Morphological, molecular, and di↵erential-host characterization
of Meloidogyne floridensis n. sp.(Nematoda: Meloidogynidae), a root-knot nematode parasitizing peach in Florida. Journal of nematology. 2004;36(1):20.
[25] Ammermann D. Die Cytologie der Parthenogenese bei dem Tardigraden Hypsibius dujardini. Chromosoma. 1967;23(2):203–213. Available from: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/bf00331113.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/497495; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Table 2: Genomic features calculated from raw data. We used
unified methods to estimate basic genomic properties directly from sequencing reads.
Ploidy was estimated using smudgeplot for all species but A. vaga (see section
Heterozygosity structure in polyploids for details). Genome size, heterozygosity and
repeats were estimated using GenomeScope. Repeats denote the fraction of the
genome occurring in more than one copy. The classified repeats, TEs and other types of
classified repeats, were estimated using DnaPipeTE.
https://github.com/KamilSJaron/genomic-features-of-asexualanimals/blob/master/tables/genome_table_infered_from_reads.tsv

Supplementary Table 3: genome assemblies: size, number of scaffolds, N50,
BUSCO, number of annotated genes. Statistics were calculated from the published
genome assemblies and genome annotations shared by authors. BUSCO genes were
searched using the metazoan database for all the non-nematode species. Nematodes
are notoriously known for the high turnover of genes and we therefore used nematode
specific BUSCO genes. The number of annotated genes were calculated as the number
of lines in the annotation with the tag “gene”.
https://github.com/KamilSJaron/genomic-features-of-asexualanimals/blob/master/tables/assembly_table.tsv

*The number of genes was extracted using the tag “mRNA” since the keyword “gene”
was not in the annotation file of Diploscapter coronatus.

Supplementary Table 4: A complete overview of horizontal gene transfer analysis.
https://github.com/KamilSJaron/genomic-features-of-asexualanimals/blob/master/tables/HGT_table.tsv

