bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Cellular Molecular Life Sciences manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

The common message of constraint-based optimization
approaches: overflow metabolism is caused by two
growth-limiting constraints
Daan H. de Groot · Julia Lischke · Riccardo Muolo · Robert Planqué ·
Frank J. Bruggeman · Bas Teusink

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Living cells can express different metabolic
pathways that support growth. The criteria that determine which pathways are selected in which environment remain unclear. One recurrent selection is overflow metabolism: the simultaneous usage of an ATPefficient and -inefficient pathway, shown for example
in Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and cancer cells. Many models, based on different assumptions,
can reproduce this observation. Therefore, they provide no conclusive evidence which mechanism is causDHdG and BT acknowledge NWO VICI grant 865.14.005,
JL thanks EraCoBiotech grant YogurtDesign (NWO grant
053.80.733) and RM acknowledges ITN SynCrop (grant
agreement No 764591) for financial support
Daan H. de Groot
Systems Bioinformatics, AIMMS, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, NL-1081HZ
E-mail: d.h.de.groot@vu.nl
Julia Lischke
Systems Bioinformatics, AIMMS, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, NL-1081HZ
Riccardo Muolo
Systems Bioinformatics, AIMMS, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, NL-1081HZ
Robert Planque
Department of Mathematics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam,
NL-1081HV
Frank J. Bruggeman
Systems Bioinformatics, AIMMS, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, NL-1081HZ
Bas Teusink
Systems Bioinformatics, AIMMS, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, NL-1081HZ
E-mail: b.teusink@vu.nl

ing overflow metabolism. We compare the mathematical structure of these models. Although ranging from
Flux Balance Analyses to self-fabricating Metabolism
and Expression models, we can rewrite all models into
one standard form. We conclude that all models predict
overflow metabolism when two, model-specific, growthlimiting constraints are hit. This is consistent with recent theory. Thus, identifying these two constraints is
essential for understanding overflow metabolism. We
list all imposed constraints by these models, so that
they can hopefully be tested in future experiments.
Keywords Overflow metabolism · Growth rate
maximization · Genome-scale modeling · Metabolism
and Expression · Elementary Flux Modes · Elementary
Growth Modes

1 Introduction
Many cells show overflow metabolism: the simultaneous
metabolism of nutrients by an energy-efficient and a less
energy-efficient pathway. For example, Escherichia coli,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and cancer cells fully oxidize
carbon sources to CO2 when growing slowly. Above a
species-specific critical growth rate, a partial oxidation
pathway kicks in, resulting in the production of overflow
metabolites: acetate, ethanol and lactate respectively
[1–3]. Lactococcus lactis shows a similar metabolic shift
from mixed-acid fermentation (3 ATP per glucose) to
lactic-acid fermentation (2 ATP per glucose) under anaerobic conditions [4]. Besides overflow metabolism that
starts at high growth rates, Escherichia coli even produces overflow products at low growth rates when growing in ammonium-limited conditions [5].
Overflow metabolism seems wasteful because two
metabolic pathways are used that independently sup-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

2

port growth, and one of them is more efficient (it has a
higher ATP yield per glucose molecule) than the other.
Since cells need energy for growth, efficient usage of nutrients is expected to be favourable. One would therefore expect that cells using the efficient growth strategy
exclusively would be selected during evolution.
The counterintuitive occurrence of overflow metabolism is in many studies explained using constraintbased optimization approaches. These approaches assume that cellular growth is constrained by physical
and chemical limits, and that cells are driven towards
these limits when evolutionary fitness is maximized. Accordingly, the behavior of cells results from maximizing
their growth rate given a set of constraints.
Since many models reproduce the experimental data
while using different biological assumptions, it is unclear what exactly causes overflow metabolism. Therefore, we need a way to analyze and compare these different models to find the cause of overflow metabolism.
Minimal, growth-supporting metabolic modes are characterized mathematically by identifying the smallest
subnetworks of the entire metabolic network that can
support growth. Such subnetworks are called Elementary Flux Modes (EFMs) in metabolic models [6], and
Elementary Growth Modes (EGMs) in self-fabrication
models [7] (see SI1 for a short introduction and comparison of EFMs and EGMs). The gradual transition from
the usage of one metabolic subnetwork to the mixed
usage of two subnetworks that is observed in overflow
metabolism indicates the simultaneous usage of two different Elementary Modes.
In recent theoretical work [7,8] we derived that cells
that maximize their growth rate will only use two Elementary Modes if they are confronted with at least two
constraints. The identification of these constraints is
therefore an important step towards finding the mechanistic cause of overflow metabolism. In this review, we
use this theory to compare the various models of overflow metabolism by making the growth-limiting constraints explicit.
Although the models range from relatively simple
Flux Balance Analyses to genome-scale self-fabrication
models, we will show that they can all be written in
the same concise standard form. Thus, the models are
highly similar: (a proxy for) the cellular growth rate is
maximized subject to two constraints. However, the biological assumptions underlying the imposed constraints
differ between those models. Hence, the success of these
models is dependent on the existence of two constraints
and not on the precise biological interpretation of those
constraints. Finding the causes of overflow metabolism
therefore amounts to identifying the two active growth-

de Groot, Lischke, Muolo, Planqué, Bruggeman, Teusink

limiting constraints and experimentally testing them.
We shall conclude that the models each offer a hypothesis that needs to be tested in falsification experiments
in the future.

2 A standard form for overflow metabolism
models
We will show that, to our knowledge, all existing models
that use growth rate maximization to explain overflow
metabolism, can be rewritten in a standard form.
We will assume that a cell adapts its state to grow
as fast as possible whenever it encounters a new environment. The cellular state is specified by optimization
variables, for example the reaction rates (v) or the enzyme concentrations (e). We will denote the optimization variables by the vector x, the ith entry of which is
denoted by xi . The growth rate is modeled as a linear
function: the objective function:
objective(x) =

n
X

w i xi ,

i=1

where wi is the weighting factor of variable i. The growth
rate maximization of the cell is modeled mathematically by searching for the set of optimization variables
that maximizes the objective function, given constraints
to be specified later. Because the objective function is
linear, there is a certain direction in the space of optimization variables in which the objective always increases. The optimal solution is the set of optimization
variables that is as far in that direction as possible.
Not all combinations of optimization variables can
be chosen due to constraints, for example a limited uptake rate, or a limited available area for membrane proteins. These constraints are formalized by inequalities
acting on a weighted sum of the variables:
n
X

aj xj ≤ b,

j=1

where aj determines the ‘cost’ of increasing the j th variable. In the special case that aj = 0, xj is not bounded
by this constraint. In general, we could have several,
say m, constraints. These constraints can be collected
in an m×n matrix A, where the ith row captures the ith
constraint. All constraints can then be written together
as:
A · x ≤ b.
The constraints can be viewed as planes bounding the
feasible combinations of variables (see Figure 1). After
all constraints have been implemented, we are left with

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Overflow metabolism is caused by two constraints

3

Fig. 1 A general view on overflow metabolism and how it is modeled. In general, overflow metabolism is the
simultaneous usage of two independent growth-supporting subnetworks with different substrate yields. In the top left subfigure,
the blue pathway produces more energy equivalents per gram nutrient than the red pathway. Together with the non-depicted
rest of the metabolic network, the blue and red pathway can separately lead to steady state growth. In the top right
subfigure, we illustrate that imposing homogeneous constraints, in this case a steady state assumption, gives rise to relations
between optimization variables. The optimization variables can for example be reaction rates or enzyme concentrations, but
for simplicity, we only show one variable here. The model objective is here visualized along the y-axis, so that the combination
of variables that gives the highest y-coordinate is optimal. In the bottom figures, we add inhomogeneous constraints on the
optimization variables. These affect which combination of variables is optimal. Under one constraint, exclusive usage of the
high-yield pathway is optimal. Adding the second constraint leads to the optimality of a combination of the two pathways.

an angular space called the solution space. Solving the
optimization problem amounts to selecting the point
in this space that maximizes the objective function. It
can be shown that there is always a corner point of the
solution space (called vertex) in which this optimum is
attained.
In this review, we will use these concepts to extract
the mathematical cores of all overflow metabolism models (that we could find) and rewrite them in the following standard form.1
n
X
maximize
wi xi
x

i=1

subject to A · x ≤ b

called homogeneous when the corresponding weighted
sum of the variables equals zero, i.e., b = 0, and inhomogeneous otherwise. Examples of homogeneous constraints that we will define later in this review are the
steady state constraint and irreversibility constraints.
When all constraints of A are homogeneous, the solution space is unbounded; it can be visualized as an infinitely stretched angular cone. The optimization problem will in this case not have a finite maximum. Inhomogeneous constraints can make the cone bounded; this
will be especially important in modeling overflow metabolism. We will therefore highlight them by presenting
them separate from the rest of the constraints.

(1)

xi ≥ 0.
The constraints in A can be homogeneous and inhomogeneous, see Figure 1 and its caption. A constraint is
1

We use a different standard form than the standard form
that is used in Linear Programming. We found that our form
better serves our purposes, but in SI2 we show that the two
forms are equivalent.

3 Current explanations of mixed behaviour and
their mathematical background
Next, we will discuss published models made to explain
overflow metabolism that use growth rate maximization. We will start with the modeling approaches that

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

4

de Groot, Lischke, Muolo, Planqué, Bruggeman, Teusink

are the easiest to understand, and gradually build up
complexity, ending with self-fabrication models.

which is equivalent to the standard form that we introduced in Equation (1) (see the Supporting Information
for the appropriate choice of w, A, x, b).

FBA models have been used to explain overflow metabolism, mathematically capturing the reasoning of AnFlux Balance Analysis studies the sets of reaction rates
dersen and von Meyenburg [10] in 1980: ”If, however,
(fluxes) through a metabolic network (say with m metabo- respiration is limited, by-product formation can lead
lites and r reactions) that can reach a steady state. A
to extra ATP production and to faster growth, prosteady state is attained when the net rate of producvided the by-product can be generated with a net gain
tion of each metabolite is equal to the net rate of its
of ATP.” The imposed flux bounds differ between the
consumption. The stoichiometry of all reactions is demodels, although all models consider a limited uptake
scribed by the stoichiometric matrix, N , which has m
rate for the carbon source. For example, Majewski and
rows and r columns. Each row corresponds to the mass
Domach [11] further propose that E. coli might have
balance of a metabolite and contains the stoichiometa limited electron transfer capacity, while Varma and
ric coefficients of this metabolite in all reactions. When
Palsson [12] assume that oxygen uptake is limited, and
N is multiplied by the rate vector, we get the ‘massthat a certain amount of ATP should be produced even
balance constraints’:
if the cell is not growing. This leads to the following
FBA problem:
N · v = 0.
maximize vBM
v
In this review we will consider all reactions to be irsubject to N · v = 0
(3)
reversible; we can always split up a reversible reaction
vi ≥ 0
into one forward and one backward reaction, resulting
in:
vO2 ,uptake ≤ 15
vi ≥ 0.
vGlc,uptake ≤ 10.5
These steady state and irreversibility constraints are
vATP,maintenance ≥ 7.6.
the homogeneous constraints. As mentioned before, the
Carlson and Srienc [13,14] also model growth rate maxispace of flux vectors that satisfy these constraints is
mization under glucose- and oxygen-limitation, but take
unbounded.
a different approach. Instead of finding only the optiIn addition, flux bounds can be imposed. Upper
mal solution, they characterize the whole steady-state
bounds, denoted ubi , are for example imposed to model
solution space by enumerating the EFMs of a coarsea limited capacity of the cell for the corresponding regrained E. coli network (see SI1 for an explanation
action. Lower bounds, denoted lbi , are for instance used
about EFMs). Using their acquired knowledge of all
to model the production of ATP for non-growth assopossible solutions, the authors select four Elementary
ciated maintenance. This gives
Flux Modes. Under any level of glucose and oxygen limitation, two of these EFMs together form the optimal
lbi ≤ vi ≤ ubi .
solution. The simultaneous usage of these EFMs leads
In FBA, we are mostly interested in those flux vectors,
to overflow metabolism.
v, that maximize some proxy for the growth rate. For
this, the so-called biomass reaction, vBM [9], is added
3.2 FBA models with thermodynamic constraints
to the model: a phenomenological reaction that pro3.1 Flux Balance Analysis models

duces all cellular compounds in the right proportions,
and thereby approximates the demands for cell synthesis.
The full problem can now be written as
maximize vBM
v

subject to N · v = 0
vi ≥ 0
lbi ≤ vi ≤ ubi ,

(2)

FBA models can be refined by adding thermodynamic
constraints [15, 16]. The laws of thermodynamics dictate that a chemical reaction can only have a positive
rate if the summed Gibbs free energy of the reaction
substrates is higher than of the reaction products, i.e.,
if the free energy change due to the reaction is negative, denoted by: ∆r G0 < 0. By using this, one for
example excludes cycles like A → B → C → A from
carrying a positive flux, since such a cycle has zero thermodynamic driving force [17]. The free energy change

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Overflow metabolism is caused by two constraints

5

due to a reaction depends on the concentrations of the
involved metabolites, but these are usually not modeled in FBA approaches. Most thermodynamic FBA
approaches thus need some way to estimate either these
metabolite concentrations, or the ∆r G0 -values directly.
There are also some methods where this estimation step
can be avoided, at the expense of the thermodynamic
constraints becoming less restrictive (see [16] for an
overview of thermodynamic FBA methods).
Recently, Niebel et al. combined growth rate maximization and a thermodynamic constraint to describe
overflow metabolism [18]. In their approach, the metabolite concentrations and the reaction rates are free variables, although the metabolite concentrations are provided with an upper and lower bound based on experimental measurements. The authors search for the optimal concentrations and rates so that the biomass production rate is maximized. This search is constrained
by the second law of thermodynamics, implying that
the free energy change induced by an active reaction
should be negative: ∆r G0j (c) < 0 for reactions with
vj > 0. These homogeneous constraints take the place
of the irreversibility constraints that were used in FBA
models, where the directionality is now based on the
sign of the Gibbs free energy change.
If we add up all these free energy changes induced
by the chemical reactions, we get the total
P dissipated
Gibbs energy per unit time: g diss = − j ∆r G0j (c)vj .
The authors observed in experiments that this dissipation function appears to have a maximum at the onset
of overflow metabolism. Therefore, they propose that
the dissipated energy might be limited by an upper
bound,
diss
g diss ≤ glim
.

(4)

In addition, another constraint is imposed ensuring that
the free energy dissipated by internal reactions equals
the free energy that is extracted from external nutrients. However, after a careful examination of the mathematics used in [18] (see SI4), we believe that this constraint should be equivalent to the steady state assumption, so that we could ignore it here. If it turns out
that we are wrong, the constraint can be added to the
problem below, without affecting the conclusions of this
review.
This modeling approach is no longer linear in the
variables because the ∆r G0j (c)-values can depend nonlinearly on the metabolite concentrations. However, for
any fixed set of metabolite concentrations, c = c0 , the
model reduces to a Linear Program that can be written in our standard form (see SI3.2 for the appropriate

choice of the variables w, A, x, b used in (1)).
maximize vBM
v

subject to N · v = 0

(5)

vj ≥ 0
∆r G0j (c) < 0 for reactions vj 6= 0
vGlc,uptake ≤ bGlc
X
diss
−
∆r G0j (c)vj ≤ glim
.
j

3.3 Resource-allocation models
Reaction rates can almost always be increased by increasing the concentration of the catalyzing enzyme
[19]. A constraint on a reaction rate can therefore not
reflect the mechanistic cause of metabolic phenomena:
if a cell would be confronted with such a constraint,
the concentration of the corresponding enzyme could
be increased, unless the enzyme concentration itself is
constrained. In that case however, it is the constraint
on enzyme concentrations that is the mechanistic cause.
In the past decade, many researchers shifted perspective by taking enzyme concentrations as the optimization variables instead of the reaction rates. These
models are called resource allocation models [20–31].
Resource allocation models also maximize the biomass
reaction rate, vBM , while metabolism is at steady state:
N · v = 0. The rate of the objective reaction can thus
only be increased if the rates of all reactions in a complete growth-supporting subnetwork are increased. Unlike in FBA models however, each reaction rate is now
coupled to the concentration of a catalyzing enzyme,
vi = ei kcat,i fi (x),

(6)

where vi is the ith reaction rate and ei is the concentration of the corresponding enzyme. The activity of an
enzyme is determined by its catalytic rate kcat,i , and
the ’saturation’ of the enzyme fi (x) with its substrates
x. This saturation term is in reality a nonlinear function of the metabolite concentrations x, that also includes product inhibition. However, we split reversible
reactions, product inhibition is almost always ignored,
and fi (x) is often simplified to be constant, such that
vi = ei kcat,i where kcat,i is now an effective rate constant. The only way to increase the reaction rates is
then to increase the enzyme concentrations. However,
resources are limited: various limits on enzyme concentrations exist, which take the form of (weighted) sums
that are bounded:
X
ci ei ≤ ub,
(7)
i

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

6

de Groot, Lischke, Muolo, Planqué, Bruggeman, Teusink

where ci is a weighting factor, and should not be confused with the metabolite concentrations that were used
earlier. All enzymes for which the weighting factor is
nonzero, ci > 0, contribute to the sum. These weighting
factors can be adjusted to capture various constraints.
For example, if the membrane area is constrained, the
weight ci would reflect the area taken up by one unit
of protein i, and ci would thus be zero for all nonmembrane proteins. Since the sum is bounded, an increase in the concentration of protein i must be compensated by a decrease in the concentration of others. The
available resources should thus be carefully allocated in
order to maximize the biomass production rate. These
approaches can be written in a form equivalent to our
standard form (see SI3.3 for the appropriate choice of
w, A, x, b in (1))
maximize vBM
v,e

subject to N · v = 0

(8)

This gives the following steady state assumption


vuptake



carbon 1 −1 −1 0 −β 
 vr 



N · v = energy 0 nr nf 0 −σ ·  vf 
 = 0.
vexcretion 
acetate 0 0 Sac −1 0
vBM
In addition, the authors set the uptake rate of nutrient:
vuptake = cuptake . Together, this yields a set of equations
with only one solution; the variables (v and φ) can
be directly calculated, and no optimization is required.
The uniqueness of the solution is due to the small size
of the model and because the constraints on uptake
rate and the total proteome are modeled as equalities
instead of inequalities. We show in SI3.4 that, for the
appropriate choice of w, A, x, b, this is equivalent to
our standard form (1) in which the biomass production
rate is maximized and the constraints are treated as
inequalities:

vi = ei kcat,i

maximize vBM

ei ≥ 0

subject to N · v = 0

X

c1i ei ≤ ub1

vf = f ϕf , vr = r ϕr , vBM =

cni ei ≤ ubn .

vuptake ≤ cuptake

i

..
.
X

v,ϕ

i

With the help of Equation (6) this problem can be
solved with the reaction rates or with the enzyme concentrations as the optimization variables, as we show in
SI3.3.
Basan et al. [27] made a core model that shows overflow
metabolism in E. coli by dividing the proteome into
three fractions: ϕf , ϕr and ϕBM , that thus sum up to
one. These denote the fractions of the proteome catalyzing a fermentation, respiration and cell synthesis reaction, respectively, according to the relations: vf = f ϕf ,
vr = r ϕr , and vBM = 1b (ϕBM − ϕ0 ). We will not define all unknown symbols in these and the following
relations, since their interpretation is not relevant for
this review. Note that the relation between the biomass
reaction and the associated proteome fraction is nonstandard, to include a non-growth associated maintenance term. Further, reactions for the uptake of a carbon source and the excretion of acetate2 are included,
but these do not have an associated proteome fraction.
2
The acetate excretion reaction was not explicitly mentioned in [27], but must have been included. We have made it
explicit to be able to write a consistent stoichiometry matrix.

(9)
1
(ϕBM − ϕ0 )
b

vi ≥ 0

ϕf + ϕr + ϕBM ≤ 1.
The authors assume that the yield of energy per carbon
molecule is higher for respiration than for fermentation:
nr > nf 3 , but that fermentation is more proteomeefficient: f > r . The enzyme cost of a certain reaction is the protein fraction necessary to attain one unit
flux. We thus see that the enzyme costs of respiration
are higher than fermentation: 1f < 1r . Because of this
trade-off between yield and enzyme costs, it becomes
optimal from a certain critical rate of carbon uptake to
use the respiration and fermentation reactions simultaneously, so that the model shows overflow metabolism.
Vazquez et al. [24] responded to the explanation of
Basan et al. by adding to the model that there is a maximum to the macromolecular density of a cell. They
argue that the enzyme costs, as defined in the previous paragraph, should be proportional to the enzyme
mass divided by its catalytic rate. The model that is
used to explain overflow metabolism is thus the same,
but with a different mechanistic underpinning of the
-parameters. This reasoning was implemented earlier
by the same authors in a genome-scale formalism called
3
The authors originally used er , ef to denote these stoichiometric fractions, but we have renamed them to avoid
confusion with enzyme concentrations.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Overflow metabolism is caused by two constraints

7

FBA with Macromolecular Crowding (FBAwMC), with
which they already explained overflow metabolism in E.
coli [23]. This formalism was later also used to model
S. cerevisiae [29].
Another hypothesis is offered by Zhuang et al. [28]
in which overflow metabolism is explained using a membrane occupancy constraint. The authors introduce parameters, mi , that capture the membrane area that is
occupied per mol/liter of enzyme i. Assuming that there
is only a limited plasma membrane budget, Bcyt , this
P
introduces the constraint
i mi ei ≤ Bcyt . Together
with the steady state assumption, and a limited glucose uptake rate, this gives:
maximize vBM
v,e

subject to N · v = 0

(10)

vi = ei kcat,i
ei ≥ 0
vuptake ≤ cuptake
X
mi ei ≤ Bcyt .
i

This hypothesis is supported by some quantitative evidence collected by Szenk et al. [22].
Note that the above resource allocation approaches
differ in the mechanistic nature of the last constraint
that is added, but that the optimization function, the
steady state assumption and the limited substrate uptake are all similar. Shlomi et al. used a similar approach with a total proteome constraint to describe the
Warburg effect in cancer cells [31].
A modeling approach that should be set slightly
apart is Constrained Allocation FBA (CAFBA) [30].
The authors use only a total proteome constraint, and
no direct limit on substrate uptake. Instead, substrate
limitation is modeled by increasing a parameter wC
that captures the protein fraction needed for carbon
catabolism to sustain one unit of carbon influx: φC =
φC,0 + wC vC . If the concentration of external nutrient
decreases, wC increases, and a larger fraction of the
proteome is thus needed in the carbon catabolic sector. Because the sum of the proteome fractions needs
to be one, this reduces the available proteome fraction
for other sectors. As such, a change in nutrient concentration leads to a re-allocation of the proteome. The
genome-scale model of E. coli can reproduce a switch
from pure respiration to acetate secretion, but it does
so with small discrete jumps. The gradual switch that
is usually associated with overflow metabolism can only
be found when the results are averaged over many different models created by choosing random parameters.

3.4 Self-fabrication models
In the previously described modeling approaches, the
demand for cell components was approximated using a
virtual biomass reaction. However, this approximation
ignores an important nonlinear aspect of self-fabrication.
A self-fabricating cell should produce two daughters
identical to itself. The proportions in which the cell
should produce cellular components thus depend on its
own interior. If the cell reallocates resources to meet
this demand for cellular components, its interior changes
and therefore also the demand. The allocation of resources thus both depends on, and determines, the demand reaction.
Another inherent nonlinearity of cellular growth arises
because cellular components dilute by growth: if a compound is not produced while the volume grows, its concentration drops. This dilution rate is equal to the growth
rate of the cellular volume, so in steady state the net
synthesis rate of all molecules should be equal to the
growth rate. In turn, the same synthesis rates of all
molecules determine how much volume is produced per
unit time, and thus how fast the cell grows. The synthesis rate thus both depends on, and determines, the
growth rate.
A small number of modeling approaches incorporate
these two nonlinearities [7, 32–37]. The demand for cell
synthesis components is calculated by the models instead of imposed on the models, and the growth rate
can only be found after solving a nonlinear problem – or
by solving a large number of linear problems in which
the growth rate is treated as a parameter, as we will
see. To keep our treatment of these complex models as
accessible as possible, we will first describe the essential
ingredients only. Then we will, referring to SI6 for most
of the mathematical derivations, derive a set of relations
that enables us to compare these self-fabrication models to the previously described models. After that, we
will shortly discuss the various extensions that describe
overflow metabolism.
The cell is modeled as consisting of three types of
compounds: metabolites (with concentrations x4 and
possibly including macromolecules such as lipids or polynucleotides), enzymes (with concentrations e), and the ribosome (with concentration r). The enzymes catalyze
the conversion of metabolites into other metabolites.
The ribosomes catalyze the synthesis of enzymes and
ribosomes from metabolites. As before, it is assumed
that the rates of the conversions scale proportionally
with the concentrations of the catalysts, and kinetic
4

The usage of x here is not related to its usage in our
standard form, Equation (1)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

8

de Groot, Lischke, Muolo, Planqué, Bruggeman, Teusink

saturation functions are again assumed constant:
vi = ei kcat,i ,

(11)

vsynth,j = rkcat,rib αj ,

(12)

vsynth,rib = rkcat,rib αrib .

(13)

Here vi is a usual metabolic reaction rate, and vsynth,j
denotes the synthesis rate of enzyme j. The factor αj is
the fraction of the ribosome that is allocated to the synthesisP
of enzyme j, and since these are fractions we must
have j αj = 1. It is further assumed that the concentrations of macromolecules add up to a fixed density5 :
X

ρj ej + ρrib r = 1,

(14)

j

where the ρj are volumetric parameters.6 In a cell that
is growing exponentially with rate µ, concentrations dilute with this same rate, see SI5 for a derivation. For
the metabolites, this changes the steady state assumption from N · v = 0 in FBA approaches to N · v = µx.
Moreover, if we explicitly model enzyme synthesis, we
should also account for the metabolites that are consumed during this synthesis. Let M be the matrix that
denotes how many metabolites are needed to make a
specific enzyme, then we get a first set of constraints
on the fluxes:




v
N −M ·
= µx,
(15)
v synth
vsynth,j = µej ,

(16)

vsynth,rib = µr.

(17)

Equations (11) to (17) define the core ingredients of
the self-fabrication models. In Supporting Information
6 we show how this system can be rewritten. In short:
equations (11), (12) and (13) are used to get expressions
for the concentrations e and r in terms of the fluxes, and
these expressions are used in equations (14), (16) and
(17) to get four relations between the fluxes v, v synth
and µ. These relations are linear in the reaction rates,
so that the system can be written in a form that looks
like a familiar Linear Program:
maximize µ
v,v synth ,µ



v



subject to A(x, µ) · v synth  = 0
µ
vi , vsynth,i ≥ 0.

(18)

5
In some modeling methods this density is modeled as an
upper bound [32, 33, 37]. In SI7 we explain the advantages
and disadvantages of doing this.
6
Dependent on the biochemical interpretation of the
ρ-parameters, some models include contributions of the
metabolite concentrations ρi xi [7, 37].

Although this looks like a Linear Program, it is more
difficult since the constraint matrix is not constant: it
depends on the metabolite concentrations, x, and on
the growth rate, µ. The x-dependence is often “solved”
by ignoring the dilution of small metabolites and fixing
the concentrations of macromolecules based on experimental data [33,36]7 . The µ-dependence that makes the
problem nonlinear is overcome by fixing the growth rate
in the constraint matrix to a certain value: A(x, µ) →
A(x, µ0 ), and then add the constraint that the µ in the
optimization variables should equal µ0 . Note that, since
it is fixed, we can no longer maximize the growth rate.
However, we can check if there is a solution that solves
the system. If there is no solution, then µ0 > µmax ; if
there is a solution, we can increase µ0 . The maximal
growth solution is found by repeating this procedure
until the problem is still feasible for µ0 = µmax , but
infeasible for all µ0 > µmax . So we get
maximize µ0
v,v synth ,µ0


such that

A(x, µ0 )
0
0
1





v



 
0


· v synth =
µ0
µ

(19)

vi , vsynth,i ≥ 0.
Using the described mathematical core, Goelzer et al.
proposed a formalism that was named Resource Balance Analysis (RBA), with which they modeled overflow metabolism in Bacillus subtilis [38]. In addition
to the density constraint of Equation (14), the authors
used a constraint on the maximal concentration
P of macromolecules in the membrane; in our notation: j σj ej ≤
Dmem .
In parallel, Thiele et al. [35] for E. coli, and Lerman
et al. [34] for Thermotoga maritima presented the socalled Metabolism and Expression (ME) models. The
mathematical basis of ME-models is equal to the basis of RBA-models (Equations (11) to (17)), but MEmodels are even more comprehensive: for example, the
synthesis rates of mRNA, tRNA, and RNA-polymerases
are explicitly modeled. Moreover, some catalytic rates,
of the ribosome for example, are no longer assumed to
be independent of the growth rate; their dependence
is estimated from experimental data. These extensions
add many variables and constraints to the model, but
we show in SI8 that these additions can still be written as relations that are linear in the reaction rates
and nonlinear in the growth rate. In short, although
the A-matrix of Equation (19) gets larger, ME-models
7

One could also solve the problem for fixed metabolite concentrations [7, 37], and then scan over all possible sets of concentrations, but this becomes computationally infeasible in
large quantitative models.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Overflow metabolism is caused by two constraints

can still be written in this form. O’Brien et al. used an
ME-model to model overflow metabolism in E. coli [36].
The cytosolic density constraint was here supplemented
with an upper bound on the substrate uptake flux.
Molenaar et al. [32] were the first to present a mechanistic model of cellular self-fabrication, a core model
with 5 reactions and 3 metabolites. Because their model
is so small, they could use enzyme kinetics and nonlinear optimization to directly maximize the growth
rate. The optimal solutions show a discrete switch from
an efficient pathway to an inefficient pathway. This is
different from the gradual switch that is observed in
overflow metabolism, even though, just as in [33], the
authors model an upper bound on the membrane density. However, this does not effectively constrain the
concentrations of membrane proteins, since the surfaceto-volume ratio can be freely adjusted in the model.
Therefore, only the density constraint of Equation (14)
is effective. In personal correspondence, the authors
confirmed that, in hindsight, it might have been more
realistic to set a lower bound to the size of the cell. In
this case, an additional constraint would have become
active.

4 Discussion
4.1 Commonalities and differences
We reviewed many constrained optimization approaches
that describe overflow metabolism, ranging from relatively simple linear Flux Balance Analysis models to
complicated nonlinear Metabolism and Expression models. Some approaches use small core models, others use
genome-scale networks comprising thousands of reactions. The imposed constraints are either limits on reaction rates, Gibbs dissipation limits or limits on enzyme concentrations. Despite all these differences, we
managed to write all these models in a concise standard form by focusing on their mathematical essence.
We conclude from this that these models must share a
feature, one that must be essential for describing overflow metabolism. In the following, we will compare the
models in their standard form using our recent theoretical work [7, 8] to analyze and explain this feature,
using an extremum principle that governs the solutions
of all the reviewed approaches.
4.1.1 A general extremum principle: Overflow
metabolism is caused by two growth-limiting
constraints
All reviewed approaches model a growing cell by imposing a set of homogeneous constraints: a first set that

9

ensures a steady state, and a second set that determines the feasible direction for irreversible reactions.
There are some differences in how the first set is imposed. FBA and resource allocation approaches model
a system that produces cell components in the proportions captured by a constant demand reaction, the
biomass reaction. The steady state assumption ensures
that no intermediate metabolite accumulates. The selffabrication models implement this assumption with a
balanced growth assumption: all cellular compounds
should be produced to match the rate of consumption
and dilution by growth. The demand reaction is therefore dependent on the growth rate, which gives rise to
nonlinear relations between the optimization variables
and the growth rate. These differences are illustrated
in Figure 2.
Despite these seemingly different setups, we can define Elementary Modes in both cases: growth-supporting
subnetworks that form the minimal building blocks of
the solution space. These are called Elementary Flux
Modes in the linear models [6], and Elementary Growth
Modes in the self-fabricator models [7], see SI1 for a
short introduction. The defining property of these modes
is that all possible solutions of the growth models can
be written as a combination of these modes. In other
words, EFMs are non-decomposable metabolic subnetworks, and EGMs are non-decomposable self-fabrication
subnetworks. Overflow metabolism is decomposable in
an energy-efficient subnetwork, and a less energy-efficient
subnetwork, and is thus a combination of two Elementary Modes.
Using the concept of Elementary Modes we derived
an extremum principle stating that the number of fluxcarrying Elementary Modes in the optimal solution will
be smaller or equal than the number of active (i.e.
growth-limiting) constraints. These growth-limiting constraints are the additional constraints that are imposed
after the steady state and irreversibility constraints (this
is illustrated and explained in Figure 1). The extremum
principle implies that only one Elementary Mode will
be selected by growth rate maximization under one constraint. For example, in a model in which only one nutrient uptake rate is constrained, we will never observe a
gradual switch from a high-yield metabolic mode to the
combination with a low-yield mode. Overflow metabolism must thus be a result of two constraints, see Figure
2 for an illustration of this result.
The extremum principle suggests that the success of
describing overflow metabolism might not lie in the details of the stoichiometric networks, or the exact choices
of model parameters, but rather in the mere existence
of two constraints. This implies that finding the mecha-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

10

de Groot, Lischke, Muolo, Planqué, Bruggeman, Teusink

Fig. 2 FBA models and self-fabrication models lead to a similar mathematical problem. In the top figures we
illustrate two of the reviewed approaches. FBA models consider steady state fluxes through networks of metabolic reactions
with constraints on the reaction rates. A virtual biomass reaction is added as a proxy for the growth rate. Self-fabricator models
make the synthesis of enzymes and the ribosome explicit, and can therefore model the growth rate as the volume increase due
to the production of components. The enzyme concentrations can now be viewed as the optimization variables, so that protein
concentration constraints can also be included. In the bottom figures we show a highly simplified illustration of the solution
space of both approaches. In the linear approaches, FBA and proteome-constrained models, all quantities depend linearly on
the growth rate, while there are nonlinear dependencies in the self-fabricator models. However, we showed that in both cases,
overflow metabolism is caused by two growth-limiting constraints.

nistic cause of overflow metabolism amounts to finding
which two constraints are actually limiting growth.
Unfortunately, the extremum principle does not predict which constraint causes overflow metabolism. It
states that there should be two constraints, but does
not reveal their identity. Moreover, overflow metabolism in different species might be due to completely different constraints. Thus, to find out which constraints
cause overflow metabolism, we must test hypothetical
constraints.

4.1.2 Specific experiments: the mechanistic cause of
overflow metabolism can be found with falsification
experiments
Encouraged by the conclusion that the growth-limiting
constraints must be important in causing overflow metabolism, we have listed all the constraints that are used
in the reviewed models (Table 1). We see that almost

all models indeed use two constraints.8 Molenaar et
al. [32] and Mori et al. [30] form exceptions to this
rule, using only one effective constraint. Our theory
thus implies that only one EFM will be used in the
optimal solutions of these models. Indeed, the models
show discrete switches between EFMs when the growth
rate increases. The model from Molenaar et al., containing only two EFMs, switches at once from respiration to fermentation. The genome-scale model of Mori
et al. contains many different EFMs that form intermediate steps between full respiration and full fermentation. Their model therefore shows many small discrete
switches, approximating a gradual switch.9 This gives
8
Only Varma and Palsson use more than two constraints. Their third constraint is a lower bound on an ATPmaintenance reaction, which we have left out of the table for
clarity.
9
The authors also present a figure showing a gradual
switch, but this is the average behaviour for many models with slightly different parameters. The discontinuities are
then averaged out.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Overflow metabolism is caused by two constraints

11

Table 1 An overview of the models that try to explain overflow metabolism, including which constraints were
used in addition to the steady-state assumptions.
Paper
Majewski et al. [11]
Varma et al. [12]
Carlson et al. [14]
Niebel et al. [18]
Basan et al. [27]
Mori et al. [30]
Vazquez et al. [23, 24]
Van Hoek et al. [29]
Zhuang et al. [28]
Szenk et al. [22]
Shlomi et al. [31]
Molenaar et al. [32]
Goelzer et al. [38]
O’Brien et al. [36]

Type
FBA
FBA
FBA
tFBA
resource
resource
resource
resource
resource
resource
resource
self-fabr
self-fabr
self-fabr

Constraint 1
glucose uptake
glucose uptake
glucose uptake
glucose uptake
glucose uptake

rate
rate
rate
rate
rate

glucose
glucose
glucose
glucose
glucose

rate
rate
rate
rate
rate

uptake
uptake
uptake
uptake
uptake

membrane density
glucose uptake rate

rise to a separate hypothesis that we cannot fully exclude. However, we find it more probable that, upon
a change in the environment, gene expression continuously tunes the proportions in which two EFMs are
used, than that it repeatedly shuts down one EFM to
upregulate another.
Among the models that use two constraints, there is
some variation in the biological underpinnings of these
constraints. The question is how to find the relevant
constraints. The genome-scale approach is to make an
extensive model and try to quantitatively match the experimental data. One risk, however, is overfitting, because a large enough model could potentially fit any
experimental data. Such an approach should therefore
be backed up by independent measurements of assumed
constraints. Still, it is hard to imagine how a model
could distinguish the effects caused by a ’total proteome
constraint’ and a ’macromolecular density constraint’.
For this, we need perturbation experiments. For example, to artificially perturb the proteome allocation of
E. coli, Basan et al. [27, 39] overexpressed the nonfunctional protein LacZ in one experiment and added translation inhibitors in another. We have derived a formalism in which such perturbation experiments can be analyzed [8]. Basan et al. could provide evidence for their
proposed total proteome constraint. In our opinion, this
makes their proposed constraint the best-established
mechanistic cause of overflow metabolism in E. coli up
to this point. However, as we now know, there should be
a second growth-limiting constraint. Basan et al. used
a limit on the uptake rate of nutrients, which cannot
truly be considered as a mechanistic cause of overflow
metabolism, because, as described by Molenaar et al.
in 2009: ”... using an artificial maximal capacity constraint on substrate uptake ignores the possibility of
variable investments made in substrate transport sys-

Constraint 2
electron transfer capacity
oxygen uptake rate
oxygen uptake rate
free energy dissipation
total proteome
total proteome
macromolecular density
macromolecular density
membrane occupancy
membrane occupancy
total proteome
macromolecular density
macromolecular density
macromolecular density

tems.” The identity of the second constraint in E. coli,
even though a constraint on transport of glucose is generally used and thus apparently accepted, remains to be
established.
4.1.3 Towards a complete model of cellular
self-fabrication.
We observe two directions of development towards a
complete model of cellular self-fabrication in the models that we have reviewed. Along the first direction the
optimization variables are moved closer to the actual
regulatory space of the cell, and thereby closer to the
origin of overflow metabolism. Along the second direction, more and more of the inherent nonlinearity of selffabrication is incorporated in the models.
To explain the first direction of development, we
recall that FBA models use fluxes as variables, which
cannot be directly regulated by the cell. Instead, enzyme concentrations are regulated and these will, together with the metabolite concentrations, determine
the fluxes. The resource allocation models switch perspective to enzyme concentrations as variables with the
major advantage that constraints on enzyme concentrations can be formulated directly. These constraints
can be related to physically observable quantities, such
as the available membrane area or cytosolic volume,
whereas flux constraints cannot. Flux constraints can
only be determined ad hoc using experimental data,
which limits their predictive power.10 One can move
even further towards the regulatory space of the cell
because the enzyme concentrations are in fact dependent on the enzyme synthesis rates, and these are regu10
In fact, many of the resource allocation models still use a
flux constraint for the nutrient uptake reaction, so that these
are also not entirely predictive.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

12

lated by the allocation of the ribosomes over the different mRNAs. The reviewed self-fabricator models indeed
use as variables the enzyme synthesis rates [36, 38], or
the ribosome allocation fractions [32]. A final step towards the regulatory space of the cell could be to model
the regulation of mRNA synthesis via gene expression
directly, but we do not know of any models that have
implemented this.
The second direction of development moves towards
incorporating three nonlinearities that are related to
self-fabrication. We already mentioned two of them:
1) the dependence of the biomass composition on the
enzyme allocation, and 2) the dependence of the demanded enzyme synthesis rates on the growth rate. The
incorporation of these two nonlinearities form the main
improvement of self-fabrication models with respect to
FBA type models. Here we want to raise attention for
a third nonlinearity: the kinetic dependence of enzyme
and ribosome activities on the metabolite concentrations. If a cell reallocates resources, metabolite concentrations change as well, causing changes in the saturation levels of enzymes. Including the metabolite concentrations in the model however, requires information
about the enzyme kinetics of all the different enzymes
in the cell. Moreover, it makes the optimization problem computationally infeasible because the problem is
no longer guaranteed to have only one local optimum.
Therefore, global optimization software has to be used
and it is difficult to ascertain that the found solution is
the actual optimum. For these reasons, enzyme kinetics can so far only be included in core models [32] and
theoretical work [7, 8, 37]. The question is if there are
constraints, rules and patterns in the changes in (optimal) metabolite levels that would allow us to approximate optimal solutions without global optimisation of
the full kinetic model.

de Groot, Lischke, Muolo, Planqué, Bruggeman, Teusink

mal in the wild type strain within the studied environmental conditions.
The sub-optimality of a population of microorganisms might be due to the high regulatory costs that
would be required to steer each individual cell to the
optimum. De Martino et al. [43] calculated a possible
probability distribution for the metabolic states of single cells by maximizing the entropy of this distribution
while the average growth rate was fixed to the measured value. This approach leads to a model of singlecell behaviour in which the least additional assumptions
were made: ‘the probability distribution is as general
as possible’. Their predicted distribution captured the
measured fluxes better than a Flux Balance Analysis
approach. Subsequently, they quantified the amount of
regulation that would be needed to get a higher average
growth rates, showing that attaining a maximal average
growth rate would bring infinite regulatory costs.

5 Conclusion
We reviewed 15 different models of overflow metabolism, ranging from Flux Balance Analyses, to nonlinear self-fabricator models such as Metabolism and Expression models. Despite the many differences between
the models, we could rewrite the mathematical cores of
each of them into a concise standard form. This standard form could be analyzed using an extremum principle, stating that the number of Elementary Modes
at maximal growth is less or equal than the number
of growth-limiting constraints. The extremum principle
implies that overflow metabolism is caused by at least
two growth-limiting constraints. We therefore listed all
reviewed models with their proposed constraints. We
hope that this list will serve as a source of hypotheses
that can now be tested using falsification experiments.

4.1.4 Alternatives for growth rate maximization
We have focused on growth rate maximization models, but alternative explanations of overflow metabolism cannot be fully excluded. For example, it might
be that not absolute fitness is maximized, but rather
relative fitness compared to competitors. For example,
cells could produce overflow products to intoxicate their
neighbours, or cells could maximize their uptake rate to
claim the largest share of the nutrient pool. These explanations have been reviewed elsewhere [40, 41].
It might even be that cells are not completely optimized for anything. For example, it was shown that the
overexpression of transcriptional regulator ArcA could
increase the growth rate of E. coli on glycolytic substrates [42]. This shows that metabolism was not opti-

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

References
1. Alan J Wolfe. The acetate switch. 69(1):12–50, 2005.
2. Erik Postma, Cornelis Verduyn, W Alexander Scheffers,
and Johannes P Van Dijken. Enzymic analysis of the
Crabtree effect in glucose-limited chemostat cultures of
Saccharomyces-cerevisiae. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, 55(2):468–477, 1989.
3. Otto Warburg. On the Origin of Cancer Cells. Science,
123(3191):309–314, 1956.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Overflow metabolism is caused by two constraints
4. T D Thomas, D C Ellwood, and V M Longyear. Change
from homo- to heterolactic fermentation by Streptococcus lactis resulting from glucose limitation in anaerobic
chemostat cultures. Journal of bacteriology, 138(1):109–
117, apr 1979.
5. James Patrick Folsom and Ross P. Carlson. Physiological,
biomass elemental composition and proteomic analyses
of Escherichia coli ammoniumlimited chemostat growth,
and comparison with iron- and glucose-limited chemostat
growth. Microbiology (United Kingdom), 161(8):1659–
1670, 2015.
6. Stefan Schuster and Claus Hilgetag. On Elementary Flux
Modes in biochemical reaction systems at steady state.
Journal of Biological Systems, 02(02):165–182, 1994.
7. Daan H de Groot, Josephus Hulshof, Bas Teusink,
Frank J Bruggeman, and Robert Planqué. Elementary
Growth Modes provide a molecular description of cellular self-fabrication. bioRxiv, page 608083, jan 2019.
8. Daan H De Groot, Coco Van Boxtel, Robert Planqué,
Frank J. Bruggeman, and Bas Teusink. The number of
active metabolic pathways is bounded by the number of
cellular constraints at maximal metabolic rates. PLOS
Computational Biology, pages 1–25, 2018.
9. Adam M Feist and Bernhard O Palsson. The biomass
objective function. Current opinion in microbiology,
13(3):344–349, 2010.
10. K B Andersen and K von Meyenburg. Are growth rates of
Escherichia coli in batch cultures limited by respiration?
Journal of bacteriology, 144(1):114–123, oct 1980.
11. Michael M Domach and R A Majewski.
Simple
constrained-optimization view of acetate overflow in
E. coli. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 35(7):732–
738, 1990.
12. A Varma and B O Palsson. Stoichiometric flux balance
models quantitatively predict growth and metabolic byproduct secretion in wild-type Escherichia coli W3110.
Applied and environmental microbiology, 60(10):3724–
31, oct 1994.
13. Ross Carlson and Friedrich Srienc. Fundamental Escherichia coli Biochemical Pathways for Biomass and Energy Production: Identification of Reactions. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 85(1):1–19, 2004.
14. Ross Carlson and Friedrich Srienc. Fundamental Escherichia coli Biochemical Pathways for Biomass and
Energy Production: Creation of Overall Flux States.
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 86(2):149–162, 2004.
15. Christopher S Henry, Linda J Broadbelt, and Vassily
Hatzimanikatis. Thermodynamics-based metabolic flux
analysis. Biophysical journal, 92(5):1792–1805, mar 2007.
16. Elad Noor.
Removing both internal and unrealistic energy-generating cycles in Flux Balance Analysis.
arXiv.org, 2018.
17. Jan Schellenberger, Nathan E Lewis, and Bernhard O
Palsson. Elimination of thermodynamically infeasible
loops in steady-state metabolic models. Biophysical
Journal, 100(5):1381, 2011.
18. Bastian Niebel, Simeon Leupold, and Matthias Heinemann. An upper limit on Gibbs energy dissipation governs cellular metabolism. Nature Metabolism, 1(1):125–
132, 2019.
19. Athel Cornish-Bowden. Principles of enzyme kinetics.
Elsevier, 2014.
20. Sheng Hui, Josh M Silverman, Stephen S Chen, David W
Erickson, Markus Basan, Jilong Wang, Terence Hwa, and
James R Williamson. Quantitative proteomic analysis
reveals a simple strategy of global resource allocation in
bacteria. Molecular systems biology, 11(1):784, 2015.

13
21. Conghui You, Hiroyuki Okano, Sheng Hui, Zhongge
Zhang, Minsu Kim, Carl W Gunderson, Yi Ping Wang,
Peter Lenz, Dalai Yan, and Terence Hwa. Coordination
of bacterial proteome with metabolism by cyclic AMP
signalling. Nature, 500(7462):301–306, 2013.
22. Mariola Szenk, Ken A. Dill, and Adam M.R. R de Graff.
Why Do Fast-Growing Bacteria Enter Overflow Metabolism? Testing the Membrane Real Estate Hypothesis.
Cell Systems, 5(2):95–104, apr 2017.
23. Alexei Vazquez, Qasim K Beg, Marcio A DeMenezes,
Jason Ernst, Ziv Bar-Joseph, Albert-László Barabási,
László G Boros, and Zoltán N Oltvai. Impact of the
solvent capacity constraint on E. coli metabolism. BMC
Systems Biology, 2:7, jan 2008.
24. Alexei Vazquez and Zoltán N Oltvai. Macromolecular
crowding explains overflow metabolism in cells. Scientific
Reports, 6:31007, 2016.
25. Matthew Scott, Carl W Gunderson, Eduard M Mateescu,
Zhongge Zhang, and Terence Hwa. Interdependence
of cell growth and gene expression: origins and consequences. Science, 330(6007):1099–1102, 2010.
26. Matthew Scott, Stefan Klumpp, Eduard M Mateescu,
and Terence Hwa. Emergence of robust growth laws from
optimal regulation of ribosome synthesis. Molecular systems biology, 10(8):747, 2014.
27. Markus Basan, Sheng Hui, Hiroyuki Okano, Zhongge
Zhang, Yang Shen, James R Williamson, and Terence
Hwa. Overflow metabolism in Escherichia coli results
from efficient proteome allocation. Nature, 528(7580):99–
104, 2015.
28. Kai Zhuang, Goutham N Vemuri, and Radhakrishnan Mahadevan. Economics of membrane occupancy
and respiro-fermentation. Molecular Systems Biology,
7(500):500, 2011.
29. Milan J A van Hoek and Roeland M H Merks. Redox balance is key to explaining full vs. partial switching to lowyield metabolism. BMC systems biology, 6(1):22, 2012.
30. Matteo Mori, Terence Hwa, Olivier C. Martin, Andrea
De Martino, and Enzo Marinari. Constrained allocation
Flux Balance Analysis. PLoS Computational Biology,
12(6):1–24, 2016.
31. Tomer Shlomi, Tomer Benyamini, Eyal Gottlieb, Roded
Sharan, and Eytan Ruppin. Genome-scale metabolic
modeling elucidates the role of proliferative adaptation
in causing the warburg effect. PLoS Computational Biology, 7(3):1–8, 2011.
32. Douwe Molenaar, Rogier van Berlo, Dick de Ridder, and
Bas Teusink. Shifts in growth strategies reflect tradeoffs in cellular economics. Molecular systems biology,
5(323):323, 2009.
33. Anne Goelzer, Vincent Fromion, and Gérard Scorletti.
Cell design in bacteria as a convex optimization problem.
Automatica, 47(6):1210–1218, 2011.
34. Joshua A. Lerman, Daniel R. Hyduke, Haythem Latif,
Vasiliy A. Portnoy, Nathan E. Lewis, Jeffrey D. Orth,
Alexandra C. Schrimpe-Rutledge, Richard D. Smith,
Joshua N. Adkins, Karsten Zengler, and Bernhard O.
Palsson. In silico method for modelling metabolism and
gene product expression at genome scale. Nature Communications, 3(May):910–929, 2012.
35. Ines Thiele, Ronan M.T. Fleming, Richard Que, Aarash
Bordbar, Dinh Diep, and Bernhard O Palsson. Multiscale
modeling of metabolism and macromolecular synthesis
in E. coli and its application to the evolution of codon
usage. PLoS ONE, 7(9), 2012.
36. Edward J. O’Brien, Joshua A. Lerman, Roger L. Chang,
Daniel R. Hyduke, and Bernhard Palsson. Genome-scale

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679019; this version posted September 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

14

37.
38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

de Groot, Lischke, Muolo, Planqué, Bruggeman, Teusink
models of metabolism and gene expression extend and
refine growth phenotype prediction. Molecular Systems
Biology, 9(693), 2013.
Hugo Dourado and Martin J Lercher. An Analytical Theory of Cellular Growth. bioRxiv, page 607374, 2019.
Anne Goelzer, Jan Muntel, Victor Chubukov, Matthieu
Jules, Eric Prestel, Rolf Nölker, Mahendra Mariadassou,
Stéphane Aymerich, Michael Hecker, Philippe Noirot,
Dörte Becher, and Vincent Fromion. Quantitative prediction of genome-wide resource allocation in bacteria.
Metabolic Engineering, 32:232–243, nov 2015.
Markus Basan. Resource allocation and metabolism: the
search for governing principles. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 45:77–83, 2018.
Anisha Goel, Meike Tessa Wortel, Douwe Molenaar,
and Bas Teusink. Metabolic shifts: A fitness perspective for microbial cell factories. Biotechnology Letters,
34(12):2147–2160, 2012.
Thomas Pfeiffer and Annabel Morley. An evolutionary
perspective on the Crabtree effect. Frontiers in molecular
biosciences, 1(October):17, 2014.
Markus Basan, Sheng Hui, and James R Williamson.
ArcA overexpression induces fermentation and results in
enhanced growth rates of E. coli. Scientific Reports,
7(1):11866, 2017.
Daniele De Martino, Anna MC Andersson, Tobias
Bergmiller, Călin C Guet, and Gašper Tkačik. Statistical mechanics for metabolic networks during steady state
growth. Nature Communications, 9(1):2988, 2018.

