bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Context-dependent role of vinculin in neutrophil adhesion, motility and trafficking

Zachary S. Wilson1,2, Hadley Witt1,2, Lauren Hazlett3, Michael Harman2,3, Brittany M. Neumann2,
Andrew Whitman2, Mohak Patel3, Robert S. Ross4, Christian Franck5, Jonathan S. Reichner2,
Craig T. Lefort2,*

1

Graduate Program in Pathobiology, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912

2

Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Research, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI 02903

3

School of Engineering, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912

4

University of California San Diego, School of Medicine, Department of Medicine/Cardiology, La Jolla,

CA 92093
5

Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706

*Corresponding author:
Craig T. Lefort, PhD
Rhode Island Hospital
593 Eddy Street
Providence, RI 02903
Phone: 401-444-2353
Fax: 401-444-8176
E-mail: craig_lefort@brown.edu

Running Title: Vinculin in neutrophil adhesion
Keywords: Vinculin, Neutrophil, β2 integrins, Focal adhesions, Traction forces, Mechanosensing, Innate
Immunity, Cell Motility, Leukocyte.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Neutrophils are innate immune effector cells that traffic from the peripheral blood to extravascular sites of
inflammation. β2 integrins are involved during multiple phases of neutrophil recruitment, including the
transition from rolling to arrest, firm attachment and motility within the vasculature. Following neutrophil
arrest, adhesion stabilization occurs as the neutrophil interacts with the endothelial surface and crawls into
a favorable position for extravasation. The cytoskeletal protein vinculin has been implicated in other cell
types as a regulator of adhesion strength by promoting focal adhesion maturation and as a sensor of the
mechanical properties of the microenvironment. Neutrophils express vinculin but do not form mature
focal adhesions. Here, we characterize the role of vinculin in β2 integrin-dependent neutrophil adhesion,
motility, mechanosensing, and recruitment. We observe that knockout of vinculin attenuates, but does not
completely abrogate, neutrophil adhesion, spreading, and crawling under static conditions. In the presence
of forces from fluid flow, vinculin was not required for neutrophil adhesion or migration. Vinculin
deficiency only mildly attenuated neutrophil traction stresses and spreading on stiff, but not soft,
polyacrylamide gels indicating a minor role for vinculin in the mechanosensing of the neutrophil as
compared to slower moving mesenchymal cells that form mature focal adhesions. Consistent with these
findings, we observe in vivo neutrophil recruitment into the inflamed peritoneum of mice remains intact in
the absence of vinculin. Together, these data suggest that while vinculin regulates some aspects of
neutrophil adhesion and spreading, it may be dispensable for neutrophil recruitment and motility in vivo.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Neutrophils are leukocytes of the innate immune system that are the first to respond and mobilize
to sites of infection or injury. The recruitment of neutrophils from the circulation is mediated by β2
integrins that interact with endothelium adjacent to an inflamed tissue site (1, 2). Humans that lack β2
integrins or their activators suffer from leukocyte adhesion deficiency type I and III, respectively, which
greatly increases host susceptibility to bacterial and fungal opportunistic pathogens (1-3). However,
excess recruitment and retention of neutrophils at sites of inflammation can also lead to bystander injury
through the release of reactive oxygen species and proteolytic enzymes from preformed granules (4, 5).
Many investigators have studied the mechanisms of neutrophil migration to find therapeutic targets that
might enable tighter control over the inflammatory response without impairing host defense. With this
long-term goal in mind, this study probes the role of vinculin in neutrophil adhesion, motility, and
trafficking mediated by β2 integrins.
In the classical model of neutrophil recruitment, expression of P- and/or E-selectin on inflamed
endothelium mediates the initial tethering and rolling of neutrophils. During rolling, neutrophils receive
activation signals via engagement of P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) and G protein-coupled
receptors, such as the canonical neutrophil chemokine receptors for IL-8 (human) or CXCL1 (murine). In
a process called “inside-out” activation, these signals trigger structural changes in β2 integrins that
increase their ligand-binding affinity by up to four orders of magnitude (6, 7). High affinity β2 integrins,
primarily LFA-1 (CD11a/CD18), mediate the transition of rolling neutrophils to arrest and firm adhesion
by binding to intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) (8). Finally, arrested neutrophils will then
spread and crawl toward a favorable site for transmigration (9). In this way, β2 integrin inside-out
signaling, where intrinsic signals through PSGL-1 and CXCR2 activate β2 integrins, dominate the steps
leading to neutrophil arrest, while β2 integrin “outside-in” signaling downstream of ICAM-1 engagement,
are critical for stabilizing adhesion, intraluminal spreading and crawling (10).

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Vinculin is a scaffolding protein involved in the maturation of integrin-based focal adhesions that
has been studied primarily in mesenchymal cells such as fibroblasts. Vinculin has multiple binding
surfaces to enable the recruitment of proteins to adhesion sties (11). Vinculin is maintained in an inactive
state through intramolecular association of its head and tail domains; activation through intramolecular
dissociation is thought to be mediated by phosphorylation and sequential binding to a series of proteins
(12-15). The localization of vinculin at integrin-mediated adhesions can occur through its association with
phosphorylated paxillin that shuttles vinculin to talin-1 that is concomitantly bound to the tail of an
activated integrin (16). Vinculin stabilizes integrin adhesions within a mature focal adhesion through the
recruitment of actin-binding proteins and the direct binding of actin bundles (17). Vinculin-dependent
focal adhesion maturation has been described as being “mechanosensitive,” which refers to the
recruitment of vinculin through actomyosin-mediated contractility and transmission of signals that scale
with the mechanical stiffness of the substrate (18). The current study establishes a mechanosensitive role
for vinculin during neutrophil adhesion and spreading mediated by β2 integrins.
Although vinculin function has been studied in other leukocytes, this is the first study to investigate the
potential role for vinculin in leukocyte trafficking (19-22). Activated neutrophils express vinculin and
form focal complexes, but they are also highly motile amoeboid-like cells that do not generate mature
focal adhesions (23, 24). Adhesion stabilization enables neutrophils to crawl toward favorable sites of
emigration, but whether this process is vinculin-dependent is unclear (25). We report that while vinculin
contributes to neutrophil adhesion to ICAM-1 in the absence of shear stress, it is dispensable for
neutrophil adhesion and motility under shear stress, and for infiltration into the inflamed peritoneum of
mice. In addition, we show that, as in other cell types, vinculin plays a role rigidity sensing for
neutrophils, as measured by their spread area and traction force generation. Together, these data point
towards a less prominent role for vinculin in neutrophils, as compared to mesenchymal cells, that depends
on the properties of the microenvironment.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Materials and Methods
Antibodies and reagents
All antibodies used are against murine antigens. Antibodies: anti-CD18 (clone GAME-46; BD
Biosciences), anti-CD11a (clone M17/4; BioLegend), anti-ICAM-1 (clone YN1; BioLegend), APC-antiCD11b (clone M1/70; BioLegend), anti-Ly6G (clone 1A8; BioLegend), APC-anti-CD117 (clone 2B8;
BioLegend), anti-CXCR2 (clone SA045E1; BioLegend), anti-α-actinin (Cell Signaling Technologies),
anti-vinculin (Cell Signaling Technologies), anti-GFP (Cell Signaling Technologies), HRP-conjugatedanti-Rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling Technologies), anti-CD11a (clone IBL-6/2; Cell Signaling Techologies),
Alexa Fluor 647-anti-Rat IgG (ThermoFisher Scientific). Reagents: recombinant murine CXCL1
(BioLegend), recombinant murine SCF (BioLegend), recombinant murine G-CSF (BioLegend),
recombinant murine ICAM-1 (R&D Systems, BioLegend), 4-Hydroxytamoxifen (Tocris), CFSE
(BioLegend), TagIt-Violet (BioLegend), Thioglycollate broth (Sigma Aldrich), PKH26/PKH67/Claret Far
Red Membrane Dye (Sigma Aldrich).
Neutrophil progenitors
Neutrophils were obtained by differentiating murine myeloid progenitors that were conditionallyimmortalized using tamoxifen-inducible HoxB8 (26). Briefly, murine hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
were isolated from bone marrow (StemCell Technologies), transduced with a tamoxifen-inducible
expression vector for the murine Hoxb8 gene (27), and then cultured in the presence of 100 nM 4Hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT), 50 ng/mL recombinant murine stem cell factor, and 1 µg/mL puromycin
(26). Progenitors were differentiated into neutrophils by removing 4-OHT and culturing in the presence of
20 ng/mL recombinant murine stem cell factor and 20 ng/mL recombinant murine granulocyte colonystimulating factor for 4 days (Fig. S1A) (28). Neutrophils differentiated from progenitors exhibit multilobed nuclei, expression of Ly6G, and a loss in the expression of CD117 (cKit) (Fig. S1B-C). To create a
vinculin knockout progenitor cell lines for this study, HoxB8-conditional progenitors were transduced

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

with a lentiviral vector that expresses Cas9 and single-guide RNA (sgRNA) targeting the Vcl gene that
encodes vinculin. To do so, we used the pLentiCRISPR v2 vector, a gift from Feng Zhang (Addgene
plasmid #52961) that was modified to confer blasticidin resistance, and the following sgRNA target
sequences: TTCCCCTAGAGCCGTCAATG (Vcl (1)) and CCGGCGCGCTCACCCGGACG (Vcl (2))
(Fig. S2A). The Tln1 and Itgb2 genes were knocked out in HoxB8-conditional progenitors as previously
described (29). Empty vector expression of Cas9 without a targeting sgRNA was used as a wild-type
control for all experiments. Vinculin was successfully disrupted in progenitors after a single lentiviral
transduction that was followed by blasticidin selection (Fig. S2B). When using a fluorescent reporter of
HoxB8 expression, no difference was observed between wild-type (WT) and vinculin knockout (VclKO)
EGFP-HoxB8 expression before differentiation and both exhibited a similar loss of EGFP-HoxB8
expression at the end of four days of differentiation (Fig. S2C).
For rescue studies, Clover (a GFP variant) conjugated to vinculin or the vinculin A50I mutant
were cloned into the doxycycline-inducible Tet-On 3G plasmid system (Takara Bio). HoxB8-conditional
progenitors (expressing Cas9 and control sgRNA or Vcl (2) sgRNA) were transduced by lentivirus with
the inducible Clover-vinculin constructs and then treated with doxycycline (Sigma Aldrich) at a
concentration of 1 µg/mL to induce expression of Clover-vinculin. After transduction, progenitors were
sorted for high expression of Clover-vinculin using fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS). Clovervinculin was successfully expressed in both control and VclKO progenitors derived from Vcl (2) sgRNA
that targets the intron-exon junction, and therefore does not target exogenous Clover-vinculin (Fig. S3).
Neutrophil static adhesion assay
Neutrophils obtained after 4-day differentiation (“in vitro-derived”) were washed and labeled
using CFSE (BioLegend). Murine bone marrow neutrophils were isolated by negative selection (StemCell
Technologies) and immediately labeled alongside in vitro-derived neutrophils using CFSE. 96-well plates
were coated for 1 hour at room temperature or overnight at 4°C with 2.5, 5, or 7.5 µg/mL ICAM-1 and/or
2.5 µg/mL CXCL1 in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and then blocked with 1% casein (ThermoFisher)
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

or 0.5% polyvinylpyrrolidone (Sigma Aldrich) in PBS for 2 hours at room temperature. Neutrophils were
loaded into the 96-well plate at 0.5x106 neutrophils per well in Hank’s balanced salt solution containing
Ca2+ and Mg2+ (HBSS++), and then incubated at 37˚C for 35 or 65 minutes. Following incubation,
neutrophils were quantified by a plate reader for fluorescence intensity (CFSE), before and after
sequential gentle washes with HBSS++. The number of adherent neutrophils was inspected visually by
light microscopy to corroborate with plate reader signal intensity. Each group was replicated in three to
six wells per independent experiment.
Neutrophil motility and spreading on glass
Neutrophils obtained after 4-day differentiation were washed and labeled using CFSE
(BioLegend). Delta T dishes (Bioptech) were coated with 2.5 µg/mL ICAM-1 and 2.5 µg/mL CXCL1 in
PBS overnight at 4°C and blocked for 1 hour with 0.5% PVP in PBS at room temperature. Approximately
75,000 neutrophils were added to warm HBSS++ and migration was followed using time-lapse microscopy
for 30 minutes at 37°C with images captured every 20 seconds. Motility was tracked using ImageJ
Manual Tracking and analyzed using Ibidi Chemotaxis to obtain measures of migration such as
accumulated distance, Euclidean distance, and velocity. Cell area was measured using the final image
acquired at 30 minutes using ImageJ.
Neutrophil spreading on polyacrylamide gels
Polyacrylamide gel substrates were prepared as originally described (30). Briefly, gels were
prepared using varying concentrations of acrylamide (Bio-Rad) and N,N-methylene-bisacrylamide (BioRad) to achieve the range of elasticity. Stiff substrates were chosen to be 12% acrylamide and 0.4%
bisacrylamide, at approximately 100 kPa stiffness; intermediate stiffness substrates were chosen to be
8%/0.08%, at approximately 8.3 kPa; and soft substrates were chosen to be 3%/0.2%, at approximately
1.5 kPa. Within the smaller range of intermediate stiffness gels, acrylamide/bisacrylamide used were:
6.4%/0.23% for approximately 20 kPa stiffness, 5.2%/0.19% for approximately 10 kPa, and 4.4%/0.16%

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

for approximately 5 kPa. Polyacrylamide solutions were vortexed and then polymerized through the
addition of excess tetramethylethylenediamine and ammonium persulfate. Gels were polymerized at room
temperature on hydrophilic-treated, glass-bottom deltaT dishes (Bioptech) and shaped using AbGene
frames to a final size of approximately 1 cm x 1 cm x 300 µm. Gels were then soaked for at least one hour
in water to remove any unpolymerized acrylamide. Final elasticity was measured by atomic force
microscopy. Sulfo-SANPAH was allowed to covalently bond to the gel for 1 hour in the dark. ICAM-1
and/or CXCL1 were then UV cross-linked to the sulfo-SANPAH at 2.5 µg/mL each. Previous work
shows that final elasticity is not affected by surface protein crosslinking, and that final protein density is
not affected by elasticity (31). After washing with buffered saline, in vitro-derived neutrophils were added
in warmed HBSS++ and incubated at 37°C. Imaging was performed 30 minutes after incubation. For
motility assays, imaging was performed within a fully enclosed microscope at 37°C for 30 minutes in L15 media supplemented with 2 mg/ml glucose.
Flow chamber assay
To prepare flow chambers, Ibidi µ-Slide VI0.1 were coated with 0.5 µg/mL E-selectin, 7 µg/mL
ICAM-1, and 8 µg/mL CXCL1 for 2 hours in PBS and then blocked with an excess of casein for 2 hours,
both at room temperature. Flow chambers were perfused at 12.98 µL/min, which is calculated to produce
a shear stress of 1 dyne/cm2. CFSE-labeled wild-type and vehicle control-treated vinculin knockout
neutrophils were evaluated within the same flow chamber. Time-lapse images were captured every 10
seconds for 1 hour, starting immediately after starting flow chamber perfusion, using transmitted light
through a 20X objective. Motility was tracked using ImageJ Manual Tracking and analyzed using Ibidi
Chemotaxis to obtain measures of migration: accumulated distance, Euclidean distance, and velocity.
Western blot
For each group, 1x106 neutrophils were lysed in Tris lysis buffer (0.2M Tris, 1% Triton X-100,
1% sodium orthovandate) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 minutes on ice

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

with occasional mixing. Lysed samples were centrifuged at 11,000g for 10 minutes and the supernatants
were heated to 95˚C for 10 minutes in Laemmli buffer. Supernatants were loaded onto 4-20% MiniPROTEAN TGX gels (Bio-Rad) and run at 160V. Gels were then transferred onto 0.45 µm nitrocellulose
membrane at 100V for 1 hour at 4˚C. Probing of western blots was carried out according to the antibody
manufacturer’s instructions (Cell Signaling Technologies). Western blots were analyzed with SuperSignal
West Pico PLUS Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Scientific) to detect HRP-conjugated antibodies
using a Bio-Rad Chemidoc XRS.
Immunocytochemistry and TIRF microscopy
Glass coverslips (0.17 mm) were coated with 10 µg/mL ICAM-1 and 2.5 µg/mL CXCL1 for 2
hours and then blocked with an excess of casein for 2 hours. Neutrophils obtained after 4-day
differentiation were washed and resuspended in HBSS++ prior to use. Neutrophils were incubated on
coverslips for 35 minutes at 37ºC, then fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 30 minutes, and
permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100 for 10 minutes. Coverslips were incubated with primary antibodies
in 1% BSA overnight at 4ºC, transferred to secondary antibodies for 1 hour at room temperature.
Neutrophils were stained with NucBlue and ActinGreen 488 (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to
manufacturer’s recommendation prior to mounting coverslips onto slides. For live cell imaging,
progenitors with transduced to express Clover-vinculin and Lifeact-mRuby2 in differentiated neutrophils.
Samples were imaged with a TILL Photonics iMIC TIRF microscope (FEI Company) and Andor iXon3
EMCCD camera.
Animals
All animal studies were approved by the Lifespan Animal Welfare Committee. Mice were housed
in a specific pathogen-free facility at Rhode Island Hospital. Mice harboring floxed Vcl alleles (Vclf/f)
were kindly provided by Dr. Robert Ross (UC-San Diego) and have been previously described (32). Vclf/f
mice were crossed with MX1-Cre (MX1cre) mice (The Jackson Laboratory) in which Cre recombinase

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

expression is controlled by the MX1 promoter and can be induced by interferon production after
administration of synthetic double-stranded RNA (33). To generate mixed chimeras, 8- to 12-week-old
C57BL/6 mice (The Jackson Laboratory) were lethally irradiated (10 Gy, single dose) and then
reconstituted by intravenous injection of bone marrow cells from a Vclf/fMX1creGFP+ mouse expressing
transgenic enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) under the ubiquitin C promoter (The Jackson
Laboratory) and a Vclf/f (GFP-) control mouse at 1:1 ratio. Deletion of the gene encoding vinculin was
induced by intraperitoneal injection of 250 µg of polyinosinic–polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C; InvivoGen),
three doses, each 2 days apart, starting 4 weeks after irradiation, inducing near complete loss of the
respective protein in neutrophils (Fig. S4). Mice were used for experiments 4–8 weeks after Poly I:C
administration.
Peritonitis model
For each mixed chimeric mouse, a blood sample was collected by saphenous vein puncture prior
to intraperitoneal injection of 1 mL 4% thioglycollate broth to induce peritonitis. For adoptive transfer
studies, mice were first challenged with an intraperitoneal dose of 1 mL 4% thioglycollate broth. At 2
hours post-challenge, mice were intravenously injected with a mixed 1:1 population of 6 x 106 membrane
dye-labeled in vitro-derived neutrophils. At the indicated time point, 5 mL of ice-cold PBS with 2 mM
EDTA was used to lavage the peritoneum. Blood and lavage were analyzed by flow cytometry using
fluorescently labeled anti-Ly6G antibody to distinguish neutrophils with a MACSQuant Analyzer 10
(Miltenyi).
Cremaster muscle intravital imaging
Mice were anesthetized using a cocktail of ketamine (125 mg/kg) and xylazine (12.5 mg/kg), the
carotid artery was cannulated, and the cremaster muscle was exteriorized, cut longitudinally, and spread
onto a stage as has been previously described (7). The cremaster muscle was perfused throughout the
experiment with 37°C bicarbonate buffered saline equilibrated with 5% CO2 in N2. A blood sample was

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

collected prior to imaging using a catheter placed in the carotid artery. For arrest assays, 600 ng murine
CXCL1 was intravenously administered through the catheter. Cremaster muscle post-capillary venules
were imaged for 14 minutes following CXCL1 injection using an upright Olympus BX60 microscope
with a 40X water-immersion objective with EGFP fluorescence captured by a Chameleon 3 color camera
(FLIR Systems) and Rapp SP20-X3 xenon flashlamp.
Traction force microscopy
Traction force microscopy was performed as previously described, with some modifications (34).
Briefly, neutrophils obtained after 4-day differentiation were washed, labeled using CFSE (ThermoFisher
Scientific), and resuspended in HBSS++. Polyacrylamide gels were prepared using varying concentrations
of acrylamide (Bio-Rad) and N,N-methylene-bisacrylamide (Bio-Rad) to achieve the range of desired
elasticities with a Poisson’s ratio of 0.5. Soft gel substrates were composed of 3% acrylamide and 0.2%
bisacrylamide at approximately 1.5kPa, very soft substrates were composed of 3% acrylamide and 0.06%
bisacrylamide at approximately 0.5 kPa. Gel substrates were embedded with 0.2% final w/v 0.5 µm
fluorescent microspheres (Invitrogen). Polyacrylamide gels were crosslinked using 1.25% APS and 0.5%
TEMED yielding a final gel thickness of approximately 40 µm. 100 µg/mL ICAM-1 and 5 µg/mL
CXCL1 were UV cross-linked to the sulfo-SANPAH, as described above. Three-dimensional time-lapse
volumetric images of fluorescent beads in polyacrylamide substrates and labeled cell membranes were
recorded using laser scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM). A fast iterative digital volume correlation
(FIDVC) algorithm was used to track the motion of beads and calculate the 3D displacement vector
during cell migration compared to a reference position obtained by detaching the cells using 2% sodium
dodecyl sulfate (Sigma Aldrich) (34).
To calculate cell tractions, T, and an overall measure of cellular contractility, 𝜇, the Cauchy
stress, σ, was determined using the following equation for a Neo-Hookean elastic solid,

𝛔=

𝐺
𝐽!/!

1
𝐁 − tr 𝐁 𝐈 + 𝐾 𝐽 − 1 𝐈.
3

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Here, J is the Jacobian of the deformation gradient tensor, B is the left Cauchy-Green deformation tensor,
and G and K are the shear and bulk modulus of the polyacrylamide gel, respectively. To compute the
surface normal, n, we applied the Delaunay triangulation on the deformed surface grid points. The
reference gel surface is assumed to be initially flat in the stress-free-state, and we compute the deformed
surface grid points by adding the cumulative surface displacement to the reference gel surface.
Using the surface normal, n, and the Cauchy stress, σ, we compute the cell tractions, T, and root-mean
squared traction, Trms, as follows,

𝐓= 𝐧∙𝝈

𝑇!"# =

!
!

!
!
!!! 𝐓! .

To establish a simple, scalar-based metric of the overall contractility of the cell, we extended the general
procedure by Butler et al. to calculate the three-dimensional dipole moment tensor as,

𝑴=

𝒙𝑻𝑑𝑆 .
!

The cellular contractility, µ, is then defined simply as the trace of the dipole moment tensor M, i.e., µ =
tr(M) (35).
Data analysis
All analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 8. As indicated, one-way or two-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare the differences between samples and post-hoc
analysis was performed using Tukey pairwise multiple comparison test. For samples that did not have a
normal distribution, Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA was used to compare difference between samples
and post-hoc analysis was performed using Tukey pairwise multiple comparison test. Experimental data
are presented with mean and standard deviation. For traction force microscopy, µ is log transformed as
this better describes the distribution of values.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results
Neutrophils are terminally differentiated leukocytes with a limited lifespan and therefore not
amenable to genetic manipulation for in vitro studies. To circumvent this limitation, we first established
the utility of HoxB8-conditional myeloid progenitors as an in vitro source of differentiated mature
neutrophils, progenitor-derived wild-type (WT) and vinculin knockout (VclKO) neutrophils were
examined for markers to confirm their neutrophil identity and function. Ly6G is a murine neutrophilspecific marker and its expression level corresponds with bone marrow differentiation of precursors into
mature neutrophils (36). For all HoxB8-conditional progenitor cell lines used in this study, differentiation
in the presence of SCF and G-CSF resulted in the complete loss in expression of CD117 and the gain in
the expression of Ly6G (Fig. S1A). LFA-1 and Mac-1, the two primary β2 integrins expressed by
neutrophils, consist of the common β2 subunit CD18 and α subunits CD11a and CD11b, respectively. We
observed similar expression of CD11a and CD11b by progenitor-derived WT, VclKO (1) and (2)
neutrophils created using two distinct sgRNAs, and by bone marrow (BM) neutrophils isolated from mice
(Fig. S5A-B). Surface expression of CD11a and CD11b was ablated in β2 integrin knockout (Itgb2KO)
neutrophils, as previously characterized (29). All groups of progenitor-derived neutrophils expressed the
canonical chemokine receptor CXCR2 (Fig. S5C). In examining the activation of neutrophils, the
upregulation of CD11b from delivery of intracellular granule stores to the cell surface was found to be
similar in both WT and VclKO neutrophils, with an approximate 4-fold increase in expression in response
to formylated peptide Met-Leu-Phe (fMLP) (Fig. S5D) (37). Altogether, these data establish the in vitroderivation of genetically-modified murine neutrophils from conditionally-immortalized progenitors.
To determine whether vinculin plays a role in β2 integrin-mediated adhesion, a static adhesion
assay was used to measure neutrophil attachment to a substrate of ICAM-1 and CXCL1. We observed
that vinculin-deficient neutrophils had attenuated adhesion compared to WT neutrophils, and had
comparable levels of adhesion as neutrophils lacking β2 integrin expression (Fig. 1A). Adhesion levels of
progenitor-derived WT neutrophils were not statistically different from that of BM neutrophils (Fig. 1A).

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The reduction in adhesion of vinculin-deficient neutrophils was observed over a range of substrate ligand
concentrations and assay wash stringency (Fig. S6A-C). Overall, these results suggest that vinculin plays
a role in β2 integrin-mediated adhesion by neutrophils.
On the surface of quiescent neutrophils in the circulation, β2 integrins are in an inactive state with
low ligand-binding affinity. In response to activation signals received during selectin-mediated rolling on
inflamed endothelium, “inside-out” activation of β2 integrins triggers a drastic increase in binding to
ICAM-1 that mediates the transition from neutrophil rolling to arrest (8). As an assay specific for the
detection of β2 integrin affinity changes, soluble ICAM-1 binding has been previously used to
demonstrate the essential role of talin-1 and Kindlin-3 in this process (7). As VclKO neutrophils had
impaired adhesion relative to WT, we sought to determine whether vinculin plays a role in the inside-out
activation of β2 integrins by measuring soluble ICAM-1 binding in response to CXCL1. As expected, WT
neutrophils exhibited a significant increase in soluble ICAM-1 binding in the presence of CXCL1, while
talin-1-deficient neutrophils were unable to activate their β2 integrins to bind soluble ICAM-1 (Fig. 1B).
Vinculin-deficient neutrophils responded to CXCL1 in a similar manner as WT neutrophils and bound
significantly more ICAM-1 than unstimulated neutrophils, indicating that β2 integrin activation remains
intact in the absence of vinculin (Fig. 1B). Levels of CXCL1-induced soluble ICAM-1 binding by VclKO
neutrophils were not significantly different from WT neutrophils (Fig. 1B). These data indicate that while
vinculin regulates neutrophil adhesion, it is not involved in the earliest steps of adhesion that rely on
inside-out β2 integrin activation.
Neutrophil spreading occurs prior to migration where the neutrophil flattens along its substrate
and increases its integrin-mediated associations (38). Spreading involves activated integrin clustering and
actin rearrangements (39, 40). Vinculin plays a role in actin polymerization, integrin clustering, and
adhesion plaque maturation in other cell types (17, 41). To understand whether vinculin plays a similar
role in neutrophil spreading, we quantified cell area and frequency of spreading under the same conditions
as those used in evaluating neutrophil adhesion. We observed that spreading is impaired in VclKO

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

neutrophils, in terms of both cell area and the fraction of cells that spread beyond the diameter of a round
neutrophil in suspension (Fig. 1C-D). Thus, vinculin is required for efficient and complete neutrophil
spreading on ICAM-1 in response to CXCL1.
Migration of neutrophils is dependent on both adhesion turnover and actin polymerization (42,
43). Vinculin has been previously described to regulate directed motility in fibroblasts (44). Here, we
examined neutrophil migration to understand the potential role of vinculin in neutrophil motility during
chemokinesis. As compared to WT neutrophils, VclKO neutrophils exhibited mild attenuation of
migration with significantly lower accumulated distance, Euclidean distance, and instantaneous velocity
(Fig. 2A-C). Directness of migration, a measure of the tendency of the neutrophil to travel in a straight
line, was similar for wild-type and vinculin-deficient neutrophils (Fig. 2D). These data suggest that
neutrophils generally undergo random-walk chemokinetic behavior under these conditions, as directness
below 0.5 indicates less than half of migration is in the direction of its ending position. Individual
neutrophil migration tracks are shown in Figure 2F. To better analyze this behavior, a two-dimensional
algorithm for measuring single particle diffusion was used to calculate mean-squared displacements for
migration up to 80 seconds. Mean-squared displacement of VclKO neutrophils was significantly impaired
compared to WT for migration up to 80 seconds (Fig. 2E). After 80 seconds the error for this model in
both wild-type and vinculin knockout neutrophils is inflated and therefore unreliable. Altogether, these
data indicate a role for vinculin in neutrophil migration under static conditions.
In the context of neutrophil recruitment from the circulation, migration on ICAM-1 expressed on
the endothelium will typically occur in an environment in which forces from blood flow are experienced
by the attached neutrophil. Thus, to better recapitulate physiological conditions, we performed neutrophil
migration assays in a flow chamber perfused at a wall shear stress within the range typical of postcapillary venules. Flow chambers were coated with E-selectin, ICAM-1, and CXCL1 to reconstitute
ligands presented by inflamed endothelial cells that mediate neutrophil rolling, arrest, and intraluminal
migration. In contrast to the apparent defect in VclKO neutrophil migration under static conditions, no

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

significant difference was observed in the accumulated distance, Euclidean distance, and instantaneous
velocity of WT and VclKO neutrophils in the presence of fluid shear stress (Fig. 3A-C and
Supplementary Video 1). WT and VclKO neutrophil directness were similar (Fig. 3D), and the Rayleigh
p-value was below 0.001 for both WT and VclKO neutrophils, suggesting that both groups of neutrophils
were similarly moving in the direction of fluid flow rather than in random chemokinetic motion (Figure
3E). Thus, in the presence of forces from fluid flow, vinculin plays no apparent role in β2 integrinmediated neutrophil motility.
To understand whether the impairment in spreading and migration are related to the actin
cytoskeleton, WT and VclKO neutrophils adherent to immobilized ICAM-1/CXCL1 were examined for
the localization of actin by fluorescence microscopy. CD11a, the α subunit of LFA-1, was used to
examine integrin localization (25). Phalloidin was used to stain F-actin, which is expected to localize to
uropods as stable F-actin fibers and as actively polymerizing in the lamellipodia during migration (43,
45). Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM) was used to selectively image fluorescent
signals at the cell surface interacting with the substrate. WT neutrophils had a strong localization of Factin within uropods, where force is expected to be generated for ameboid migration (46), while there was
no discernable organization pattern of CD11a (Fig. 4A). In observing actin distribution, 77% of WT
neutrophils could be considered polarized compared to 32% and 25% in VclKO (1) and (2), respectively
(Fig. 4B and S7A). The fluorescent skewness and kurtosis of F-actin distribution was measured to
determine whether the distribution of fluorescence was asymmetric around the mean or peaked,
respectively. Skewness of greater than 1 can be considered asymmetrical while positive kurtosis indicates
peaked intensity away from a Gaussian distribution. F-actin median skewness in WT neutrophils was
observed to be 1.23 compared to VclKO (1) and (2), which have a median skewness of 0.89 and 1.02,
respectively (Fig. S7B). All neutrophils displayed similar median kurtosis values (Fig. S7B). After
normalizing to WT, VclKO (1) and (2) neutrophils had a median F-actin intensity in TIRFM images that
was significantly less than that of WT neutrophils (Fig. 4C), whereas CD11a intensity was not different

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

across groups (Fig. 4D). Neutrophil morphology was measured based on aspect ratio, roundness and
circularity; higher values of aspect ratio and lower values of roundness and circularity imply more
elongated neutrophil morphology. The median circularity, median roundness and median aspect ratio of
WT neutrophils were significantly different than that of VclKO neutrophils (Fig. S7B). Altogether these
data indicate that vinculin-deficient neutrophils are less polarized compared to WT neutrophils, which
may be related to impairment in actin cytoskeletal organization. When vinculin was expressed
endogenously with a fluorescent tag or visualized using antibody labeling, it was found to localize to the
perimeter of the neutrophil (Fig. S8A-B), as has been previously described (24, 47). Using neutrophils
expressing Clover-vinculin and Lifeact-mRuby2, to visualize actively polymerizing actin, surfaceproximal vinculin was tracked in a live neutrophil migrating on ICAM-1/CXCL1 (Fig. S8A). We
observed that Clover-vinculin increased in intensity as neutrophils contracted inward during migration,
suggesting a potential role for vinculin during the contraction stage of migration.
To better understand the apparent contradictory results on the role of vinculin in neutrophil
migration, a murine mixed bone marrow chimeric model was used to examine whether vinculin regulates
in vivo neutrophil recruitment. Mixed chimeric mice allow for analysis of competitive in vivo recruitment
of wild-type (Vclf/f) and vinculin knockout (Vclf/fMX1cre) neutrophils in an internally controlled
inflammatory environment. For mice challenged with an intraperitoneal injection of thioglycollate broth
that induces sterile inflammation, neutrophil recruitment peaks during the first 4-6 hours and occurs
through mechanisms involving β2 integrins (1). Comparing the baseline (pre-stimulus) peripheral blood
chimerism to that observed in the peritoneal lavage at 4 hours after inducing peritonitis, we found no
significant difference in the recruitment of wild-type and vinculin-deficient neutrophils (Fig. 5A).
Additionally, in vitro progenitor-derived WT and VclKO neutrophils were adoptively transferred into
C57BL/6 mice to observe their competitive recruitment during thioglycollate-induced peritonitis. Again,
there was no difference in the recruitment of in vitro-derived WT and VclKO neutrophils, whereas

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Itgb2KO neutrophils exhibited impaired recruitment into the inflamed peritoneum as expected (Fig. S9CD).
The murine cremaster muscle microvasculature was observed in mixed chimeric mice by
intravital microscopy during soluble chemokine (CXCL1) stimulation, which has previously been shown
to induce rapid β2 integrin-mediated neutrophil arrest that is dependent on integrin activation by talin-1
and Kindlin-3 (7). In addition, the time that elapses prior to detachment of neutrophils after CXCL1indued arrest was used to measure adhesion strengthening (48). We observed no impairment in the arrest
or adhesion strengthening of vinculin-deficient neutrophils relative to wild-type (Fig. 5B-C). Further,
Vclf/f and Vclf/fMX1cre bone marrow neutrophils assayed ex vivo exhibited a similar increase in soluble
ICAM-1 binding (Fig. 5D), supporting previous results using progenitor-derived neutrophils and
indicating that vinculin is not required for β2 integrin activation. It is therefore unclear how vinculin
deficiency results in enhanced numbers of neutrophils arresting on post-capillary venules after CXCL1
stimulation (Fig. 5B). Altogether, these in vivo data are consistent with our in vitro findings analyzing
neutrophil migration under fluid flow that suggest vinculin is dispensable for intraluminal neutrophil
motility. Further, these in vivo data also suggest that the process of neutrophil diapedesis and entry into
extravascular tissue sites does not require vinculin.
Vinculin is well characterized for its mechanosensitive function in other cell types, and so we
reasoned that vinculin may play an analogous role in neutrophils (49, 50). The spreading of human
neutrophils has been shown to depend on substrate stiffness (31), but the molecules involved in the
neutrophil mechanosensing response have yet to be identified. To probe the function of vinculin in
neutrophil mechanosensing, we analyzed neutrophil spreading on polyacrylamide gels of varying stiffness
that were functionalized with ICAM-1 and CXCL1. With increasing substrate stiffness, WT neutrophils
exhibited an increase in cell area and the fraction of neutrophils that spread, whereas VclKO neutrophils
exhibited an attenuated response that differed significantly from WT neutrophils only at the highest (100
kPa) substrate stiffness (Fig. 6A-B and S10A). While the mechanosensitive spreading of VclKO

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

neutrophils was significantly attenuated relative to WT, vinculin deficiency did not completely ablate β2
integrin-dependent spreading, as demonstrated by comparing VclKO neutrophils to Itgb2KO neutrophils
lacking β2 integrin expression (Fig. 6A-B). We further probed neutrophil adhesion and motility at
intermediate substrate compliance (5 – 20 kPa), observing that the mechanosensitive phenotype of
vinculin-deficient neutrophils became measurable in our experimental system within this intermediate
range of substrate stiffness (Fig. S10B). In addition, we observed that neutrophils lacking vinculin had
impaired motility on 5 kPa and 10 kPa gels, but not on 20 kPa gels (Fig. S10C).
To gain further insight into the mechanisms of vinculin-mediated neutrophil mechanosensing and
spreading, we attempted rescue of VclKO neutrophil spreading on 100 kPa substrates by exogenous
expression of wild-type or mutant forms of vinculin. Expression of vinculin tagged with a variant of GFP,
Clover-vinculin, was able to enhance the spread area of VclKO neutrophils to levels observed in WT
neutrophils (Fig. 6C). However, expression of Clover-vinculin-A50I, with a single amino acid mutation
that disrupts interaction with talin-1 (17), was not able to rescue the spreading deficiency of VclKO
neutrophils (Fig. 6C). Altogether, these data indicate that vinculin regulates β2 integrin-dependent
neutrophil spreading through a mechanosensing mechanism that involves vinculin interaction with the
integrin tail-binding protein talin-1.
Contractile force generation is essential for neutrophil adhesion, spreading, and migration (42).
To quantify contractility, we performed traction force microscopy using bead-embedded polyacrylamide
gels. There was a technical limitation for these studies, in that only on gel substrates of relative low
stiffness (less than 1.5 kPa) do neutrophils produce measurable gel/bead displacements. Nevertheless,
traction force microscopy is a sensitive technique capable of resolving small differences in traction stress
that do not necessarily manifest in a population-level phenotype. Polyacrylamide gels were functionalized
as above with ICAM-1 and CXCL1, but with 40-fold more ICAM-1 and 2-fold more CXCL1 to
maximize contractility in each individual cell. Possibly due to this increased ligand density, neutrophils
underwent adhesion and spreading, but there was no observable long-range migration under any of the

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

measured conditions. In vitro-derived WT and VclKO neutrophils generated increased traction stresses
from very soft (0.5 kPa) to soft (1.5 kPa) gels, but had similar overall contractility under the tested
conditions (Fig. 7A-B). VclKO neutrophils had reduced traction stresses on soft gels compared to WT
neutrophils, but similar overall contractility for both very soft and soft gels. These data are consistent with
VclKO neutrophil spreading being unimpaired on gels of lower matrix relative to WT, suggesting again
that the magnitude of the role for vinculin in neutrophil adhesive function depends on the mechanical
microenvironment.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Discussion
The goal of this study was to assess the role of vinculin in neutrophil adhesion and motility. In the
classic example mesenchymal cell adhesion, vinculin is involved in the maturation of integrin-based focal
adhesions and contributes to cell spreading and mechanotransduction (51, 52). In leukocytes, vinculin has
been shown to have roles in unique processes like T and B cell immune synapse formation, marking
apoptosis for T cells, and osteoclast actin-ring formation during bone resorption (20, 22, 53). In platelets,
vinculin is dispensable for most physiological functions (54). Whether vinculin is a mediator or regulator
of neutrophil adhesion was uncertain prior to the current study. Although neutrophils do not form mature
focal adhesions, we hypothesized that vinculin may play a role in neutrophil behavior during processes
such as adhesion strengthening to the endothelium.
By live cell imaging, we observed that vinculin accumulates in punctate structures in the
neutrophil as it contracts inward on ICAM-1, similar to what has been previously described for vinculin
localization in neutrophils (55). Our study finds that vinculin knockout attenuates neutrophil adhesion,
spreading and migration on ICAM-1 in vitro under static conditions. The attenuated response in adhesion
mimics the attenuation in spreading, which may imply that the neutrophils remaining adhered in the static
adhesion assay are those that are spread. Despite the in vitro defect observed in neutrophils lacking
vinculin, there was no in vivo phenotype as assessed in a classical recruitment model of acute peritonitis.
Furthermore, neutrophil adhesion strengthening in inflamed post-capillary venules of the cremaster
muscle remained intact in vinculin-deficient neutrophils. In fact, there were significantly more vinculin
knockout neutrophils that underwent rapid arrest in post-capillary venules in response to CXCL1, an in
vivo assay of β2 integrin activation. It is possible that in mixed chimeric mice the supply of vinculin
knockout neutrophils to the cremaster muscle vascular bed was transiently enhanced relative to wild-type,
as neutrophils can become sequestered elsewhere in the circulation in response to systemic stimuli.
During sterile inflammation, chemokines form a gradient outward from the offended site that
guides migrating neutrophils (56). Neutrophils first encounter these chemokines intravascularly as they
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

are immobilized by heparan sulfate on the apical surface of the inflamed endothelium (56). Neutrophil
crawling on inflamed endothelium is necessary to find a favorable site to transmigrate, and adhesion
strengthening aids this process as the neutrophil must resist detachment under the shear stress of blood
flow (9, 48, 57, 58). Interestingly, we found that the involvement of vinculin in regulating neutrophil
migration is dependent on the hemodynamic context in which it is assayed. While the migration of
vinculin-deficient neutrophils was reduced compared to wild-type neutrophils in a commonly used static
motility assay, no impairment in migration under flow was observed in vinculin knockout neutrophils. In
the flow chamber assay, there was a preference for neutrophils to crawl in the direction of shear stress
rather than opposing it, and both wild-type and vinculin-deficient neutrophils exhibited this directional
behavior. There is much evidence for in vivo chemokine gradients superseding in vivo physical cues such
as shear stress to direct neutrophils toward sites of injury (56, 59). However, shear stress is still a
quantifiable factor in vivo with neutrophils often favoring travel with flow rather than against (57).
Addressing the chemotactic persistence of neutrophils under flow after vinculin ablation would be critical
as this has been ascribed as a critical role for vinculin, which was not resolved with our experiments that
employed immobilized CXCL1 as a chemokinetic stimulus (44). In the absence of forces due to shear
stress, random migration was observed, with no significant role for vinculin in the persistence of
neutrophil migration based on directness and the linearity of the mean-squared displacement graph (60).
However, the model in which mean-squared displacement was calculated has a limited fit for calculations
at greater time intervals, and the curvature of mean-squared displacements for wild-type and vinculin
knockout neutrophils might not be completely solved.
Outside-in signaling by integrins plays a prominent role in actin cytoskeletal reorganization for
physiological functions such as migration. Here we show a marked ablation of stable F-actin and
neutrophil polarization on ICAM-1 in vinculin knockout neutrophils that may indicate an impaired
outside-in integrin signaling response. Stable F-actin is important for the contractility of neutrophils and
force generation is attenuated in vinculin knockout neutrophils as quantified by traction force microscopy.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Outside-in signaling by ligand-bound integrins is thought to occur through ITAM-containing receptors,
such as the low affinity Fc receptor Fcγ and DAP12 expressed in leukocytes (61). These receptors are
phosphorylated by Src family kinases (SFKs) to recruit and activate Syk, leading to downstream activity
of PLCγ2, Vav exchange factors, PI3K, and SLP-76 adaptor. In this way SFKs are responsible for
adhesion strengthening, morphological change, and migration through outside-in signaling. However,
while Syk has been found to localize with proteins such as the β2 integrin Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18) and
mAbp1, which are important for intraluminal crawling, the proteins necessary for integrin outside-in
signaling (Syk, SFKs and ITAM-containing receptors) have been found to have disparate roles in
intraluminal crawling and only minimally influence extravasation in fMLP- and chemokine-mediated
models of neutrophil recruitment (62). For example, a recent study found the Tec family kinase Btk and
the SFK Hck, while indispensable for fMLP-mediated intraluminal crawling and recruitment, were
dispensable for chemokine-mediated neutrophil recruitment (63). Our study is limited to chemokinemediated neutrophil recruitment, so we cannot rule out other pathways of activation that might involve
vinculin-dependent intraluminal crawling or outside-in signaling in general. Interestingly, while PKCθ
and mAbp1 are implicated strongly in adhesion strengthening and intraluminal crawling under flow
conditions, respectively, they have more dispensable roles under static conditions (48, 57). Here we
describe the reverse, in which vinculin has a dispensable role for neutrophil crawling under shear forces
but is important for crawling in the absence of flow in vitro. Together with these previous findings, our
data suggests that neutrophils employ distinct mechanisms for migration that depend upon
microenvironmental conditions and cues. One might speculate that vinculin is more important to
interstitial crawling compared to vascular recruitment, but additional studies are necessary to directly
address this possibility. The in vitro system used in our study to probe neutrophil migration is twodimensional and used ligands to mimic endothelium, while interstitial crawling in tissues is most often
three-dimensional and can have a dispensable role for integrins (64).

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Outside-in and inside-out signaling have been defined for integrins to describe their nature as
both adhesion molecules and signaling receptors (65). We find that vinculin was not required to regulate
neutrophil β2 integrin activation through inside-out signaling when neutrophils were activated by soluble
CXCL1. We cannot rule out that vinculin may participate in integrin regulation through an outside-in
pathway once bound to ICAM-1, in which talin-1 is bound to the β2 integrin tail (7). The outside-in
component of integrin signaling was of interest to this study because of vinculin’s known role in
mechanotransduction in other cell types (51, 66). As neutrophils can travel from the blood to virtually all
parts of the body, sensing the mechanical environment is of immense importance to fine tune neutrophil
function in different tissues (31). In mesenchymal cells, rigidity sensing is a well-characterized adaptive
response that influences focal adhesion formation, cell spreading, and traction force generation (67).
Indeed, our data indicate that vinculin can also mediate mechanosensing by neutrophils. However, the
stiff gels of 100 kPa used in our study are not of a physiologically relevant tissue compliance. Vinculindependent spreading was only found to be impaired on 100 kPa substrates, while traction stress
generation and spreading was not impaired on physiologically relevant substrate stiffnesses between 1-10
kPa. Rescue of vinculin-deficient of neutrophil spreading was achieved through exogenous expression of
full-length vinculin, but not by the A50I mutant of vinculin that disrupts its interaction with talin-1 (17).
These data point towards a mechanism that involves the function of vinculin at integrin-based adhesion
structures. A mechanosensing phenotype was also resolved using traction force microscopy, with a small,
but significant, attenuation of neutrophil contraction observed after vinculin depletion. This defect would
be unlikely to affect motility, which agrees with the in vivo model and suggests that physiological
neutrophil motility is unimpaired in the absence of vinculin. Considering that vinculin expression is
unnecessary for neutrophil recruitment using a murine model of acute peritonitis, it remains unclear
whether this might be because rigidity sensing by neutrophils does not play a role in their recruitment to
this specific tissue.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In conclusion, we report that the role of vinculin in neutrophil adhesive function mediated by β2
integrins is highly dependent on the mechanical context of the microenvironment. Analysis of neutrophil
spreading and adhesion under static conditions, using assays commonly used in the field, first suggested a
prominent role for vinculin. By performing assays of mechanosensitivity and of adhesion and migration
under flow, we observed that vinculin is dispensable when experimental conditions more closely mimic
physiological conditions. Finally, we found that vinculin is also not required for neutrophil recruitment in
an animal model of sterile inflammation.. Further studies are necessary to probe other inflammatory
contexts and tissue sites to determine whether a vinculin-dependent mode of neutrophil adhesion and
motility is employed in vivo under different microenvironmental conditions.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Dr. Paul Ekert for the tamoxifen-inducible Hoxb8 plasmid used to produce the
progenitor cell lines used in this study. This study was supported by the following awards from the
National Institutes of Health: R35GM124911 (CTL), R01AI116629 (JSR and CF), F31DE028745 (HW),
and T32HL134625 (BMN and HW). All authors declare no related conflict of interest.

Author contributions
ZSW designed and performed experiments, analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript. LH, MP, and MH
designed, performed and analyzed traction force microscopy experiments, and were supervised by CF.
HW performed and analyzed experiments probing neutrophil spreading on polyacrylamide gels and was
supervised by JSR. BMN analyzed some of the neutrophil migration data. AW assisted with adhesion
assays. CTL designed experiments, supervised the study and wrote the manuscript.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.
Walzog B, Scharffetter-Kochanek K, Gaehtgens P: Impairment of neutrophil emigration in
CD18-null mice. Am J Physiol 276(5 Pt 1):G1125-1130, 1999.
2.
Anderson DC, Schmalsteig FC, Finegold MJ, Hughes BJ, Rothlein R, Miller LJ, Kohl S, Tosi
MF, Jacobs RL, Waldrop TC, et al.: The Severe and Moderate Phenotypes of Heritable Mac-1, Lfa-1
Deficiency - Their Quantitative Definition and Relation to Leukocyte Dysfunction and Clinical-Features.
Journal of Infectious Diseases 152(4):668-689, 1985.
3.
Manevich-Mendelson E, Feigelson SW, Pasvolsky R, Aker M, Grabovsky V, Shulman Z, Kilic
SS, Rosenthal-Allieri MA, Ben-Dor S, Mory A, et al.: Loss of Kindlin-3 in LAD-III eliminates LFA-1 but
not VLA-4 adhesiveness developed under shear flow conditions. Blood 114(11):2344-2353, 2009.
4.
Grommes J, Soehnlein O: Contribution of neutrophils to acute lung injury. Mol Med 17(3-4):293307, 2011.
5.
Ayars GH, Altman LC, Rosen H, Doyle T: The injurious effect of neutrophils on pneumocytes in
vitro. Am Rev Respir Dis 129(6):964-973, 1984.
6.
Lu C, Shimaoka M, Ferzly M, Oxvig C, Takagi J, Springer TA: An isolated, surface-expressed I
domain of the integrin alphaLbeta2 is sufficient for strong adhesive function when locked in the open
conformation with a disulfide bond. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98(5):2387-2392, 2001.
7.
Lefort CT, Rossaint J, Moser M, Petrich BG, Zarbock A, Monkley SJ, Critchley DR, Ginsberg
MH, Fassler R, Ley K: Distinct roles for talin-1 and kindlin-3 in LFA-1 extension and affinity regulation.
Blood 119(18):4275-4282, 2012.
8.
Lefort CT, Ley K: Neutrophil arrest by LFA-1 activation. Front Immunol 3:157, 2012.
9.
Phillipson M, Heit B, Colarusso P, Liu L, Ballantyne CM, Kubes P: Intraluminal crawling of
neutrophils to emigration sites: a molecularly distinct process from adhesion in the recruitment cascade. J
Exp Med 203(12):2569-2575, 2006.
10.
Pick R, Brechtefeld D, Walzog B: Intraluminal crawling versus interstitial neutrophil migration
during inflammation. Mol Immunol 55(1):70-75, 2013.
11.
Peng X, Nelson ES, Maiers JL, DeMali KA: New insights into vinculin function and regulation.
Int Rev Cell Mol Biol 287:191-231, 2011.
12.
Diez G, Auernheimer V, Fabry B, Goldmann WH: Head/tail interaction of vinculin influences
cell mechanical behavior. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 406(1):85-88, 2011.
13.
Bois PR, O'Hara BP, Nietlispach D, Kirkpatrick J, Izard T: The vinculin binding sites of talin and
alpha-actinin are sufficient to activate vinculin. J Biol Chem 281(11):7228-7236, 2006.
14.
Sun L, Noel JK, Levine H, Onuchic JN: Molecular Simulations Suggest a Force-Dependent
Mechanism of Vinculin Activation. Biophys J 113(8):1697-1710, 2017.
15.
Auernheimer V, Lautscham LA, Leidenberger M, Friedrich O, Kappes B, Fabry B, Goldmann
WH: Vinculin phosphorylation at residues Y100 and Y1065 is required for cellular force transmission. J
Cell Sci 128(18):3435-3443, 2015.
16.
Case LB, Baird MA, Shtengel G, Campbell SL, Hess HF, Davidson MW, Waterman CM:
Molecular mechanism of vinculin activation and nanoscale spatial organization in focal adhesions. Nat
Cell Biol 17(7):880-892, 2015.
17.
Humphries JD, Wang P, Streuli C, Geiger B, Humphries MJ, Ballestrem C: Vinculin controls
focal adhesion formation by direct interactions with talin and actin. J Cell Biol 179(5):1043-1057, 2007.
18.
Atherton P, Stutchbury B, Wang DY, Jethwa D, Tsang R, Meiler-Rodriguez E, Wang P, Bate N,
Zent R, Barsukov IL, et al.: Vinculin controls talin engagement with the actomyosin machinery. Nat
Commun 6:10038, 2015.
19.
Propato A, Cutrona G, Francavilla V, Ulivi M, Schiaffella E, Landt O, Dunbar R, Cerundolo V,
Ferrarini M, Barnaba V: Apoptotic cells overexpress vinculin and induce vinculin-specific cytotoxic Tcell cross-priming. Nat Med 7(7):807-813, 2001.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

20.
Saez de Guinoa J, Barrio L, Carrasco YR: Vinculin arrests motile B cells by stabilizing integrin
clustering at the immune synapse. J Immunol 191(5):2742-2751, 2013.
21.
Walde M, Monypenny J, Heintzmann R, Jones GE, Cox S: Vinculin binding angle in podosomes
revealed by high resolution microscopy. PLoS One 9(2):e88251, 2014.
22.
Fukunaga T, Zou W, Warren JT, Teitelbaum SL: Vinculin regulates osteoclast function. J Biol
Chem 289(19):13554-13564, 2014.
23.
Lammermann T, Sixt M: Mechanical modes of 'amoeboid' cell migration. Curr Opin Cell Biol
21(5):636-644, 2009.
24.
Yuruker B, Niggli V: Alpha-actinin and vinculin in human neutrophils: reorganization during
adhesion and relation to the actin network. J Cell Sci 101 ( Pt 2):403-414, 1992.
25.
Zhang H, Schaff UY, Green CE, Chen H, Sarantos MR, Hu Y, Wara D, Simon SI, Lowell CA:
Impaired integrin-dependent function in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein-deficient murine and human
neutrophils. Immunity 25(2):285-295, 2006.
26.
Wang GG, Calvo KR, Pasillas MP, Sykes DB, Hacker H, Kamps MP: Quantitative production of
macrophages or neutrophils ex vivo using conditional Hoxb8. Nat Methods 3(4):287-293, 2006.
27.
Salmanidis M, Brumatti G, Narayan N, Green BD, van den Bergen JA, Sandow JJ, Bert AG,
Silke N, Sladic R, Puthalakath H, et al.: Hoxb8 regulates expression of microRNAs to control cell death
and differentiation. Cell Death Differ 20(10):1370-1380, 2013.
28.
Gurzeler U, Rabachini T, Dahinden CA, Salmanidis M, Brumatti G, Ekert PG, Echeverry N,
Bachmann D, Simon HU, Kaufmann T: In vitro differentiation of near-unlimited numbers of functional
mouse basophils using conditional Hoxb8. Allergy 68(5):604-613, 2013.
29.
Wilson ZS, Ahn LB, Serratelli WS, Belley MD, Lomas-Neira J, Sen M, Lefort CT: Activated
beta2 Integrins Restrict Neutrophil Recruitment during Murine Acute Pseudomonal Pneumonia. Am J
Respir Cell Mol Biol 56(5):620-627, 2017.
30.
Pelham RJ, Jr., Wang Y: Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate
flexibility. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94(25):13661-13665, 1997.
31.
Oakes PW, Patel DC, Morin NA, Zitterbart DP, Fabry B, Reichner JS, Tang JX: Neutrophil
morphology and migration are affected by substrate elasticity. Blood 114(7):1387-1395, 2009.
32.
Zemljic-Harpf AE, Miller JC, Henderson SA, Wright AT, Manso AM, Elsherif L, Dalton ND,
Thor AK, Perkins GA, McCulloch AD, et al.: Cardiac-myocyte-specific excision of the vinculin gene
disrupts cellular junctions, causing sudden death or dilated cardiomyopathy. Mol Cell Biol 27(21):75227537, 2007.
33.
Velasco-Hernandez T, Sawen P, Bryder D, Cammenga J: Potential Pitfalls of the Mx1-Cre
System: Implications for Experimental Modeling of Normal and Malignant Hematopoiesis. Stem Cell
Reports 7(1):11-18, 2016.
34.
Toyjanova J, Bar-Kochba E, Lopez-Fagundo C, Reichner J, Hoffman-Kim D, Franck C: High
resolution, large deformation 3D traction force microscopy. PLoS One 9(4):e90976, 2014.
35.
Butler JP, Tolic-Norrelykke IM, Fabry B, Fredberg JJ: Traction fields, moments, and strain
energy that cells exert on their surroundings. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282(3):C595-605, 2002.
36.
Riffelmacher T, Clarke A, Richter FC, Stranks A, Pandey S, Danielli S, Hublitz P, Yu Z, Johnson
E, Schwerd T, et al.: Autophagy-Dependent Generation of Free Fatty Acids Is Critical for Normal
Neutrophil Differentiation. Immunity 47(3):466-480 e465, 2017.
37.
Graves V, Gabig T, McCarthy L, Strour EF, Leemhuis T, English D: Simultaneous mobilization
of Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18) and formyl peptide chemoattractant receptors in human neutrophils. Blood
80(3):776-787, 1992.
38.
Lomakina EB, Marsh G, Waugh RE: Cell surface topography is a regulator of molecular
interactions during chemokine-induced neutrophil spreading. Biophys J 107(6):1302-1312, 2014.
39.
Sengupta K, Aranda-Espinoza H, Smith L, Janmey P, Hammer D: Spreading of neutrophils: from
activation to migration. Biophys J 91(12):4638-4648, 2006.
40.
Labrador V, Riha P, Muller S, Dumas D, Wang X, Stoltz JF: The strength of integrin binding
between neutrophils and endothelial cells. Eur Biophys J 32(8):684-688, 2003.
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

41.
Thievessen I, Thompson PM, Berlemont S, Plevock KM, Plotnikov SV, Zemljic-Harpf A, Ross
RS, Davidson MW, Danuser G, Campbell SL, et al.: Vinculin-actin interaction couples actin retrograde
flow to focal adhesions, but is dispensable for focal adhesion growth. J Cell Biol 202(1):163-177, 2013.
42.
Smith LA, Aranda-Espinoza H, Haun JB, Dembo M, Hammer DA: Neutrophil traction stresses
are concentrated in the uropod during migration. Biophys J 92(7):L58-60, 2007.
43.
Weiner OD, Servant G, Welch MD, Mitchison TJ, Sedat JW, Bourne HR: Spatial control of actin
polymerization during neutrophil chemotaxis. Nat Cell Biol 1(2):75-81, 1999.
44.
Rahman A, Carey SP, Kraning-Rush CM, Goldblatt ZE, Bordeleau F, Lampi MC, Lin DY,
Garcia AJ, Reinhart-King CA: Vinculin Regulates Directionality and Cell Polarity in 2D, 3D Matrix and
3D Microtrack Migration. Mol Biol Cell, 2016.
45.
Cassimeris L: Chemoattractant-stimulated polymorphonuclear leukocytes contain two
populations of actin filaments that differ in their spatial distributions and relative stabilities. The Journal
of Cell Biology 110(4):1067-1075, 1990.
46.
Toyjanova J, Flores-Cortez E, Reichner JS, Franck C: Matrix confinement plays a pivotal role in
regulating neutrophil-generated tractions, speed, and integrin utilization. J Biol Chem 290(6):3752-3763,
2015.
47.
Lokuta MA, Huttenlocher A: TNF-alpha promotes a stop signal that inhibits neutrophil
polarization and migration via a p38 MAPK pathway. J Leukoc Biol 78(1):210-219, 2005.
48.
Bertram A, Zhang H, von Vietinghoff S, de Pablo C, Haller H, Shushakova N, Ley K: Protein
kinase C-theta is required for murine neutrophil recruitment and adhesion strengthening under flow. J
Immunol 188(8):4043-4051, 2012.
49.
Nagasato AI, Yamashita H, Matsuo M, Ueda K, Kioka N: The distribution of vinculin to lipid
rafts plays an important role in sensing stiffness of extracellular matrix. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem
81(6):1136-1147, 2017.
50.
del Rio A, Perez-Jimenez R, Liu R, Roca-Cusachs P, Fernandez JM, Sheetz MP: Stretching
single talin rod molecules activates vinculin binding. Science 323(5914):638-641, 2009.
51.
Janostiak R, Brabek J, Auernheimer V, Tatarova Z, Lautscham LA, Dey T, Gemperle J, Merkel
R, Goldmann WH, Fabry B, et al.: CAS directly interacts with vinculin to control mechanosensing and
focal adhesion dynamics. Cell Mol Life Sci 71(4):727-744, 2014.
52.
Gautrot JE, Malmstrom J, Sundh M, Margadant C, Sonnenberg A, Sutherland DS: The nanoscale
geometrical maturation of focal adhesions controls stem cell differentiation and mechanotransduction.
Nano Lett 14(7):3945-3952, 2014.
53.
Nolz JC, Medeiros RB, Mitchell JS, Zhu P, Freedman BD, Shimizu Y, Billadeau DD: WAVE2
regulates high-affinity integrin binding by recruiting vinculin and talin to the immunological synapse.
Mol Cell Biol 27(17):5986-6000, 2007.
54.
Mitsios JV, Prevost N, Kasirer-Friede A, Gutierrez E, Groisman A, Abrams CS, Wang Y,
Litvinov RI, Zemljic-Harpf A, Ross RS, et al.: What is vinculin needed for in platelets? J Thromb
Haemost 8(10):2294-2304, 2010.
55.
Takubo T, Tatsumi N: Microscopic co-distributions of myosin, actin, alpha-actinin and vinculin
in human neutrophils during movement. Haematologia (Budap) 29(4):285-294, 1999.
56.
Massena S, Christoffersson G, Hjertstrom E, Zcharia E, Vlodavsky I, Ausmees N, Rolny C, Li
JP, Phillipson M: A chemotactic gradient sequestered on endothelial heparan sulfate induces directional
intraluminal crawling of neutrophils. Blood 116(11):1924-1931, 2010.
57.
Hepper I, Schymeinsky J, Weckbach LT, Jakob SM, Frommhold D, Sixt M, Laschinger M,
Sperandio M, Walzog B: The mammalian actin-binding protein 1 is critical for spreading and intraluminal
crawling of neutrophils under flow conditions. J Immunol 188(9):4590-4601, 2012.
58.
Alcaide P, Auerbach S, Luscinskas FW: Neutrophil recruitment under shear flow: it's all about
endothelial cell rings and gaps. Microcirculation 16(1):43-57, 2009.
59.
McDonald B, Pittman K, Menezes GB, Hirota SA, Slaba I, Waterhouse CC, Beck PL, Muruve
DA, Kubes P: Intravascular danger signals guide neutrophils to sites of sterile inflammation. Science
330(6002):362-366, 2010.
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

60.
Qian H, Sheetz MP, Elson EL: Single particle tracking. Analysis of diffusion and flow in twodimensional systems. Biophys J 60(4):910-921, 1991.
61.
Mocsai A, Abram CL, Jakus Z, Hu Y, Lanier LL, Lowell CA: Integrin signaling in neutrophils
and macrophages uses adaptors containing immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs. Nat
Immunol 7(12):1326-1333, 2006.
62.
Futosi K, Mocsai A: Tyrosine kinase signaling pathways in neutrophils. Immunol Rev
273(1):121-139, 2016.
63.
Volmering S, Block H, Boras M, Lowell CA, Zarbock A: The Neutrophil Btk Signalosome
Regulates Integrin Activation during Sterile Inflammation. Immunity 44(1):73-87, 2016.
64.
Lammermann T, Afonso PV, Angermann BR, Wang JM, Kastenmuller W, Parent CA, Germain
RN: Neutrophil swarms require LTB4 and integrins at sites of cell death in vivo. Nature 498(7454):371375, 2013.
65.
Ley K, Laudanna C, Cybulsky MI, Nourshargh S: Getting to the site of inflammation: the
leukocyte adhesion cascade updated. Nat Rev Immunol 7(9):678-689, 2007.
66.
Huveneers S, Oldenburg J, Spanjaard E, van der Krogt G, Grigoriev I, Akhmanova A, Rehmann
H, de Rooij J: Vinculin associates with endothelial VE-cadherin junctions to control force-dependent
remodeling. J Cell Biol 196(5):641-652, 2012.
67.
Trichet L, Le Digabel J, Hawkins RJ, Vedula SR, Gupta M, Ribrault C, Hersen P, Voituriez R,
Ladoux B: Evidence of a large-scale mechanosensing mechanism for cellular adaptation to substrate
stiffness. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109(18):6933-6938, 2012.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure legends
Figure 1. Vinculin knockout attenuates β2 integrin-dependent neutrophil adhesion. (A) Adhesion of
neutrophils to immobilized ICAM-1 and CXCL1 assessed for progenitor-derived wild-type (WT),
vinculin knockout (VclKO) created using sgRNAs (1) and (2), β2 integrin knockout (Itgb2KO), and
murine bone marrow neutrophils (n=3 independent experiments). Analyzed using one-way ANOVA with
Tukey pairwise multiple comparison test. ** p<0.01. (B) Soluble ICAM-1 binding to neutrophils in
response to CXCL1, as measured by flow cytometry (3 replicates per group, n=3 independent
experiments). Analyzed using two-way ANOVA with Tukey pairwise multiple comparison test. * p<0.05;
*** p<0.001. (C) Spread area of membrane-labeled neutrophils on immobilized ICAM-1 and CXCL1
(n>70 cells/group, n=2 independent experiments). Analyzed using Mann-Whitney Rank Sum Test. **
p<0.01. (D) Percent of neutrophils spreading on immobilized ICAM-1 and CXCL1 after 30 minute
incubation (n>17 fields of view/group, n=3 independent experiments). Analyzed using unpaired Student’s
t-test. ** p<0.01.

Figure 2. Vinculin plays a role in β2 integrin-dependent neutrophil motility. (A-D) Parameters of
neutrophil motility during 30-minute chemokinesis on immobilized ICAM-1 and CXCL1 (n>160
cells/group, 3 independent experiments). Analyzed using unpaired Student’s t-test. ** p<0.01; ***
p<0.001. (E) Mean-squared displacement of neutrophil migration based on particle modeling. Analyzed
using linear regression with comparison of slopes. WT: y = 120t – 1338; VclKO: y = 60.5t - 431.3. ***
p<0.001. (F) Individual neutrophil tracks during 30-minute chemokinesis on immobilized ICAM-1 and
CXCL1.

Figure 3. Vinculin is dispensable for neutrophil motility under shear stress. (A-D) Parameters of
neutrophil motility during 60-minute chemokinesis in a flow chamber coated with E-selectin, ICAM-1

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and CXCL1, and perfused at a wall shear stress of 2 dyne/cm2 (n>70 cells/group, 5 replicate runs, 2
independent experiments). Analyzed using unpaired Student’s t-test. (E) Neutrophil tracks during 60minute chemokinesis in a flow chamber (as in A-D).

Figure 4. Vinculin is required for stable F-actin localization within uropods and neutrophil
polarization. (A) Representative immunoflluorescence images of neutrophils after 30-minute incubation
on immobilized ICAM-1 and CXCL1. Cells were stained with Hoescht, phalloidin, and anti-CD11a (n=3
independent experiments). Scale bar = 10 µm. (B) Polarization of neutrophils based on asymmetric Factin distribution (n=3 independent experiments). (C-D) Background-subtracted and normalized TIRFM
fluorescent intensities of F-actin and CD11a (n>30 cells/group, 3 independent experiments). Analyzed
using Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA with Dunn’s multiple comparison test. **** p<0.0001.

Figure 5. Vinculin is dispensable for neutrophil recruitment in vivo. (A) Percentage composition of
control (Vclf/f) and vinculin knockout (Vclf/fMX1cre) neutrophils in the peripheral blood and peritoneal
lavage, 4 hours after induction of peritonitis in mixed chimeric mice (n=5 mice, 2 independent
experiments). Analyzed using two-way ANOVA with Tukey multiple comparison test. (B-C) The arrest
and time course of sustained adhesion of neutrophils in response to intravenous injection of CXCL1, and
over the 15-minute period immediately following (n=12 fields of view, across 7 chimeric mice). Data
were analyzed using non-linear regression: (WT) Y = e-0.119t, (VclKO) Y = e-0.136t. (D) Soluble ICAM-1
binding to bone marrow neutrophils in response to CXCL1, as measured by flow cytometry (3 replicates
per group, n=3 independent experiments).

Figure 6. Vinculin plays a role in neutrophil mechanosensing. (A-B) Neutrophil cell area and
spreading frequency on polyacrylamide gels of varying stiffness (soft: 1.5 kPa, intermediate: 8.3 kPa,

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

stiff: 100 kPa) conjugated with ICAM-1 and CXCL1 (n>100 cells/group, 15 fields of view/group, 3
independent experiments). Analyzed using two-way ANOVA with Tukey multiple comparison test. **
p<0.01, *** p<0.001, **** p<0.0001. (C) Area of neutrophils from the indicated groups of WT and
VclKO (2) cells with exogenous expression of Clover-vinculin in wild-type or A50I mutant forms.
Neutrophils were allowed to adhere and spread on 100kPa polyacrylamide gels conjugated with ICAM-1
and CXCL1 (n>250 cells/group, 12 fields of view/group, 3 independent experiments) * p<0.05, ***
p<0.001.

Figure 7. Neutrophil traction stress generation is attenuated by vinculin deficiency. (A) 3D tractions
and the trace of the dipole moments, µ, of WT and VclKO neutrophils on polyacrylamide gels of either
0.5 kPa or 1.5 kPa stiffness (n>25 cells/group, 3 independent experiments). Data analyzed using two-way
ANOVA with Tukey multiple comparison test. *p<0.05. (B) Representative 3D traction cone plots for
WT and VclKO neutrophils (shown in purple) on polyacrylamide gels of indicated stiffness. Cones
indicate traction direction while color and size represent traction magnitude, in Pascals. Scale bar =10
µm.

33

***

Control
CXCL1

*

2

1

0

50

Vc
l

KO

0.0

KO

B
W
T

0.6

Vc
l

**
Cell area (µm2)

0.4

PMN spreading (%)

BM

A

W
T

3

O

0.2

**

1K

O

W
T
O
Vc (1)
lK
O
(2
)
Itg
b2
KO
Vc
lK

PMN adhesion
(normalized)

**

Tl
n

lK

Vc

4

W
T

sICAM1 MFI
(normalized)

Figure 1

C
600

**

400

200

0

D
**

40

30

20

10

0

B

C

60
40
20
0

10000

MSD (µm2)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

O

O
***

6000
4000
2000
0

20

lK

VclKO

-150

150

WT

-150

40

60

Time (s)

Vc

W
T

WT
VclKO

8000

0

F
y position (µm)

0.2

E

1.0

Directness

0.4

Vc

Vc
l

lK

Vc

D

0.6

0.0

W
T

O

0

80

**

lK

50

0.8

***

W
T

100

100

Velocity (µm/s)

**

KO

Euclidean distance (µm)

150

W
T

A

Accumulated distance (µm)

Figure 2

150

x position (µm)

80

100

O

lK

Vc

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1.0

E

0.0
-300

Vc

200

100
50

0

WT

Flow
300

x position (µm)

O

150

Velocity (µm/s)

B

lK

W
T

O

0

lK

50

Vc

100

Euclidean distance (µm)

150

W
T

O

200

300

lK

Vc

W
T

250

-300

y position (µm)

D

W
T

Accumulated distance (µm)

A

Directness

Figure 3

C
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

VclKO (1)

Flow

O
(2

(1
)

)

0.0

lK

0.5

O

1.0

Vc

1.5

CD11a fluorescence
(normalized)

2.0

lK

)

****
****

W
T

(2

C

Vc

O

0.0

)

20.0

(1

40.0

lK

60.0

O

80.0

Actin fluorescence
(normalized)
2.5

Vc

)

100.0

lK

(2

)

B
actin

W
T

O

(1

nucleus

Vc

lK

O

W
T

A

Vc

lK

Vc

Polarized PMNs (%)

Figure 4

CD11a overlay

WT

VclKO (1)

VclKO (2)

D

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Neutrophil adhesion
after CXCL1 (normalized)
0.00

0

d

1.00

5
10

Time (min)

50

Arrested cells/mm2
(normalized)

100

0

C

1.25

Vclf/f
Vclf/fMX1cre

0.75

0.50

0.25

15

6

0

cr
e

l f/f

m

A

X1

Vc

eu

o

o

f/f

l f/f
M

rit
on

th
i

th
i

Percent of Total Neutrophils

Vcl

Vc

e

st

pr

po

d

Pe

oo

oo

f/f

sICAM1 MFI
(normalized)

Bl

Bl

Figure 5

Vcl MX1

cre

B
800

*

600

400

200
0

D
8
Control
CXCL1

**

Vclf/f

**

4

2

Vclf/fMX1cre

Figure 6

Cell area (µm2)

800

B

WT
VclKO
Itgb2KO

***
*** ***

600

***
**

400
200
0

1.5 kPa

8.3 kPa

100 kPa

PMN spreading (%)

A

100
80

WT
VclKO
Itgb2KO

***
*** ***
***
***

60
40
20
0

1.5 kPa

8.3 kPa

C
***
***

***
***

***
***

**

200
200

100

0

V
C
Vc clK
on
O
lK
tro
O
+
l
C
+
V
l
o
c
C
lK
v
lo
W
O
ve erT
+
r-v vin
C
cu
in
lo
lin
ve cul
r-v inA
in
cu 5 0
lin I
-A
50
I

Cell area
area (µm
(µm22))
Cell

300
300

WT
VclKO
VclKO + Clover-vinculin
VclKO + Clover-vinculin-A50I
WT + Clover-vinculin-A50I

100 kPa

Figure 7
A
Traction (Pa)

1500

B

WT
VclKO

0.5 kPa
*

1000

500

0

0.5 kPa

1.5 kPa

VclKO

1000

|µ| (nN*µm)

WT

100
10
1
0.1

0.5 kPa

1.5 kPa

1.5 kPa

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary information
Supplementary Video 1. Neutrophil migration in a flow chamber. Flow chambers coated with Eselectin, ICAM-1, and CXCL1 were perfused for 30 minutes with a 1:1 mix of WT (CFSE labeled) and
VclKO neutrophils at a wall shear stress of 1 dyne/cm2. Scale bar = 10 µm.

Figure S1. Differentiated HoxB8-conditional progenitors display a neutrophil phenotype. (A)
Schematic of the inducible HoxB8 progenitor system and G-CSF-induced differentiation into neutrophils.
(B) Wright-Giemsa stain of in vitro progenitor-derived neutrophils. (C) Flow cytometry of day 4
differentiated progenitors, analyzing neutrophil marker Ly6G and progenitor marker CD117.

Figure S2. Knockout of vinculin in HoxB8-conditional progenitors and neutrophils. (A) Schematic
of CRISPR/Cas9 targeting of the murine Vcl locus with independent sgRNAs. (B) Representative western
blot of in vitro-derived neutrophil protein expression of vinculin and loading control α-actinin. (C)
Representative flow cytometry histograms of wild-type (WT) and vinculin knockout (VclKO) progenitors
and neutrophils, analyzing HoxB8-GFP expression (representative of 3 independent experiments).

Figure S3. Exogenous re-expression of Clover-vinculin. Representative western blot of in vitro-derived
neutrophil protein expression of vinculin (endogenous, recognized by anti-vinculin), Clover-vinculin
(exogenous, recognized by both anti-vinculin and anti-GFP), and loading control α-actinin. Clovervinculin is abbreviated CV.

Figure S4. Tissue-specific knockout of vinculin in mice. Representative western blot of purified bone
marrow neutrophils from control, Vclf/f, and Vclf/fMX1cre mice, with and without Poly I:C activation of
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MX1-Cre recombinase-induced disruption of Vcl. Western blots were probed for protein expression of
vinculin and loading control α-actinin.

Figure S5. Expression of adhesion and signaling receptors in progenitor-derived neutrophils. Flow
cytometry quantification of cell surface expression of (A) CD11a, (B) CD11b, and (C) CXCR2 by mean
fluorescent intensity (MFI). Groups of in vitro-derived neutrophils are indicated and are shown with
analyses of bone marrow neutrophils (n=4 independent experiments, except for BM where n=2). (D)
Flow cytometry analysis of CD11b upregulation after fMLP stimulation for WT and VclKO neutrophils
(representative of n=2 experiments).

Figure S6. Additional analyses of neutrophil static adhesion assays. (A-C) Normalized adhesion of
CFSE-labeled neutrophils under conditions as indicated: (A) Evaluation of CXCL1-induced neutrophil
adhesion to ICAM-1, (B) Analysis of sequential washes to remove non-adherent neutrophils, (C) Analysis
of coating concentration dependence of neutrophil adhesion. All experiments were analyzed using oneway or two-way ANOVA with Tukey multiple comparison test (3 independent experiments). * p<0.05;
** p<0.01; *** p<0.001; **** p<0.0001.

Figure S7. Vinculin-deficient neutrophils display a less polarized phenotype. (A) Representative
image of F-actin distribution (by TIRFM) of WT and VclKO neutrophils, displayed with a cross-sectional
histogram of fluorescence intensity at the plane indicated. (B) Analyses of the fluorescent distribution of
actin and shape of polarized neutrophils based on F-actin staining of neutrophil after 30 minute adhesion
and spreading on ICAM-1 and CXCL1. Data were analyzed using Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA on
ranks with Dunn’s multiple comparison test (n>30 cells per group, 3 independent experiments). * p<0.05.
** p<0.01. *** p<0.001, **** p<0.0001.
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S8. Vinculin localizes to contracting pseudopods. (A) Migration of neutrophils expressing
Clover-vinculin and Lifeact-mRuby2 on a substrate of ICAM-1 and CXCL1 over the course of 10
minutes (representative of 3 independent experiments). Arrows point to punctate vinculin-containing
structures. Scale bar = 10 µm. (B) Immunocytochemistry of neutrophils fixed after 30 minutes of
migration on ICAM-1 and CXCL1. Samples were stained with antibodies against vinculin and CD11a;
phalloidin and Hoescht used for F-actin and nuclear staining. Scale bar = 10 µm.

Figure S9. Analyses of neutrophil trafficking during sterile peritonitis. (A) Schematic that depicts the
experimental design for analyzing neutrophil trafficking in murine mixed chimeras reconstituted with
both control (Vclf/f) and vinculin knockout (Vclf/fMX1creGFP+) bone marrow. Induction of vinculin
knockout was achieved with Poly I:C treatment. (B) Representative flow cytometry dot plots of peripheral
blood and peritoneal lavage of mixed chimeric mice, depicting the method to determine the fraction of
wild-type and vinculin knockout neutrophils within those compartments. (C-D) Experiments to determine
the trafficking of progenitor-derived neutrophils that were labeled with distinct fluorescent dyes, mixed in
1:1 ratios, and intravenously injected into mice during the course of thioglycollate-induced peritonitis. In
(C), representative (top) and composite (bottom) analysis of the frequency of adoptively transplanted
TagIt-Violet labeled WT neutrophils (in vitro-derived) and CFSE labeled VclKO neutrophils (in vitroderived) in the blood and peritoneal lavage, 4 hours after induction of peritonitis. In (D), representative
analysis of the frequency of adoptively transplanted PKH67 labeled WT neutrophils (in vitro-derived) and
PKH26 labeled Itgb2KO neutrophils (in vitro-derived) in the blood and peritoneal lavage, 4 hours after
induction of peritonitis. As a control, these same analyses are shown for mice receiving intraperitoneal
saline rather than 4% thioglycollate.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847780; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S10. Additional analyses of neutrophil mechanosensing. (A) Representative images of WT,
VclKO, and Itgb2KO neutrophil spreading on ICAM-1/CXCL1-conjugated polyacrylamide gels across a
range of stiffness, as imaged using a 40X objective, DIC light microscope. Scale bar = 10 µm. (B, C)
Further analyses of WT and VclKO neutrophil spread area and motility parameters (accumulated
distance, Euclidean distance, velocity) on ICAM-1/CXCL1-conjugated polyacrylamide gels of
intermediate stiffnesses: 5 kPa, 10 kPa, and 20 kPa.

37

Figure S1

A

B

C

CD117

Neutrophil unlabeled
Progenitor unlabeled
Neutrophil
Progenitor

Ly6G

Figure S2
A

B

Vinculin
130 kDa
α-actinin
100 kDa

Normalized

C

Hoxb8 (GFP)

WT unlabeled
WT neutrophil
VclKO (1) neutrophil
WT progenitor
VclKO (1) progenitor

Figure S3

250 kDa 150 kDa 100 kDa -

anti-vinculin

250 kDa 150 kDa 100 kDa -

anti-GFP

100 kDa -

anti-α-actinin

Figure S4

Poly I:C
MX1cre
Vclf/f

Vinculin
130 kDa
α-actinin
100 kDa

BM

e
Vc W
lK T
Vc O
lK (1)
O
Itg (2
b2 )
KO

C

ot
yp

150

100

50

Normalized

0

BM

0

e
W
lK T
Vc O
lK (1)
O
Itg (2
b2 )
KO

B

Vc

20

ot
yp

40

CD11b expression

60

is

BM

e
W
lK T
Vc O
lK (1)
O
Itg (2
b2 )
KO
Vc

ot
yp

is

CD11a expression

A

is

CXCR2 expression

Figure S5

80

60

40

20
0

D

CD11b

WT unlabeled
WT unstimulated

VclKO (1) unstimulated

WT fMLP
VclKO (1) fMLP

Figure S6
A

B
WT ICAM1/CXCL1
WT ICAM1

**

0.5

*
0.0

0

1

WT
BM
VclKO (1)
VclKO (2)
Itgb2KO

1.0

Adherence
(normalized)

Adherence
(normalized)

1.0

0.5

0.0

2

0

1

Washes

Washes

C
Adherence
(normalized)

0.6
0.4

****
****

****
****

0.8

***
****

***
***

0.2

7.
5

5

µg

µg

-1

/m

/m
L

L

IC

IC

AM

AM
-1

-1
AM
IC
L

/m
µg
2.
5

2.
5

µg

/m

L

IC

AM

-1

0.0

2.5 µg/mL CXCL1

2

WT
VclKO (1)
VclKO (2)

3

4

W
T
O
Vc (
lK 1)
O
(2
)

lK

1.5

1.0

****

0.5

4.0

Roundness

2.0

1.0

Actin Kurtosis

3.0

0.0

****
*

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

Vc W
lK T
Vc O (
lK 1)
O
(2
)

W
T
Vc O (
lK 1)
O
(2
)
lK

Vc

4.0

*

0.0

**

Vc W
lK T
Vc O (
lK 1)
O
(2
)

W
T
Vc O (
lK 1)
O
(2
)
lK

Vc

B

Vc

VclKO (1)

Actin skewness

WT

Circularity

A

Aspect ratio

Figure S7

20.0

15.0

10.0
5.0

0.0

1.5

***
*

1.0

0.5

0.0

Figure S8
A

B
0s

50s

100s

150s

200s

250s

Nucleus

Vinculin
Actin
Lifeact

300s

350s

400s

450s

500s

550s

600s

Vinculin

CD11a

Figure S9
A

Peripheral Blood

SSC

B

SSC

Peritoneal Lavage

Ly6G

C

Lavage

Blood
saline

4% thioglycollate

PKH26

TagIt-Violet

Blood

D

GFP

CFSE

PKH67

CFSE

Lavage
saline

VclKO

4% thioglycollate

PKH26

100
75
50
25

PKH67

0

Blood

e

Lavage

av

ag

d

oo

ea

lL

Bl
rit
on

% of Total Neutrophils

WT
125

PKH67

PKH67

Figure S10
A

100 kPa

8.3 kPa

1.5 kPa
WT

VclKO (1)

Itgb2KO

500

Cell area (µm2)

200
150
100
50

400
300
200
100

****
***

**
*

200

100

0

5 kPa 10 kPa 20 kPa

Euclidean distance (µm)

WT
VclKO (1)
VclKO (2)
300

400
200
0
W
T
lK
O
Vc (1)
lK
O
(2
)

Vc

W
T
lK
O
Vc (1)
lK
O
(2
)
Vc

C
Accumulated distance (µm)

0

600

W
T
lK
O
Vc (1)
lK
O
(2
)

0

****
****

800

150

****
****

Vc

Cell area (µm2)

*

****
****

Cell area (µm2)

***

250

20 kPa

10 kPa

5 kPa

15

*

100

50

Velocity (µm/min)

B

****
****

***
*

10

5

0

0

5 kPa 10 kPa 20 kPa

5 kPa 10 kPa 20 kPa

