bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Sensitive Detection of Protein Binding to the
Plasma Membrane with Dual-Color Z-Scan
Fluorescence
Angert, I., Karuka, S.R., Hennen, J., Chen, Y., Albanesi, J.P., Mansky, L.M., and
Mueller, J.D.

Running title: Protein binding to the plasma membrane
Keywords: Langmuir-Isotherm, peripheral membrane protein, fluorescence, brightness,
protein-lipid interactions, cooperativity

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

ABSTRACT
Delicate and transitory protein engagement at the plasma membrane (PM) is crucial to
a broad range of cellular functions including cell motility, signal transduction, and virus
replication. Here we describe a dual color (DC) extension of the fluorescence z-scan
technique which has proven successful for quantification of peripheral membrane
protein binding to the PM in living cells. We demonstrate that the co-expression of a
second distinctly colored fluorescent protein provides a soluble reference species,
which delineates the extent of the cell cytoplasm and lowers the detection threshold of
z-scan PM binding measurements by an order of magnitude. DC z-scan generates an
intensity profile for each detection channel that contains information on the axial
distribution of the peripheral membrane and reference protein. Fit models for DC z-scan
are developed and verified using simple model systems. Next, we apply the quantitative
DC z-scan technique to investigate the binding of two peripheral membrane protein
systems for which previous z-scan studies failed to detect binding: human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) matrix (MA) protein and lipidation-deficient
mutants of the fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate 2α. Our findings show that
these mutations severely disrupt PM association of fibroblast growth factor receptor
substrate 2α but do not eliminate it. We further detected binding of HIV-1 MA to the PM
using DC z-scan. Interestingly, our data indicate that HIV-1 MA binds cooperatively to
the PM with a dissociation coefficient of

K d ~16 µM and Hill coefficient of n ~2.

SIGNIFICANCE
Protein binding to the plasma membrane of cells plays an important role in a multitude
of cell functions and disease processes. Quantitative binding studies of
protein/membrane interactions are almost exclusively limited to in vitro systems and
may produce results that poorly mimic the authentic interactions in living cells. We
report quantitative measurements of plasma membrane binding directly in living cells by
using dual color z-scan fluorescence, which improves the detection threshold by an
order of magnitude compared to our previous single color technique. This advance
allowed us to examine the role of mutations on binding affinity and identify the presence
of cooperative binding in protein systems with relevance to HIV/AIDS and cancer
biology.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
The association of peripheral membrane proteins with the plasma membrane (PM) is a
crucial and vital step in numerous cellular pathways, such as cell differentiation (1), lipid
metabolism (2), signal transduction (3), and oncogenesis (4). Proteins may be recruited
to the PM through interactions with integral membrane proteins or by direct interaction
with membrane lipids (5, 6). Because the ability to bind rapidly and reversibly to
membranes is essential for the function of peripheral membrane proteins, their
membrane affinity is a biophysical property of fundamental interest. Membrane binding
studies are routinely performed using in vitro assays utilizing liposomes, supported lipid
bilayers, or lipid monolayers (7–9). However, extrapolating the results of such studies to
proteins in living cells is challenging because the in vitro environment cannot faithfully
reproduce the native conditions that give rise to the complex organization and dynamic
behavior of cellular membranes (10). Therefore, direct measurements of membrane
binding in living cells are needed to explore the binding process in its natural
environment and critically examine observations derived from in vitro work.
We recently succeeded in directly measuring the PM binding curve of EGFPtagged peripheral membrane proteins in living cells by single color (SC) z-scan (11). An
axial scan of the focal spot generated by two-photon excitation through a chosen
cytoplasmic location produces a z-scan intensity profile. This profile is the convolution of
the two-photon point spread function (PSF) of the instrument with the axial
concentration profile of the labeled protein along the scan trajectory (12). A population
of PM-bound protein leads to the appearance of intensity peaks along the scan path at
the location of the bottom and top PM. Modeling of the intensity profile separates
cytoplasmic and membrane-bound fluorescence components, which allows for the
determination of the protein concentration in the cytoplasm and at the membrane (13).
We successfully applied this approach to characterize PM binding of human T-cell
leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) matrix (MA) protein in live cells, and identified the
binding affinity as well as the saturating binding concentration of the protein (11).
However, this method failed to detect PM binding of the matrix protein of a different
retrovirus, human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) (14). Because HIV-1 MA
interacts much more weakly with the PM than HTLV-1 MA, the membrane-bound
population of HIV-1 MA is below the detection threshold of the SC z-scan method. In
general, detection of PM binding by SC z-scan is limited to proteins with relatively high
binding affinity or high binding site density at the PM.
To overcome this limitation of SC z-scan we co-expressed the EGFP-labeled
membrane-binding protein together with mCherry to provide a reference marker of the
cytoplasmic space. The z-scan intensity profile of mCherry furnishes independent
information on the starting and ending point of the cytoplasm, thereby improving the
resolution of small fluorescence intensity contributions from the PM-bound EGFPlabeled protein. In this study we demonstrate that the simultaneous collection of the
intensity profiles of the EGFP-labeled protein and mCherry in two separate detection

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

channels increases the ability to resolve PM binding by an order of magnitude. We
establish a framework for analyzing DC z-scan measurements and verify it
experimentally. Control experiments were performed to explore the sensitivity threshold
of detecting a PM-bound protein population from DC z-scan profiles.
Here we applied DC z-scan to characterize PM binding of the fibroblast growth
factor receptor substrate 2α (FRS2α). It was recently established that FRS2α not only is
myristoylated near its N terminus but is also doubly palmitoylated (15). Removing the
palmitoyl groups weakened PM binding to the detection limit of the previously described
SC z-scan technique (15). By applying DC z-scan we were able to identify residual PM
binding in the absence of palmitoylation and compare this binding to that of wildtype
(WT) FRS2α. DC z-scan was further applied to characterize PM-binding of HIV-1 MA in
live cells. Interestingly, a simple Langmuir-isotherm model was inconsistent with the
experimental data. Our results indicate that HIV-1 MA binds cooperatively to the PM.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Sample Preparation, Cell Culture & Expression Vectors
U-2 OS and HeLa cell lines were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS
(Hycolone Laboratories, Logan, UT). For measurement, cells were plated into
chambered 8-well slides (Cellvis, Mountain View, CA) and transfected with the indicated
plasmids using GenJet (SignaGen Laboratories, Rockville, MD) transfection reagent
according to the manufacturer instructions. Transfections were performed 12-24hr
before measurement with cells at ~50% confluency. Cell media was exchanged for
phosphate buffered saline immediately before measurement. Chambered slides were
held at room temperature on the microscope during measurement. In vitro experiments
utilized EGFP and mCherry purified from E. coli as previously described (16).
HIV-1 MA was amplified from HIV-1 Gag (17) with a 5' primer that encoded a
XhoI restriction site and 3' primer that encoded a EcoRI site. The PCR product was
digested and ligated into pEGFP-N1 (clonetech, CA) to generate the HIV-1 MA EGFP
vector. HIV-1 MAG2A-EGFP was made using the QuikChange XL Site-Directed
Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). HIV-1 MAG2A-ΔHBR-EGFP was generated
from HIV-1 MAG2A-EGFP by deleting amino acids 18-32 using the Q5 Site-Directed
Mutagenesis Kit (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA). pEGFP-N1 and pEYFP-N1 were
obtained from Clonetech (Mountainview, CA). All other plasmids have been previously
described: mCherry and EGFP-mCherry (18); HTLV-1 MA-EGFP (14); FRS2α-EGFP,
FRS2αG2A-EGFP and FRS2αC4,5S-EGFP (15).
Supported Lipid Bilayer
Supported lipid bilayers consisted of 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(POPC; Avanti Polar Lipids, Alabaster, AL) with a small admixture of Texas Red and
BODIPY FL conjugated to DHPE lipids (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

provide fluorescent labels. The lipids were mixed in chloroform at 1:3300 ratio (BODIPY
FL DHPE : POPC) and 1:1100 ratio (Texas Red DHPE : POPC) and dried under
nitrogen flow. Dried lipids were mixed with PBS to form large unilamellar vesicles, which
were then extruded to generate small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs) using a 100 nm filter
and the NanoSizer MINI Liposome Extruder (T & T Scientific, Knoxville, TN) according
to manufacturer instructions. Coverslips were cleaned by brief exposure to a butane
flame followed by ~1 hr etch in 50/50 w/w KOH solution. The SUV solution was added
to each coverslip for 15 min, followed by a wash with PBS to remove any free floating
SUVs.

Instrumentation and Measurement
DC z-scan measurements were performed on a Zeiss Axiovert 200 microscope modified
for two-photon excitation. 1000nm excitation light provided by a mode-locked Ti:S laser
(MaiTai or Tsunami models, Spectra Physics, Santa Clara, CA) is focused to a
diffraction limited spot at the sample by a 1.2 numerical aperture water immersion
objective (C-Apochromat, Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). Fluorescence emission light is
collected by the same objective and separated from excitation light by a short-pass
dichroic (740DCSPXR, Chroma Technology, Bellows Falls, VT) before being split into
red and green detection channels by a 580nm long-pass dichroic filter (FF580-FDi01;
Semrock, Rochester, NY) and detected by single photon counting detectors (hybrid
PMT; HPM-100-40, Becker and Hickl, Berlin, Germany). A 515/50nm band pass filter is
placed immediately before the green channel detector to eliminate Fresnel-reflected
mCherry light from the green channel.
To perform DC z-scan measurements, samples were mounted on a stage with
piezo-driven z-axis (PZ2000, ASI, Eugene OR) that is controlled by a voltage signal
originating from an arbitrary waveform generator (model 33250A, Agilent Technologies,
Santa Clara, CA). DC z-scans were performed by driving the piezo stage with a triangle
waveform with a period T and peak-to-peak displacement Zpp. All DC z-scan
measurements were performed with T = 10 s and Zpp = 24 μm. Thus, each 10 s period
yields two z-scan traces, each 5 s or 24 μm in length; the first trace corresponds to
motion of the PSF upward through the sample and the second to motion downward
through the sample.

Modeling of z-scan traces
The PSF of our instrument is well-approximated by the modified squared GaussianLorentzian (mGL) PSF with parameters typically in the range of z R = 0.70 ± 0.15 µm, y =
1.3 ± 0.2, and w0 =0.47 ± 0.05 μm. The precise z R and y parameters are determined by
a daily calibration with an uncertainty of 1 – 5% as previously described (12).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

This results in a typical PSF volume of V = 0.3 ± 0.1 μm3 and a cross-sectional
area

of

A0 =

0.17±

0.04 μm2.

The

radially

integrated

PSF,



RIPSF  z    PSF   ,   2 d  , provides the foundation for modeling z-scan intensity
0

profiles (12). The normalized observation volume is defined by definite integration of the
RIPSF function (11),

va ,b  z  

1
V



b z

a z

RIPSF   d  .

For the special case of a δ-layer Eq. 1 reduces to va ,a  z  

1

1
RIPSF  a  z  (11).
A0

Analytical formulas (11) of the volume function are listed in the Supporting Material.

Characterization of z-scan by simulation
DC z-scan traces were modeled based on a δ-s-δ layer for the EGFP labeled protein
and an s layer for mCherry (Eq. 13) with added Poisson noise to account for the photon
counting process. The fluorescence intensity amplitudes of the membrane and cytosolic
protein populations were chosen as described in the Results section. The simulated DC
z-scan data were fit using the same procedure as applied to experimental data.
Separate simulations to characterize the SC z-scan method were performed similarly
except only green channel intensity traces were simulated and fit. All summary statistics
presented in the text represent the result of fits to 1000 realizations of each z-scan
trace. Fits that were observed to become stuck in local minima were identified based on
elevated reduced chi-square and removed from the data set before the calculation of
summary statistics. All modeled traces were calculated assuming an mGL PSF with
parameters z R = 0.75 μm and y = 1.35.
Membrane binding equilibria
To construct binding equilibria, the cytoplasmic ( f C ) and membrane-bound ( f M )
fluorescence amplitudes (Eq. 8) were converted into cytoplasmic concentrations cC and
membrane-bound surface density  M (13),

fC  cCV 
f M  M A0

.

2

The brightness  of the label EGFP was determined by calibration experiments as
previously reported (12).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Membrane binding equilibria can be modeled by the Hill equation, which depends
on three parameters, the dissociation coefficient K d , the saturation density  0 , and the
Hill exponent n,

M  0

cCn
.
K d  cCn

3

The membrane intensity fraction (Eq. 14) of the Hill equation is identified by

m

 0cCn 1

cCn 1 ( 0  rcC )  rK d

,

4

where r is the ratio of the PSF volume to its cross-sectional area,

r

V
,
A0

5

which for our instrument is given by 1.6 μm. The Hill equation reduces to the Langmuir
isotherm for the case n  1 , which describes non-cooperative membrane binding.
Experimental data were first fit to a Langmuir isotherm and subsequently to the Hill
equation in cases where the Langmuir isotherm failed to adequately describe the data.
For a Langmuir isotherm the maximum value of m , which we denote as m0 , is obtained
as the cytoplasmic concentration approaches zero (11). The ratio of the binding
parameters K d and  0 are related to m0 by

Kd

0



1 1  m0
.
r m0

6

RESULTS
The building block of SC z-scan analysis is the slab layer (s layer). This horizontal layer
extends from height a to b with uniform protein concentration c0 within the slab and zero
outside the layer (Fig. 1A),
ca,b  z   c0ua ,b  z  ,

7

with the boxcar function ua,b  z  , which is equal to 1 for a  z  b and 0 otherwise. Two
limiting cases of the s layer are of interest. First, the infinitesimally thin layer or delta (δ)
layer located at a (Fig. 1A) represents the limit b  a with concentration profile
ca,a  z    0ua,a  z    0  z  a  , where  0 is the surface concentration (13) (Fig. 1B).
Second, the semi-infinite layer represents the case where one of the boundaries goes to
infinity, i.e. ca ,  z  (Fig. 1C).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

An axial scan of the two-photon PSF through a concentration layer ca ,b  z  gives
rise to a fluorescence intensity profile F  z  , which reflects the spatial overlap of the
PSF with the concentration profile. We previously showed that the z-scan intensity
profile is modeled by (12)
F  z   f va,b  z 

8

with f representing the amplitude, which is proportional to the concentration c0 of the
layer, and the volume function va ,b  z  , which is derived from the convolution of the PSF
with the sample layer (12). Formulas describing va ,b  z  are listed in the Supplemental
information. Straightforward extension of the SC z-scan model to two colors requires
that the volume function va ,b  z  remain identical for each detection channel.
To experimentally test this proposition, we performed DC z-scans on model
systems. First, we selected a cytoplasmic location of U-2 OS cells co-expressing EGFP
and mCherry (CH) to mimic a slab layer. A DC z-scan measurement determined the
intensity profiles of the green and red channel, Fg  z  and Fr  z  . To simplify visual
comparison of both curves we scaled Fg  z  by a factor  to match the amplitude of the
red intensity curve, Fg   Fg (Fig. 1D). The normalized residuals between the green and
red curve are flat with a reduced chi-square  v2 = 1.0 (Fig. 1D, lower panel). The
absence of a mismatch between both intensity curves indicates that the volume function
va ,b  z  is the same for each channel within experimental uncertainty.
Next, we performed DC z-scans on a delta layer, which was realized by a
supported lipid bilayer containing Texas Red and BODIPY FL conjugated lipids. We
again scaled Fg  z  to match the amplitude of Fr  z  (Fig. 1E) and calculated the
normalized residuals (Fig. 1E, bottom panel). Again, the scaled intensity traces are
indistinguishable (  v2 = 1.1). Finally, a mixture of purified EGFP and mCherry was
added to a well-slide to create a semi-infinite layer. The scaled intensity profiles of both
channels acquired with DC z-scan coincide (Fig. 1F) with flat residuals (  v2 = 1.1, Fig.
1F, lower panel).
These results suggest that modeling of DC z-scan intensity profiles is a
straightforward extension of Eq. 8,
F  z   f v a ,b  z  ,

9

where F  z    Fg ( z ), Fr ( z )  and f   f g , f r  represent the vector notation of the intensity
profile and amplitude of the green and red detection channel. The volume function
va ,b  z  depends on the PSF model. We choose the modified Gaussian-Lorentzian

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

(mGL) PSF, which proved successful in describing single color z-scan intensity profiles
(12). To evaluate the DC z-scan model we fit the unscaled intensity profiles of the three
model geometries to Eq. 9 using the volume function for the mGL model with fixed PSF
parameters. A fit of the intensity profiles of the cytoplasmic layer to a slab model
identifies a slab thickness L  b  a of 3.28 μm with good agreement between data and
fit (Fig. 1G). Similarly, the intensity profile of the supported lipid bilayer is reproduced by
a fit to a delta-layer model ( a  b ) (Fig. 1H). Finally, the semi-infinite layer model ( b  
) successfully describes the intensity profiles of the dye mixture solutions (Fig. 1I).
Together, these results demonstrate the success of Eq. 9 in modeling the DC z-scan
profile of a single layer.

Figure 1. DC z-scan of three sample layers. The two detection channels of the DC z-scan are
represented by the green and the red color. An illustration of the fluorescence profile as a function of
axial height z are shown for a slab layer (A), a delta layer (B), and the semi-infinite layer (C). The start
and end height of each layer is marked by a and b, respectively. The experimental intensity profiles

Fg  z  of the green channel are scaled to the intensity profile Fr  z  of the red channel and shown for

the slab (D), delta (E), and semi-infinite layer (F) together with the normalized residuals,

Rgr of the

scaling. Fits of the unscaled intensity profiles of the slab (G), delta (H), and semi-infinite layer (I) to the
corresponding DC z-scan model are shown with normalized residuals, Rg and Rr corresponding to the
green and red channel fits, respectively.

We next consider a single fluorescence species, i.e. EGFP, occupying multiple
layers. For single color z-scan the profile from multiple layers is given by the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

superposition of the intensity profiles of each layer (14). Extending this result to DC zscan we get

F  z    fi vai ,bi  z   α  fi vai ,bi  z  ,
i

10

i

where ai and bi are the start and end coordinates of the i-th layer with amplitude vector

fi . The fluorescence intensity is split into each detection channel as determined by the
optical filters and the emission spectrum of the fluorescent protein. This spectral
crosstalk ensures that, for a single species, the fluorescence of the green and red
channel are proportional to each other. This relation is quantified by the crosstalk vector
α , which relates the intensity amplitudes of both detection channels, fi  α fi , where
f i  f i , g  f i ,r is the total amplitude of both channels combined. We present a DC z-scan

of a cell expressing HTLV-1 MA-EGFP to illustrate multiple layers (Fig. 2). The
peripheral membrane protein MA is found both at the bottom and top PM as well as in
the cytoplasm as indicated by its concentration profile (Fig. 2A). The two intensity peaks
visible in the green channel represent the signal from MA-EGFP bound to the
membranes (Fig. 2B). The concentration profile of a peripheral membrane protein is
modeled by a δ-s-δ layer model, where the δ layers represent the two membranes and
the s layer describes the cytoplasmic space (C) separating the top membrane (TM) and
bottom membrane (BM) (14). The DC z-scan profile of the δ-s-δ model for an EGFPlabeled protein is,





EGFP
EGFP
FEGFP
 va ,a  z   f CEGFP  va ,b  z   f TM
 vb ,b  z  ,
 z   α EGFP f BM
s

11

with the membranes located at z  a and z  b . The red tail of EGFP’s emission
spectrum gives rise to a crosstalk signal in the red detection channel (Fig. 2B) with a
crosstalk vector defined by α EGFP  1   EGFP ,  EGFP  . The experimental DC z-scan data
are well described by the δ-s-δ model (  v2 = 1.3) with  EGFP = 0.11 (Fig. 2B). The
fluorescence contributions from each layer were calculated from the fitted fluorescence
EGFP
EGFP
intensity amplitudes ( f BM
, f CEGFP , f BM
) as well as membrane locations ( a , b ) and are
identified in Fig. 2C.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. DC z-scan of HTLV-1 MA-EGFP. A) Schematic concentration profile through a cell expressing
MA-EGFP without mCherry. The protein is present in the cytoplasm as well as at the upper and lower PM.
B) DC intensity profile of the green and red detection channel with fit (solid line) to a δ-s-δ model (Eq.11).
C) Decomposition of intensity profile into its cytoplasmic and PM components. The fluorescence
amplitudes as well as the location of the membrane layers are determined by the fit.

To improve the accuracy of the fit model we routinely include background above
and below the sample. For a sample starting at height a and ending at b two semiinfinite layers, f v,a  z  and f vb,  z  , are added to the fit model to account for
background with DC amplitudes of f  and f  . We illustrate the effect of background by
considering a δ layer located at a , which was experimentally realized by a supported
lipid bilayer. Modeling of the DC z-scan profile with a single δ layer, f va,a  z  , resulted
in
a
poor
fit
(Fig.
S1B).
After
including
background,
EGFP
f v,a  z   α
f va,a  z   f va,  z  , data and fit are in agreement (Fig. S1A). Although
we omit explicit mention of the background component, all data presented in this study
were analyzed with background layers added to the fit model where appropriate.
The second color of our study is provided by mCherry. The optical filters are
chosen to prevent crosstalk of mCherry emission into the green detection channel,
which predicts a crosstalk vector of αCH   0,1 . The lack of crosstalk is confirmed by a
cytoplasmic DC z-scan through a cell expressing mCherry (Fig. S2), which was fit by a
slab model,
FsCH  z   αCH fCCH  va,b  z  ,

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

where α CH is allowed to vary. This fit recovered α CH = (0.014, 0.986). Because the 1.4%
mCherry crosstalk estimated by this fit is generally negligible, we fixed α CH = (0, 1) in all
subsequent DC z-scan fits.
DC z-scan profiles that contain both EGFP and mCherry are described by a
superposition of the profiles for EGFP and mCherry, F  z   FEGFP  z   FCH  z  , where
each individual profile is modeled by Eq. 10. We are particularly interested in an EGFPlabeled protein that associates with the plasma membrane in the presence of
cytoplasmic mCherry. The EGFP z-scan profile follows the δ-s-δ model (Eq. 11), while
the mCherry z-scan profile is modeled by the s layer (Eq. 12; Fig.3A). Adding both
profiles together yields





EGFP
EGFP
F s , s   z   α EGFP f BM
 va ,a  z   f CEGFP  va ,b  z   f TM
 vb ,b  z   α CH f CCH  va ,b  z  ,

13

a model described by four amplitudes and the locations a and b of the membranes.
Eq. 13, which we refer to as the δ-s-δ,s model, represents the δ-s-δ model adapted for
the present DC z-scan application. This fit model successfully reproduces a DC z-scan
profile through the cytoplasm of a U-2 OS cell co-expressing HTLV-1 MA-EGFP and
mCherry (Fig. 3B). The decomposition of the green channel signal into its membrane
and cytoplasmic component is shown in Fig. 3C. A useful parameter for modeling
membrane binding of an EGFP-labeled protein is the membrane intensity fraction (13)

m

f MEGFP
,
f MEGFP  fCEGFP

14

where the subscript M either refers to the top (TM) or bottom (BM) membrane. The
EGFP
EGFP
fluorescence amplitudes at the membrane ( fTM
and f BM
) and the cytoplasm
( f CEGFP ) are identified from fitting the DC z-scan intensity profiles to Eq. 13. The fitted
DC z-scan of HTLV-1 MA-EGFP (Fig. 3B&C) resulted in m of 60% and 56% for the top
and bottom membrane, respectively.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Cytoplasmic DC z-scan of HTLV-1 and of HIV-1 MA-EGFP in the presence of mCherry.
A) Schematic concentration profile of HTLV-1 MA-EGFP and mCherry. B) Intensity profile together with fit
to a δ-s-δ,s model (Eq. 13). The residuals correspond to

 v2 = 1.4. C) Fit (solid line) of intensity profile for

EGFP decomposed into cytoplasmic (dashed line) as well as the upper PM (dotted line) and lower PM
contribution (dash-dotted line). D) Schematic concentration profile of HIV-1 MA-EGFP and mCherry. E)
Intensity profile together with fit to Eq. 13. The residuals correspond to

 v2 = 1.2. F) Fit (solid line) of

intensity profile for EGFP decomposed into cytoplasmic (dashed line) as well as the upper PM-bound
(dotted line) and lower PM-bound contribution (dash-dotted line).

We next performed a DC z-scan on a cell expressing the EGFP-labeled matrix
protein of HIV-1 in the presence of mCherry (Fig. 3E), which is in stark contrast to the
previous DC z-scan. Not only have the peaks in the green-channel profile Fg  z 
disappeared, but there is little difference in the shape of the profiles from both channels
(Fig. 3E), indicating the absence of a pronounced membrane-bound HIV-1 MA-EGFP
population. Nevertheless, a fit of the DC z-scan traces to Eq. 13 identified a small
contribution from a membrane-bound population (Fig. 3F), resulting in membrane
intensity fractions of 5.4% and 3.2% for the top and bottom membranes, respectively.
Repeated z-scans at the same location and fits to the resulting traces yielded average
m of 4.1% ± 0.8% and 0.9% ± 0.6% (SEM, n = 12) for the top and bottom PMs. These
small membrane intensity fractions cannot be recovered by analysis of the green
channel z-scan profile Fg  z  alone. In fact, our previous attempt to detect HIV-1 MA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

binding to the PM by single color z-scan failed (14), which agrees with earlier results
demonstrating that m needs to exceed ~10% for single color z-scan analysis to
succeed (13).
These results suggest that the DC z-scan method has a significantly lower
threshold for detecting a membrane-bound population of protein compared to SC zscan. We turned to modeling to compare the SC and DC z-scan procedure and assess
their potential to detect PM-bound fluorescent layers. Z-scan profiles of an EGFPlabeled protein with specific membrane intensity fractions min in the presence or
absence of cytoplasmic mCherry were modeled as described in the Methods section.
Each calculated z-scan profile included shot noise and was fitted to either the SC δ-s-δ
layer model as previously described (14) or the DC δ-s-δ,s layer model (Eq. 13) to
recover the fitted mout value. The average and standard deviation of mout was calculated
from fits of n = 1000 modeled profiles. To assess whether the DC z-scan procedure
recovers correct m values, we plotted the average fitted mout versus the input value min
of the modeled profiles. Because previous SC z-scan studies fitted traces with the
constraint that all fluorescent amplitudes be positive, we considered fit procedures with
and without this constraint for both SC and DC.
SC z-scan correctly recovered min provided its value was large ( min > 10%), but
returns biased estimates for small min (Figs. 4A & C). With the constraint of positive
fluorescence amplitudes this bias manifested predominantly as a positive offset in
recovered mout and depends on the overall intensity of the modeled profile (Fig. 4A),
while without the constraint the offset could be either positive or negative (Fig. 4C).
Similarly, results obtained for modeled DC z-scan profiles with fits constrained to
positive amplitudes revealed the presence of bias in the recovered mout at small values
of min (Fig. 4B). Importantly, once the constraint was removed the DC z-scan fit method
recovered unbiased mout values within statistical uncertainty (Fig. 4D).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Performance of SC and DC z-scan in recovering the true membrane intensity fraction
min from modeling Eq. 13 in the presence of shot noise. The recovered value mout from fits of the
modeled data to Eq. 13 is plotted vs. the input value min for SC z-scan with fitted fluorescence amplitudes
restricted to positive values (Panel A) and unrestricted values (Panel C). The DC z-scan results for
restricted (Panel B) and unrestricted (Panel D) fitting of amplitudes are shown for comparison. The black
solid line represents mout = min. The red, green, and blue curve correspond to modeled cytoplasmic
intensity amplitudes of 10 kHz, 100 kHz, and 1000 kHz, respectively and a cytoplasm length, L = 3µm.

We further compared the standard deviation sm of the recovered mout value for
the constrained SC and the unconstrained DC z-scan method as a function of the input
value min in Fig. 5A, where each colored line represents a different cytoplasmic
intensity. For large membrane intensity fractions min the SC and DC method achieve
identical performance, while at low min , the DC method outperforms the SC approach
by a factor 3 to 6. In general, DC z-scans with higher intensity values lead to lower
uncertainty because the relative contribution of the Poisson noise to the signal
decreases (13). Quantitatively, we expect sm to be inversely proportional to the square
root of the total number of photons collected, N  . We are primarily interested in
applying DC z-scan to recover small membrane fractions (m < 10%) where the
contribution of the PM-bound population to the total intensity is small. Under these

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

conditions sm is approximately independent of m (Fig 5A) and the number of photons
collected during a z-scan will be proportional to the intensity amplitude and the length of
the slab layer, N  L  f CEGFP  f CCH  . We expect that the statistical uncertainty of m is
then given by,
sm  t

L  fCEGFP  fCCH  ,

15

where t is a constant that accounts for the shape of the intensity profile. This model
provides a means to estimate the expected DC z-scan performance by accounting for
N  . For convenience, we rescaled sm of the DC z-scan simulations of Fig. 5A to the
conditions of the green solid line ( fCEGFP = f CCH = 100 kHz and L = 3 μm), which resulted
in overlapping curves (Fig. 5B) and validates this approach. We further repeated the
same simulations with a reduced thickness and also with an altered ratio fCEGFP / f CCH for
the three cytoplasmic intensities. The results were rescaled to match the conditions of
the green solid line of Fig. 5A to simplify comparison. We note that in all cases the
scaled standard uncertainty is close to 1% (Fig. 5B).
To compare this simulation result with experiments, we performed DC z-scan
measurements in cells co-expressing HIV-1 MA-EGFP and mCherry. Each z-scan was
repeated 12 times at a single location within the cell to determine the mean and
standard deviation of m from fits to each trace. We rescaled the experimental standard
deviation to our reference conditions mentioned above ( f CEGFP = fCCH = 100 kHz and L =
3 μm) to simplify comparison. The rescaled experimental uncertainties (Fig. 5B) are
generally in good agreement with the simulations. This validates the utility of our DC zscan simulations and demonstrates that Eq. 15 provides a rudimentary, but reliable tool
for gauging the expected uncertainty in recovering membrane populations from DC zscan experiments.

Figure 5. Uncertainty sm in the recovered membrane intensity fraction m . A) The results from
simulations of SC z-scan fitted using positive amplitudes is given by the dashed lines. The results from
simulations of DC z-scan with unrestricted fitting of amplitudes is represented by the solid lines. The red,
EGFP

green, and blue lines correspond to modeled f C

of 10 kHz, 100 kHz, and 1000 kHz, respectively. B)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

The performance of Eq. 15 is assessed by using this relation to re-scale sm from simulated data for
differing cytoplasmic intensities and lengths so that they match the conditions of the green solid line in A.
Experimental results (diamonds) obtained from fitting DC z-scan data of cytoplasmic HIV-1 MA-EGFP
followed by re-scaling (using Eq. 15) the observed variance from n = 12 repeated scans to match the
same reference conditions. C) Averaging of fitted membrane intensity fraction m of repeated DC z-scans
of cytoplasmic HIV-1 MA-EGFP. The uncertainty sm in the fitted m value decreases as the square root of
the number of repeated scans n.

These simulations suggest that a typical DC z-scan profile acquired in a cell with
a cytoplasmic intensity of ~100 kHz can recover m within an uncertainty of ~1%.
Because subsequent z-scan profiles acquired at the same location are independent
statistical samples, we expect that averaging of multiple estimates of m reduces the
uncertainty by 1/ n , where n represents the number of scans. We collected repeated
(n = 120) z-scans in cells co-expressing HIV-1 MA-EGFP and mCherry. These scans
were grouped into sets of size n , followed by a calculation of the standard deviation of
m over each set, which demonstrates the expected decrease in sm as a function of
averaging (Fig. 5C). Based on this result we chose to acquire 60 s (n = 12) of repeated
z-scans and present the average and SEM estimated from these repeated passes to
summarize the z-scan result for a given location in a cell.
The above results support the potential of DC z-scan as a method to detect weak
interactions of proteins with the PM. We next tested the technique on cytoplasmic
proteins without binding affinity to the PM. These measurements serve as controls to
check the robustness of the method in the context of live cell measurements. For these
data we only consider m from the top membrane and discard m from the bottom
membrane for reasons that will be discussed later. As our first control, we performed
repeated DC z-scans in the cytoplasm of U-2 OS cells expressing EYFP. The red-shift
in the spectrum of EYFP as compared to EGFP increases the crosstalk
( α YFP   0.80,0.20  ) into the red emission channel. The DC z-scan was fit to Eq. 13 with
a crosstalk of zero, which is equivalent to treating the EYFP crosstalk signal as our
cytoplasmic reference. The recovered membrane intensity fractions from many cells
were histogrammed (Fig.6A) and describe a distribution mean of m = 0.08% ± 0.05%
(SEM, n ~ 400), indicating that the DC z-scan procedure recovers a PM fraction that
agrees with the expected result of 0% within 1.6 SD. In this control the fluorescent light
in the reference channel originated from the same molecules as the fluorescence light
detected by the green channel.
As an additional control we measured repeated DC z-scans in the cytoplasm of
cells co-expressing EGFP and mCherry, which were fit to Eq. 13 with EGFP crosstalk (
 EGFP = 0.11). The histogram of the recovered membrane intensity fractions (Fig. 6D)
has a mean of 0.32% ± 0.07% (SEM, n = 500), which implies a minute fraction of PMbound EGFP and is in contradiction to the known properties of EGFP. We further

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

examined a fusion construct linking EGFP and mCherry (EGFP-mCherry) as a third
control (Fig. 6G). Repeating the same experiment resulted in a mean of –0.18% ±
0.03% (SEM, n = 350), which is 5.5 SD from the expected value of zero. These
observations indicate the presence of small systematic errors that limit the
determination of m values close to zero. We introduced a threshold of mlimit = 0.5% to
account for the bias observed by the data of Fig. 6. Thus, we consider experimental m
values that are within the range of  mlimit to be consistent with m = 0 and only values
that exceed mlimit count as a reliable indicator of PM binding. The recorded m values
were graphed versus the cytoplasmic concentration of the proteins (Fig. 6) together with
 mlimit . We further converted m and mlimit into the corresponding surface densities at the
PM using Eq. 2 (Figs. 6C, F and I). The SEM of nearly all measured values overlaps
with the range of  mlimit for the negative control samples.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. DC z-scan of controls with no PM binding. DC z-scans in cells expressing EYFP (top row),
EGFP and mCherry (middle row) and EGFP-mCherry (bottom row). For each sample the PM binding
from DC z-scan fits is presented as a histogram of the average m value from each z-scan location (A, D,
G), as a scatter plot of average m vs cytoplasmic concentration cC of the green channel (B, E, H), and as
a plot of the surface density of PM binding

 M vs cC

(C, F, I). The red solid lines denote  mlimit and

indicate the approximate region of null detection. Diamonds and error bars denote the average and SEM
estimated from n = 12 repeated z-scans at each location within a cell.

During collection of the data we noted that DC z-scans frequently returned m
values from the bottom PM that were significantly negative. Because the DC z-scan
method introduced here is a relative measurement comparing an EGFP labeled protein
against a soluble mCherry cytoplasmic marker, negative m values can arise if the red
channel fluorescence trace contains a red emitting fluorescent contamination at the
glass surface of the well plates (effectively adding a δ-layer at the bottom PM of the
reference channel). We verified that this is the case for the well plates used in this study
(Fig. S3) and thus we discarded m values associated with the bottom PM interface.
Although FRS2α is a major mediator of fibroblast growth factor signaling, its PM
binding properties are not well understood. It has been reported that N-myristoylation of
FRS2α is important for its localization to membranes and its ability to stimulate
downstream signaling events (19). However, recent work by the Albanesi lab found that
in addition to being myristoylated FRS2α is also double palmitoylated at C4 and C5, and
that the palmitoyl groups are the main driver of PM binding (15). Because the FRS2α
mutants employed in this study were at the detection limit of the SC z-scan method (14),
we decided to revisit this study using DC z-scan to characterize their PM binding
properties. WT FRS2α labeled with EGFP served as a reference to judge the influence
of mutations on PM binding. Since FRS2α-EGFP strongly interacts with the PM, it was
measured by SC z-scan in U-2 OS cells to determine its cytoplasmic and PM-bound
concentration ( cC and  M , respectively) as well as its membrane intensity fraction m .
The PM binding is characterized by a plot of m vs cC or alternatively by a plot of  M vs

cC (Fig. 7A & B). A global fit of both binding curves to a Langmuir-isotherm model (Eqs.
3 and 4) identified a dissociation coefficient Kd = 0.15 ± 0.05 μM and saturating surface
concentration  0 = 500 ± 80 μm–2 (Figs. 7A & B).
Next, we performed DC z-scan measurements on the palmitoylation-deficient
FRS2αC4,5S-EGFP construct to determine m (Fig. 7C). The mutation resulted in a
severe reduction in the membrane intensity fraction from an average of 60% to ~10%
(Figs. 7A & C). Similarly, the surface density of FRS2αC4,5S-EGFP at the membrane is
significantly reduced (Fig. 7D). Because the cytoplasmic concentration expressed by
the FRS2α-based constructs is low, the data are insufficient for a fit to a Langmuirisotherm. However, we note that the binding data for FRS2αC4,5S-EGFP are consistent
with K d much higher than the concentration range we were able to access. The ratio

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Kd  0

is determined by the limiting membrane intensity fraction

m0

at low

concentrations (Eq. 6), which predicts a K d  0 value of 5.3 μm . We further were able
-1

to estimate the dissociation coefficient of the mutant by assuming that the density  0 of
available binding sites at the PM is not affected by the mutation. In this case, we predict
a dissociation coefficient of ~4.3 μM, which is an approximate 30-fold reduction in
membrane binding affinity due to elimination of palmitoylation. This estimate
demonstrates that the palmitoyl groups are the main determinant of PM binding. In
addition, we also measured the EGFP-labeled G2A mutant FRS2αG2A, which eliminates
both myristoylation and palmitoylation (15), and constructed plots of m vs cC and  M
vs cC (Fig. 7E & F). PM binding of FRS2αG2A-EGFP averaged 0.9 ± 0.1% (SEM,
n=500), which is slightly above the detection limit of the DC z-scan method and
suggests that FRS2α retains a small PM binding even in the absence of lipidation.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 7: PM binding of WT FRS2α and two mutants. (A) m vs. cC of WT FRS2α-EGFP as well as
(B)

M

vs. cC together with fit to Langmuir-isotherm model (solid blue line). (C) m vs. cC of FRS2αC4,5S-

EGFP, and (D)
G2A

M

vs. cC . (E) m vs. cC of FRS2αG2A-EGFP, and (F)

M

vs. cC . PM binding of

FRS2α -EGFP is detected below ~0.5µM and approaches the detection threshold of DC z-scan (red
lines) at higher concentration.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 8: PM binding of HIV-1 MA and HIV-1 MAG2A-ΔHBR. (A) m vs. cC for HIV-1 MA-EGFP. (B)

M

vs. cC for HIV-1 MA-EGFP. The solid blue lines represent a fit to the Hill equation (see Fig. S4). (C) m
vs. cC for HIV-1 MAG2A-ΔHBR–EGFP. (D)

M

vs. cC for HIV-1 MAG2A-ΔHBR–EGFP. PM binding of HIV-1

MAG2A-ΔHBR–EGFP is generally below the detection threshold of DC z-scan (red lines).

We next applied DC z-scan to characterize the binding of the matrix domain of
HIV-1 Gag at the PM, which is driven by hydrophobic interactions due to N-terminal
myristoylation at G2 as well as electrostatic interactions between acidic lipids and the
highly basic region (HBR) of MA (20, 21). Although binding of MA to membranes at high
concentration is readily detected by in-vitro studies (22–29), we were previously unable
to detect binding of HIV-1 MA-EGFP to the PM of live cells with the SC z-scan
technique (14), suggesting that its membrane fraction is generally below 10%. We
performed DC z-scan measurements in the cytoplasm of cells co-expressing HIV-1 MAEGFP and mCherry. The resulting plot of m versus cC in Fig. 8A showed clear PM
binding at all concentrations and a plot of  M versus cC showed a clear increase in

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

binding density for cC between 2 and ~30 μM (Fig. 8B). Notably, m values averaged
6.2% within this concentration range and only ~10% of all DC z-scans yielded m values
>10%. To confirm that the PM binding signal is attributable to the expected PM targeting
motifs in MA, we performed DC z-scan measurements on the myristoylation deficient
MAG2A mutant with a truncated HBR (MAG2A-ΔHBR, Fig 8C & D). These measurements
failed to detect PM binding, with an average m value of 0.23% ± 0.08% (SEM, n =
1000), which is below the DC z-scan detection threshold mlimit and comparable to the m
value measured for the EGFP : mCherry negative control (Figs. 6E and F).
Because a relatively wide concentration range was achieved for the expression
of HIV-1 MA-EGFP, we further analyzed the DC z-scan results in Figs. 8A & B to
investigate whether the PM binding can be described by a simple binding model.
Notably, the m vs. cC plot showed an increasing trend while the  M vs. cC plot showed
a convex curvature. Both of these shapes are incompatible with the Langmuir isotherm,
which produces strictly decreasing and concave functions on the m vs. cC and  M vs.

cC plots, respectively. We therefore fit the binding data from Figs. 8A & B to the Hill
equation. As shown in Fig. S4, the Hill equation adequately described the measured
HIV-1 MA binding curve with  v2 = 1.2. This fit recovered K d = 16 ± 2 μM,  0 = 2800 ±
400 µm-2 and Hill coefficient, n = 2.0 ± 0.08, indicating a significant degree of
cooperativity in the PM binding of HIV-1 MA-EGFP. An additional fit to a Langmuir
isotherm showed a poor quality of fit (  v2 = 17), demonstrating that our qualitative
observations that the PM binding of HIV-1 MA-EGFP cannot be described by a
Langmuir isotherm model were recapitulated quantitatively.

DISCUSSION
Our results demonstrate that DC z-scan significantly enhances the detection limit of
protein binding to the PM. The key component of this improvement over SC z-scan is
the presence of mCherry as a fluorescent paint to mark the cellular space, which
provides an independent measure of the cytoplasmic thickness at the scan location.
This additional information not only constrains the fit, which leads to a large reduction in
the uncertainty sm of the fitted membrane intensity fractions m (Fig. 5), but also
removes the inherent bias of SC z-scan in recovering low membrane intensity fractions
(m ≤ 10%, Fig. 4). Together, removal of bias and reduction in sm improved the detection
limit from ~10% for SC z-scan to below 1% for DC z-scan.
Quantitative z-scan analysis also relies on an optical system free of significant
optical aberrations over the scan depth (30). In fact, we previously employed a coexpressed mCherry reference to interrogate PM binding of HIV-1 MA (31), but our
earlier work was performed in the presence of chromatic and spherical aberrations. As a
consequence, we were unable to rigorously analyze the DC z-scan traces in this earlier
work and failed to detect HIV-1 MA PM binding. In this study we demonstrate that the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

use of two-photon co-excitation, the absence of pinholes in the detection path, and use
of a high-quality water immersion objective permits a quantitative description of the DC
z-scan traces sensitive resolution of PM binding. While the absence of statistical biases
and chromatic effects in DC z-scan would in principle allow detection of even smaller
membrane intensity fractions by reducing the uncertainty sm based on averaging (Fig.
5C), we noticed the appearance of systematic errors at m ≤ 0.3% (Fig. 6). Although the
source causing this effect is currently unknown, its amplitude is sufficiently small to
render it negligible in most applications. We account for the potential presence of bias
by setting a conservative detection threshold of mlimit = 0.5% for positive identification of
PM binding. In practice we observed that slight fluorescent contamination at the
coverslip surface is a far larger source for potential error in DC z-scan measurements.
The fluorescence at the surface presents a signal not accounted for in the fit models,
which biases the results. This is especially important at low expression levels, where the
contaminating signal is strongest with respect to the sample. We expect that careful
cleaning of the coverslip glass would eliminate or reduce the fluorescence at the
interface, which should allow reliable DC z-scan data to be obtained from the bottom
PM of adherent cells.
Utilizing DC z-scan enabled us to investigate the contributions of lipid anchors to
PM binding of FRS2α. Because FRS2α is required for most aspects of fibroblast growth
factor receptor (FGFR) signaling, and has itself been implicated in oncogenesis (32),
mechanisms underlying its recruitment to the PM have been intensively investigated for
over two decades. Previous measurements on the palmitoylation-deficient FRS2αC4,5SEGFP construct was at the detection threshold of the SC z-scan technique and only
was able to deduce the presence of residual PM binding by careful comparison with
negative controls (15). In contrast, DC z-scan clearly identified a membrane intensity
fraction of ~10% and was able to estimate a ~30 fold reduction of the binding affinity
due to removal of the palmitoyl groups. FRS2αG2A-EGFP, which lacks all lipid anchors,
showed a further reduction of PM binding. Unlike SC z-scan (15), DC z-scan was able
to detect small amounts of residual PM binding of FRS2αG2A-EGFP, which may
originate from constitutive binding between the FRS2α phosphotyrosine-binding domain
and a juxtamembrane motif in endogenously FGFRs at the PM (33).
Extensive in vitro studies have reported binding of HIV-1 MA with various lipid
substrates (22–28). The current work provides, to our knowledge, the first quantitative
characterization of the PM binding of HIV-1 MA in-situ of the living cell. We found that
MA binds to the PM of cells with a dissociation constant of ~16 μM, and saturating
density of PM binding sites ~3000/μm2. Notably, the observed binding was cooperative
in nature, which we speculate is a consequence of MA-MA oligomerization at the PM.
Our observation of cooperativity is not unexpected. First, a recent SPR study measured
a Hill coefficient of ~2 for binding to membranes composed of 100% DOPS lipids (26).
Second, MA likely forms oligomers upon PM binding, which can dramatically increase
PM affinity. This was previously shown by artificial dimerization of MA via addition of the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

HIV-1 capsid C-terminal domain, which increased the MA-membrane affinity by an order
of magnitude (25). WT HIV-1 MA has been reported to trimerize variously as a 3D
crystal (34), at high concentration in solution (35), when bound to biomimetic
membranes (36) and in the mature viral particle (37). Trimerization of MA is thought to
be important to accommodate the large cytoplasmic tail of the viral envelope protein for
its proper packaging into infectious virus (37–39). Although the concentrations at which
MA has been reported to trimerize in solution are significantly higher (~70 µM half point)
than those probed by DC z-scan, PM binding likely favors oligomerization through
increased MA-MA proximity due to partitioning into the reduced (effectively 2dimensional) volume at the PM. Because of this membrane “scaffolding” effect, we
expect trimerization of PM bound MA will occur at substantially lower cytoplasmic MA
concentrations than are required to produce MA trimers in solution. We therefore
suggest that after PM binding HIV-1 MA undergoes the expected trimerization reaction
and that the trimeric form has significantly enhanced anchoring to the PM due to the
increased binding energy associated with up to 3 MA-PM interfaces. This type of multistep reaction is commonly associated with the observation of cooperativity. In such
cases the Hill coefficient can be interpreted as a lower bound on the multiplicity of the
oligomers (40, 41). We note that the Hill coefficient found for HIV-1 MA by DC z-scan is
consistent with the expectation of MA trimers, although it does not exclude the
possibility of a dimeric PM bound state, as we previously observed in the case of HTLV1 MA (14).
The Kd ~16 µM measured in live cells by DC z-scan compares favorably to a
recent NMR study that measured an apparent dissociation constant of 10 ± 2 μM for
HIV-1 MA binding to phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) containing liposomes
(24). The SPR study of HIV-1 MA binding to tethered bilayers composed of
DOPC/DOPS/PIP2/cholesterol yielded Kd values in the range of 0.8 to 2.4 μM
depending on the specific lipid composition (26). However, the low salt conditions used
in this study (50 mM; to prevent aggregation of purified MA) may have led to an
exaggerated electrostatic component of MA-PM interaction and an increased MA-PM
affinity. Increased PM affinity under low salt conditions has been reported in the case of
Rouse sarcoma virus MA (42) and HIV-1 MA (25). Interestingly, the dissociation
constant estimated by a previous SC z-scan study of HTLV-1 MA was ~200 nM (11),
which differs from that of HIV-1 MA by nearly two orders of magnitude. These results
serve to emphasize the striking diversity among retroviruses, particularly the
orthoretroviruses, despite the relative conservation of retroviral MA domain structure.
Our study demonstrates that the DC z-scan approach eliminates statistical
biases inherent to the SC z-scan method and furthermore increases the detection
sensitivity by an order of magnitude. These advances significantly extend the range of
cellular based PM binding assays. As demonstrated, DC z-scan allows evaluation of the
contributions of individual PM binding motifs through mutation studies directly in the
context of the living cell. In addition, DC z-scan successfully detected the weak binding
of HIV-1 MA to the PM, and furthermore observed a cooperative binding process in the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

living cell. These results illustrate the potential of DC z-scan to contribute to our
understanding of binding interactions between proteins and membranes in the authentic
environment of the cell.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
I.A., S.R.K., L.M.M., J.P.A, and J.D.M were responsible for experimental design. I.A.,
S.R.K., J.H., and Y.C performed experiments, developed constructs and contributed
analytical tools. I.A., S.R.K., J.H., and J.D.M. performed analysis. I.A., S.R.K., L.M.M.,
J.P.A, and J.D.M wrote the manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health grant, GM064589 (J.D.M,
J.H., S.R.K., and Y.C.), and GM121536 (J.P.A., Y.C., J.D.M), and GM124279 (L.M.M.,
I.A., J.D.M.). I.A. was supported by NIH grant T32 AI083196.

REFERENCES
1. Osaki, L.H., and P. Gama. 2013. MAPKs and signal transduction in the control of
gastrointestinal epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 14:
10143–10161.
2. Glatz, J.F.C., J.J.F.P. Luiken, and A. Bonen. 2010. Membrane fatty acid transporters
as regulators of lipid metabolism: implications for metabolic disease. Physiol. Rev.
90: 367–417.
3. Airaksinen, M.S., and M. Saarma. 2002. The GDNF family: signalling, biological
functions and therapeutic value. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3: 383–394.
4. Goldfinger, L.E., and J.V. Michael. 2017. Regulation of Ras signaling and function
by plasma membrane microdomains. Biosci. Trends. 11: 23–40.
5. Cho, W., and R.V. Stahelin. 2005. Membrane-protein interactions in cell signaling
and membrane trafficking. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 34: 119–151.
6. Whited, A.M., and A. Johs. 2015. The interactions of peripheral membrane proteins
with biological membranes. Chem. Phys. Lipids. 192: 51–59.
7. Cho, W., L. Bittova, and R.V. Stahelin. 2001. Membrane binding assays for
peripheral proteins. Anal. Biochem. 296: 153–161.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

8. Chan, Y.-H.M., and S.G. Boxer. 2007. Model membrane systems and their
applications. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 11: 581–587.
9. Zhao, H., and P. Lappalainen. 2012. A simple guide to biochemical approaches for
analyzing protein-lipid interactions. Mol. Biol. Cell. 23: 2823–2830.
10.

Monje-Galvan, V., and J.B. Klauda. 2016. Peripheral membrane proteins: Tying
the knot between experiment and computation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1858:
1584–1593.

11.

Smith, E.M., J. Hennen, Y. Chen, and J.D. Mueller. 2015. In situ quantification of
protein binding to the plasma membrane. Biophys. J. 108: 2648–2657.

12.

Macdonald, P.J., Y. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Chen, and J.D. Mueller. 2010. Brightness
analysis by Z-scan fluorescence fluctuation spectroscopy for the study of protein
interactions within living cells. Biophys. J. 99: 979–988.

13.

Smith, E.M., J. Hennen, Y. Chen, and J.D. Mueller. 2015. Z-scan fluorescence
profile deconvolution of cytosolic and membrane-associated protein populations.
Anal. Biochem. 480: 11–20.

14.

Smith, E.M., P.J. Macdonald, Y. Chen, and J.D. Mueller. 2014. Quantifying
protein-protein interactions of peripheral membrane proteins by fluorescence
brightness analysis. Biophys. J. 107: 66–75.

15.

Barylko, B., Y.-J. Chen, J. Hennen, I. Angert, Y. Chen, J.D. Mueller, H.-Q. Sun,
C.A. Taylor, J. Liou, H. Yin, and J.P. Albanesi. 2019. Myristoylation-Dependent
Palmitoylation of the Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Adaptor FRS2α. Biochemistry. 58:
2809–2813.

16.

Macdonald, P.J., Y. Chen, and J.D. Mueller. 2012. Chromophore maturation and
fluorescence fluctuation spectroscopy of fluorescent proteins in a cell-free
expression system. Anal. Biochem. 421: 291–298.

17.

Sandefur, S., V. Varthakavi, and P. Spearman. 1998. The I domain is required for
efficient plasma membrane binding of human immunodeficiency virus type 1
Pr55Gag. J. Virol. 72: 2723–2732.

18.

Wu, B., Y. Chen, and J.D. Müller. 2009. Fluorescence fluctuation spectroscopy of
mCherry in living cells. Biophys. J. 96: 2391–2404.

19.

Kouhara, H., Y.R. Hadari, T. Spivak-Kroizman, J. Schilling, D. Bar-Sagi, I. Lax,
and J. Schlessinger. 1997. A lipid-anchored Grb2-binding protein that links FGFreceptor activation to the Ras/MAPK signaling pathway. Cell. 89: 693–702.

20.

Zhou, W., L.J. Parent, J.W. Wills, and M.D. Resh. 1994. Identification of a
membrane-binding domain within the amino-terminal region of human

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

immunodeficiency virus type 1 Gag protein which interacts with acidic phospholipids.
J. Virol. 68: 2556–2569.
21.

Charlier, L., M. Louet, L. Chaloin, P. Fuchs, J. Martinez, D. Muriaux, C. Favard,
and N. Floquet. 2014. Coarse-grained simulations of the HIV-1 matrix protein
anchoring: revisiting its assembly on membrane domains. Biophys. J. 106: 577–585.

22.

Chukkapalli, V., I.B. Hogue, V. Boyko, W.-S. Hu, and A. Ono. 2008. Interaction
between the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Gag matrix domain and
phosphatidylinositol-(4,5)-bisphosphate is essential for efficient gag membrane
binding. J. Virol. 82: 2405–2417.

23.

Saad, J.S., J. Miller, J. Tai, A. Kim, R.H. Ghanam, and M.F. Summers. 2006.
Structural basis for targeting HIV-1 Gag proteins to the plasma membrane for virus
assembly. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103: 11364–11369.

24.

Mercredi, P.Y., N. Bucca, B. Loeliger, C.R. Gaines, M. Mehta, P. Bhargava, P.R.
Tedbury, L. Charlier, N. Floquet, D. Muriaux, C. Favard, C.R. Sanders, E.O. Freed,
J. Marchant, and M.F. Summers. 2016. Structural and Molecular Determinants of
Membrane Binding by the HIV-1 Matrix Protein. J. Mol. Biol. 428: 1637–1655.

25.

Dalton, A.K., D. Ako-Adjei, P.S. Murray, D. Murray, and V.M. Vogt. 2007.
Electrostatic interactions drive membrane association of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Gag MA domain. J. Virol. 81: 6434–6445.

26.

Barros, M., F. Heinrich, S.A.K. Datta, A. Rein, I. Karageorgos, H. Nanda, and M.
Lösche. 2016. Membrane Binding of HIV-1 Matrix Protein: Dependence on Bilayer
Composition and Protein Lipidation. J. Virol. 90: 4544–4555.

27.

Anraku, K., R. Fukuda, N. Takamune, S. Misumi, Y. Okamoto, M. Otsuka, and M.
Fujita. 2010. Highly sensitive analysis of the interaction between HIV-1 Gag and
phosphoinositide derivatives based on surface plasmon resonance. Biochemistry.
49: 5109–5116.

28.

Zhou, W., and M.D. Resh. 1996. Differential membrane binding of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 matrix protein. J. Virol. 70: 8540–8548.

29.

Saad, J.S., S.D. Ablan, R.H. Ghanam, A. Kim, K. Andrews, K. Nagashima, F.
Soheilian, E.O. Freed, and M.F. Summers. 2008. Structure of the myristylated
human immunodeficiency virus type 2 matrix protein and the role of
phosphatidylinositol-(4,5)-bisphosphate in membrane targeting. J. Mol. Biol. 382:
434–447.

30.

Macdonald, P., J. Johnson, E. Smith, Y. Chen, and J.D. Mueller. 2013.
Brightness Analysis. In: Methods in Enzymology. Elsevier. pp. 71–98.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

31.

Fogarty, K.H., S. Berk, I.F. Grigsby, Y. Chen, L.M. Mansky, and J.D. Mueller.
2014. Interrelationship between cytoplasmic retroviral Gag concentration and Gagmembrane association. J. Mol. Biol. 426: 1611–1624.

32.

Sato, T., and N. Gotoh. 2009. The FRS2 family of docking/scaffolding adaptor
proteins as therapeutic targets of cancer treatment. Expert Opin. Ther. Targets. 13:
689–700.

33.

Ong, S.H., G.R. Guy, Y.R. Hadari, S. Laks, N. Gotoh, J. Schlessinger, and I. Lax.
2000. FRS2 proteins recruit intracellular signaling pathways by binding to diverse
targets on fibroblast growth factor and nerve growth factor receptors. Mol. Cell. Biol.
20: 979–989.

34.

Hill, C.P., D. Worthylake, D.P. Bancroft, A.M. Christensen, and W.I. Sundquist.
1996. Crystal structures of the trimeric human immunodeficiency virus type 1 matrix
protein: implications for membrane association and assembly. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 93: 3099–3104.

35.

Tang, C., E. Loeliger, P. Luncsford, I. Kinde, D. Beckett, and M.F. Summers.
2004. Entropic switch regulates myristate exposure in the HIV-1 matrix protein.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101: 517–522.

36.

Alfadhli, A., R.L. Barklis, and E. Barklis. 2009. HIV-1 matrix organizes as a
hexamer of trimers on membranes containing phosphatidylinositol-(4,5)bisphosphate. Virology. 387: 466–472.

37.

Tedbury, P.R., M. Novikova, S.D. Ablan, and E.O. Freed. 2016. Biochemical
evidence of a role for matrix trimerization in HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein
incorporation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113: E182-190.

38.

Tedbury, P.R., and E.O. Freed. 2014. The role of matrix in HIV-1 envelope
glycoprotein incorporation. Trends Microbiol. 22: 372–378.

39.

Alfadhli, A., A.O. Staubus, P.R. Tedbury, M. Novikova, E.O. Freed, and E.
Barklis. 2019. Analysis of HIV-1 matrix-envelope cytoplasmic tail interactions. J.
Virol. .

40.

Wyman, J. 1964. LINKED FUNCTIONS AND RECIPROCAL EFFECTS IN
HEMOGLOBIN: A SECOND LOOK. Adv. Protein Chem. 19: 223–286.

41.

Weber, G., and S.R. Anderson. 1965. Multiplicity of Binding. Range of Validity
and Practical Test of Adair’s Equation *. Biochemistry. 4: 1942–1947.

42.

Dalton, A.K., P.S. Murray, D. Murray, and V.M. Vogt. 2005. Biochemical
characterization of rous sarcoma virus MA protein interaction with membranes. J.
Virol. 79: 6227–6238.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/766436; this version posted September 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

