bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Cerebral Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation Assessed using
Quantitative FMRI
Catherine Foster1, Jessica J Steventon1,2,3, Daniel Helme4, Valentina Tomassini1,5, Richard G. Wise1

1. Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff,
UK 2. School of Physics and Astronomy, Cardiff University, UK. 3. NMHRI, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
UK. 4. Department of Anaesthetics and Intensive Care Medicine, Cardiff University School of Medicine, Cardiff,
UK. 5. Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, UK.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Claudine Gauthier and Dr. Christopher Steele for helpful
discussions on data analysis and interpretation and Dr. Ilona Lipp for assistance with analysis pipelines
and task development. RGW and VT are supported by the Higher Education Funding Council for Wales.

Correspondence to:
Prof. Richard G. Wise
CUBRIC, School of Psychology,
Cardiff,
CF24 4HQ
wiserg@cardiff.ac.uk
+44 29 208 70358

This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust [grant numbers [506285] and [200804/Z/16/Z] and
The Waterloo Foundation.

Key words
Calibrated fMRI, cerebral blood flow, functional MRI, motor adaptation, oxygen metabolism

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Abstract
The neural energetics underlying functional brain plasticity have not been thoroughly investigated in
the healthy human brain. A better understanding of the blood flow and metabolism changes
underlying plasticity will help us to address pathologies in which plasticity is compromised and, with
interventions, could be enhanced for patient benefit.
Calibrated fMRI was conducted in 20 healthy participants during performance of a serial reaction time
task which induces rapid motor adaptation. Regions of interest (ROIs) were defined from areas
showing linearly decreasing task-induced BOLD and CBF responses. BOLD, CBF and relative CMRO2
responses were calculated for each block of the task. The flow-metabolism coupling ratio, n, was also
calculated for each ROI. Increases from baseline in BOLD, CBF and CMRO2 were observed in multiple
brain regions including the motor and sensorimotor cortices, cerebellum and hippocampus during SRT
task performance, as well as changes in the response amplitude from early to late task blocks
reflecting task adaptation. CMRO2 responses on average decreased faster than BOLD or CBF
responses, potentially due to rapid neural adaptation. However, the mean flow-metabolism coupling
ratio was not significantly different between ROIs or across blocks.
Calibrated fMRI can be used to study energetic changes during learning in the healthy brain and could
be used to investigate the vascular and metabolic changes underlying reductions in plasticity in ageing
and disease.

Keywords
Calibrated fMRI, motor adaptation, metabolism, plasticity,

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Introduction
The brain retains a lifelong ability to adapt through learning and in response to injury or disease related
damage, a process known as functional neuroplasticity. Residual neuroplasticity in chronic diseases
such as Multiple Sclerosis, or following stroke, can be harnessed in rehabilitation strategies to promote
recovery of function. However, the neuronal and vascular mechanisms that promote and limit
plasticity are not fully understood. Adequate energy delivery in the form of cerebral blood flow (CBF),
which carries oxygen, glucose and other nutrients to tissue, is essential for healthy neuronal function,
as is the capacity to metabolise these substrates. In Multiple Sclerosis for example, there is evidence
of both CBF (D’haeseleer, Cambron, Vanopdenbosch, & De Keyser, 2011; Ota et al., 2013) and
metabolic dysfunction (Fan, Evans, Stout, Rosen, & Adalsteinsson, 2015; Ge et al., 2012; Kidd et al.,
1999) which may play a central role in limiting plasticity. The neural energetics underlying functional
brain plasticity have not been thoroughly investigated experimentally in the healthy human brain. A
better understanding of the blood flow and metabolism changes which occur during motor skill
acquisition, and which facilitate plasticity, is needed before characterisation in disease, and
subsequent translation to informing treatment interventions to maintain or recover function.

Calibrated fMRI enables measurement of regional CBF and relative changes in the rate of cerebral
metabolic oxygen consumption (CMRO2) through the addition of hypercapnic calibration (Davis,
Kwong, Weisskoff, & Rosen, 1998; Hoge et al., 1999) during dual-acquisition of BOLD and CBF
weighted images. The technique has potential applications in identifying clinically relevant
abnormalities in vascular and metabolic function which are not visible using BOLD fMRI alone. CBF
and CMRO2 provide additional information which aids interpretation of fMRI studies of ageing and
disease where neurovascular coupling (NVC) is likely to be altered (Restom, Bangen, Bondi, Perthen,
& Liu, 2008). For example, greater BOLD responses with increasing age during a Stroop task have been
reported, alongside a reduced CMRO2 increase in response to the task (Mohtasib et al., 2012). This
suggests that as CBF was unaffected by age in this cohort, the greater BOLD signal changes were due
to a reduction in the CMRO2 response. As CMRO2 and neuronal firing are closely coupled, a decreased
neural response with age is the most likely explanation for these results. Such changes in vascular
reserve and NVC would not have been evident with BOLD alone, and the results demonstrate the value
of calibrated fMRI in any study where cerebral energetics may be altered by experimental conditions
or over time.

CMRO2 changes during the task may also reflect increases in aerobic glycolysis which have been
suggested during learning, and motor adaptation (Goyal, Hawrylycz, Miller, Snyder, & Raichle, 2015).
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation
Recently, using PET, Brodmann’s area 44 (BA44) showed increases in aerobic glycolysis and reductions
in O2 metabolism following a visuomotor adaptation task (Shannon, Neil, Vlassenko, Shimony, &
Rutlin, 2016), the latter being associated with reductions in synaptic activity. The sustained aerobic
glycolysis increases in BA44 were interpreted as a local metabolic change resulting from functional
remodelling following learning. As aerobic glycolysis varies regionally (Vaishnavi, Vlassenko, Rundle,
Snyder, & Mintun, 2010), it is therefore likely that CBF and CMRO2 responses will also differ within
task networks. In addition, Madsen et al. (1995) measured global CBF, glucose, and O2 consumption
during the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task using the Kety-Schmidt technique. During the task, CBF and
glucose consumption increased but O2 consumption did not. The observed increase in glucose
consumption showed that there was an increase in aerobic glycolysis, which persisted for 40 minutes
after task completion, although CBF levels returned to baseline. However, the Kety-Schmidt technique
is global, and any localised O2 consumption changes would not have been detected. Nevertheless,
these results suggest that aerobic glycolysis plays an important role in long term depression (LTD) and
long term potentiation (LTP) processes which occur with learning and plasticity. The role of aerobic
glycolysis in learning and skill acquisition must be taken into consideration when interpreting CMRO 2
changes as aerobic glycolysis changes may affect the net change in CMRO2 during such tasks (Vaishnavi
et al., 2010).

The aim of the current study was to measure BOLD, CBF and CMRO2 responses during performance of
a serial reaction time (SRT) task (Nissen & Bullemer, 1987) using calibrated fMRI. In the SRT task,
participants respond to a sequence of stimuli that appear one-by-one at various locations on a screen.
Participants respond by indicating the current stimulus location which follows a repeating pattern (see
figure 1) allowing participants to identify this sequence with practice, improving the accuracy and
speed of responses. Visuo-motor task performance can be improved over short periods of time,
accompanied by haemodynamic changes in task-relevant regions, which are thought to reflect shortterm plasticity in the adult brain (Fernández-Seara, Aznárez-Sanado, Mengual, Loayza, & Pastor, 2009;
Olson et al., 2006; Shannon et al., 2016). Previous work has demonstrated BOLD and CBF task
responses in motor and visual cortex as well as prefrontal regions and the cerebellum during task
performance (Ungerleider, Doyon, & Karni, 2002). BOLD signal reductions over time, due to task
adaptation have also been observed within a single MRI session (Floyer-Lea & Matthews, 2004;
Shannon et al., 2016). Therefore, we expected to observe BOLD signal decreases in task-relevant areas
as motor adaptation occurred. CBF and CMRO2 may change dynamically with adaptation to the task
in ways that are not visible by looking solely at the BOLD response as it is the result of changes in
vascular and metabolic processes. For example, although BOLD and CBF responses have been reported
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation
during motor skill learning task (Olson et al., 2006), it is not established whether their changes over
time follow similar patterns or whether there are alterations in the CMRO2 response, as previously no
changes (Madsen et al., 1995) and reductions in CMRO2 (Shannon et al., 2016) have been reported
during skill learning.

To examine motor task adaptation, BOLD, CBF and CMRO2 responses were calculated for each block
of an SRT task in regions which showed reducing BOLD and CBF responses across the task. Significant
changes in each parameter from baseline were investigated along with flow-metabolism coupling
differences between brain regions and task blocks. Lastly, regression analysis was conducted to
determine whether CBF, CMRO2 or BOLD predicted task performance.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Methods
Participants
20 right handed, healthy participants (10 female, mean age 25±4.6) took part in this study. All
participants were non-smokers and educated to university level. The study was approved by the
Cardiff University School of Psychology Research Ethics Committee and performed in accordance with
the guidelines stated in the Cardiff University Research Framework (version 4.0, 2010). Informed
written consent was obtained for all subjects.

Imaging
Imaging was performed on a whole body 3T MRI (GE Excite HDx, Milwaukee WI, USA) system using an
8-channel receive-only head coil. Simultaneous perfusion and BOLD weighted data were acquired with
a single subtraction PICORE QUIPSS II (Wong, Buxton, & Frank, 1998) pulsed arterial spin labelling
(PASL) sequence (non-commercial) with a dual-echo gradient-echo readout(Liu, Wong, Frank, &
Buxton, 2002) and spiral k-space acquisition (Glover, 1999).

Imaging parameters for functional scans (task and hypercapnic calibration) were: TR = 2.4s, TE1 =
2.7ms, TE2 = 29ms, TI1 = 700ms, TI2 = 1.5s (most proximal slice), FOV = 19.8cm, flip angle = 90 matrix
size = 64x64, slice thickness 7mm, 1.5 mm gap, 3.1mm in plane resolution with 15 slices. Label
thickness was 200mm with a 10mm gap between the end of the label and the most proximal imaging
slice. A separate single volume M0 scan was acquired using the same parameters, except TR=4s, to
measure the equilibrium brain tissue magnetisation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for absolute CBF
estimation. For registration, a 3D T1-weighted fast spoiled gradient echo sequence was acquired;
TR=7.9ms, TE=3ms, 256 x 256, slice thickness = 1 mm, giving a resolution of 1mm3.

Physiological monitoring was performed using a respiratory belt placed just below the ribs to monitor
ventilation and a pulse oximeter to obtain cardiac traces. A sampling line connected to a tightly fitted
face mask (Quadralite Intersurgical, Wokingham, Berkshire, UK) was used to record expired PETCO2
and PETO2 concentrations using the Biopac system (Biopac®, Worcestershire, UK). The face mask was
connected to a breathing circuit used to deliver gas mixtures and followed the design of (Tancredi,
Lajoie, & Hoge, 2014). The MEDRAD system (MEDRAD, Pittsburgh, PA) was used to monitor blood O2
saturation during hypercapnia.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Visuomotor Task
The SRT (Antonio, Case, Harman, & Lacey, 1987) is a visuomotor task which has been used previously
in fMRI studies in healthy subjects as well as in patient groups such as MS, chronic stroke and
Huntington’s Disease (HD) (Bonzano et al., 2011; Boyd & Winstein, 2001; Knopman & Nissen, 1991).
A modified version of the SRT developed by (Nissen & Bullemer, 1987) was used as the visuo-motor
learning task during imaging acquisition. The task was projected via a screen inside the scanner at a
frame rate of 60Hz and a resolution of 1024x768. A star appeared on the screen in a sequence of 4
boxes (figure 1), participants responded by pressing the corresponding button on a button box in their
right hand. The 12-minute task consisted of 6 blocks of a 12-item sequence repeated 6 times with
variable inter-stimulus interval (600-1000ms) interspersed with 3 blocks of a pseudorandom sequence
to assess response latency decreases related to task familiarisation rather than sequence learning.
Participants were not informed that there was a repeating sequence during task instructions.

Figure 1 Schematic of the SRT presentation, ISIs on the left indicate example times between trials.

Hypercapnic Calibration
The SRT task was followed by hypercapnic calibration to obtain a measure of cerebrovascular
reactivity (CVR) to CO2 for estimation of CMRO2. Participants breathed through a tight-fitting facemask as described above, gases were administered from gas cylinders connected to an in-house built
manually controlled flow meter system. Gases were piped through a mixing chamber with three
feeding lines coming in for the delivery of medical air, 5% CO2, and medical oxygen. Medical oxygen
was not administered but was connected in case of emergency. The scan began with a 2-minute
normocapnia period during which participants breathed medical air (20.9% O2 balance N2) with a flow
rate of 30 L/min. This was followed by a rapid switch to 2 minutes of hypercapnia where an increase
in PETCO2 of +7 mmHg was targeted. In total, the scan consisted of three two-minute blocks of
normocapnia and two two-minute blocks of hypercapnia.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Data Analysis
Image Preprocessing
Perfusion and BOLD weighted images were created from the first and second echo data respectively.
Physiological noise correction was carried out using a modified RETROICOR technique (Glover, Li, &
Ress, 2000) to remove cardiac and respiratory noise components from the BOLD and CBF task data.
First and second harmonics of the respiratory and cardiac cycle along with the interaction term were
regressed from the raw CBF signal (before tag and control subtraction) in a GLM framework. In
addition, variability related to CO2, O2, respiration and heart rate were removed from the SRT task run
(Birn, Murphy, Handwerker, & Bandettini, 2009). Surround averaging was applied to the BOLD
weighted images to remove contamination from perfusion weighting (Liu & Wong, 2005). Perfusion
signal modelling was carried out within FEAT (FMRI Expert Analysis Tool) to model the difference
between control and tag images in the timeseries.

Task Response Modelling
One subject was excluded from the analysis due to a low task response rate. The remaining 19
subjects’ BOLD and CBF task responses were analysed using a general linear model (GLM) within FEAT
(FMRIB’s Software Library, www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl) with high pass filtering (cut off 80s). The voxelwise
GLM was used to identify statistically significant BOLD and CBF responses across all sequence blocks.
FEAT contrasts were set up to investigate positive and negative task vs. rest activity. Further contrasts
modelled linear response changes over time, using the task timing regressor to model the average
change across the experiment as opposed to a block by block change. Cluster based thresholding was
applied to define significant BOLD and CBF task responses (z > 2.3, p < 0.05, FWE corrected). A second
FEAT GLM was carried out with contrasts set to calculate BOLD and CBF responses for each individual
sequence and random block.

Individual subject’s functional data were registered to the high resolution T1-weighted structural
image using FLIRT, FMRIB’s linear image registration tool (Jenkinson & Smith, 2001), with 6 degrees of
freedom. The high-resolution images were then registered to the Montreal Neurological Institute
(MNI) standard space with 12 degrees of freedom. FEAT contrasts were set up to investigate positive
and negative task vs. rest activity. All subjects’ data were then entered into a higher-level FEAT analysis
to define functional regions of interest (ROIs) for further analysis.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Definition of ROIs
ROIs were created from regions where there was a linearly decreasing component to the task-inducedsignal (BOLD and CBF) over sequence blocks, to investigate training related adaptation. All reported
ROIs were created from the intersection between BOLD and CBF task responses unless otherwise
stated. Random blocks were not included in ROI creation. These areas were then separated into
anatomical regions using the Harvard-Oxford cortical and subcortical atlases within FSL. The thalamus
and BA44 were also included as ROIs due to the previously reported involvement of these regions in
motor learning (Hardwick, Rottschy, Miall, & Eickhoff, 2013; Shannon et al., 2016). However, BA44 did
not show a significant mean BOLD or CBF signal decrease across the task and in the thalamus, only a
BOLD signal decrease was observed. For each ROI, the parameter estimate (PE) for each stimulus block
was used to calculate the percentage CBF change or BOLD response for each stimulus block.

Calculation of CVR and CMRO2
CVR to CO2 was calculated according to the method described previously (Bright & Murphy, 2013),
where the beta weight calculated for the CO2 regressor reflects the percentage BOLD or CBF signal
change caused by hypercapnia and is normalised by the change in in end-tidal CO2 (mmHg). CVR was
calculated using the voxel-averaged timeseries in each ROI. As the timing of the haemodynamic
response is not uniform across the brain and there are delays in the physiological response to CO2, the
end-tidal CO2 regressors were selected based on which of the 97 time shifts applied produced the best
fit to the data.
The Davis model (Davis, Kwong, Weisskoff, & Rosen, 1998) was used to calculate CMRO2 from
normalised BOLD and CBF data in each ROI. The hypercapnia measurement was performed to
estimate the scaling parameter M (see equation 2A) which represents the estimated maximum BOLD
signal response upon washout of all deoxyhaemoglobin according to the calibrated fMRI equation
(Davis et al., 1998) (equation 2B). This model assumes that the targeted level of hypercapnia does not
change CMRO2. The values for α and β must also be assumed. In the model, α represents the change
in CBV as a function of CBF, the original value of this exponent as proposed by Grubb (1974) was 0.38
to describe arterio-venous blood volume. More recently it has been established that the volume of
the deoxyhaemoglobin compartment, venous CBV, is what is required to calculate M. Chen, & Pike
(2010) used steady-state flow and volume changes to estimate the power–law relationship between
CBV and CBF and the model fit produced a coefficient of 0.18 which is comparable to simulation work
(Griffeth & Buxton, 2011) and values between 0.18-0.23 and are more commonly used at 3T. However,
being a biological parameter, actual α values are likely to vary with age, health status and under
different experimental conditions.
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation
The parameter β which equals 1.5 in the original equation is a constant representing the relationship
between blood oxygenation and the BOLD signal. As relaxivity is field dependent an optimised value
of 1.3 tends to be used at 3T (Bulte et al., 2012; Mark, Fisher, & Pike, 2011). Values of α = 0.20 β =1.3
were used in this study (Bulte et al., 2012).

A

B
Equation 1 (A) Equations for the calculation of M (A) and relative CMRO2 (rCMRO2) (Davis et al., 1998) (B). BH and FH are BOLD
and CBF CVR measures, α is the estimated ratio of fractional change in CBF to CBV and β which represents the field strength
dependent relationship between blood oxygenation and the BOLD signal, F(t) = CBF at time (t), B(t) = BOLD at time (t).

Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were carried out using R (https://www.R-project.org) and SPSS version 20.0 (IBM
Corp., Armonk, N.Y., USA). The false discovery rate (FDR) was used correct for multiple corrections
where such corrections were necessary; a corrected p-value of < 0.05 was considered significant in all
cases. To derive an overview of block-by-block responses, repeated measures ANOVAs with tests for
sphericity were used to compare each block to a zero baseline, and to compare responses in sequence
blocks 1, 2 and 6 against each other.
Repeated measures ANOVAs were used to investigate changes in the flow-metabolism coupling ratio
n, the ratio of the fractional change in CBF relative to the fractional change in CMRO2 (Buxton, Uludağ,
Dubowitz, & Liu, 2004), in each ROI and between blocks 1, 2 and 6. Repeated measures ANOVAs were
again conducted for behavioural data to identify significant RT changes from sequence block 1 vs. all
subsequent sequence and random blocks. RT was then used to investigate relationships between
behaviour and neurophysiological data. Finally, multiple linear regression analysis was used to
investigate the relationships between RT and imaging-based responses.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Results
Behavioural Responses

% CORRECT RESPONSES

SRT Response Accuracy
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

SRT BLOCK NUMBER
A

RT (MS)

SRT Reaction Time
410
400
390
380
370
360
350
340
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

SRT BLOCK NUMBER
B
Figure 2 Average (mean ± SEM) response accuracy per block (A), and average response latency (B) per task block. Error bars
represent the standard error of the mean across participants. Blocks 3, 6 and 9 (shown in red) represent pseudorandom
sequence blocks.

A one-way repeated measures ANOVA was carried out to compare performance across sequence
blocks. Mauchley’s test for sphericity was significant with p < 0.001, therefore degrees of freedom
were corrected using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity, ε = .441. The results showed that
there was a significant effect of time on performance; response accuracy improved over time; F(2.2,
38.3) = 12.47, p < 0.001. Follow up comparisons indicated that all subsequent blocks had a significantly
higher accuracy rate than block one. There was a 16.9±9% accuracy improvement from sequence
block 1 to sequence block 6, p < 0.001. Accuracy was higher in sequence blocks than random blocks,
apart from sequence block 1 which had the lowest performance of all blocks (Figure 2a). Random
blocks 1 and 2 had significantly lower accuracy than sequence blocks 3-6. However, random block 3
scores were only significantly lower than sequence blocks 3, 4 and 6, all p < 0.05. This shows that
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation
performance improvements over time can largely be attributed to sequence learning rather than more
general motor skill improvements.
There was a significant effect of time on reaction speed; F(5, 85) = 298, p < 0.001. Follow up
comparisons showed that RT decreased by 5.1±11% from block 1 to block 6, p < 0.001. Random blocks
had a greater response latency, again except for sequence block 1 (Figure 2B). Reaction time (RT) was
significantly longer in random block 1 than sequence blocks 2-6, random block 2, RT in random blocks
2 and 3 was longer than sequence blocks 3-6, all p < 0.05.

Imaging Data
Overview
Figure 3a-f shows the mean BOLD and CBF task responses, and regions where signal decreased on
average across task blocks, respectively as well as the conjunction between BOLD and CBF responses
in each case. There were no areas of statistically significant CBF, or BOLD response increases from rest
across the task. Table 1 shows the group mean CVR and M values for each ROI shown in figures 4 and
5.

a

b

c

d

e

f

Figure 3 Maps (a-c) show the mean BOLD signal response to the task (green), the CBF response (blue) and regions with
overlapping BOLD and CBF task-related signal increases from rest (red) (see design column 3 in supplementary figure 1).
Random blocks were not included in this analysis.
Maps (d-f) show areas of BOLD signal decrease over time during the SRT task (green), decreasing CBF responses (blue) and
overlapping BOLD and CBF signal decreases across the task (see design column 7 in supplementary figure 1). As above,
random blocks were not included in this analysis.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation
ROI

BOLD
CVR
%/mmHg

CBF CVR
%/mmHg

M%

Global Signal
reduction
across the
task
ACC

0.17
(0.09)

2.4 (1)

8
(0.5)

0.24
(0.02)

2.1 (0.2)

13
(2.5)

BA44

0.23
(0.03)

2 (0.2)

15
(3.3)

Brainstem

0.22
(0.02)

2.6 (0.3)

8 (1)

Cerebellum

0.23
(0.04)

2.5 (0.3)

8
(1.7)

Hippocampus

0.11
(0.02)

1.9 (0.2)

9.5
(2.8)

Insula

0.16
(0.01)

2.1 (0.2)

4 (3)

LOC

0.12
(0.01)

2.2 (0.3)

4.5
(1.7)

M1

0.2 (0.02)

2.3 (0.3)

13
(3.6)

S1

0.2 (0.03)

2.2 (0.3)

17
(5.6)

Precuneus

0.3 (0.04)

2.1 (0.3)

13
(2.7)

Thalamus

0.45
(0.05)

3 (0.4)

19
(4.2)

Table 1 Mean (SEM) CVR and M values for each ROI shown in figures 4 and 5A-K.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Figure 4. Plots showing the mean ± SEM responses for each task block in the global mean reduction ROI shown in figure 3f.
S1 = SRT block 1, R1 = random block 1. Y = Yes to indicate statistically significant (p < 0.05), signal changes from baseline and
between first and second and first and last SRT blocks.

Anatomical ROIs: BOLD, CBF and CMRO2 Responses in Each Task Block
ROIs defined from the intersection between BOLD and CBF task response reductions (shown in figure
3f) and subdivided into 9 anatomical areas were investigated: the precentral gyrus (M1), the
postcentral gyrus (S1), insula, lateral occipital cortex (LOC), precuneus, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
hippocampus, brainstem and cerebellum. For the additional ROIs, the thalamus showed a significant
BOLD signal reduction over time, and BA44 did not show any signal reduction. Figures 5 and 6 show
the mean BOLD, CBF and CMRO2 responses for each task block across the global reduction ROI and for
each of the anatomical ROIs respectively.

Paired t-tests were carried out to identify significant changes between the first and second, and first
and last blocks. Significant CMRO2 changes between blocks were observed in the global task ROI, the
cerebellum and between the first and last blocks in M1 and S1. Significant BOLD changes between
blocks were observed in most regions, except BA44, and the thalamus between block 1 and block 6.
This was also the case for CBF where changes were not observed in BA44, the brainstem, hippocampus
and precuneus between block 1 and 2, and the thalamus between block 1 and 6 (see figure 5A-K for a
summary of statistically significant changes for each ROI and block.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation
Outliers in the BOLD and CBF and CMRO2 data were identified using Tukey’s method(Tukey, 1977)
where the interquartile range is multiplied by 1.5 to define a reasonable range. A number of subjects
were then rejected from each ROI on this basis (see supplementary table 1).

A

B

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

C

D

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

E

F

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

G

H

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

I

J

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

K
Figure 5 Plots showing the mean ± SEM responses for each task block in different anatomical regions showing a mean (BOLD
and CBF) signal reduction across the task. S1 = SRT block 1, R1 = random block 1. Y = Yes to indicate statistically significant (p
< 0.05), signal changes from baseline and between first and second and first and last SRT blocks.

Flow Metabolism Coupling
The flow-metabolism coupling ratio, n, was investigated in each region comparing differences
between sequence block 1 and block 2 and between sequence block 1 and block 6 using repeated
measures ANOVAs. Figure 6 shows the mean coupling across each ROI. Despite observed differences,
there were no statistically significant differences in coupling between any ROIs or timepoints. Of the
12 ROIs, global, M1, S1, cerebellum and the hippocampus showed what could be considered ‘typical’
coupling. The precuneus and brainstem displayed typical coupling until the final 2 blocks (Figure 5AF). The LOC, insula, BA44, ACC, and thalamus had more atypical coupling relationships (see figure 5GK) where the BOLD response was positive despite a negative CMRO2 change from baseline. Typical
coupling, in this instance refers to ROIs where all BOLD, CBF and CMRO2 follow the same pattern, e.g.
sustained responses above baseline in all parameters. An example of atypical coupling is in the insula
where there was a sustained BOLD task response across the task yet CBF and/or CMRO2 was near or
below baseline levels.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Figure 6 Mean coupling ratios (ΔCBF/ΔCMRO2) all SRT task blocks calculated as a per subject average, SEM represents SEM
across subjects. B/stem = brainstem, C/bellum = Cerebellum, HC = Hippocampus.

FMRI and Behaviour
Regression analysis was conducted to determine whether RT was predicted by BOLD, CBF or CMRO2.
For this, we focused on the first and last SRT task blocks. Multiple linear regression was carried out
across subjects for each ROI with RT as the dependent variable, and BOLD, CBF and CMRO2 as
independent variables. Neither BOLD, CBF nor rCMRO2 were predictors of RT at the beginning or end
of the task with all regression coefficients below 0.2, and p-values < 0.05 (data not shown).

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Discussion
In this study we have shown changes from baseline in BOLD, CBF and CMRO2 in multiple brain regions
recruited during performance of an SRT task, as well as changes in the amplitude of these responses
from early to late task blocks. The pattern of changes was heterogeneous across regions, but the
largest response amplitudes occurred in the first task block. Outside of M1 and S1, in areas where a
statistically significant CMRO2 response was detected in early blocks (BA44, precuneus and
cerebellum), CMRO2 returned to within baseline levels by the third task block. In contrast, BOLD
responses were sustained (i.e. significantly different from baseline) across blocks in most ROIs except
for the precuneus and hippocampus in later blocks. In the cerebellum, a sustained CBF response was
also observed in the absence of a significant CMRO2 increase after the first sequence block.
In random task blocks, only M1 and S1 showed significant CBF and CMRO2 responses, however CBF
responses across all 3 random blocks were observed in BA44 and the cerebellum, and in random block
1 in the ACC, precuneus and LOC.

The mean flow-metabolism coupling ratio n over all sequence blocks in the cerebellum was 1.6, which
was over 3 times that of the insula where the coupling ratio was 0.5 (see figure 6). Despite this,
coupling was not statistically different between any ROIs, or between task blocks within ROIs, perhaps
as inter-subject variability was high.

The increase in RT for random task blocks was not reflected by increases in the BOLD or CBF responses,
and RT in SRT blocks did not correlate significantly with the imaging data, despite fMRI responses and
RT both decreasing in a similar fashion across blocks. Therefore, the BOLD, CBF or CMRO2 responses
cannot be assumed to reflect sequence specific learning directly. What we are demonstrating, is the
energetic adaptations occurring with repeated execution of a motor sequence, and therefore this
study has important implications for the study of plasticity and higher cognitive processes such as
learning. With appropriate tasks in future studies, CMRO2 could be calculated during early and late
phases of learning as well as before and after behavioural or drug interventions to study energetic
changes during learning and memory processes, and to evaluate the neural changes brought out by
interventions, as CMRO2 is assumed to be closely coupled to neuronal activity.

Energetic Adaptations during the SRT
Task responses and response reductions over time were identified in regions typical of a visuomotor
learning task; M1, S1, the ACC, cerebellum, insula and LOC, areas involved in motor performance,
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation
visual processing, attention and information processing. The cerebellum is critically involved in motor
learning and coordination of voluntary movement, therefore decreases in this area may represent a
shift towards automated performance of the motor task, given the sustained CBF response and CMRO2
near baseline levels. The insula has been associated with hand to eye motor coordination, while the
LOC is primarily involved in shape discrimination; signal reductions in these regions, combined with
the absence of a significant CMRO2 increase during task performance may also be attributed to rapid
task adaptation and low difficulty level of the task.

Outside of M1 and S1, key regions involved in motor execution, several ROIs including the ACC,
thalamus and BA44 showed a sustained BOLD response in the absence of a significant CMRO2
response. BOLD signal increases without notable CMRO2 responses may be due to signalling
mechanisms leading to a preparatory haemodynamic response (Buxton, 2010; Buxton, Griffeth,
Simon, & Moradi, 2014; Gjedde, Vafaee, & Gjedde, 2004) which, due to the low task difficulty, is not
subsequently required as only a small CMRO2 increase is needed to perform the task. Other regions
such as the insula, LOC and hippocampus showed CMRO2 reductions from baseline in later blocks,
with only the hippocampus also showing BOLD reductions from baseline, however these CMRO2
changes were not statistically significant. Low CMRO2 responses in regions where the BOLD, and
sometimes CBF, response was sustained across blocks, such as in cerebellum, ACC, thalamus and
BA44, demonstrates the importance of acquiring metabolic measures in addition to the BOLD
response. Taking BA44 as an example, the BOLD response alone suggests a significant BOLD increase
was sustained for all sequence and random blocks. However, the CBF data shows only significant
changes for the first sequence blocks and all random blocks, and a CMRO2 increase was detected only
in the first task block. BA44 has been previously associated with motor adaptation (Shannon et al.,
2016), where reductions in oxygen consumption and functional connectivity with V1 were observed
following a motor adaptation task. The CBF and CMRO2 data suggest that motor adaptation occurred
quickly, with greater effort required for the first sequence block and random blocks. The sustained
BOLD may be a result of the preparatory motor response (Gjedde et al., 2004) with only a small, or
negligible, subsequent metabolic increase.

As we did not measure aerobic glycolysis, it is not possible to identify changes in both this and CMRO2.
However, increases in aerobic glycolysis may also explain the absence of CMRO2 increases during the
task in regions such as BA44, if there was increased aerobic glycolysis and reduced oxygen metabolism
with task adaptation (Shannon et al., 2016). Rather than a small increase in metabolic demand during
the task, it could also be that there is a shift towards greater aerobic glycolysis, hence the lack of an
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation
observed CMRO2 increase in many ROIs, including BA44, after the initial sequence block. The
sustained CMRO2 response observed in M1 and S1 may be explained by ongoing recruitment of these
regions for motor execution, rather than adaptation or learning, processes may rely more on increases
in aerobic glycolysis. As shown in figure 5A-K, the greatest responses in BOLD, CBF and CMRO2 are
always observed in the first SRT block. This is likely to be a result of the initial demands of the task,
focusing visual attention on the task and selecting the correct motor responses, as well as processing
task information to identify the repeating sequence. In this particular task, subjects quickly adapted
to the task demands, as evidenced by the rapid improvement in accuracy and reduction in response
time. This fast adaptation may explain the sharp reduction in BOLD and CBF responses, as well as the
small, on average, CMRO2 increases from baseline in later blocks, as this adaptation led to a reduced
neuronal demand.

While the neurobiological phenomena discussed above may explain the data, it must also be kept in
mind that the CMRO2 measurements obtained using calibrated fMRI are prone to noise and therefore
lower power than individual optimised measurements of each parameter. CMRO2 measured using
calibrated fMRI being derived from BOLD and ASL CBF signals suffers from a lower contrast-to-noise
ratio than BOLD, limiting the detectability of small CMRO2 changes. As a result, changes from baseline
may not have been detected, whereas BOLD and CBF changes, more robust over short timescales,
were detected.

Signal reductions over task blocks observed in this study have been reported previously for BOLD and
PET (Floyer-Lea & Matthews, 2004; Laguna & Cognitive, 1995) with the largest reduction also occurring
between the first and second blocks. Fernandez-Seara et al. (2016) used ASL to investigate CBF
changes during two separate 6-minute explicit learning tasks where a different pattern of sequential
finger movements was trained in each task. To investigate learning-related changes, 3 learning phases
were defined representing early to intermediate learning. CBF decreases relative to CBF measured
during a control block were reported bilaterally for regions recruited during task performance, and
perfusion reached levels comparable to baseline by the final task block in agreement with many ROIs
in the current study. However, in contrast to the current study, where no perfusion increases over
time were found, Fernandez-Seara et al. (2016) found perfusion increases with task practice in
somatosensory cortex, the posterior insula and putamen, cingulate cortex and left hippocampus
which may be due to differences in the task design or ASL sequence, as PCASL, which provides
increased perfusion signal was used by Fernandez-Seara et al. (2016).

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation
Although significant changes in CBF and CMRO2 without accompanying BOLD changes were not
typically observed, acquiring CBF and CMRO2 data is still valuable as it can provide an insight into the
main processes contributing to the measured BOLD signal. This is evident where BOLD and CBF remain
elevated from baseline across the task despite CMRO2 being close to, or reduced from, baseline. Most
regions showed similar patterns at the beginning of the task, significant BOLD and CBF responses,
accompanied by CMRO2 changes in motor regions, and the cerebellum, and a sharp drop in signal by
block 2. In agreement with Buxton et al. (2014), the CMRO2 response suggests more rapid adaptation
to the task than the BOLD or CBF data; it is possible that neural adaptation occurs faster than the
haemodynamic response adaptation. Changes in later blocks became more variable across ROIs, but
overall CMRO2 responses were close to baseline, in contrast to the larger responses seen in the first
SRT block in many ROIs. This pattern may be similar to previously reported rapid adaptation followed
by slower, more gradual adaptations which are likely to continue beyond the short task duration
(Doyon & Benali, 2005).

Flow-metabolism Coupling
In this study, no significant differences in flow-metabolism coupling were observed between ROIs or
task blocks, despite group mean coupling ratios ranging from 0.5-1.6 across ROIs, therefore
speculation about the differences observed must be limited. Observed values were lower than
coupling ratios previously reported in the visual cortex during visual stimulation of 2.2 (Uludağ et al.,
2004) and ~1.8 (Kim et al., 1999), this may derive from weaker visual stimulation in the present study
compared to checkerboard stimuli commonly used to activate V1. Ratios of change in CBF to change
in CMRO2 of 3:1 have been reported for graded motor activation from 0.5-3hz (Kastrup, Kru,
Neumann-Haefelin, Glover, & Moseley, 2002) and in M1, a group average value of ~3.4 has been
reported during finger-thumb opposition (Chiarelli et al., 2007). This is much larger than the changes
observed in the current study, but the values reported for the current work are comparable to values
of 1.6 reported for the medial temporal lobe during a memory encoding task (Restom, Perthen, & Liu,
2008) which required motor responses to images presented in blocks of familiar and unfamiliar
stimuli. The variation across studies is likely to be due to differences in the type of stimulation or task
used, but also reflect differences in neurovascular coupling across the brain. The lack of statistically
significant differences between blocks or regions in the current study may be explained by the large
inter-subject variation, both between regions and blocks (see figure 6).

Typical coupling between CBF and CMRO2 in brain regions outside of visual, motor and somatosensory
cortices has not been clearly established, nor is it clear how processes such as skill acquisition affect
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation
the coupling ratio n. Uludağ et al. (2004) reported that coupling ratios during activation and
deactivation (due to task-related signal decreases) are similar in the visual cortex, but it is not clear if
this trend is uniform across the brain and under different levels of cognitive load. As mentioned in the
introduction, changes in coupling may occur as a result of changes in aerobic glycolysis as less glucose
is metabolised through oxidative phosphorylation during and following learning (Shannon et al.,
2016). In visuomotor adaptation and learning tasks, the coupling ratio n, and changes in n with task
practice, may represent the LTP and LTD processes involved in learning, and which underlie plasticity
in the healthy brain. However, additional studies which track CBF and CMRO2 after task performance
are needed to establish whether energetic changes suggestive of LTP and LTD can be identified using
fMRI during short motor adaptation tasks.

Finally, brain measures did not correlate significantly with gains in performance in the form of accuracy
and reaction time. Contributing to this observation may the low level of difficulty such that ceiling
effects were observed in the performance data, alongside very low variability in performance across
subjects. Coupled with the high variability of the brain data, this may explain why no correlations were
observed. Therefore, although motor adaptations were observed in the form of performance
improvements and signal reductions, the signal changes cannot be directly interpreted as sequence
specific motor learning. In the pseudorandom task blocks performance was lower, however, there was
no significant difference in BOLD or CBF in these blocks compared to the SRT tasks before and after
(data not shown). This suggests that the changes in BOLD, CBF and CMRO2 were not due to sequence
specific motor learning but more to adaptation to repeated finger movements.

Limitations
The principal limitation is the low contrast-to-noise of CMRO2 estimates, largely arising from low CNR
of ASL CBF measurement. Previous work studying cerebrovascular changes during cognitive tasks has
used much longer paradigms than the 12-minute task used here, with some exceptions (FernandezSeara et al., 2016b). Only 6 sequence blocks were included here due to time limitations within the
scan session, meaning that SNR was relatively low for the purposes of looking at individual 45 second
block activity. Additional blocks would allow ‘chunking’ of the data into early, intermediate and late
blocks to examine differences between the 3 stages of learning with increased SNR. For example,
Olson et al. (2006) incorporated three 20-minute SRT blocks in their protocol which served to dilute
the effects of transient anomalies in activity and build a more reliable picture of average group
responses. While the 12-minute task is useful for measuring short term adaptation differences
between patients and controls and to limit head motion and fatigue effects, to quantitatively assess
motor learning, longer paradigms should be used along with larger sample sizes to establish whether
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation
the variability observed in this study is due to real individual differences or simply the low CNR
inherent in ASL data.

Conclusions
This study demonstrates the use of calibrated fMRI to detect regional BOLD, CBF and CMRO2
responses to a short motor adaptation task, and the changes in the amplitude of these responses over
time in a sample of healthy adults. The most interesting result of this study is the finding that in several
regions including the ACC, BA44, thalamus and cerebellum, there was a sustained BOLD
haemodynamic response in the absence of a significant CMRO2 increase from baseline which suggests
that the brain may continue to elevate the supply energy even after actual utilisation (CMRO2) has
reduced to near baseline levels. Therefore, relying on BOLD data alone in behavioural studies can mask
the nature of underlying metabolic responses and their changes over time with repeated task
performance. With refinements to the task and MR acquisition, calibrated fMRI could be used to study
energetic changes during learning in the healthy brain and to investigate the vascular and metabolic
changes underlying reduced cognitive and motor function and limited plasticity in ageing and disease.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

References
Antonio, S., Case, L., Harman, C., & Lacey, J. (1987). Attentional Requirements of
Learning: Performance Measures Evidence from, 32.
Birn, R. M., Murphy, K., Handwerker, D. A., & Bandettini, P. A. (2009). fMRI in the
presence of task-correlated breathing variations. NeuroImage, 47(3), 1092–1104.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.05.030
Bonzano, L., Tacchino, A., Roccatagliata, L., Sormani, M. P., Mancardi, G. L., &
Bove,M. (2011). NeuroImage Impairment in explicit visuomotor sequence learning is
related to loss of microstructural integrity of the corpus callosum in multiple sclerosis
patients
with
minimal
disability,
57,
495–501.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.04.037
Boyd, L. A., & Winstein, C. J. (2001). Implicit motor-sequence learning in humans
following unilateral stroke : the impact of practice and explicit knowledge, 298, 65–69.
Bright, M. G., & Murphy, K. (2013). Reliable quantification of BOLD fMRI
cerebrovascular reactivity despite poor breath-hold performance. NeuroImage, 83,
559–568. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.07.007
Bulte, D. P., Kelly, M., Germuska, M., Xie, J., Chappell, M. a., Okell, T. W., … Jezzard, P.
(2012). Quantitative measurement of cerebral physiology using respiratory-calibrated
MRI.
NeuroImage,
60(1),
582–591.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.12.017
Buxton, R. B. (2010). Interpreting oxygenation-based neuroimaging signals: the
importance and the challenge of understanding brain oxygen metabolism. Frontiers in
Neuroenergetics, 2(June), 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnene.2010.00008
Buxton, R. B., Griffeth, V. E. M., Simon, A. B., & Moradi, F. (2014). Variability of the
coupling of blood flow and oxygen metabolism responses in the brain : a problem for
interpreting BOLD studies but potentially a new window on the underlying neural
activity, 8(June), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2014.00139
Buxton, R. B., Uludağ, K., Dubowitz, D. J., & Liu, T. T. (2004). Modeling the
hemodynamic response to brain activation. NeuroImage, 23 Suppl 1, S220-33.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.07.013
Chen, J. J., Pike, B., Chen, J. J., & Pike, G. B. (2010). MRI measurement of the BOLDspecific flow- volume relationship during hypercapnia and hypocapnia in humans,
(September 2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.07.003
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Chiarelli, P. A., Bulte, D. P., Gallichan, D., Piechnik, S. K., Wise, R., & Jezzard, P. (2007).
Flow-Metabolism Coupling in Human Visual , Motor , and Resonance Imaging, 547,
538–547. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.21171
Davis, T. L., Kwong, K. K., Weisskoff, R. M., & Rosen, B. R. (1998a). Calibrated functional
MRI: mapping the dynamics of oxidative metabolism. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 95(4), 1834–1839.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.4.1834
Davis, T. L., Kwong, K. K., Weisskoff, R. M., & Rosen, B. R. (1998b). Calibrated functional
MRI: mapping the dynamics of oxidative metabolism. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 95(4), 1834–1839.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.4.1834
D’haeseleer, M., Cambron, M., Vanopdenbosch, L., & De Keyser, J. (2011). Vascular
aspects of multiple sclerosis. The Lancet. Neurology, 10(7), 657–666.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70105-3
Doyon, J., & Benali, H. (2005). Reorganization and plasticity in the adult brain during
learning of motor skills. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 15(2), 161–167.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2005.03.004
Fan, A. P., Evans, K. C., Stout, J. N., Rosen, B. R., & Adalsteinsson, E. (2015). NeuroImage
Regional quanti fi cation of cerebral venous oxygenation from MRI susceptibility
during
hypercapnia.
NeuroImage,
104,
146–155.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.09.068
Fernández-Seara, M. A., Aznárez-sanado, M., Mengual, E., Loayza, F. R., & Pastor, M.
A. (2009). NeuroImage Continuous performance of a novel motor sequence leads to
highly correlated striatal and hippocampal perfusion increases. NeuroImage, 47(4),
1797–1808. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.05.061
Floyer-Lea, A., & Matthews, P. M. (2004). Changing brain networks for visuomotor
control with increased movement automaticity. Journal of Neurophysiology, 92, 2405–
2412. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.01092.2003
Ge, Y., Zhang, Z., Lu, H., Tang, L., Jaggi, H., Herbert, J., … Grossman, R. I. (2012).
Characterizing brain oxygen metabolism in patients with multiple sclerosis with T2relaxation-under-spin-tagging MRI. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism,
32(3), 403–412. https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2011.191

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Gjedde, A., Vafaee, M. S., & Gjedde, A. (2004). Vafaee MS & Gjedde A . Spatially
dissociated flow-metabolism coupling in brain activation . Spatially dissociated flowmetabolism
coupling
in
brain
activation,
(March).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.10.003
Glover, G. H. (1999). Simple analytic spiral K-space algorithm. Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine, 42(2), 412–415.
Glover, G. H., Li, T., & Ress, D. (2000). Image Based Retrospective Correction of Noise,
Magn. Res. Med., 167(March), 162–167.
Goyal, M. S., Hawrylycz, M., Miller, J. A., Snyder, A. Z., & Raichle, E. (2015). HHS Public
Access, 19(1), 49–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2013.11.020.Aerobic
Griffeth, V., & Buxton, R. B. (2011). Modeling the Effect of Changes in Hematocrit, O2
Extraction Fraction, and Blood Volume Distribution on the BOLD Signal and Estimates
of CMRO2 Change with a Calibrated BOLD Method. Proceedings of the 18th Annual
Meeting of the ISMRM, Di(May 2009), 1.
Hardwick, R. M., Rottschy, C., Miall, R. C., & Eickhoff, S. B. (2013). A quantitative metaanalysis and review of motor learning in the human brain. NeuroImage, 67, 283–297.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.11.020
Hoge, R. D., Atkinson, J., Gill, B., Crelier, G. R., Marrett, S., & Pike, G. B. (1999).
Investigation of BOLD signal dependence on cerebral blood flow and oxygen
consumption: the deoxyhemoglobin dilution model. Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine : Official Journal of the Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine / Society
of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 42(5), 849–863.
Jenkinson, M., & Smith, S. M. (2001). A global optimization method for robust affine
registration of brain images. Medical Imaging Analysis, 5, 143–156.
Kastrup, A., Kru, G., Neumann-haefelin, T., Glover, G. H., & Moseley, M. E. (2002).
Changes of Cerebral Blood Flow , Oxygenation , and Oxidative Metabolism during
Graded Motor Activation, 82, 74–82. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.0916
Kidd, D., Barkhof, F., Mcconnell, R., Algra, P. R., Allen, I. V, & Revesz, T. (1999). Cortical
lesions in multiple sclerosis, 17–26.
Kim, S., Kim, S., Rostrup, E., Larsson, H. B. W., Ogawa, S., & Paulson, O. B. (1999). Kim
SG , Rostrup E , Larsson HBW , Ogawa S , Paulson OB. Determination of relative CMRO2
from CBF and BOLD changes : significant increase of oxygen consumption rate during
visual stimulat ... Determination of Relative CMRO 2 From CBF and BOLD Changes :
Sign, (February 2016). https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1522-2594(199906)41
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Knopman, D., & Nissen, M. J. (1991). PROCEDURAL LEARNING IS IMPAIRED IN
HUNTINGTON ’ S DISEASE : EVIDENCE FROM THE SERIAL REACTION TIME TASK that the
brain has separate learning systems has generated a great deal of controversy [ 12 ,
22 , 29 ]. The neuropsychological evidence is perhaps the, 29(3), 245–254.
Laguna, L., & Cognitive, H. (1995). Karni , A . et al . Functional MRI evidence for adult
motor cortex plasticity during motor skill learning . Nature 377 , 155-158, (May 2016),
155–158. https://doi.org/10.1038/377155a0
Liu, T. T., & Wong, E. C. (2005). A signal processing model for arterial spin labeling
functional
MRI.
NeuroImage,
24(1),
207–215.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.09.047
Liu, T. T., Wong, E. C., Frank, L. R., & Buxton, R. B. (2002). Analysis and Design of
Perfusion-Based
Event-Related
fMRI
Experiments,
282,
269–282.
https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.1038
Madsen, P. L., Hasselbalch, S. G., Hagemann, L. P., Olsen, K. S., Bülow, J., Holm, S., …
Lassen, N. A. (1995). Persistent Resetting of the Cerebral Oxygen/Glucose Uptake Ratio
by Brain Activation: Evidence Obtained with the Kety—Schmidt Technique. Journal of
Cerebral
Blood
Flow
&
Metabolism,
15(3),
485–491.
https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.1995.60
Mark, C. I., Fisher, J. A., & Pike, G. B. (2011). NeuroImage Improved fMRI calibration :
Precisely controlled hyperoxic versus hypercapnic stimuli, 54, 1102–1111.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.08.070
Mohtasib, R. S., Lumley, G., Goodwin, J. A., Emsley, H. C. A., Sluming, V., & Parkes, L.
M. (2012). NeuroImage Calibrated fMRI during a cognitive Stroop task reveals reduced
metabolic
response
with
increasing
age,
59,
1143–1151.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.07.092
Nissen, M. J., & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional requirements of learning: Evidence
from
performance
measures.
Cognitive
Psychology,
19(1),
1–32.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(87)90002-8
Olson, I. R., Rao, H., Moore, K. S., Wang, J., Detre, J. a., & Aguirre, G. K. (2006a). Using
perfusion fMRI to measure continuous changes in neural activity with learning. Brain
and Cognition, 60(3), 262–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2005.11.010

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Olson, I. R., Rao, H., Moore, K. S., Wang, J., Detre, J. A., & Aguirre, G. V. K. (2006b).
Using perfusion fMRI to measure continuous changes in neural activity with learning,
60, 262–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2005.11.010
Ota, M., Sato, N., Nakata, Y., Ito, K., Kamiya, K., Maikusa, N., … Kunugi, H. (2013).
Abnormalities of cerebral blood flow in multiple sclerosis: A pseudocontinuous arterial
spin labeling MRI study. Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 31(6), 990–995.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mri.2013.03.016
Restom, K., Bangen, K. J., Bondi, M. W., Perthen, J. E., & Liu, T. (2008). NIH Public
Access, 37(2), 430–439.
Restom, K., Perthen, J. E., & Liu, T. T. (2008). Calibrated fMRI in the medial temporal
lobe during a memory-encoding task. NeuroImage, 40(4), 1495–1502.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.01.038
Shannon, B. J., Neil, S., Vlassenko, A. G., Shimony, J. S., & Rutlin, J. (2016). Brain aerobic
glycolysis
and
motor
adaptation
learning,
(26),
1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1604977113
Tancredi, F. B., Lajoie, I., & Hoge, R. D. (2014). A simple breathing circuit allowing
precise control of inspiratory gases for experimental respiratory manipulations. BMC
Research Notes, 7(1), 235. https://doi.org/10.1186/1756-0500-7-235
Tukey, J. W. (1977). Exploratory Data Analysis. Analysis, 2(1999), 688.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-7976-6
Uludaug, K., Dubowitz, D. J., Yoder, E. J., Restom, K., Liu, T. T., & Buxton, R. B. (2004).
Coupling of cerebral blood flow and oxygen consumption during physiological
activation and deactivation measured with f{MRI}. Neuroimage, 23(1), 148–155.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.05.013
Ungerleider, L., Doyon, J., & Karni, A. (2002). Imaging brain plasticity during motor skill
learning.
Neurobiol
Learn
Mem,
78,
553–564.
https://doi.org/10.1006/nlme.2002.4091
Vaishnavi, S. N., Vlassenko, A. G., Rundle, M. M., Snyder, A. Z., & Mintun, M. A. (2010).
Regional aerobic glycolysis in the human brain, 107(41), 17757–17762.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1010459107
Wong, E. C., Buxton, R. B., & Frank, L. R. (1998). Quantitative imaging of perfusion using
a single subtraction (QUIPSS and QUIPSS II). Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 39(5),
702–708. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.1910390506
32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/539130; this version posted February 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Metabolic Changes during Visuomotor Adaptation

Supplementary Data
ROI

Number of outliers removed
from imaging data
Global
1
ACC
3
BA44
2
Brainstem
0
Cerebellum
2
Hippocampus 1
Insula
1
LOC
1
M1
1
S1
3
Precuneus
3
Thalamus
3
Table S1 Number of outliers removed from analysis of each ROI

33

