bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

1

Dual process coding of recalled locations in human oscillatory brain activity
Abbreviated title: Dual process coding in human oscillatory brain activity
Mary H. MacLean1,2
Tom Bullock1,2
Barry Giesbrecht1,2,3
1Psychological
2Institute

& Brain Sciences, University of California Santa Barbara, 93106

for Collaborative Biotechnologies, University of California Santa Barbara,
93106

3Graduate

Program in Dynamical Neuroscience, University of California Santa
Barbara, 93106

Corresponding authors: barry.giesbrecht@psych.ucsb.edu,
mary.maclean@psych.ucsb.edu
8 figures
Abstract: 78 words
Introduction: 618 words
Discussion: 1,211 words
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

2
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the Institute for Collaborative
Biotechnologies through contract W911NF-09-0001 and cooperative agreement
W911NF-19-0026, both from the U.S. Army Research Office. The content of the
information does not necessarily reflect the position or the policy of the
Government, and no official endorsement should be inferred. We would like to
thank James Elliott for his crucial feedback and suggestions, as well as Caroline
Trinh, Lena Nalbandian, and Scott Patterson for their help with data collection.
M.H.M. and T.B. are co-first authors. M.H.M, T.B., and B.G. designed the experiment.
T.B. programmed the experiment. M.H.M and T.B. collected the data. T.B., M.H.M.,
and B.G. analyzed the data. M.H.M, T.B., and B.G. wrote the manuscript.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

3
Abstract
A mental representation of the location of an object can be constructed using
sensory information selected from the environment and information stored
internally. Human electrophysiological evidence indicates that behaviorally relevant
locations, regardless of the source of sensory information, are represented in alphaband oscillations suggesting a shared process. Here we present evidence from
human subjects of either sex for two distinct alpha-band based processes that
separately support the representation of location, exploiting sensory evidence
sampled either externally or internally.
Significance Statement
Our sensory environment and our internal trains of thought are coded in
patterns of brain activity and are used to guide coherent behavior. Oscillations in
the alpha frequency band are a predominant feature of human brain activity. This
oscillation plays a central role in both selective attention and working memory,
suggesting that these important cognitive functions are mediated by a unitary
mechanism. We show that the alpha oscillation reflects two distinct processes, one
that is supported by continuous sampling of the external sensory environment, and
one that is based on sampling from internal representations coded in visual shortterm memory. This represents a significant change in our understanding of the
nature of alpha oscillations and their relationship to attention and memory.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

4
Introduction
Mental representations of behaviorally relevant visual features and locations
are based on information sampled from the environment and can persist in visual
working memory even in the absence of maintained external sensory input (Foster,
Sutterer, Serences, Vogel, & Awh, 2016; Harrison & Tong, 2009; Serences, Ester,
Vogel, & Awh, 2009). Unlike features (e.g. colors), when stimulus locations are being
maintained in working memory, the location of a stimulus remains available so long
as there is visual input from the environment to be sampled, even if the stimulus is
not present. Importantly, uninterrupted visual input is not necessary for successful
recall of location, as multiple attended locations can be recalled when eyes are
closed during retention (Pearson & Sahraie, 2003). Thus, mental representations of
locations can be constructed from information sampled from the external
environment or from information encoded internally.
Both the selection (i.e., sampling) and retention of mental representations of
locations, regardless of the source of information (i.e., external or internal), appear
to be supported by processes associated with alpha band oscillations (Foster et al.,
2016; Foster, Sutterer, Serences, Vogel, & Awh, 2017; Kelly, Lalor, Reilly, & Foxe,
2006; Samaha, Sprague, & Postle, 2016; Thut, Nietzel, Brandt, & Pascual-Leone,
2006; van Moorselaar et al., 2018). The retention of spatially selective
representations, and the associated alpha activity, may represent a continuous
process of selection, i.e., the focus of attention (Lewis-Peacock, Drysdale, Oberauer,
& Postle, 2012), working memory, or a combination of both. Consistent with this
hypothesis, recent evidence from a dual task paradigm involving a shift of spatial

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

5
attention during the retention interval of a spatial working memory task revealed
that alpha carried information about the location stored in memory, but then when
attention was cued to a new location, alpha carried information about the newly
attended location until the task was complete and shifted back to the location stored
in memory (van Moorselaar et al., 2018). This systematic tradeoff between the
attention and memory tasks suggests that alpha represents a unitary mechanism
that mediates spatial selectivity and that this mechanism is shared by attention and
spatial working memory.
While the evidence reviewed above is consistent with the notion that alpha
represents a unitary mechanism for the selection and retention of behaviorally
relevant locations, this evidence comes exclusively from tasks in which there is
sustained visual input from the external environment. Thus, it is unknown whether
similar processes are involved in coding information from internal representations,
as may be required when sensory input is disrupted (e.g., by eye closure or sensory
degradation) and, as such, it is unclear whether alpha represents a unitary process
for the selection and retention of locations when information is sampled from the
external environment or from information that has already been encoded internally
(i.e., information in visual working memory). Here we present evidence that at least
two distinct processes associated with alpha-band oscillations support spatially
selective representations: (1) a fast and continuous location selection process that is
disrupted by a masking stimulus and that degrades without continued external
visual input, and (2) a delayed process that emerges when external visual input is no
longer available. Participants performed a delayed spatial estimation task (Foster et

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

6
al., 2016; Wilken & Ma, 2004; Zhang & Luck, 2008), in which a single stimulus was
briefly presented in the periphery, in one of eight possible locations on the
circumference of an imaginary circle (Fig. 1a). Participants were instructed to
attend covertly to the stimulus location, remember its location, and report the
location after a short delay. The presence or absence of a masking checkerboard
after the stimulus, and the state of the eyes during retention (open or closed)
yielded four within-subject conditions: eyes open, eyes open + mask, eyes closed,
eyes closed + mask.
Materials & Methods
Participants
Participants were 18 adult volunteers (mean age = 20.8 years, 13 females, all
right handed) recruited from the University of California Santa Barbara community.
Participants were compensated at a rate of $10 per hour (minimum of $120
total/participant). All participants reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
The UCSB Human Subjects Committee approved all procedures.
Stimuli and procedure
Each participant completed four testing sessions on four separate days.
Sequential sessions were separated by a minimum of 24 hours and a maximum of 1
week. All four sessions were completed within an eight-week period for a given
participant. In each session the participant was required to perform 15 blocks of 64
trials (960 trials total) of the same delayed spatial estimation task. Each session
consisted of a different experimental condition of the task: “eyes open” (EO), “eyes

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

7
closed” (EC), “eyes open with mask” (EO+M), “eyes closed with mask” (EC+M). The
order of experimental conditions was counterbalanced between participants.
Each trial of the delayed spatial estimation task began with a small blue
fixation dot (subtending 0.2 visual angle) in the center of the screen, along with a
green dot (subtending 0.4 visual angle) representing the location of the
participant’s gaze. The participant aligned their gaze dot with the fixation dot and
pressed the space bar to start the trial. The fixation dot immediately turned grey to
indicate that the trial was underway. After a brief fixation (jittered randomly
between 0.6 s and 1.5 s) the stimulus, a grey target circle (subtending 1.6 visual
angle), appeared, centered at a point on an imaginary circle circumventing 4 from
fixation. The stimulus appeared within one of eight angular location bins relative to
fixation [0, 45, 90, 135, 180, 225, 270, 315], with angle jittered randomly
within each bin between +1-44.
The stimulus remained on screen for 0.25 s. Following stimulus offset there
was a 1.75 s retention interval. A grey response ring then appeared, circumventing
4 of visual angle from fixation, along with an auditory cue (0.1 s, 250 Hz pure sinewave). The participant used the mouse cursor to indicate the location of the target
on the response ring. The mouse cursor appeared in a randomized corner of the
response screen on each trial. This prevented the participant from anticipating the
forthcoming mouse movement during the retention period. The key manipulations
between sessions occurred immediately post-stimulus, during the retention
interval. In the EO condition participants were instructed to maintain fixation for
the duration of the retention interval. In the EC condition participants were
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

8
instructed to close their eyes immediately after stimulus offset and reopen them
when they heard an auditory cue at the end of the retention interval. In the EO+M
and EC+M conditions participants were given then same respective instructions,
however the target was masked with a global checkerboard (0.05 s, whole screen,
each checker subtending 0.48 by 0.48 of visual angle).
Gaze-contingent eye tracking was employed in all sessions during fixation,
stimulus presentation and retention periods. Trials where participants blinked or
their gaze deviated more than 2.4 from fixation were aborted. In the EC/EC+M
conditions, the trial was also aborted if the participant did not close their eyes
between 0.05 s and 0.5 s following target offset. This ensured that participants
closed their eyes in a timely manner and also that they viewed the checkerboard
mask in its entirety in the masked condition. If the participant reopened their eyes
during the retention period of the EC/EC+M condition the trial was aborted. On all
trials where the gaze-contingent conditions were broken, the next trial began
immediately and the aborted trial was added to the end of the trial sequence for that
block of trials, thus ensuring a complete set of trials without gaze deviations were
recorded for each participant in each condition.
While performing the task the participant was positioned in a chin rest at
120 cm viewing distance from a monitor (19 inch ViewSonic E90f CRT), and stimuli
were presented using custom scripts that utilized the Psychophysics Toolbox for
MATLAB. An eye-tracker (Eyelink 1000 plus, SR Research Ltd, Mississauga, Ontario,
Canada) was positioned 60 cm from the right eye (monocular tracking @ 1000 Hz,
mean error < 1˚). Performance on the delayed spatial estimation task was modeled

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

9
using the MemToolbox (Foster et al., 2016; Suchow, Brady, Fougnie, & Alvarez,
2013; Zhang & Luck, 2008). A standard mixture model with bias was applied to
error in the spatial estimates (in degrees of offset) of each participant within each
condition yielding a measure of precision of estimation as well as guess rate.
EEG Data Acquisition
EEG data were recorded for each participant using a BioSemi Active Two
system (BioSemi, Amsterdam, Netherlands) consisting of 64 Ag-AgCl sintered active
electrodes arranged in an elastic cap (Electro-Cap, USA) and placed in accordance to
the 10-20 system. Additional electrodes were placed at the right and left mastoids,
as well as 1 cm lateral to the left and right canthi (horizontal) and above and below
each eye (vertical) for the EOG. Data were sampled at 1024 Hz and referenced
offline to the average mastoid signal. At the beginning of each investigation all
impedances were < 20 kΩ. All recording took place in an electrically shielded
chamber to ensure minimal interference from external sources of electrical noise.
EEG Data Pre-processing
Custom scripts in MATLAB (version 2013b, Massachusetts, The MathWorks
Inc.) and using the EEGLAB toolbox (Delorme & Makeig, 2004) were used for offline
processing of the EEG data. The continuous data were referenced to the average
mastoid signal and then high- and low- pass filtered between 0.1 Hz and 80 Hz,
respectively (EEGLAB function pop_eegfiltnew). The Automatic Artifact Removal
(AAR) toolbox (Gomez-Herrero et al., 2006) was then used to remove ocular
artifacts associated with eye closure during the EC/EC-M conditions. The data were
then resampled at 256 Hz (EEGLAB function pop_resample), to reduce computation

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

10
time and memory demands, then epoched between -0.5 and 2.5 s around the onset
of the stimulus and (EEG data for aborted trials were discarded). The data were
then visually inspected and noisy electrodes were excluded (mean electrodes
excluded [mean ± SEM] = 1.23 ± .36). In order to maintain consistency in the
topographic distribution of electrical activity across the scalp, noisy electrodes that
were excluded from one condition were also excluded from all other conditions for
that subject. Trials exceeding ± 150 µV in remaining electrodes were then excluded
(mean trials excluded: 19.21 ± 4.53; EC 17.06 ± 3.15, EO+M 16.27 ± 3.27; EC+M
16.06 ± 4.14).
Inter-Trial Coherence
In order to observe the evoked response to the stimulus, the mask, and eye
closure we calculated inter-trial coherence (ITC) of the epoched data in the alpha (812 Hz) range (EEGLAB function erpimage) for each participant within each
condition. ITC reflects the phase coherence of the EEG signal between trials
(between 0 and 1, where 0 indicates no coherence and 1 indicates perfect
coherence). Increased phase coherence reflects a reset in phase time-locked to an
event (stimulus, mask or eye closure onset). This value is determined separately
within each electrode. As we were interested in signals evoked by visual processing
we averaged the ITC in parietal and occipital electrodes (P07/8, P03/4, O1/2, POz,
Oz).
Spectral Analysis
Epoched data were filtered using a 3rd order Butterworth bandpass filter
(MATLAB function butter) from 8-12 Hz (alpha). A Hilbert transformation (MATLAB

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

11
function hilbert) was then applied to the filtered signal in order to obtain a measure
of instantaneous amplitude and phase. The data were then epoched again between 0.5 to 2 s (.5 s pre stimulus to the end of the retention period).
Prior to modeling, induced power was calculated as the square of the
absolute of the Hilbert transformed complex values. Induced power reflects ongoing
oscillatory activity regardless of its phase relationship with stimulus onset. Within
each location bin trials were then randomly subdivided into three samples and then
averaged to create three averaged trials per location bin. Following averaging, each
condition included 24 averaged trials (8 location bins x 3 averaged trials).
Because trial-based artifact rejection results in uneven numbers of trials per
condition, it was necessary to ensure that any comparisons between conditions
were not influenced by unequal trial counts. Prior to entering the data into the IEM,
the minimum number of trials per location bin (n) was calculated across the four
conditions for each participant. To ensure equal numbers of trials from each
location bin were entered into the model, n-1 trials were randomly selected from
each bin.
Inverted Encoding Model
An IEM was used to estimate spatially selective neural population
(“channels”) response profiles based on the topographical distribution of alpha
power across the scalp (Foster et al., 2016). The model first estimates the extent to
which the linear combination of a priori canonical channel responses (i.e. a basis
set) captures the underlying structure of the observed data (topographical
distribution of alpha power), yielding a set of regression weights. The model then

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

12
uses these weights to estimate the channel response from the observed data. The
parameters of these channel response estimates can then be used to quantify the
spatially selective response. This method was initially applied to fMRI data
(Brouwer & Heeger, 2009, 2011, 2013; Ester, Sprague, & Serences, 2015; Naselaris,
Kay, Nishimoto, & Gallant, 2011; Serences & Saproo, 2012) and has been recently
applied to EEG recorded at the scalp (Bullock, Elliott, Serences, & Giesbrecht, 2017;
Foster et al., 2016, 2017; Garcia, Srinivasan, & Serences, 2013; Samaha et al., 2016).
The IEM was run separately for each sample in time (256 Hz EEG sampling
rate x 2.5 sec = 640 samples) using induced alpha power within each condition for
each participant. Evoked power was also modeled; the results replicated those of
Foster et al. (2016), and did not differ by condition. Note that as performance of the
IEM is sensitive to noise we compared the alpha signal-to-noise ratio (SNR; alpha
power / standard deviation of power in other frequencies) between conditions and
found no difference (all effects BF < 1). For cross-validation of the IEM a k-fold
approach was employed where k = 3. The averaged trials were randomly grouped
into three blocks, each with one averaged trial per location bin. Training was
performed using 2/3 blocks and the resulting model was tested on the remaining
block. This was repeated such that each block served as the test block.
For each participant and condition, m represents the number of EEG
electrodes in each dataset (mean across participants = 62.77 ± .36; equivalent
within participant), n1 represents the number of trials in the training set (2 blocks of
8 trials) and n2 represents the number of trials in the testing set (1 block of 8 trials).
Let j be the number of hypothetical location selective channels (C1, j x n1), composed

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

13
of half-sinusoidal functions raised to the seventh power as the basis set. Here, the
basis set was comprised of 8 equally spaced locations (i.e. j=8). B1 (m x n1)
represents the training set and B2 (m x n2) the test set. A standard implementation
of the general linear model (GLM) was then used to estimate the weight matrix (W,
m x j) using the basis set (C1). More specifically, using the GLM:
B1 = WC1

(𝐄𝐪𝐮𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧 𝟏)

Then, the ordinary least-squares estimate of W can be computed as:
̂ = B1 C1T (C1 C1T )−1
W

(𝐄𝐪𝐮𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧 𝟐)

Using the estimated weight matrix (Ŵ, Equation 2) and the test data (B2), the
channel responses C2 (j x n2) can be estimated by:
̂ TW
̂ )−1 W
̂ T B2
Ĉ2 = (W

(Equation 3)

After the Ĉ2 was solved for each location bin, the channel response function
on each averaged trial was then circularly shifted to a common stimulus-centered
reference frame (degrees of offset from channel’s preferred location bin), and the
centered response functions were averaged across channels. The model was
repeated for each time sample. To safeguard that the outcome of the model and
ensure that any subsequent analyses were not influenced by an idiosyncratic
selection of trials, this process was repeated 10 times, with a randomized selection
of trials entered into the IEM for each of the iterations, and the final centered tuning
function was computed by averaging over the 10 iterations.
The IEM procedure was also performed with randomly permuted location
bin labels. Randomizing the location bin labels should eliminate spatially selective

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

14
responses and result in flat channel response profiles. These permuted responses
were used in hypothesis testing.
Temporal Generalization of IEM
In order to observe the intra- and inter-condition temporal generalization of
the IEM we ran the IEM as described above by training at each sample in time, but
then testing on every sample in time, either within condition or between conditions.
In order to reduce computation time and the number of comparisons we downsampled the data prior to modeling from 256 Hz (640 samples) to 16 Hz (40
samples). We repeated the generalization IEM procedure with permuted location
bin labels for the purpose of hypothesis testing.
Quantifying Spatially Selective Representations
To quantify spatial selectivity the estimated channel responses were folded
around 0° of offset, transforming the responses from [-135, -90, -45, 0, 45, 90, 135,
180] into [0, 45, 90, 135, 180] by averaging the response at corresponding offsets (±
45, 90, and 135˚; 0˚ an 180˚ were not averaged). Slope was then computed (MATLAB
function polyfit) as the linear regression weight of alpha power across offset. Larger
slope values indicate greater spatial selectivity.
Linear Decoding Analysis
To assess the extent to which the scalp topography of alpha power
discriminated between the neural responses to stimuli presented in the eight
different location bins without assuming an a priori response profile (i.e., the basis
set in the IEM approach), we trained and tested linear discriminant pattern
classifiers in a series of three analyses that paralleled the IEM analyses. First, we

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

15
trained and tested classifiers within each condition at each point in time during the
trial. Second, we conducted an intra-condition temporal generalization analysis in
which a classifier was trained at each time point and tested on all of the other time
points. Third, we conducted an inter-condition temporal generalization analysis in
which training was conducted on each time point in one condition and tested on all
the time points in each of the other conditions.
For each analysis, the classifier (MATLAB Statistics and Machine Learning
Toolbox classify, ‘linear’ option) was trained using power at parietal (P1-10,z),
parietal-occipital (PO3,4,7,8,z), occipital (O1,2,z), and inion (Iz) electrodes. We
restricted the analyses to these 20 electrodes on an a priori basis to reduce the
dimensionality of the training data, ensuring stability of the classifier. To reduce
computation time and to facilitate comparison with the IEM generalization analyses
we down-sampled the data at 16 Hz, (16 Hz EEG sampling rate x 2.5 sec for each
trial = 40 samples). Leave-one-trial-out cross validation was used to train and test
the classifiers and performance was measured by computing the proportion of
correct classifications (n correct classifications/total classifications). Chance for
these analyses was 1/8=0.125. As with the IEM analyses, all classification analyses
were rerun permuting the location bin labels.
Alpha Lateralization Analysis
Systematic changes in alpha power topography that occurred as a function of
stimulus locations were assessed by normalizing (i.e., dividing) the difference in
alpha power at contralateral and ipsilateral parietal/occipital electrodes sites
(PO3/4, PO7/8, O1/2) by the sum of power at contralateral and ipsilateral sites.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

16
Normalized alpha power at contralateral and ipsilateral sites was then averaged by
condition and time window. The first time window overlapped with cue
presentation, following the earliest stimulus-related evoked potentials and the
emergence of a spatially selective representation (198-250 ms). The second time
window overlapped with the retention interval (post-mask/eye closure; 750-2,000
ms). Because the first time window is only 52 ms, while the second is 1,250 ms, a 52
ms window was randomly and independently selected from the retention interval
for each condition for each participant, such that the average latency of the window
was centered ~ 1,375 ms after stimulus onset. This ensured that estimates of the
mean and variability in each time window were based on the same number of time
points.
Experimental Design and Statistical Analysis
Bayes Factor (BF) was calculated for the purpose of inferential statistics
(Kass & Raftery, 1995; Kruschke & Liddell, 2016; Rouder, Morey, Speckman, &
Province, 2012) using functions from the BayesFactor toolbox for R(Morey, Rouder,
& Jamil, 2015), which employs a Cauchy prior. According to various guidelines a BF
between 1-3 indicates “anecdotal evidence” for H1, between 3 and 10 indicates
“moderate” evidence, between 10 and 30 indicates “strong” evidence and greater
than 30 indicates “very strong” evidence (Dienes, 2016; Kass & Raftery, 1995;
Kruschke & Liddell, 2016; Wetzels et al., 2011).
To test the reliability of the spatially selective channel responses, BF paired ttests (R function ttestBF) were computed at each sample in time comparing the
slopes of the real and permuted channel response estimates. To test for differences

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

17
in slope between conditions BF ANOVAs (R function anovaBF) with the factors eyes
(open vs. closed) and mask (masked vs. unmasked) were computed comparing the
slopes of the real channel response estimates at each time point. To contrast slope
values resulting from the temporal generalization analyses within conditions, to
those between conditions, BF paired t-tests were also computed for each cell in the
generalization matrix. To assess the relationship between slope and ITC, BF
regressions (R function regressionBF) were computed. BF ANOVAs and t-tests were
also used to test for differences in performance.
Our analyses involve repeated comparisons at multiple time points, which
raises the specter of increased inferential error. However, it should be noted that
Bayesian inference, even without correcting for multiple comparisons, is more
conservative than frequentist inference, and much less likely to result in false
confidence (Gelman & Tuerlinckx, 2000). Furthermore, our effects are present at
multiple time points, as hypothesized, and no inference relies on a single
comparison, but rather a pattern of effects across time. Our inferences are further
strengthened by our use of IEM parameters based on permuted data for
comparisons, which yields a more realistic null for our comparisons, and that our
parameters are averaged over multiple repetitions of the IEM. These features should
help mitigate errors due the peculiarities in the data at a given time point or sample
of trials.
Code Accessibility
All custom code will be made available in a public repository on GitHub/OSF,
please contact the corresponding author for more information.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

18
Control Study
Participants in the control study were 12 adult volunteers (mean age = 22.9;
six males; 11 right-handed) recruited from the University of California Santa
Barbara community. Participants were compensated at a rate of $10 per hour
(minimum of $120 total/participant). All participants reported normal or
corrected-to-normal vision. The UCSB Human Subjects Committee approved all
procedures.
Participants completed two conditions of the same delayed spatial
estimation task as described above, in two separate sessions on two different days:
(1) eyes open, and (2) eye-blink. The eyes open condition was identical to that used
in the main experiment. The eye-blink condition is identical to the eyes closed
condition except that participants were instructed to re-open their eyes after closing
them in response to the auditory cue (i.e., we asked them to blink). The deadline for
re-opening their eyes was the same as the deadline for eye closure in the eyes closed
conditions (750 ms post cue). Performance was unaffected by condition
(precision: Eyes Open = 7.16 ± .41, Eyes Blinked = 6.66 ± .40, BFt-test = 1.61; guess
rate: Eyes Open = .004 ± .001, Eyes Blinked = .002 ± .002, BF t-test < 1). All EEG
recording and analyses, as well as the approach to statistical inference, were
identical to those described above.
Results
Location report precision and guess rate are affected by eye closure
The precision of the reported stimulus location was reduced when
participants were required to close their eyes (BF > 1,000), an effect enhanced by
the presence of a mask (BF > 1,000; Fig. 1b). This suggests that the representation
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

19
of location without the support of continued external visual input is less precise,
especially when masked. While guess rate was extremely low in all conditions, there
was a small decrease in guessing when participants were required to close their
eyes during retention (BF > 7). Modulation of recall precision by eye closure is
inconsistent with evidence that spatial recall, when measured as accuracy, is robust
to eye closure without saccades (Pearson & Sahraie, 2003); however a continuous
report measure, as in the case of the delayed estimation task used here, is possibly
more sensitive to the effects of eye closure than discrete measures.
Reconstructions of location representations are temporarily disrupted by a visual
mask, and degrade over time with eye closure
In order to observe the spatially selective representation of the stimulus
location, an inverted-encoding model (IEM) was employed to reconstruct spatially
selective responses from topographically specific patterns of alpha band oscillations
in scalp-recorded EEG (Foster et al., 2016; Samaha et al., 2016; van Moorselaar et al.,
2018) (Fig. 2a-c). More specifically, the IEM method used here employed a general
linear model in which the topographic pattern of oscillatory activity was regressed
onto an a priori defined set of spatially selective channels. This basis set consists of
the expected response of each channel to each location as expressed in arbitrary
units – i.e., the hypothesized response function of each spatially selective channel.
The shape of the hypothesized function resembles that of a tuning function as
observed in neural population responses, where the channel is activated the most in
response to its unique preferred location with decreasing activation at increasingly
distant locations, and is recreated as a half sine function raised to some power. The
resulting regression weights, trained and tested using leave-one-out cross19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

20
validation, reflect the pattern of neural activity particular to each spatially selective
channel, i.e., only that variability predicted by the basis set. The product of the
weights and the observed neural activity yields an estimate of the response in each
spatially selective channel – i.e., the representation of location.
There was evidence of a spatially selective response, centered on the
stimulus location, in the alpha band following stimulus presentation under all
conditions. The spatially selective response emerged ~200 ms after stimulus onset,
around the time when initial effects of covert shifts in spatial attention have
previously been observed in evoked activity (Di Russo, Martínez, & Hillyard, 2003;
Hillyard et al., 1999).
The presentation of a masking stimulus disrupted the spatially selective
response beginning ~200 ms after mask onset (see slope difference between
masked and unmasked conditions during the .25-.75s time window in Fig. 2b and
the corresponding BF for the effect of mask Fig. 2d “mask”). An evoked potential
observed at parietal and occipital electrode sites, phase-locked to the onset of the
mask, was observed to coincide with this disruption (Fig. 2e). The magnitude of the
mask-evoked response predicted the magnitude of disruption to the spatially
selective response shortly after mask onset (r (16) = -.66, BF > 10, and r (16) = -.76,
BF > 300, for EC+M and EO+M respectively). However, this disruption was neither
complete nor permanent. While degraded, evidence for a spatially selective
response remained strong following the mask and returned to similar levels
observed in the absence of a mask ~500-700 ms after mask onset. This pattern
suggests that while a mask disrupts the retention of a spatially selective

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

21
representation, the representation can be recovered, even in the absence of external
visual input when eyes were closed.
Unlike the effect evoked by the mask, there was no evidence that the spatially
selective response was disrupted by eye closure (Fig. 2d “eyes”). Neither did eye
closure evoke a phase-locked response (Fig. 2e). There was, however, moderate
evidence of a small reduction of the spatially selective response later in the
retention interval ~1,000 ms after eye closure, as compared to when eyes remained
open. Nonetheless evidence for the spatially selective representation remained
robust throughout the retention interval when eyes were closed. Thus, the
disruptive effect induced by eye closure on spatially selective representations is
smaller and delayed compared to the immediate disruptive effect evoked by the
mask.
Importantly, the results of the IEM demonstrate that a spatially selective
representation was present in alpha under all conditions in the retention interval to
the same degree, except for some evidence of a slight drop in selectivity at the very
end of the interval when eyes were closed. This would appear to support the unitary
nature of the spatially selective mechanism in alpha oscillations – that the
representation is robust to changes in input. However, as the following section will
demonstrate, while a spatially selective representation can be recreated from alpha
similarly under both eyes open and eyes closed conditions, this representation is
not encoded by the same pattern (topography and/or power) of alpha under both
conditions.
Reconstructions of location representations are supported by dual processes

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

22
The retention of a spatially selective representation, and its disruption by a
masking stimulus, is evident in alpha band oscillations under conditions both with
and without continued external visual input. Thus, the patterns of alpha band
oscillations that encode for location are persistently robust throughout the entire
stimulus presentation and retention interval regardless of condition. However, it is
unclear whether a) the continuous encoding of location in alpha band oscillations is
supported by a single common process or by multiple distinct processes, and b)
which process or processes supporting the spatially selective response are affected
by the disruption of external visual input (i.e., masking, eye closure, or both).
In order to observe the dynamics of the process, or processes, supporting
spatially selective representations under these different conditions we examined
the inter-temporal and inter-conditional generalization of the IEM. The
generalization approach can be used to identify the extent that specific neural codes,
reconstructions of spatial spatially selective responses in this case, are present
across time and/or conditions (King & Dehaene, 2014). Models of neural codes
trained on the topographic pattern of neural activity in specific time windows
and/or conditions that can recover similarly reliable spatially selective patterns in
other time windows and conditions would be those that exhibit generalization. Such
a pattern would be evidence for a common process, as a spatially selective
representation can be recreated from the same pattern of alpha as at another
time/in another condition. In contrast, models trained on the topographic pattern of
neural activity in specific time windows and/or conditions that fail generalize would
be evidence that the spatially selective representation is coded by a different

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

23
topographic pattern of neural activity predicted by the basis set, i.e. a different
process. In the case of the IEM model, generalization indicates that the beta weights,
representing the linear regression of alpha against the basis set, are different from
one time/condition to another.
In the case where a lack of generalization is observed, it is important to rule
out the possibility that the impaired ability of the model to reconstruct spatially
selective patterns in other time windows and/or conditions is not merely due to a
loss of signal. Importantly, there was evidence of a spatially selective response at all
time points in all conditions beginning ~200 ms after stimulus onset, thus any lack
of generalization can not be attributed to a loss of the signal that encodes for
location during these times in any of the conditions. While the ability to generalize
between conditions may be impaired by changes in cap placement, impedance, etc.
between sessions, this effect should be equivalent between all conditions at all time
points.
When eyes were open and no mask was presented there was strong evidence
of a unitary process supporting the spatially selective response during both stimulus
presentation and retention intervals with continuous external visual input (Fig. 3a
“Train EO  Test EO”), as there was extensive temporal generalization both
forward and backward in time. This pattern is consistent with the conclusion that
the process maintaining the spatially selective representation during retention
when eyes were open is also the same process as during stimulus presentation (i.e.,
during selection), and remains static throughout the entire retention interval.
Despite a similarly continuous and robust encoding of location, this was not

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

24
the case without continuous visual input, when eyes were closed (Fig. 3a “Train EC
 Test EC”). Earlier time points did not generalize forward in time to the end of the
retention interval, nor did later time points generalize backward in time to the onset
of the cue despite evidence for spatially selective responses at those times. Instead,
when eyes were closed the pattern of temporal generalization supports two
processes: a robust selection process beginning ~100 ms after cue onset and
persisting until ~500 ms after eye closure before decaying; and a subsequent
process, starting around the time of eye closure (~500 ms after cue onset) and
lasting the remainder of the retention interval. At this point, rather than assigning
mechanistic labels to these processes (e.g., selection, retention, etc.), we take a more
agnostic approach, labeling these processes in terms of their ordinal position during
the trial sequence and refer to them as process 1 and process 2, respectively.
Process 1 is interrupted in the period following the presentation of a mask in
both the eyes open and closed conditions (Fig. 3a “Train EO+M  Test EO+M”/
“Train EC+M  Test EC+M”). With eyes open, process 1 re-emerges ~200 ms postmask, but fails to re-emerge with eyes closed. This pattern of generalization
indicates that process 1, possibly a spatial selection process, is dependent on
uninterrupted external visual input, is disrupted by a visual masking stimulus, and
can fully recover a spatial representation when external visual input remains
available post-mask (i.e., when eyes remain open). This is similar to the observation
that a subsequent cue can restore degraded representations (Sprague, Ester, &
Serences, 2016), however, in the current case, there is spontaneous recovery with
no aid of additional cues to location, and only when input remains.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

25
There was strong evidence that process 1 generalized between eyes open
and eyes closed conditions, regardless of mask presence (Fig. 3b). Process 1, trained
in one eye condition and tested in another, persisted robustly forward in time
towards the end of the retention interval in the eyes open conditions (“Train EC 
Test EO”/ “Train EC+M  Test EO+M”), but not in the eyes closed conditions
(“Train EO  Test EC”/ “Train EO+M  Test EC+M”). Although evidence for
generalization between eyes open and eyes closed conditions was stronger and
more consistent in the unmasked conditions, process 1 still generalized between
masked and unmasked conditions whether eyes were open or closed. This pattern
suggests that process 1, the process that overlaps with stimulus processing, is
common to all conditions.
Unlike process 1, there was only sporadic, weak evidence that process 2,
which supported the representation of spatial selectivity during the retention
period when eyes were closed, generalized to the same period when eyes were
open. This may indicate that process 2 is not entirely absent in conditions with
continuous external visual input, but may also be present to some degree when such
input is available. However, there is evidence that process 2 generalized between
the eyes closed conditions. This pattern of generalization indicates that process 2
emerges reliably when there is an interruption to external visual input, as when the
eyes are closed.
Evidence for dual processes in the alpha frequency band is not dependent on the IEM
analytic method

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

26

The strength of the IEM approach is that the selection of the basis set is
grounded in what is understood about the responses of the visual system to the
feature of interest, in this case spatial location. The interpretability of the estimated
channel responses is heavily dependent on the careful selection of the basis set (for
a discussion of these issues please see, (Gardner & Liu, 2019; Liu, Cable, & Gardner,
2018; Sprague et al., 2018; Sprague, Boynton, & Serences, 2019). Here, we use the
same basis set as that used in previous work to describe the nature of alpha power
as a signal for both encoding and maintaining spatial information in memory (Foster
et al., 2016, 2017; van Moorselaar et al., 2018). However, it is also important to
demonstrate that the results we present here using the IEM method are not the
result of any possible idiosyncrasies of that particular basis set. A common
approach is to use a set of Kronecker delta functions, as the basis set which assumes
that the channel responses are impulse responses, and then recreate the IEM
analysis with the new basis set (Foster et al, 2016; Bullock et al., 2017). Another
approach is to circumvent the IEM approach altogether and to simply determine
whether the same signal (i.e., alpha power) can be used to decode the stimulus
locations. The assumption in this latter approach is that the responses to the
different stimulus locations are discriminable in some way that doesn’t necessarily
map onto any specific a priori response profile.
We repeated the generalization analyses using a linear discriminant classifier
for location, using classifier accuracy as the primary dependent variable instead of
slope (Fig. 4). The pattern of results from the decoding analysis was very consistent
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

27
with the IEM analysis. Within condition, there was strong evidence for classifier
generalization across all time windows in the EO condition, but not in the EC
condition (Fig. 4a); and there was also evidence that the early spatial selection
process is disrupted by the mask and can recover later in the retention interval. The
inter-condition temporal generalization decoding analysis (Fig. 4b) also provided
evidence consistent with the IEM analysis, such that classifiers trained during the
early time window generalized across conditions during those same time windows,
but those trained on later time windows did not.
Thus, as with the IEM analysis, the pattern of temporal generalization in the
linear decoding analysis supports a series of two processes: (process 1) a robust
selection process beginning ~100 ms after cue onset and persisting until ~500 ms
after eye closure before decaying; and (process 2) a subsequent process, starting
around the time of eye closure (~500 ms after cue onset) and lasting the remainder
of the retention interval.
Changes in alpha, if unrelated to the code for the spatially selective representations,
are insufficient to disrupt temporal generalization
Eye closure results in a well-documented increase in alpha power that is not
uniformly distributed, rather it is larger at posterior electrodes relative to frontal
and temporal electrodes (Barry, Clarke, Johnstone, Magee, & Rushby, 2007;
Chapman, Armington, & Bragdon, 1962). Here, as expected, alpha power increased
with eye closure (see Fig. 5a) and this increase in power was localized primarily in
parietal and occipital electrodes (i.e., over visual cortex; Fig. 5b). Importantly, these
electrodes are also associated with the largest GLM weights from the IEM (see Fig.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

28
8c). Thus, it is reasonable to wonder whether such changes in alpha power and/or
topography resulting from eye closure could have influenced the coding of the
spatially selective representation in alpha and its ability to generalize across time
and conditions.
In order to examine this possibility, we again ran the IEM and the temporal
generalization analysis for the eyes open conditions, but prior to modeling we added
alpha power to simulate the increase in alpha power observed in the eyes closed
condition. Specifically, in the eyes open conditions we added a random amount of
power, to each electrode, at each time point from 750 (deadline for eye closure) to
2,000 ms after target onset. This random power was sampled from a normal
distribution with the mean of the difference in power between the eyes closed and
eyes open conditions, and the pooled standard deviation of power in the eyes open
and eyes closed conditions for that electrode at that time point. This added noise
reflects any systematic differences in alpha power (see Fig. 5a) and topography (see
Fig. 5b) resulting from eye closure.
In other words, the added noise recreates the exact changes in alpha power and
topography evoked by eye closure in the eyes open conditions. However, as the
noise is drawn randomly from the distribution of difference in power and
topography between eyes open and eyes closed conditions, this noise should not
impact the temporal generalization of the spatially selective representation. This is
necessary the case, as the spatially selective representation extracted by the IEM is
based on the pattern of alpha that is predicted by the a priori defined set of spatially
selective neural channels (the basis set). In order for any change to alpha power

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

29
and/or topography to affect the results of the IEM, and its generalization, it must
necessarily impact the relationship between the pattern of alpha power and the
basis set (i.e., the beta weights). Changes that are independent of the pattern of
alpha that codes the spatially selective representation will not affect the result of the
IEM or its generalization.
Alpha power in the eyes open conditions with the added noise resembled that
in the eyes closed condition (Fig. 5a). The topography of alpha power in the eyes
open conditions with the additional noise also closely resembled that of the
corresponding eyes closed condition during the 750-2,000 ms period (Fig. 5b). The
results of the temporal generalization of the IEM in the eyes open conditions (both
with and without mask) with the added noise were identical to those observed
without (Fig. 5d). This simulation supports the conclusion that changes in alpha
power and topography resulting from eye closure that are layered on top of the
patterns of alpha oscillations coding remembered locations, but are otherwise
independent of the memory activity, are insufficient to disrupt the IEM
reconstructions of remembered locations and their generalization.
Is process 2 evoked by eye closure or by the absence of continued visual input?
The purpose of the eyes closed conditions was to examine whether the
absence of continued visual input would affect the encoding of spatial information in
alpha-band activity. However, as discussed in the previous section, it is possible
that the effects we observe are specific to some phenomenon unique to eye closure.
We have shown that the well-documented effect of increased alpha power
associated with eye closure does not account for the pattern of temporal

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

30
generalization where process 1 and 2 are evident. As a further control we collected
data from an additional independent sample from two conditions (Fig. 6a): (1) the
same eyes open condition as in the main study, and (2) an eye-blink condition.
There was evidence of a spatially selective response, centered on the
stimulus location, in the alpha band following stimulus presentation in both
conditions (Fig. 6b/c). Interestingly, as in the eyes open masked condition, that
spatially selective response was briefly disrupted by the eye-blink but recovered to
a degree indistinguishable from the eyes open condition.
The evidence for a unitary process (process 1) was replicated in the eyes
open condition, and, again as in the eyes open masked condition, that same process
was evident throughout the eye-blink condition except for the brief disruption
following the blink (Fig. 6d). Importantly, we did not observe the pattern that
would have indicated the emergence of process 2 in the eye-blink condition, as we
did in the eyes closed conditions of the main study. Thus, we conclude that the
emergence of process 2 is not a result of eye closure, but rather the continued
absence of visual input during the retention interval.
What is different between process 1 and process 2?
In order to address this question we first examined whether there were any
differences in the topography of alpha power as a function of condition and time
window – i.e., either those times overlapping with process 1 (during cue
presentation) or process 2 (retention interval). Given previously reported results
we should expect that alpha power is greater at electrode sites ipsilateral to the cue
location as compared to contralateral sites – indicating that spatial

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

31
attention/memory modulated the topographical distribution of alpha (Kelly et al.,
2006; Sauseng et al., 2005; Thut et al., 2006; Worden, Foxe, Wang, & Simpson,
2000). To that end we examined the alpha lateralization as a function of condition
and time window.
There was significant alpha lateralization such that alpha power was greater
at ipsilateral sites than at contralateral sites (effect of laterality, BF = 231.85; Fig.
7a). Alpha lateralization was greater for eyes open conditions than eyes closed
conditions (interaction of eyes and laterality, BF = 18.64; Fig. 7b). The lateralization
of alpha was also reduced during the time window overlapping with the emergence
of process 2 relative to that overlapping with process 1 (interaction of time window
and laterality, BF = 79.88). However, the effect of eyes did not modulate the effect of
time window on laterality (all BFs < 1). Thus, there is no difference in the
lateralization of alpha between eyes open and eyes closed conditions unique to the
retention period, which could have possibly account for the difference between
process 1 and 2.
Within the context of the analytical approach we employed here (IEM), the
difference between process 1 and process 2 is that the pattern of GLM weights
across electrodes generated by the IEM differs between process 1 and process 2 in
the eyes closed conditions, but not within process 1 and process 2. Indeed in the
eyes open condition there is no consistent change in the weights beginning at ~300
ms after target onset – corresponding to process 1 (Fig. 8a). In contrast, in the eyes
closed condition there are two separate time windows during which there is no
consistent change in weights: the first from ~300 to 900 ms after target onset, and
31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

32
the other from ~900 to 2,000 ms. These two time periods roughly correspond to the
two processes evident in the temporal generalization of the IEM. From the first time
window, possibly equating to process 1, to the second time window, possibly
equating to process 2, weights on average moved in the negative direction.
Weights were more dynamic, showing greater absolute change over time, in
the eyes closed conditions (Fig. 8b), especially during the retention interval, than in
the eyes open conditions. In order to examine the topography of the change in
weights over time during the retention interval we ranked the electrodes according
to absolute change in weight between the two time points of every sample pair in
the temporal generalization matrix. We then averaged these rankings over the
generalization matrix during the period from 750-2,000 ms. For both eyes open and
eyes closed conditions parietal and occipital electrode sites were consistently
ranked highest for weight change (Fig. 8c). These electrodes also consistently rank
highest in terms of absolute weight in the IEM (Fig. 8d). This suggests that the
differences in weights between process 1 and process 2 are more likely to be located
at parietal and occipital electrode sites, although the exact nature and meaning of
these weight differences is unknown.
Discussion
Alpha oscillations are the predominant systematic and recurring voltage
fluctuation in the human electroencephalogram and were first described by Berger
(1930). While alpha oscillations were initially considered to represent a low arousal
state (e.g., ‘cortical idling’, Adrian & Matthews, 1934; see also Pfurtscheller, Stancák,
& Neuper, 1996), it is now clear that oscillations in the 8-14 Hz range play a key role

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

33
in perception and cognition, perhaps via mechanism of inhibition (Jensen &
Mazaheri, 2010; Klimesch, 2012), although perhaps not (see Foster & Awh, 2019).
Selective attention to, and retention of, behaviorally relevant locations can both be
measured via alpha oscillations (Foster et al., 2016, 2017; Kelly et al., 2006;
Medendorp et al., 2007; Samaha et al., 2016; Sauseng et al., 2005; Thut et al., 2006;
van Moorselaar et al., 2018; Worden et al., 2000), suggesting that alpha oscillations
represent the functioning of a unitary, or at the very least a shared, mechanism for
spatial representation involved in both attention and memory. The evidence
presented here, regardless of analytic approach (encoding - IEM or decoding – linear
discriminant classification), however, suggests that alpha does not support a single
unitary cognitive mechanism, but rather that there are at least two distinct
processes that support the selection and retention of behaviorally relevant locations
that operate within the alpha frequency band: one that is fast and continuous,
supporting selection of information from the sensory environment and that is
disrupted by masking and no sustained visual input; and a second that is delayed
relative to the first, emerging upon the cessation of sustained visual input.
Alternatives
While the present results are consistent with the notion that alpha supports
at least two distinct processes supporting the mental representation of behaviorally
relevant locations, facets of the experimental design introduce known artifacts that
may appear as confounds. First, the mere closing of the eyes results in a robust and
reproducible increase in alpha power that varies systematically across the scalp,
being larger at posterior electrodes than at other electrodes (see Fig. 5a). These

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

34
dramatic modulations in alpha oscillations, the signal encoding spatially selective
representations, are an obvious candidate for the disruption to inter-temporal
generalization. Importantly, when alpha power and topography in the eyes open
condition was made to resemble that of the eyes closed condition during the
retention interval as noise, the results of the temporal generalization are unchanged
(Fig. 5b). This simulation demonstrates that changes in alpha power and
topography, such as those that follow eye closure, cannot influence the results of the
IEM, or its temporal generalization, when uncorrelated with the basis set (i.e.,
unrelated to the pattern which encodes location). Thus, it is unlikely that the lack of
temporal generalization reflects a contamination of alpha oscillations that actually
represent a unitary mechanism, rather we argue that the pattern of temporal
generalization (and lack thereof) is evidence for at least two alpha-based processes
involved in the selection and retention of spatial information.
Eye closure also results in large ocular artifacts that propagate across the
scalp. Thus, it is reasonable to suggest that the impaired generalization is due to
residual artifacts due to eye closure. However, we demonstrated in an independent
control study that mere eye closure (as when blinking), and any artifacts associated
with that ocular event, do not yield the same pattern of temporal generalization
evident in the eyes closed conditions (Fig. 6); rather, the temporal generalization
matrix in the eye-blink condition resembled that of the eyes open-masked condition,
i.e., a single process temporarily disrupted.
The results of the eye-blink control study also address the possibility that the
difference between the eyes open and closed conditions is attributable to a dual-

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

35
task demand of having to close their eyes, i.e., as reconstructions of remembered
spatial locations are sensitive to demands on attention (van Moorselaar et al., 2018).
While it is true that participants had to close their eyes and wait for the tone to give
the response, participants experienced a similar level of demand in the eye-blink
condition. Furthermore, all conditions required participants to hold the information
in memory and wait until the tone indicated it was time to give the response, and
even the eyes open conditions made an additional demand (maintain fixation). Thus,
the conditions are quite closely matched in terms of divided attention demands,
making this account no more, and perhaps less likely than the guaranteed effect that
continuous external visual input was absent in one condition and not the other.
This alternative would also predict that the reconstructed profiles of
spatially-selective representations in those conditions with increased demands on
attention (i.e., eyes closed), would be degraded relative to conditions without the
divided attention demands (i.e., eyes closed). However, the results, as depicted in
Fig. 2, reveal that the slopes of the reconstructed spatially-selective channel
responses in the eyes open and eyes closed conditions do not differ during that
period when process 2 emerges. Thus an account based on differential divided
attention demands is not a viable alternative explanation of our findings.
In addition to the issue of noise, and related to the issue of reduced SNR,
losses in temporal generalizability could also be attributed to unobserved losses in
the signal of interest following eye closure. However, the pattern of temporal
generalization in the eyes closed condition, in this case, cannot be explained by
signal loss. The within condition IEMs during this time window reliably reconstruct

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

36
the spatial location held in memory in the eyes closed condition to the same degree
as in the eyes open condition. Thus the signal that carries the location information
is present to the same extent in the eyes closed condition as in the eyes open
condition during the same period of the retention interval when the loss of temporal
generalization occurs.
Conclusion
Based on the collection of evidence presented here we suggest that mental
representations of stimulus location are retained via at least two distinct processes
coded in alpha band oscillations. When visual input continues to be available,
spatially selective representations can be supported and even recovered by the
same process present when a location is initially selected and may be mediated by
“attention-based rehearsal” (Awh, Jonides, & Reuter-Lorenz, 1998; Awh et al., 1999;
Postle, Awh, Jonides, Smith, & D’Esposito, 2004) of the external sensory
environment, as has previously been observed (Foster et al., 2016, 2017; van
Moorselaar et al., 2018). However, when visual input is not available, a process
possibly based on internal selection from information encoded in memory (Chun,
Golomb, & Turk-Browne, 2011; Kiyonaga & Egner, 2013) emerges to support the
ongoing spatial representation. To the extent that the topographic pattern of alpha
oscillations is reflective of the activity in retinotopically mapped brain regions (de
Munck et al., 2007; Kelly et al., 2006; Worden et al., 2000), then our results suggest
that these areas are differentially activated when eyes are closed than when eyes
are open. This differential involvement may be the result of local changes in
patterns of activity (e.g., local patterns of inhibitory activity) or from perturbations

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

37
from other brain areas. The latter possibility would be consistent with recent
evidence that initial selection of remembered information is supported by
oscillatory activity in prefrontal and parietal/occipital locations, while the
reactivation of that information in memory relies a network of occipital/temporal
locations (Quentin et al., 2019).
References
Adrian, E. D., & Matthews, B. H. C. (1934). The Berger rhythm: Potential changes
from the occipital lobes in man. Brain, 57, 440–471.
Awh, E., Jonides, J., & Reuter-Lorenz, P. A. (1998). Rehearsal in spatial working
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 24(3), 780–790. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.24.3.780
Awh, E., Jonides, J., Smith, E. E., Buxton, R. B., Frank, L. R., Love, T., … Gmeindl, L.
(1999). Rehearsal in Spatial Working Memory: Evidence From Neuroimaging.
Psychological Science, 10(5), 433–437. https://doi.org/10.1111/14679280.00182
Barry, R. J., Clarke, A. R., Johnstone, S. J., Magee, C. A., & Rushby, J. A. (2007). EEG
differences between eyes-closed and eyes-open resting conditions. Clinical
Neurophysiology, 118, 2765–2773.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2007.07.028
Berger, H. (1930). Uber das Elektrenkephalogramm des Menschen, 2nd report. J
Psychol Neurol (Leipzig), 40(87), 160–179. Retrieved from
http://pubman.mpdl.mpg.de/pubman/item/escidoc:2281721/component/esc
idoc:2281720/Berger_1929_Ueber_Elektroenkephalogramm.pdf

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

38
Brouwer, G. J., & Heeger, D. J. (2009). Decoding and Reconstructing Color from
Responses in Human Visual Cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(44), 13992–
14003. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3577-09.2009
Brouwer, G. J., & Heeger, D. J. (2011). Cross-orientation suppression in human visual
cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 106(5), 2108–2119.
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00540.2011
Brouwer, G. J., & Heeger, D. J. (2013). Categorical Clustering of the Neural
Representation of Color. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(39), 15454–15465.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2472-13.2013
Bullock, T., Elliott, J. C., Serences, J. T., & Giesbrecht, B. (2017). Acute Exercise
Modulates Feature-selective Responses in Human Cortex. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 29(4), 605–618. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01082
Chapman, R. M., Armington, J. C., & Bragdon, H. R. (1962). A quantitative survey of
kappa and alpha EEG activity. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, 14(6), 858–868. https://doi.org/10.1016/00134694(62)90136-0
Chun, M. M., Golomb, J. D., & Turk-Browne, N. B. (2011). A Taxonomy of External and
Internal Attention. Annual Review of Psychology, 62(1), 73–101.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.093008.100427
de Munck, J. C., Gonçalves, S. I., Huijboom, L., Kuijer, J. P. A., Pouwels, P. J. W.,
Heethaar, R. M., & Lopes da Silva, F. H. (2007). The hemodynamic response of
the alpha rhythm: An EEG/fMRI study. NeuroImage, 35(3), 1142–1151.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2007.01.022

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

39
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of
single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. Journal
of Neuroscience Methods, 134(1), 9–21.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009
Di Russo, F., Martínez, A., & Hillyard, S. A. (2003). Source Analysis of Event-related
Cortical Activity during Visuo-spatial Attention. Cerebral Cortex, 13(5), 486–
499. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/13.5.486
Dienes, Z. (2016). How Bayes factors change scientific practice. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 72, 78–89.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2015.10.003
Ester, E. F., Sprague, T. C., & Serences, J. T. (2015). Parietal and Frontal Cortex
Encode Stimulus-Specific Mnemonic Representations during Visual Working
Memory. Neuron, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.07.013
Foster, J. J., & Awh, E. (2019). The role of alpha oscillations in spatial attention:
limited evidence for a suppression account. Current Opinion in Psychology, 29,
34–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COPSYC.2018.11.001
Foster, J. J., Sutterer, D. W., Serences, J. T., Vogel, E. K., & Awh, E. (2016). The
topography of alpha-band activity tracks the content of spatial working
memory. Journal of Neurophysiology, 115(1), 168–177.
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00860.2015
Foster, J. J., Sutterer, D. W., Serences, J. T., Vogel, E. K., & Awh, E. (2017). Alpha-Band
Oscillations Enable Spatially and Temporally Resolved Tracking of Covert
Spatial Attention. Psychological Science, 28(7), 929–941.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

40
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797617699167
Garcia, J. O., Srinivasan, R., & Serences, J. T. (2013). Near-real-time feature-selective
modulations in human cortex. Current Biology, 23(6), 515–522.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.02.013
Gardner, J. L., & Liu, T. (2019). Inverted Encoding Models Reconstruct an Arbitrary
Model Response , Not the Stimulus, 6(April).
Gelman, A., & Tuerlinckx, F. (2000). Type S error rates for classical and Bayesian
single and multiple comparison procedures. Computational Statistics, 15(3),
373–390. https://doi.org/10.1007/s001800000040
Gomez-Herrero, G., Clercq, W., Anwar, H., Kara, O., Egiazarian, K., Huffel, S., &
Paesschen, W. (2006). Automatic Removal of Ocular Artifacts in the EEG
without an EOG Reference Channel. Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Signal
Processing Symposium - NORSIG 2006, 130–133.
https://doi.org/10.1109/NORSIG.2006.275210
Harrison, S. A., & Tong, F. (2009). Decoding reveals the contents of visual working
memory in early visual areas. Nature, 458(7238), 632–635.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07832
Hillyard, S. A., Martínez, A., Anllo-Vento, L., Sereno, M. I., Frank, L. R., Buxton, R. B., …
Heinze, H. J. (1999). Involvement of striate and extrastriate visual cortical areas
in spatialattention. Nature Neuroscience, 2(4), 364–369.
https://doi.org/10.1038/7274
Jensen, O., & Mazaheri, A. (2010). Shaping functional architecture by oscillatory
alpha activity: gating by inhibition. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 4, 186.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

41
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00186
Kass, R. E., & Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes Factors. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 90(430), 773–795.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1995.10476572
Kelly, S. P., Lalor, E. C., Reilly, R. B., & Foxe, J. J. (2006). Increases in Alpha Oscillatory
Power Reflect an Active Retinotopic Mechanism for Distracter Suppression
During Sustained Visuospatial Attention. Journal of Neurophysiology, 95(6).
Retrieved from http://jn.physiology.org/content/95/6/3844.short
King, J.-R., & Dehaene, S. (2014). Characterizing the dynamics of mental
representations: the temporal generalization method. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 18(4), 203–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2014.01.002
Kiyonaga, A., & Egner, T. (2013). Working memory as internal attention: Toward an
integrative account of internal and external selection processes. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 20(2), 228–242. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-012-0359y
Klimesch, W. (2012). Alpha-band oscillations, attention, and controlled access to
stored information. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(12), 606–617.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.10.007
Kruschke, J. K., & Liddell, T. M. (2016). The Bayesian New Statistics : Hypothesis
testing , estimation , meta-analysis , and planning from a Bayesian perspective.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1–53.
https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2606016
Lewis-Peacock, J. A., Drysdale, A. T., Oberauer, K., & Postle, B. R. (2012). Neural

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

42
Evidence for a Distinction between Short-term Memory and the Focus of
Attention. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 24(1), 61–79.
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00140
Liu, T., Cable, X. D., & Gardner, X. J. L. (2018). Inverted Encoding Models of Human
Population Response Conflate Noise and Neural Tuning Width, 38(2), 398–408.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2453-17.2017
Medendorp, W. P., Kramer, G. F. I., Jensen, O., Oostenveld, R., Schoffelen, J. M., & Fries,
P. (2007). Oscillatory activity in human parietal and occipital cortex shows
hemispheric lateralization and memory effects in a delayed double-step
saccade task. Cerebral Cortex, 17(10), 2364–2374.
https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhl145
Morey, R. D., Rouder, J. N., & Jamil, T. (2015). Package “Bayes Factor”.
Naselaris, T., Kay, K. N., Nishimoto, S., & Gallant, J. L. (2011). Encoding and decoding
in fMRI. NeuroImage, 56(2), 400–410.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.07.073
Pearson, D., & Sahraie, A. (2003). Oculomotor control and the maintenance of
spatially and temporally distributed events in visuo-spatial working memory.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A, 56(7), 1089–1111.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02724980343000044
Pfurtscheller, G., Stancák, A., & Neuper, C. (1996). Event-related synchronization
(ERS) in the alpha band — an electrophysiological correlate of cortical idling: A
review. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 24(1–2), 39–46.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-8760(96)00066-9

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

43
Postle, B. R., Awh, E., Jonides, J., Smith, E. E., & D’Esposito, M. (2004). The where and
how of attention-based rehearsal in spatial working memory. Cognitive Brain
Research, 20(2), 194–205.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COGBRAINRES.2004.02.008
Quentin, R., King, J., Sallard, E., Fishman, N., Thompson, R., Buch, E., … Cohen, L. G.
(2019). Differential brain mechanisms of selection and maintenance of
information during working memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 2764–18.
Rouder, J. N., Morey, R. D., Speckman, P. L., & Province, J. M. (2012). Default Bayes
factors for ANOVA designs. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 56(5), 356–374.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2012.08.001
Samaha, J., Sprague, T. C., & Postle, B. R. (2016). Decoding and Reconstructing the
Focus of Spatial Attention from the Topography of Alpha-band Oscillations.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 28(8), 1090–1097.
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00955
Sauseng, P., Klimesch, W., Stadler, W., Schabus, M., Doppelmayr, M., Hanslmayr, S., …
Birbaumer, N. (2005). A shift of visual spatial attention is selectively associated
with human EEG alpha activity. European Journal of Neuroscience, 22(11),
2917–2926. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04482.x
Serences, J. T., Ester, E. F., Vogel, E. K., & Awh, E. (2009). Stimulus-Specific Delay
Activity in Human Primary Visual Cortex. Psychological Science, 20(2), 207–214.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02276.x
Serences, J. T., & Saproo, S. (2012). Computational advances towards linking BOLD
and behavior. Neuropsychologia, 50(4), 435–446.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

44
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.07.013
Sprague, T. C., Adam, K. C. S., Foster, J. J., Rahmati, M., Sutterer, D. W., & Vo, V. A.
(2018). Inverted Encoding Models Assay Population-Level Stimulus
Representations, Not Single-Unit Neural Tuning. ENeuro, 5(3), ENEURO.009818.2018. https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0098-18.2018
Sprague, T.C., Boynton, G.M., & Serences, J.T. (2019). Inverted encoding models
estimate sensible channel responses for sensible models. Commentary on
"Inverted Encoding Models Reconstruct an Arbitrary Model Response, not the
Stimulus" by Gardner & Liu, 2019. bioRxiv 642710; doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/642710
Sprague, T. C., Ester, E. F., & Serences, J. T. (2016). Restoring Latent Visual Working
Memory Representations in Human Cortex. Neuron, 91(3), 694–707.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.07.006
Suchow, J. W., Brady, T. F., Fougnie, D., & Alvarez, G. A. (2013). Modeling visual
working memory with the MemToolbox. Journal of Vision, 13(10), 9–9.
https://doi.org/10.1167/13.10.9
Thut, G., Nietzel, A., Brandt, S. a, & Pascual-Leone, A. (2006). Alpha-band
electroencephalographic activity over occipital cortex indexes visuospatial
attention bias and predicts visual target detection. The Journal of Neuroscience :
The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 26(37), 9494–9502.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0875-06.2006
van Moorselaar, D., Foster, J. J., Sutterer, D. W., Theeuwes, J., Olivers, C. N. L., & Awh,
E. (2018). Spatially Selective Alpha Oscillations Reveal Moment-by-Moment

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

45
Trade-offs between Working Memory and Attention. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 30(2), 256–266. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01198
Wetzels, R., Matzke, D., Lee, M. D., Rouder, J. N., Iverson, G. J., & Wagenmakers, E.-J.
(2011). Statistical Evidence in Experimental Psychology. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 6(3), 291–298.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691611406923
Wilken, P., & Ma, W. J. (2004). A detection theory account of change detection.
Journal of Vision, 4(12), 11. https://doi.org/10.1167/4.12.11
Worden, M. S., Foxe, J. J., Wang, N., & Simpson, G. V. (2000). Anticipatory biasing of
visuospatial attention indexed by retinotopically specific alpha-band
electroencephalography increases over occipital cortex. The Journal of
Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 20(6), RC63.
Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10704517
Zhang, W., & Luck, S. J. (2008). Discrete fixed-resolution representations in visual
working memory. Nature, 453(7192), 233–235.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06860

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

46
Figure Legends
Figure 1. Delayed spatial estimation task. (a) Trial procedure for each experimental
condition. (b) Precision of spatial estimation and guess rate. Error bars = standard
error of the mean.
Figure 2. Results of the alpha-based inverted encoding model estimation of the
stimulus location. (a) Estimated neural population response, or “channel” (offset of
channel’s preferred location from stimulus location: ±0,45,90,135, or 180˚),
response (alpha-band power) starting 500 ms before onset of stimulus until end of
retention period. (b) Linear regression weights of estimated channel response
folded around 0˚ offset (“slope”), indicating the degree of spatial selectivity. (c)
Bayes Factor (BF) of t-test comparing slope at each time point to slope of response
estimated using permuted location labels. (d) BF of ANOVA for effects of eye closure
and mask on slope. (e) Inter-trial coherence (ITC) indicating stimulus- and maskevoked potentials and scatterplots of correlation between ITC and slope during the
period of the mask-evoked potentials for masked conditions.
Figure 3. IEM generalization. (a) Temporal generalization within experimental
condition. Slopes for a spatially selective response are plotted. Those with less than
moderate evidence (BF<3) plotted as uniform dark blue. Encoding endurance
indicates the sequential extent of temporal generalization backward and forward in
time, where BF ≥ 3. Process 1 and 2 are indicated in the EO and EC plots. b) Intercondition generalization. Points with moderate or greater evidence (BF ≥ 3) for a
difference between intra-condition generalizations shown in Panel A and intercondition generalizations are outlined in white.
Figure 4. Linear discriminant classifier generalization. (a) Temporal generalization
within experimental condition. Classifier accuracy is plotted. Accuracy with less
than moderate evidence (BF<3) plotted as uniform dark blue. Encoding endurance
indicates the sequential extent of temporal generalization backward and forward in
time, where BF ≥ 3. Process 1 and 2 are indicated in the EO and EC plots. b) Intercondition generalization. Points with moderate or greater evidence (BF ≥ 3) for a
difference between intra-condition generalizations shown in Panel A and intercondition generalizations are outlined in white.
Figure 5. Investigation into the role of alpha enhancement with eye closure on
temporal generalization within and between conditions. (a) Alpha power by
condition demonstrating the alpha enhancement with eye closure and its recreation
in the eyes open conditions for the simulation. (b) Scalp topography of alpha power
by condition demonstrating that alpha is largely occipital in all conditions, and the
simulation of alpha power topography in the eyes open conditions. (c) Scalp
topography of electrode weight rank, where higher values indicate larger weights
for those electrodes resulting from the IEM. (d) The results of the temporal
generalization with the simulated recreation of alpha enhancement in the eyes open

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/361774; this version posted June 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

47
conditions. The pattern of temporal generalization is unchanged by this simulated
alpha enhancement (see Fig. 3).
Figure 6. Control study into the effects of eye closure (blink). (a) Trial procedure for
each experimental condition. (b) Estimated neural population response, or
“channel” (offset of channel’s preferred location from stimulus location:
±0,45,90,135, or 180˚), response (alpha-band power) starting 500 ms before onset
of stimulus until end of retention period. (c) Linear regression weights of estimated
channel response folded around 0˚ offset (“slope”), indicating the degree of spatial
selectivity. (d) Bayes Factor (BF) of t-test comparing slope at each time point to
slope of response estimated using permuted location labels. (e) Results of temporal
generalization.
Figure 7. (a) Topography of normed alpha power during process 1 and process 2
time windows as a function of spatial location and condition. Alpha power is
normalized to the range of alpha at P-O electrode sites (i.e., proportion of max value
of alpha power among P-O electrodes for that condition) in order to be able to
observe local topography for those critical sites. (b) Alpha lateralization index
(alpha power at ipsilateral sites – contralateral sites / ipsilateral + contralateral) by
condition and time window - overlapping with process 1 (T1 = 198-250 ms) or
process 2 (T2 = randomly selected 52 ms window from 750-2,000 ms).
Figure 8. Investigation into the nature of the weight change. (a) In the eyes open
condition average weight change was ~0 throughout the retention interval (iii-v),
following the initial average increase in weights from 250 ms after stimulus onset
forward in time (i and ii). This same increase in weights was also present in the eyes
closed condition (i and ii). However, there was an additional average change unique
to the eyes closed condition - a decrease from around the time of eye closure (~300
to 750 ms after stimulus onset) forward into the rest of the retention interval (iv).
Otherwise average weight change in the eyes closed condition was ~0 (iii and v).
(b) Weights were more dynamic throughout the trial in the eyes closed condition,
including prior to eye closure, than in the eyes open condition. (c) The changes in
the eyes closed condition after eye closure, while greater than that during the same
time period in the eyes open condition, are largely in parietal and occipital
electrodes as they are in the eyes open condition.

47

