bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Induced RPB1 depletion reveals a direct gene-specific control of RNA Polymerase III
function by RNA Polymerase II
Alan Gerber1*, Keiichi Ito1, Chi-Shuen Chu1 and Robert G. Roeder1*
1

Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065,
USA
*

Corresponding author

Summary
Increasing evidence suggests that tRNA levels are dynamically and specifically regulated in response to
internal and external cues to modulate the cellular translational program. However, the molecular
players and the mechanisms regulating the gene-specific expression of tRNAs are still unknown. Using
an inducible auxin-degron system to rapidly deplete RPB1 (the largest subunit of RNA Pol II) in living
cells, we identified Pol II as a direct gene-specific regulator of tRNA transcription. Our data suggest that
Pol II transcription robustly interferes with Pol III function at specific tRNA genes. This activity was
further found to be essential for MAF1-mediated repression of a large set of tRNA genes during serum
starvation, indicating that repression of tRNA genes by Pol II is dynamically regulated. Hence, Pol II
plays a direct and central role in the gene-specific regulation of tRNA expression.

Keywords
RNA Pol III, tRNA differential expression, Auxin degron, RNA Pol II

Introduction
Eukaryotic nuclear transcription is carried out by RNA polymerases I , II and III (Pols I, II and III). Pol I
transcribes the single multi-copy gene that specifies the large ribosomal RNAs (28S rRNA, 18S rRNA,
and 5.8S rRNA). Pol II transcribes genes that specify pre-messenger RNAs and long non-coding RNAs
(the vast majority), as well as various small functional RNAs such as microRNAs and small nuclear RNAs
(snRNAs). Finally, Pol III transcribes genes that specify small untranslated RNAs essential for protein
synthesis, such as transfer RNAs (tRNAs) and the 5S ribosomal RNA, as well as a heteroclite group of
short regulatory RNAs (Palazzo and Lee, 2015; Roeder and Rutter, 1969). In contrast to transcription
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

by Pol II, which involves countless types of promoters and enhancers and many diverse transcriptional
regulators, transcription of Pol III genes involves only three types of promoters that are regulated by a
limited set of transcription factors (Dumay-Odelot et al., 2014; Schramm and Hernandez, 2002).
Notably, transcription of all tRNA genes, other than those for selenocysteine tRNAs, is governed by
type II internal promoters that require only the conserved multi-subunit transcription factors TFIIIB
and TFIIIC in conjunction with Pol III. Initiation of tRNA transcription starts with the binding of TFIIIC to
two intragenic boxes in the tRNA coding sequence. TFIIIC, in turns, promotes the association of TFIIIB
to a region immediately upstream of the TSS. Finally, TFIIIB recruits Pol III to direct the first round of
transcription. Upon reaching the terminator, a stretch of 4 or more thymidine residues, Pol III can be
recycled to the same TFIIIB-bound promoter at much higher rates than the initial preinitiation complex
(PIC) formation, in a process known as facilitated recycling (Arimbasseri et al., 2014; Orioli et al., 2012).
tRNAs are stable molecules synthesized at very high rates (tens of millions of tRNAs every cell cycle
in mammalian cells). Their expression is co-regulated, primarily at the level of transcription initiation,
in response to nutrient availability and cellular stresses via different signaling pathways (Grewal, 2015;
Moir and Willis, 2013). Despite the apparent simplicity in the Pol III transcriptional machinery, the
relative abundance of individual tRNAs varies considerably across different tissues and cell lines
(Dittmar et al., 2006; Sagi et al., 2016) in response to stresses and changes in growth conditions (Cieśla
et al., 2007; Orioli et al., 2016; Pang et al., 2014; Torrent et al., 2018), in support of cell proliferation or
differentiation (Gingold et al., 2014) and in pathologies such as cancer (Goodarzi et al., 2016; PavonEternod et al., 2009). Dynamic changes in the composition of the cellular tRNA repertoire in response
to external and internal cues may in turn affect protein abundance, translation fidelity, protein folding
and even mRNA stability (reviewed in (Rak et al., 2018) to modify cellular metabolism or physiology.
The levels of a specific tRNA are determined by both its stability and its synthesis rate (Rak et al.,
2018; Wichtowska et al., 2013). Surprisingly, however, there are no known tissue- or gene-specific
transcription factors dedicated to tRNA gene transcription. Interestingly, in human and mouse cells,

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Pol II is often found in close proximity to tRNA genes that display high Pol III occupancy (Barski et al.,
2010; Canella et al., 2012; Moqtaderi et al., 2010; Oler et al., 2010; Raha et al., 2010; Yeganeh et al.,
2017). Different hypotheses have been proposed to explain these observations, and range from a
spurious recruitment of Pol II at genes displaying high levels of Pol III (Canella et al., 2012; Yeganeh et
al., 2017) to a requirement of Pol II activity to remodel the chromatin environment in order to facilitate
Pol III recruitment or activity. Treatment of cells with the transcriptional inhibitor α-amanitin at a
concentration selective for Pol II was found to mildly reduce the expression of some Pol III targets
(Barski et al., 2010; Listerman et al., 2007; Raha et al., 2010). However, and especially in light of the
slow action of α-amanitin in vivo (Nguyen et al., 1996), these experiments did not establish that these
effects were direct. In contrast, the expression levels of the Pol II-transcribed AtNUDT22 gene in
Arabidopsis negatively correlate with the expression of a set of overlapping Pol III-transcribed proline
tRNA genes (Lukoszek et al., 2013). These results suggest transcriptional interference between the two
types of polymerases rather than Pol II-assisted enhancement of Pol III activity. In order to unravel the
primary function of Pol II at Pol III-transcribed genes in vivo, we established a human cell line that
allows an inducible, rapid and selective depletion of RPB1 in living cells using an auxin-degron system.
Here, by exploiting this auxin-inducible system along with different Pol II transcriptional inhibitors,
we report the identification of specific tRNA genes whose transcription by Pol III is directly under the
control of elongating Pol II complexes. Unexpectedly, we found that the auxin-induced degradation of
RPB1 in Pol II complexes was incomplete, generating termination incompetent CTD-less (Pol IIB)
complexes specifically at small nuclear RNA (snRNAs) and stably paused genes. By comparing the
changes in the levels of nascent tRNAs in cells treated with the pause-release inhibitor DRB and in cells
after auxin-induced RPB1 degradation, we further confirmed that Pol II passage through tRNA genes
interferes robustly with their transcription. Pol II-mediated repression of Pol III also appeared to be
essential for MAF1-mediated repression of a majority of tRNA genes during serum starvation. In
addition, our experiments reveal that the downregulation of specific tRNA genes following Pol II
inhibition or depletion is caused mainly by indirect effects such as loss of the MYC protein, which can
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

explain the reported downregulation of particular tRNA genes in α-amanitin-treated cells (Barski et al.,
2010; Raha et al., 2010). Hence, Pol II can regulate tRNA transcription by Pol III dynamically and in a
gene-specific manner both directly, through transcriptional interference, and indirectly, by regulating
the expression of MYC.

Results
Establishment of a cell line for rapid and inducible depletion of RPB1
To study the interplay between Pol II and Pol III, we established a HEK293 cell line expressing a full
length RPB1 that is C-terminally tagged with a minimal auxin-sensitive degron (Natsume et al., 2016),
and an orange fluorescent protein (Figure 1A) as the sole source of this essential subunit of Pol II as
described in Figure S1A-C. In these cells, a rapid and auxin-dependent degradation of RPB1 was
observed when the expression of the plant ubiquitin ligase OsTIR1 was induced for 12 hrs with
doxycycline (Dox) followed by addition of auxin for 2 hrs (Figure 1B). Three clones (#7, #12 and #19)
displaying high responsiveness to the treatment were selected and used in all further experiments
(Figure 1C). A temporal analysis of these clones by flow cytometry revealed a rapid decay of
fluorescence with a half-life of 33.2 min ± 1.8 min following auxin addition (Figure 1D-F). Microarray
analysis of pools of RNA isolated from all three clones in untreated (Ctl), DOX-treated (D) or DOX
treatment followed by auxin (DA) conditions revealed that steady-state levels of Pol II and Pol III
transcripts were largely unchanged (Figure 1G-I). Surprisingly, about two third of the genes that were
affected more than 2-fold (205/331 genes) were even upregulated in RPB1-depleted cells (Figure 1I).
Pol II depletion on target genes was confirmed by RPB3 ChIP-seq for clones #7 and #19, which are,
respectively, the most and least auxin-responsive clones and both of which showed a complete loss of
this endogenous subunit on all annotated genes (Figure 1J). Finally, sequencing of nascent RNAs
isolated from elongating polymerases complexes (Werner and Ruthenburg, 2015; Wuarin and Schibler,
1994; Figure S1D) further revealed a clear reduction of transcription (Figure 1K). This approach is well
suited to evaluate transcription by all three types of polymerase (Figure S1E) and efficiently separates

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

nascent chains from mature tRNAs (Figure S1F). Hence, these results confirm that the degradation
protocol is efficient and sufficiently rapid to prevent notable changes in steady-state RNA levels (except
for highly unstable species) and should therefore allow for the evaluation of primary effects of RPB1
loss on Pol III transcription. To our surprise the levels of RNAs in whole cell RNAs or in the polymerasebound nascent RNA fraction were not dramatically affected by the DA-mediated depletion of Pol II. Pol
II transcription is responsible for ~60% of total RNA synthesis in mammalian cells (Pombo et al., 1999;
Wansink et al., 1993). Hence if Pol II activity was indeed fully lost, one would expect a substantial
reduction (at least 50%) in the levels of nascent RNAs per cells. Yet our measurements revealed a mere
23% reduction (Figure 1L), indicating a significant residual level of Pol II transcription in DA-treated
cells.

Dox + auxin-treatment converts a fraction of initiated Pol II into termination-incompetent
CTD-less complexes
In an attempt to understand these discrepancies, we evaluated nascent RNA expression for the
upregulated genes in the microarray (Figure 2A). To our surprise, most of these genes were expressed
only at low levels prior to RPB1 depletion (see also Figure 1H). Importantly, however, virtually all of
them were located downstream of highly expressed genes and the increase in their expression
appeared to originate from termination site read-through from neighboring genes (Figure 2A and 2C).
Importantly, termination defects were not observed for most genes (Figure 1K and 2B). MST1L lncRNA,
the most upregulated gene (21-fold in the microarray analysis), is located downstream of a Pol IItranscribed U1 snRNA gene that presented a marked transcription termination defect upon DA
treatment (Figure 2C), a feature shared by all Pol II-transcribed snRNA genes (Figure 2D). In addition,
termination site read-through was also particularly pronounced at genes, such as UBC (Figure 2E and
2F), previously reported to display stable Pol II pausing (Chen et al., 2015). These results prompted us
to reevaluate whether the tagged RPB1 construct was indeed fully degraded.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Taking advantage of the multiple tags and different antibodies available for RPB1 (Figure 2G), we
probed the chromatin-bound fraction (containing only initiated polymerases) isolated from untreated
and DA-treated cells for RPB1 expression. Immunoblot analyses revealed the formation of truncated
RPB1 lacking the CTD entirely (Figure 2G, S2A and S2B). Furthermore, immunoblotting for the
endogenous Pol II subunits RPB2 and RPB3 confirmed that about a third of the transcribing Pol II was
still present on the chromatin after RPB1 depletion (Figure 2H and S2B). In contrast, Pol I and Pol III
levels remained unaffected (Figure 2I and S2B). Since Pol II with a CTD containing only 5 heptad repeats
(out of a total of 52) is deficient for initiation in the context of chromatin (Lux et al., 2005; Meininghaus
et al., 2000), the absence of truncated RPB1 in nuclear extracts (Figure S2B) suggests that the
truncation occurred after initiation. Moreover, CTD-less Pol II (Pol IIB) is also deficient in termination
(McCracken et al., 1997), and thus will remain associated with the chromatin. To confirm the absence
of transcription initiation following DA treatment, serum-starved cells were stimulated with 20% fetal
calf serum (FCS) following RPB1 depletion (Figure S2C). This treatment completely abolished induction
of all serum-responsive genes (Figure S2D and S2E). Hence, the lack of RPB3 accumulation along target
genes and the upregulation of non-expressed genes following RPB1 depletion are both explained by
the conversion of a fraction of initiated Pol II into a form (CTD-free Pol IIB) that is competent for
elongation but not for termination. However, the truncation was restricted to snRNA genes or genes
displaying stable pausing.

Pol II transcription interferes with RNA Pol III activity
Next, we postulated that a coupled auxin-mediated RPB1 depletion-nascent RNA expression analysis
could provide insights into potential functions of Pol II at tRNA loci. Indeed, while complete depletion
of Pol II would directly reveal its requirement at tRNA loci, this approach does not discriminate
between the functions of transcribing, paused or promoter-bound Pol II molecules in Pol III-dependent
transcription. However, we reasoned that the termination defect of CTD-less Pol II, which can easily
be identified in nascent RNA-seq data, offered us a unique opportunity to examine directly the
functional consequences of transcribing Pol II complexes at tRNA located downstream of a Pol II gene
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

presenting termination site read-though. Finally, to identify all Pol II-sensitive tRNAs genes, we
reanalyzed published nascent RNA-seq data (Werner and Ruthenburg, 2015) with wild-type HEK293
cells treated for 1 hr with the CDK9 inhibitor DRB, which blocks Pol II pause-release and therefore
provides a reference where no Pol II transcription can occur at tRNA loci (Figure 3A). This analysis
revealed that out of a total of 371 expressed tRNA loci, 55 were affected by DRB (44 upregulated and
11 downregulated at least 1.5-fold with an FDR <0.05). In our DA-treated HEK293 cells, only 8 of the
44 DRB-upregulated tRNA genes were also significantly increased by DA-mediated RPB1 depletion
(Figure 3B, S3A and Table S2). As expected, tRNA loci that appeared upregulated because of high levels
of Pol II read-through under DA conditions (Figure S3A) were not affected in DRB-treated cells. In
addition, loci downregulated under DA conditions because they were located in transcribed Pol II genes
were also not considered for further analysis (Figure S3B). We also confirmed that all DRB-sensitive
tRNA genes were bona fide Pol III target genes in our cell lines by a ChIP-seq analysis of the RPC62
subunit of Pol III (Figure S3C).
Given these observations, we then investigated Pol II occupancy at the three categories of tRNA
loci defined in Figure 3C, namely: (1) those upregulated both in DA-treated cells and in DRB-treated
cells at the nascent RNA level, (2) those upregulated only in DRB-treated cells and, finally, (3) those
downregulated following DRB treatment (categories (1), (2) and (3) in Figure 3C). We did not observe
Pol II densities at most tRNA loci (all categories) under control conditions (Figure 3C, 7Ctl and 19Ctl
profiles). This suggests that Pol II does not accumulate at high levels near affected tRNA genes in
HEK293. However, Pol II densities were observed at tRNA loci in the second category (upregulated in
DRB only at the nascent RNA level) in DA-treated cells (Figure 3C, (2)). In addition, consistent with the
presence of Pol II, clear evidence of active transcription upstream of most of these loci could also be
observed upon DA treatment (Figure 4A, tRNA-SeC-TCA-1-1; Figure S3D, tRNA-Ser-GCT-5-1). Hence,
the DRB-mediated increase in nascent tRNA levels is likely not caused by an indirect effect of Pol II
transcription loss. Indeed, only a subset of tRNA genes was stimulated by DRB or DA treatment.
Moreover, many DRB-induced tRNA genes remained unaffected in RPB1-depleted cells when Pol II
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

transcription was maintained by CTD-less complexes (category (2)). Hence, the difference between
category (1) genes that are upregulated in both DA- and DRB-treated cells and category (2) genes,
upregulated only in DRB, lies in the maintenance of active Pol II transcription at these loci. In relation
to the genes downregulated by DRB, none were affected to a statistically significant degree, relative
to controls, by DA treatment (Figure 4B, (3)). These genes were nonetheless negatively impacted by
RPB1 depletion but presented significant clonal variability even in non-treated cells.
To further characterize the effects of Pol II inhibition/depletion on tRNA gene transcription in all
three clones, we focused our attention on three model loci that are representative of the three
categories of genes discussed above (Figure 4C): (1) tRNA-Thr-CGT-2-1 (pre-Thr), a DA-upregulated
gene that is the second-most robustly overexpressed tRNA under DRB conditions; (2) tRNA-SeC-TCA1-1 (pre-SeC), a gene that is regulated by type III external promoter and represents the third-most
highly induced tRNA gene by DRB, but is unaffected by DA treatment. The lack of effect of the DA
treatment at this locus correlates with the presence of transcribing, presumably termination
incompetent, Pol IIB originating from the stably paused FOSB gene; (3) tRNA-Ala-TGC-7-1 (pre-Ala), a
tRNA gene downregulated by DRB and one of the four tRNA genes downregulated in our microarray
analysis of DA-treated cells (Figure 1G and 1H).
First, we confirmed that DA and DRB treatments mediated their effects via the same pathway by
incubating cells for 1 hr with DRB prior to RPB1 depletion. DRB treatment, like RPB1 depletion,
efficiently reduced the mRNA levels of unstable (MYC, JUN) Pol II transcripts and there was no additive
effect of RPB1 depletion and DRB (Figure 4C). Similarly, DRB and DA treatments each showed robust
increases in pre-Thr tRNA levels and decreases in pre-Ala tRNA levels with combined treatments being
essentially equivalent to the somewhat stronger DRB effects (Figure 4B and 4C, DA/Ctl ratio = 1).
Interestingly, in total RNA, pre-SeC tRNA levels remained unaffected following DA treatment but
showed a statistically significant 1.7-fold increase with DRB. This latter observation confirmed that this
tRNA is upregulated following DRB treatment but not by RPB1 deletion. Similar results could also be

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

reproduced with the CDK9 inhibitor LDC00067 (LDC) and the initiation inhibitor Triptolide (Trip)
pretreatment (Figure S4A, S4B-and S4E). These treatments confirmed that the effects observed are
caused by the loss of Pol II transcription itself since degrading or inhibiting pause-release or initiation
of Pol II have all the same effects. Moreover, since the triptolide treatment that was used induces the
complete loss of Pol II at the time of gene expression analysis (Figure S4A), it appears very clear that
all the expression changes in DA-treated cells at these loci are directly caused by modulation of Pol III
activity. Finally, we evaluated the effects of RPB1 depletion on Pol III occupancy at these three loci by
RPC62 ChIP-qPCR (Figure 4D). Pol III levels at the pre-Ala tRNA locus were reduced, confirming
repression of this locus upon Pol II loss. In contrast, neither pre-Thr tRNA nor pre-SeC tRNA loci showed
alterations in their Pol III levels. Since the density of a polymerase at a specific locus is determined by
the ratio of the initiation frequency over the elongation rate (Ehrensberger et al., 2013), a higher tRNA
synthesis rate without a change in the level of Pol III implies concomitant increases in both initiation
and elongation rates (see Discussion).
Taken together, these results indicate that Pol II activity rapidly modulates Pol III transcription both
positively and negatively at specific subsets of tRNA genes. Moreover, it is likely that Pol II transcription
per se, rather than pausing or recruitment mediates these effects. Indeed, the exact same outcomes
were obtained with drugs (LDC and DRB) that stall polymerases at pause sites and with a drug (Trip)
that blocks initiation and induces complete loss of Pol II in these cells. The absence of detectable Pol II
densities near regulated tRNA loci is incompatible with the presence of stably paused Pol II but not
with an infrequent passage of transcribing Pol II complexes through these genes and an associated
interference with the Pol III transcription cycle. A clear accumulation of Pol II near tRNA genes could
only be observed when transcribing CTD-less complexes encountered tRNA genes strongly bound by
Pol III (Figure S3D) – confirming that Pol III or its associated factors can slow down transcribing Pol II
at tRNAs but not fully stop them as revealed by overlapping nascent RNAs (see also Figure S6A).

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

RPB1 depletion affects tRNA transcription rates directly and indirectly
The fact that pre-Thr tRNA transcription can be enhanced without changes of Pol III occupancy or
evidence of Pol II transcription prompted us to further evaluate whether these effects were indeed
caused by modulation of Pol III activity or by changes in the stability or retention time of RNA
precursors on chromatin. Thus, we monitored de novo synthesis of both stable tRNAs and their
unstable precursors using metabolic labelling. Control or RPB1-depleted cells were incubated for 1 h
with ethynyl-uridine (EU) (Figure 4E) and total RNA isolated from these cells was treated with an RNA
demethylase (AlkB) to remove methyl groups that are known to interfere with RNA reverse
transcription (Cozen et al., 2015; Zheng et al., 2015). Finally, EU-labelled RNAs were biotinylated,
captured on streptavidin magnetic beads and analyzed by RT-qPCR. As expected, the synthesis of both
stable and unstable mRNAs was substantially reduced (Figure 4F), but not abolished, by RPB1
degradation, consistent with the formation of elongating CTD-less complexes. The rapid loss of RPB1
did not alter EU incorporation either in Pol I transcripts or in most of the tested Pol III transcripts (Figure
4F and S4F). As expected, however, pre-Thr tRNA levels were increased in both total and EU-labelled
RNA following DA treatment, consistent with an increase in transcriptional rates (Figure 4G).
Furthermore, a significant Increase of EU-labelled mature tRNA could also be measured for tRNA-Thr
(labelled pre-Thr tRNA, which is also detected by the primers used for the mature form, contributes
only a small fraction (1/28) of the level measured; Figures S4G and S4H). In contrast, levels of both the
pre- and mature Ala-tRNA were decreased in total RNA and EU labelled fractions following DA
treatment, suggesting that this tRNA is unstable in HEK293 cells (Figure 4G). Finally, increased levels
of EU incorporation could be observed for pre-SeC tRNA but not for its mature form, consistent with
the changes detected at the nascent RNA level. Hence, these changes mainly reflect higher EU
incorporation into readthrough transcripts that are synthesized by CTD-less complexes and cannot be
processed and remain associated with the chromatin.
To further confirm that these effects reflected changes in transcriptional rates rather than
stability/processing of the tRNA precursors, control and DA-treated cells were incubated with ActD to
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

fully block transcription by all RNA polymerases and pre-tRNA levels were measured at different time
points. The decay rates of all three tested pre-tRNAs were not significantly affected by RPB1 depletion
(Figure S4I and S4J), confirming that changes in expression levels mirrored alterations in Pol III
transcriptional rates. In addition, changes in pre-tRNA synthesis rates following RPB1 depletion were
also independent of protein synthesis, as revealed by pre-incubation with the translation inhibitor
cycloheximide (CHX; Figure S4K). Hence, stimulation of pre-Thr tRNA transcription following RPB1depletion is likely direct. However, in the case of the downregulated pre-tRNAs, these experiments did
not formally rule out an indirect effect such as loss of an unstable activator(s). Except for MYC, none
of the genes encoding known Pol III factors or activators were among the 23 protein-coding genes
affected in DA-treated cells (Figure 5A and Table S3). Indeed, MYC has been shown to exert a positive
stimulatory role on Pol III transcription via recruitment of GCN5 and TRRAP (Kenneth et al., 2007). Since
MYC levels rapidly decreased during the DA-treatment (Figure 5A and 5B), we decided to evaluate the
MYC contribution to pre-tRNA expression by transfecting cells with a siRNA pool targeting MYC (siMyc)
for 36 hrs prior to RPB1 depletion (Figure S5A). While MYC knock-down at the mRNA level was very
efficient (Figure S5C), it also interfered with Dox-mediated induction of the TIR1 ubiquitin ligase and,
as a consequence, impaired RPB1 degradation in a large number of cells (Figure S5B and S5C). As a
consequence, pre-Thr tRNA appeared less induced by the DA-treatment but its expression in RPB1expressing cells remained unaffected by MYC knock-down (Figure 5C). Similarly, Pre-SeC tRNA levels
were not significantly altered by siRNA-mediated depletion of MYC. In contrast, pre-Ala tRNA levels
were reduced by MYC siRNAs to the same extent that they were reduced in DA treated cells. Although
the decrease in pre-Ala tRNA levels did not strictly parallel the extent of MYC mRNA reduction, this
tRNA gene nonetheless appears to be sensitive to MYC levels. Hence, the downregulation of pre-Ala
tRNA observed after RPB1 depletion seems to be caused, at least in part, by the loss of MYC and thus
more likely reflects indirect effects. Interestingly, the three clones displayed different levels of
expression of MYC protein (Figure 5A and 5B), which correlates with the difference in the levels of

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

nascent RNAs observed in control versus treated cell for the tRNA loci downregulated by DRB (Figure
3C (3)).

Pol II activity is essential for the repression of tRNA genes in serum-deprived cells
The fact that Pol II transcription loss did not affect the transcription of all tRNAs suggests a direct
participation of Pol II in the modulation of Pol III activity at specific loci rather than an alteration of the
levels or activity of a general regulator. However, as shown above, changes in MYC levels specifically
modulated pre-Ala expression. By analogy, mammalian and yeast tRNAs display different sensitivities
to the global Pol III repressor MAF1 (Cieśla et al., 2007; Orioli et al., 2016; Turowski et al., 2016). In
human cells, MAF1 is essential for Pol III repression in response to unfavorable growth conditions, such
as serum starvation (Michels et al., 2010). This Pol III repressor was also shown to exert a negative
control under basal conditions, at least in IMR90 and HEK293 cells (Reina et al., 2006). Hence, we
assessed the effects of RPB1 degradation on pre-tRNA expression in MAF1-depleted cells. First, we
confirmed that MAF1 protein levels and subcellular localization were not affected by the DA treatment
(Figure 5D and 5E). To investigate whether repression by Pol II transcription is achieved via MAF1 or
whether both exert independent negative effects, we manipulated MAF1 activity instead of its levels
using rapamycin (Rapa). This mTORC1 inhibitor was shown to prevent MAF1 phosphorylation and
inactivation in mammalian cells (Michels et al., 2010; Shor et al., 2010). Cells thus were treated either
with DMSO or with rapamycin (Rapa) prior to or after RPB1 depletion (Figure S5D). While Rapa could
repress all three pre-tRNAs (Figure 5F), it had no impact on the stimulation of pre-Thr tRNA
transcription or the repression of pre-Ala tRNA transcription by RPB1 depletion and did not change the
response of pre-SeC tRNA transcription to RPB1 degradation. These effects were also not affected by
inverting the order of RPB1 depletion and Rapa addition (Figure S5E). These results indicate that MAF1
and Pol II act via independent mechanisms. Interestingly, the relative levels of pre-Thr tRNAs in Rapa
plus DA-treated cells was similar to the level of pre-Thr tRNA in cells cultured in control conditions (Ctl,
DMSO) (Figure 6F). Hence, loss of Pol II transcription cancelled the repression imposed by Rapa.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To evaluate the full extent of this effect of RPB1 depletion on Rapa-mediated activation of MAF1,
which is normally activated under low growth conditions, we measured pre-tRNA expression in cells
deprived of serum for 18 hrs prior to RPB1 depletion (Figure S2C). To our surprise, pre-Thr tRNA levels
in serum-starved cells were up to 8-fold higher following RPB1 depletion, indicating that loss of Pol II
activity for just 2 hrs was sufficient to fully reverse the normal low serum-mediated repression of this
gene (Figure 5G and 5H). Similarly, RPB1 depletion in serum-starved cells restored pre-SeC tRNA
expression to a level comparable to that observed in cells at high serum (Figure 5G and 5H). In contrast,
the normal repression of pre-Ala tRNA transcription in serum-starved cells was enhanced by RPB1
depletion (Figure 5G and 5H, DA/Ctl <1). Strikingly, a microarray analysis performed with pools of
RNAs prepared from all three clones treated or not with DA revealed that the transcriptional response
of a large majority of tRNA genes affected by serum starvation in Ctl treated cells remain unaffected
in serum starved DA-treated cells (202 vs 50; compare Figure 5I to 5J). Finally, serum stimulation of
deprived cells induced a rapid and robust induction of all three pre-tRNAs in the presence and absence
of Pol II (Figure S5F). However, the kinetics of these inductions were different for the pre-Thr and preSeC tRNAs, which both displayed faster responses to serum stimulation in the absence of Pol II – as
revealed by the slopes of the inductions in the first 30 min (Figure S5F, red triangles). Altogether these
results indicate that RNA Pol II transcription plays an essential role in the regulation of the
transcriptional response of most tRNA genes in response to environmental cues.

Pol II transcription can repress Pol III function directly from local promoters
Data accumulated so far are compatible with a model in which Pol II transcription can modulate Pol III
activity directly via transcriptional interference or indirectly via loss of an unstable (co)activator(s).
However, we were not able to show unambiguously that Pol II transcription occurs at tRNA genes that
are upregulated by transcriptional inhibitors and by RPB1 depletion. Moreover, it also is not clear if
these effects are restricted to HEK293 cells. Since Pol II was observed near 70% of all Pol III-bound tRNA
loci in HeLa cells (Oler et al., 2010), we analyzed the presence of serine 2-phosphorylated (S2P) Pol II,
a CTD modification associated with elongating complexes (Komarnitsky et al., 2000), at these loci in
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

HeLa S3 cells using available ENCODE datasets. In this cell line, clear densities of Pol II and S2P-Pol II
could be observed at both pre-Thr and pre-SeC tRNA loci but not at the pre-Ala tRNA locus (Figure 6A).
If Pol II directly interferes with Pol III activity, one could expect that higher levels of Pol II should be
correlated with greater repression. We tested this hypothesis using DRB, LDC and Trip treatments and
measured pre-tRNA expression levels in HeLa S3 cells (Figure 6B). As expected, a 2-hr treatment with
any of these inhibitors robustly stimulated expression of pre-Thr (up to 8-fold) and pre-SeC (up to 3fold) tRNAs, but not pre-Ala tRNA (which was downregulated in all three cases as observed in HEK293
cells) (Figure 6C). These data support the hypothesis that tRNA repression by transcribing Pol II
complexes is both direct and not restricted to HEK293 cells. Moreover, analysis of nascent RNA levels
in DRB- and DA-treated HEK293 cells at a Pol III-transcribed MIR element located in the first intron of
the Pol III subunit gene POLR3E (Yeganeh et al., 2017) showed that loss of Pol II transcription is
accompanied by a clear upregulation of the Pol III gene (Figure S6A), further confirming that Pol II
directly controls Pol III activity at specific loci via transcriptional interference. Next, we examined
whether the tRNA-Thr locus displayed characteristics of a Pol II promoter by examining available
ENCODE datasets for general transcription factor (GTFs) as well as gene specific regulators in all
available cell lines (Figure S6B). This analysis revealed the presence of GTFs (such as TFIIF and TFIID) as
well as numerous transcription factors in the immediate vicinity of this Pol III gene. Among them, the
Wnt regulated factor TCF4 in HCT-116 cells was further found to localize in close proximity of half of
all the DRB-sensitive tRNA loci identified (Figure 6D). Hence, if our model is correct, one can make the
prediction that TCF4 should be involved in the repression of the tRNA-Thr locus by stimulating Pol II
transcription (Figure 6E). To test this hypothesis, we first confirmed that the pre-Thr and pre-Ala tRNAs
were indeed also regulated by Pol II in these cells using transcriptional inhibitors (Figure 6F). These
results further confirmed the generality of Pol II repression in yet another cell line. Next, we assessed
the function of TCF4 by transfecting a plasmid expressing a dominant-negative TCF4 (ΔN-TCF4)
(Korinek et al., 1997). Despite a relatively low transfection efficiency (Figure S6C), cells expressing the
dominant-negative constructs (Figure S6D), contributed sufficiently to the analyzed pool of RNAs to
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

reveal a highly specific upregulation of tRNA-Thr without any effects on the tRNA-Ala loci and with no
changes in MYC mRNA expression (Figure 6G). These results strongly indicate that Pol II, recruited
specifically at local promoters by Pol II-specific transcriptional activators can regulate Pol III-dependent
tRNA transcription via transcriptional interference.

Discussion
The relative simplicity in the Pol III transcriptional machinery allows an efficient global regulation of
RNA species involved in protein biosynthesis to match cellular demands. However, several lines of
evidence suggest that individual tRNAs are specifically modulated in response to internal and external
cues to support specific roles in a large number of biological processes (see (Rak et al., 2018). How
gene-specific transcription of tRNAs genes is established remained largely unexplored in mammalian
cells.

During the past 10 years, numerous ChIP-seq studies revealed a surprising genomic

colocalization of Pol II near Pol III genes (Barski et al., 2010; Canella et al., 2012; Moqtaderi et al., 2010;
Oler et al., 2010; Raha et al., 2010; Yeganeh et al., 2017). However, the functional significance of these
observations is difficult to address using conventional techniques since the mature forms of Pol III RNAs
are very stable, highly abundant and difficult to measure.
To overcome these issues and explore functionally the connections between Pol II and Pol III
transcription events, we designed cell lines in which the rapid depletion of RPB1 can be induced by the
addition of auxin. Surprisingly, loss of Pol II resulted in rapid and severe consequences on the
transcription of specific tRNA genes as revealed by nascent-RNA sequencing, pre-tRNA level
measurement and metabolic labeling, which directly assess the Pol III transcriptional output. Our
approach unambiguously identified Pol II as a direct gene-specific regulator of tRNA transcription by
Pol III. In addition, fortuitously, these cell lines also allowed us to assess the effects of Pol II
transcription at tRNA loci as a result of a partial truncation of the CTD in Pol II complexes at snRNA and
stably paused genes.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Identification of Pol II as a gene-specific regulator of tRNA transcription by Pol III
Rapid depletion of RPB1 by doxycycline and auxin (DA) treatment as well as pharmacological inhibition
of Pol II revealed that Pol II transcription can modulate the synthesis of specific pre-tRNAs either
positively or negatively (summarized in Figure 7C). Our results suggest that the decrease in expression
of Pol III targets observed following RPB1 depletion (current results) or in α-amanitin treated cells
(Barski et al., 2010; Listerman et al., 2007; Raha et al., 2010) is most likely indirect and results from the
loss of unstable Pol III regulators such as MYC, previously shown to be a positive regulator of Pol III
transcription (Kenneth et al., 2007). In contrast, repression of certain tRNA loci by Pol II is direct and
does not require de novo protein synthesis. Loss of Pol II transcription was accompanied by higher
levels of nascent tRNAs associated with repressed loci and by increased incorporation of EU into
corresponding precursors and mature tRNAs. Moreover, the stability of the precursors tested was not
affected by RPB1 depletion, confirming modulation of the synthesis of these pre-tRNAs. Further, the
increase in tRNA transcription caused by Pol II inhibitors was not observed in RPB1-depleted cells when
Pol II transcription was maintained by the termination-deficient, CTD-free Pol IIB formed at
neighboring Pol II genes. To our surprise, we also found that Pol II transcription was essential to sustain
repression of many tRNA genes during rapamycin treatment, which inhibits mTORC1 and thereby
prevents MAF1 inactivation (Michels et al., 2010; Shor et al., 2010), and during serum starvation.
Hence, MAF1 requires Pol II transcription to fully repress most tRNA genes. Altogether our results
support a direct and essential role of Pol II in the repression of tRNA transcription not only in basal
conditions but also in response to environmental cues and signaling pathways as diverse as the Wnt
pathway.

A model for Pol III repression by transcriptional interference
Following the first round of transcription, terminating Pol III was found to be committed to reinitiation
on the same template for multiple rounds without being released in solution in a process referred to
as facilitated recycling (Dieci and Sentenac, 1996; Dieci et al., 2013). Polymerases engaged in such
hyper-processive cycles transcribe their targets at much higher rates (between 5- to 10-fold) and are
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

resistant to MAF1 (Cabart et al., 2008). Structural studies showed that MAF1 binds the same Pol III
interface bound by TFIIIB, thereby preventing Pol III recruitment to cognate promoters (Vannini et al.,
2010). Interestingly, reconstitution of Pol III elongating complexes in the presence of promoter-bound
TFIIIB revealed that Pol III can interact with TFIIIB even in the gene body and likely during the entire
transcription cycle (Han et al., 2018). This observation provides a mechanistic basis not only for
facilitated recycling but also for the resistance of engaged polymerases to MAF1 in vitro. Although it
still is not clear if facilitated recycling occurs in vivo (Arimbasseri et al., 2014), electron microscopic
studies of 5S loci in yeast revealed an apparent interaction between the promoter and the terminator
of some of these genes – an observation compatible with the existence of facilitated recycling in living
cells (French et al., 2008). Hence, if recycling does occur in vivo, polymerases engaged in such hyperprocessive loops would require an external player to break the cycling and allow MAF1 to establish
repression. Based on our observations, transcribing Pol II passage through regulated tRNAs could
assume this function by displacing, or at least interfering with, TFIIIB-Pol III interactions, thus allowing
Pol III to interact with MAF1 and preventing subsequent recruitment to (re)assembled promoters
(Figure 7D). This model further explains the apparent reversion of tRNA repression following Pol II loss
during serum starvation. Indeed, since MAF1 is 4- to 10-fold less abundant than Pol III in mammalian
cells (Orioli et al., 2016), it is very likely that every tRNA gene will encounter at least one MAF1-free
Pol III complex during the 2-hr period of RPB1 depletion in our analyses, thereby allowing facilitated
recycling to be reestablished. In addition, since the dwell time of reinitiating polymerases at promoters
and terminators has to be shorter than the dwell time of newly initiating Pol III, the proposed model
also explains how higher rates of transcription can be achieved without increased Pol III occupancy at
the pre-Thr tRNA locus analyzed here – providing that elongation also occurs at a higher speed.
Hence, the presence of Pol II peaks close to tRNAs genes in some cell lines but not others could
simply reflect cell line/tissue specific differences in nearby Pol II promoter activity. Higher local Pol II
initiation rates would increase the chance of accumulation of elongating complexes at tRNA genes as
they are slowed down by Pol III or its associated factors. Indeed, the strength of pre-Thr or pre-SeC
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

tRNA stimulation following pharmacological inhibition of Pol II correlated with the higher levels of Pol
II seen in HeLa cells. Our analysis also revealed that transcription factors such as the T Cell factor 4
(TCF4) can indirectly repress the pre-Thr-CGT-2-1 gene via Pol II in HCT-116 cells. Hence, systematic
identification of these promoters and the specific regulators involved in their regulation will provide
insights into the regulation of particular tRNAs in response to environmental cues, adverse conditions
or pathologies. Such a transcriptional control is meaningful only if a sufficient number of genes
encoding a particular tRNA isodecoder (anticodon) are co-regulated. Interestingly, more than 50% of
all expressed Ala-ACG, Arg-TCG, iMet, SeC and Ser-CGA and -GCT tRNAs appeared to be enhanced upon
DRB treatment (Figure S7), which therefore could potentially affect the abundance of proteins relying
on these tRNAs for their translation. This is particularly interesting in the case of initiator methionine
(iMet), which is essential for translation initiation and whose levels have been shown to control body
size and developmental timing in Drosophila (Rideout et al., 2012). Moreover, an upregulation of this
tRNA by only 1.4-fold was found to induce a global reprogramming of tRNA expression and to increase
proliferation in human epithelial cells (Pavon-Eternod et al., 2013). However, the fact that most tRNA
genes did not react to Pol II inhibition or depletion, or that some were even downregulated, suggests
that the proposed mechanism is not general. It would therefore be of particular interest to evaluate
whether these genes are capable of facilitated recycling in vivo and, if so, how these cycles are
interrupted in adverse conditions. Alternatively, the dependency of pre-Ala tRNA levels on MYC levels
may also indicate that high rates of transcription are perhaps achieved through stimulation of de novo
initiation frequencies at this tRNA gene.

Acknowledgements
We thank Sohail Malik, Takashi Onikubo, Evelina Tutucci and Ueli Schibler for their comments on the
manuscript. This work was supported by NIH grants CA129325, DK071900 and CA202245 to R.G.R. A.G.
was supported by a Swiss National Science Foundation Early Mobility Fellowship (P2GEP3_151952)
and by a Human Frontier Science Program Long-Term Fellowship (LT001083/2014). K.I. was supported
by a NCI T32 grant (CA009673) and a JSPS postdoctoral fellowship for research abroad.
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Author Contributions
A.G. designed and performed experiments, analyzed and interpreted data and wrote the manuscript.
K.I. performed FACS experiments. C-S.C. performed ChIP experiments. R.G.R supervised the project
and wrote the manuscript. All authors read the manuscript.

Declaration of Interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Figure legends
Figure 1. Establishment of a cell line for rapid and inducible depletion of RPB1
(A) Schematic representation of the tagged RPB1 construct expressing a full length human RPB1 cDNA
flanked with an N-terminal Flag-HA tag and a C-terminal Flag tag followed by a minimal auxin-sensitive
degron, a V5 epitope and an mKO2 orange fluorescent protein. (B) Standard protocol for RPB1
depletion. (C) RPB1 immunoblot of RIPA nuclear extracts prepared from all three clones used in this
study and a representative example of a fluorescence microscopy analysis showing a DOX + auxin (DA)dependent depletion of RPB1. (D) Time course flow cytometry experiment for clone #7 showing the
progressive loss of fluorescence of DA-treated cells (in green). In red, untreated fluorescent cells. In
blue, parental non-fluorescent cells. (E) Kinetics of fluorescence decay in all three clones. (F) % of
remaining fluorescent cells at different time points during DA treatment for all 3 clones. (G) Correlation
between gene expression levels in untreated (Ctl) and DOX-treated (DOX) pools of RNA prepared from
all three clones. (H) Same as (G) but showing correlation between Ctl versus DA expression levels. (I)
Number and type of genes affected >2-fold in the microarray analysis presented in (G) and (H). (J)
Profile of RPB3 enrichment scores at all RefSeq genes for RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA)
clones #7 and 19#. TSS, transcription start site. TES, transcription end site. (K) Overlays of normalized
nascent RNA and input-subtracted RPB3 ChIP-seq coverage at the MYC locus in RPB1-expressing (Ctl,
blue) and RPB1-depleted (DA, red) cells for clones #7 and #19. (L) Quantification of RNA content in
whole cell extract (Total) or nascent RNA fractions (Nascent) for clone #7 and #19 relative to Ctl.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. DA-treatment converts a fraction of initiated Pol II into termination-incompetent
Pol IIB
(A) Profile of nascent RNA scores at Pol II genes upregulated in the microarray analysis presented in
Figure 1H-I in RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA) cells for clones #7 and 19#. TSS,
transcription start site. TES, transcription end site. (B) Same as (A) but genome-wide profile (all RefSeq
genes) of nascent RNA scores downstream of TES. (C) Overlays of normalized nascent RNA and inputsubtracted RPB3 coverage at the MST1L lncRNA locus (anti-sense of MST1L), showing termination site
read-through from the upstream snRNA U1-4 gene in DA treated clone #7 and #19. (D) Same as (B) but
profile of nascent RNA scores downstream of all snRNA genes. (E) same as (C) at and downstream of
the stably paused UBC gene showing termination site read-through for DA-treated clones #7 and #19
cells. (F) same as (B) but profiles of nascent RNA scores downstream of stably paused genes. (G)
Schematic representation of tagged RPB1 protein and the different antibodies used to evaluate RPB1
degradation efficiency and immunoblot and corresponding Ponceau-stained membrane of chromatin
pellets prepared from DA-treated and control cells. (H) Quantification of the levels of Pol II subunit
expression in nuclear extracts and chromatin pellets (see Figure S2B). (I) Same as (H) but quantification
of Pol I and III expression levels. NP and NE correspond to, respectively, nuclear pellets and nuclear
extracts. Data represent the average +/- SD. * indicates statistically significant difference (T-test;
p<0.05).

Figure 3. Pol II transcription interferes with RNA Pol III activity
(A) Schematic representation of the experimental approach and expected effects on tRNA gene
transcription. See main text for details. (B) tRNA genes affected >1.5-fold at the nascent RNA level with
a FDR<0.05 in DRB-treated HEK293 (data from (Werner and Ruthenburg, 2015)) ranked by Log2 fold
change). tRNA genes affected significantly in DA-treated clones #7 and #19 cells are indicated by purple
bars. Black rectangles identify the 3 model tRNA genes used in following experiments. (C) Profiles of
nascent RNA and RPB3 enrichment scores at tRNA genes upregulated in both DA-treated and DRBtreated cells (1), upregulated in DRB only (2) or downregulated in DRB only (3) as defined in (A).
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. RPB1 depletion affects tRNA transcription rates
(A) Input-subtracted RPC62 ChIP-seq (overlay of clone #7 and #19 ChIP data), overlays of normalized
nascent RNA and input-subtracted RPB3 ChIP-seq coverage in RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted
(DA) clone #7 and #19 cells and nascent RNA coverage tracks of DRB-treated (green) and mock-treated
(yellow) cells from Werner and Ruthenberg (2015). (B) Relative RNA expression levels in all three
clones normalized to DMSO Ctl in RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA) cells pre-treated with
DRB or DMSO. (C) DA/Ctl ratios for data presented in (B). (D) RPC62 ChIP-qPCR analysis of chromatin
preparations from clone #7 and #19 cells treated with auxin or DA. Data are represented as % of input.
(E) Protocol used for the analysis of demethylated total and ethynyl-uridine (EU) labelled RNAs by RTqPCR. (F) Relative expression levels of selected Pol I and Pol II RNAs in RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1depleted (DA) cells for all 3 clones normalized to their levels under Ctl conditions. Data show the levels
in total (Total) or metabolically labelled (EU-labelled) RNAs. (G) Same as (F) but for the three selected
mature or precursor tRNAs. Data in (B)-(G) represent the average +/- SD. * indicates statistically
significant differences, ns non-significant (T-test; p<0.05).

Figure 5. Pol II activity regulates tRNA transcription directly and indirectly and is essential
for the repression of most tRNA genes in serum-deprived cells
(A) MYC immunoblot and corresponding Coomassie-stained membrane of nuclear extracts prepared
from untreated (Ctl), Dox-treated and DA-treated cells for all three clones. (B) Quantification of data
shown in (A). Histogram represents the average expression. (C) Relative pre-tRNA expression levels
normalized to siCtl-treated cells for all 3 clones transfected with a non-targeting (siCtl) or MYCtargeting pool of siRNAs (siMyc) prior to RPB1 depletion. (D) MAF1 immunoblots and corresponding
Coomassie-stained membrane of nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts. (E) MAF1 protein levels in
cytoplasmic extracts prepared from RPB1-expressing or RPB1-depleted cells for all 3 clones.
Histograms represent the average expression levels (F) Relative pre-tRNA levels normalized to Ctl
DMSO levels in RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA) cells for all three clones treated with Rapa
prior to or after auxin addition. (G) Relative pre-tRNA levels normalized to Ctl cells kept in serum in
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA) cells for all three clones cultured in the presence (black)
or absence (white) of serum prior to and during RPB1-depletion. (H) DA/Ctl ratios for data shown in
(G). (I) Microarray analysis of pools of RNA prepared from all three clones cultured in the presence
(serum) or absence of serum (starved) for 20hrs. (J) Same as (I) but for cells treated with DA. Data in
(C), (F), (G) and (H) represent the average +/- SD. * indicates statistically significant differences, ns nonsignificant (T-test; p<0.05).

Figure 6. Pol II repression of tRNA genes is not limited to HEK293 cells and likely occurs
directly from local Pol II promoters
(A) ChIP-seq coverage for total and Ser2-phosphorylated RPB1 and corresponding input (data from
ENCODE) in HeLa S3 cells at three model pre-tRNA loci. (B) Relative mRNA levels in HeLa S3 cells treated
for 1hr with LDC, DRB and Trip normalized to levels in DMSO-treated cells. (C) Same as (B) but showing
normalized relative pre-tRNA levels. (D) Venn diagram showing that half of the tRNA genes upregaluted by DRB in HEK293 cells are bound by TCF4 (within 500 bps from the tRNA genes) in HCT116
cells. (E) Model of β-catenin/TCF4-mediated repression of tRNA genes sensitive to Pol II repression. (F)
same as (B, C) but for HCT-116 cells. (G) Relative mRNA and pre-tRNA levels in HCT-116 cells transiently
cotransfected with plasmids expressing a dominant-negative TCF4 construct (ΔN-TCF4) and an EGFP
or just an EGFP (control). Data in (B), (C), (F) and (G) represent the average +/- SD. * indicates
statistically significant differences (T-test; p<0.05).

Figure 7. A model for direct repression of Pol III activity at tRNA genes by Pol II
transcription
(A) Summary of the effects of different treatments on the expression of three pre-tRNAs. (B) Model
for the Pol II regulation of tRNA transcription rates. See Discussion for details.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary figure legends
Figure S1. Related to Figure 1
(A) A construct encoding a full length RPB1 tagged with a fluorescent protein and auxin-degron was
first stably transfected into an HEK293 cell line expressing a DOX-inducible OsTIR1 from the AAVS1
locus (Natsume et al., 2016). Dox and auxin (DA)-sensitive mKO2-expressing cells (non-fluorescent cells
sorted in bulk after DA treatment) were then transfected with a plasmid expressing a guide RNA
targeting selectively the endogenous RPB1 gene and a Cas9-GFP construct. Cells positive for both
mKO2 and GFP were finally sorted as single clones. 146 clones were first screened for substantial cell
death after prolonged treatment with DA, indicating inactivation of all endogenous copies of RPB1 as
shown in (B) for a clone depending (#19, green) or not (clone #10, red) on the tagged RPB1 for survival.
The data also show efficient depletion (loss of mKO2 fluorescence level) of the tagged construct in
presence of auxin with massive cell death (#19) or no effect on cell viability (#10). 47 clones (32%)
passed this first round of selection and the absence of endogenous RPB1 was confirmed by
immunoblot using RIPA extracts prepared from isolated nuclei as shown in (C) for a few representative
clones. E indicates the position of the endogenous RPB1 and T the position of the tagged RPB1. (D)
Protocol used for the preparation of cytoplasmic, NUN-nuclear and pellets protein extracts as well as
nascent RNA isolation. (E) Ratio of different RNA levels in total RNA versus chromatin bound fraction
in RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA) cells for clones #7, #12 and #19. (F) Left panel, EtBr
staining of a denaturing polyacrylamide gel loaded with RNAs prepared from isolated nuclei (Nuclear
RNA), NUN-extracted chromatin pellets (Nascent RNA) and increasing amount of total RNA (Total).
Right panel, tRNA-iMet Northern blot showing complete depletion of mature tRNAs in the nascent
RNA fraction. Note that 0.5 μg Nascent RNA corresponds to 12.5 μg of total RNA. This approach is well
suited to evaluate transcription by all three types of polymerases. Indeed, while the 45S rRNA
precursor is fully retained in the nascent RNA fraction, pre-mRNAs are clearly enriched compared to
their mRNA counterpart as shown in (E). Pre-tRNAs however are likely not processed co-

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

transcriptionally and are expected to be released from the polymerase before excision of leader and
trailer sequences (Arimbasseri, 2018).

Figure S2. Related to Figure 2 and 5
(A) RPB1 and Flag immunoblots of nuclear extracts (NE) or chromatin pellets (P) prepared,
respectively, from HeLa cells expressing endogenous RPB1 (Endo) and a Flag-tagged RPB1 lacking the
entire CTD (ΔCTD) orDA-treated cells. The truncated RPB1 is present only on the chromatin-bound
fraction in DA-treated cells. (B) Immunoblots and corresponding Coomassie-stained membranes of
NUN extracts and pellets from untreated, DOX-treated or DA-treated cells probed for expression of
different polymerase subunits. The physical isolation method used efficiently separates transcribing
Pol III from Pol III containing phosphorylated RPC53 (slower migrating bands in nuclear extracts),
presumably inactive (Lee et al., 2015). (C) Protocol used for time course analysis of RNA expression in
serum-deprived cells following serum stimulation (also for Figure 6G-I). (D) Time course analysis of
relative mRNA levels of selected immediate early genes in serum-starved RPB1-expressing (Ctl) and
RPB1-depleted (DA) cells prior (Time 0) or after stimulation with serum as shown in (C). Data represent
the average +/- SD. * indicates statistically significant differences (T-test; p<0.05). (E) Histogram of all
protein-coding serum-inducible genes in Control (Ctl) and DA-treated cells revealed in a microarray
analysis of pools of RNAs prepared from all three clones showing complete abolishment of the serum
induction (the remaining enhancement observed in DA-treated cells corresponds to the fraction of
cells that do not respond to the DA-treatment, see Figure 1F).

Figure S3. Related to Figure 3
(A) Venn diagram showing the number of tRNA genes affected >1.5-fold with a FDR <0.05 in DRBtreated wild-type HEK293 cells and DA-treated clones #7 and #19. Numbers in gray indicate numbers
of tRNA genes affected by overlapping Pol II transcripts (and hence not considered in following
analyses). (B) Nascent-RNA profiles of tRNA genes appearing up- or down-regulated because of
changes in overlapping Pol II transcripts (CTD-less Pol II read-through or bona fide Pol II genes). Control

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

conditions for clone #7 and #19 are shown in red, DA-treated profiles in blue. (C) Heat maps of RPC62
enrichment at tRNA loci in all 3 groups defined in Figure 4B, demonstrating that these loci are Pol III
target genes in these two clones. (B) Example of a tRNA locus upregulated in DRB but not in DA-treated
cells (second group in Figure 3C). The data correspond, in descending order, to input-subtracted RPC62
ChIP-seq (overlay of clone #7 and #19 data), overlays of normalized nascent RNA and input-subtracted
RPB3 ChIP-seq coverage in RPB1-expressing (Ctl, blue) or RPB1-depleted (DA, red) clone #7 and #19
cells. In addition, nascent RNA coverage replicates of DRB- or mock-treated cells are shown,
respectively, in green and yellow. Note that the presence of read-through transcription in DA-treated
cells is accompanied by an accumulation of presumably transcribing CTD-less Pol II complexes at the
Pol III locus.

Figure S4. Related to Figure 4
(A) Immunoblots and corresponding Ponceau-stained membranes of NUN extracts and chromatin
pellets prepared from RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA) clone #7 cells pretreated with
DMSO, LDC or Trip for 1 hr prior to auxin addition. IIO, IIA and IIB indicate the positions, respectively,
of phosphorylated-, unphosphorylated- and truncated forms of RPB1. (B) Relative pre-tRNA expression
levels in all three clones normalized to DMSO Ctl in RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA) cells
pre-treated with LDC or DMSO. (C) DA/Ctl ratios for data presented in (B) as well as for some mRNAs.
(D) Same as (B) but with cells pre-treated with Triptolide and DMSO. (E) Same as (C) but for data shown
in (D). (F) Relative expression levels of different types of Pol III-transcribed RNAs (other than tRNAs) in
RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA) cells for all 3 clones normalized to their levels in Ctl
condition. Data shows levels in total (black bars) or metabolically labelled RNAs (white bars). (G)
Relative levels of mature and precursor pre-Thr tRNA in total RNA prepared from RPB1-expressing (Ctl)
and RPB1-depleted (DA) cells for all three clones. The histograms represent the average expression.
(G) Same as (H) but in EU-labelled RNA. This shows that despite the fact that the primers used to
measure the mature form also hybridize to the precursor form, the contribution of the labelled
precursor is negligible (1/28 of the mature tRNA level). (I) Decay curve fits used to calculate the stability
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

of pre-Thr tRNA in RPB1-expressing (Ctl) and RPB1-depleted (DA) cells for all three clones treated with
ActD to block transcription. The data are shown as % of the levels in cells prior to ActD addition (Time
0). (J) Half-life of precursor tRNAs in RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA) cells for all three
clones. (K) DA/Ctl ratios of RNA expression levels in RPB1-expressing (Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA) cells
for all 3 clones pre-treated 15 min with cycloheximide (CHX) or DMSO. Data in (B)-(F) and (I) to (K)
represent the average +/- SD. * indicates statistically significant differences, ns non-significant
differences (T-test; p<0.05).

Figure S5. Related to Figure 5
(A) Protocol for siRNA-based knock-down prior to RPB1 depletion. (B) Fluorescence microscopy
pictures showing the effects of MYC knock-down on RPB1 depletion in DA cells. (C) Relative mRNA
expression levels normalized to siCtl-treated cells for all 3 clones transfected with a non-targeting
(siCtl) or MYC-targeting pool of siRNAs (siMyc) prior to RPB1 depletion. (D) Protocol for rapamycin
(Rapa) treatments prior to or after RPB1-depletion. (E) DA/Ctl ratios for data presented in (Figure 5F)
for pre-tRNAs. (F) Time course analysis of relative pre-tRNAs levels in serum- depleted RPB1-expressing
(Ctl) or RPB1-depleted (DA) cells stimulated with 20% FCS after RPB1 depletion. Red triangles
emphasize the faster response of DA-treated cells during the first 30 min of serum stimulation. Data in
(C)-(F) represent the average +/- SD. * indicates statistically significant differences (T-test; p<0.05).

Figure S6. Related to Figure 6
(A) Input-subtracted RPC62 ChIP-seq (overlay of clone #7 and #19 data), overlays of normalized
nascent RNA and input-subtracted RPB3 ChIP-seq coverage in RPB1-expressing (Ctl, blue) or RPB1depleted (DA, red) clone #7 and #19 cells at a MIR locus that is transcribed by Pol III in the anti-sense
direction from the Pol II-transcribed POLR3E gene (encoding a subunit of Pol III itself). In addition,
nascent RNA coverage replicates of DRB- or mock-treated cells are shown, respectively, in green and
yellow. The loss of elongating Pol II at this locus is correlated with an increase in transcription of the
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

MIR element in both DA-treated cells and DRB-treated cells. (B) UCSC bowser snapshot of the tRNAThr-CGT-2-1 locus displaying ENCODE ChIP-seq data for common histone modifications found at
promoters and regulatory regions as well as all available data for Pol II, its associated general
transcription factors and the sequence-specific transcriptions factors immunoprecipitated in the
vicinity of this locus, suggesting the presence of a local Pol II promoter near this tRNA locus. (C)
Microscopy picture showing transfection efficiencies (EGFP-positive cells) of HCT116 cells cotransfected with plasmids and EGFP and a ΔN-TCF4 constructs. (D) Immunoblot and corresponding
Coomassie-stain membrane of total extracts prepared form HCT116 cells transfected cells probed with
anti-MYC antibody to evaluate expression of the myc-tagged ΔN-TCF4 construct.

Figure S7. Related to Figure 7
Histogram showing the proportion (and numbers) of tRNA genes (grouped by anticodon) induced by
DRB. See Discussion for details.

References
Arimbasseri, A.G., Rijal, K., and Maraia, R.J. (2014). Comparative overview of RNA polymerase II and
III transcription cycles, with focus on RNA polymerase III termination and reinitiation. Transcription 5,
e27369.
Barski, A., Chepelev, I., Liko, D., Cuddapah, S., Fleming, A.B., Birch, J., Cui, K., White, R.J., and Zhao, K.
(2010). Pol II and its associated epigenetic marks are present at Pol III–transcribed noncoding RNA
genes. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 17, 629–634.
Cabart, P., Lee, J., and Willis, I.M. (2008). Facilitated recycling protects human RNA polymerase III
from repression by Maf1 in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 36108–36117.
Canella, D., Bernasconi, D., Gilardi, F., LeMartelot, G., Migliavacca, E., Praz, V., Cousin, P., Delorenzi,
M., Hernandez, N., Hernandez, N., et al. (2012). A multiplicity of factors contributes to selective RNA
polymerase III occupancy of a subset of RNA polymerase III genes in mouse liver. Genome Res. 22,
666–680.
Chen, F., Gao, X., and Shilatifard, A. (2015). Stably paused genes revealed through inhibition of
transcription initiation by the TFIIH inhibitor triptolide. Genes Dev. 29, 39–47.
Cieśla, M., Towpik, J., Graczyk, D., Oficjalska-Pham, D., Harismendy, O., Suleau, A., Balicki, K., Conesa,
C., Lefebvre, O., and Boguta, M. (2007). Maf1 Is Involved in Coupling Carbon Metabolism to RNA
Polymerase III Transcription. Mol. Cell. Biol. 27, 7693–7702.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Cozen, A.E., Quartley, E., Holmes, A.D., Robinson, E.H., Phizicky, E.M., and Lowe, T.M. (2015). ARMSeq: AlkB-facilitated RNA methylation sequencing reveals a complex landscape of modified tRNA
fragments. Nat. Methods 12, 879–884.
Dieci, G., and Sentenac, A. (1996). Facilitated Recycling Pathway for RNA Polymerase III. Cell 84, 245–
252.
Dieci, G., Bosio, M.C., Fermi, B., and Ferrari, R. (2013). Transcription reinitiation by RNA polymerase
III. Biochim. Biophys. Acta BBA - Gene Regul. Mech. 1829, 331–341.
Dittmar, K.A., Goodenbour, J.M., and Pan, T. (2006). Tissue-Specific Differences in Human Transfer
RNA Expression. PLoS Genet 2, e221.
Dumay-Odelot, H., Durrieu-Gaillard, S., Ayoubi, L.E., Parrot, C., and Teichmann, M. (2014).
Contributions of in vitro transcription to the understanding of human RNA polymerase III
transcription. Transcription 5, e27526.
Ehrensberger, A.H., Kelly, G.P., and Svejstrup, J.Q. (2013). Mechanistic Interpretation of PromoterProximal Peaks and RNAPII Density Maps. Cell 154, 713–715.
French, S.L., Osheim, Y.N., Schneider, D.A., Sikes, M.L., Fernandez, C.F., Copela, L.A., Misra, V.A.,
Nomura, M., Wolin, S.L., and Beyer, A.L. (2008). Visual Analysis of the Yeast 5S rRNA Gene
Transcriptome: Regulation and Role of La Protein. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28, 4576–4587.
Gingold, H., Tehler, D., Christoffersen, N.R., Nielsen, M.M., Asmar, F., Kooistra, S.M., Christophersen,
N.S., Christensen, L.L., Borre, M., Sørensen, K.D., et al. (2014). A Dual Program for Translation
Regulation in Cellular Proliferation and Differentiation. Cell 158, 1281–1292.
Goodarzi, H., Nguyen, H.C.B., Zhang, S., Dill, B.D., Molina, H., and Tavazoie, S.F. (2016). Modulated
Expression of Specific tRNAs Drives Gene Expression and Cancer Progression. Cell 165, 1416–1427.
Grewal, S.S. (2015). Why should cancer biologists care about tRNAs? tRNA synthesis, mRNA
translation and the control of growth. Biochim. Biophys. Acta BBA - Gene Regul. Mech. 1849, 898–
907.
Han, Y., Yan, C., Fishbain, S., Ivanov, I., and He, Y. (2018). Structural visualization of RNA polymerase
III transcription machineries. Cell Discov. 4, 40.
Kenneth, N.S., Ramsbottom, B.A., Gomez-Roman, N., Marshall, L., Cole, P.A., and White, R.J. (2007).
TRRAP and GCN5 are used by c-Myc to activate RNA polymerase III transcription. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 104, 14917–14922.
Komarnitsky, P., Cho, E.-J., and Buratowski, S. (2000). Different phosphorylated forms of RNA
polymerase II and associated mRNA processing factors during transcription. Genes Dev. 14, 2452–
2460.
Korinek, V., Barker, N., Morin, P.J., Wichen, D. van, Weger, R. de, Kinzler, K.W., Vogelstein, B., and
Clevers, H. (1997). Constitutive Transcriptional Activation by a β-Catenin-Tcf Complex in APC−/−
Colon Carcinoma. Science 275, 1784–1787.
Listerman, I., Bledau, A.S., Grishina, I., and Neugebauer, K.M. (2007). Extragenic Accumulation of RNA
Polymerase II Enhances Transcription by RNA Polymerase III. PLOS Genet. 3, e212.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Lukoszek, R., Mueller-Roeber, B., and Ignatova, Z. (2013). Interplay between polymerase II- and
polymerase III-assisted expression of overlapping genes. FEBS Lett. 587, 3692–3695.
Lux, C., Albiez, H., Chapman, R.D., Heidinger, M., Meininghaus, M., Brack-Werner, R., Lang, A.,
Ziegler, M., Cremer, T., and Eick, D. (2005). Transition from initiation to promoter proximal pausing
requires the CTD of RNA polymerase II. Nucleic Acids Res. 33, 5139–5144.
McCracken, S., Fong, N., Yankulov, K., Ballantyne, S., Pan, G., Greenblatt, J., Patterson, S.D., Wickens,
M., and Bentley, D.L. (1997). The C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II couples mRNA processing
to transcription. Nature 385, 357–361.
Meininghaus, M., Chapman, R.D., Horndasch, M., and Eick, D. (2000). Conditional Expression of RNA
Polymerase II in Mammalian Cells DELETION OF THE CARBOXYL-TERMINAL DOMAIN OF THE LARGE
SUBUNIT AFFECTS EARLY STEPS IN TRANSCRIPTION. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 24375–24382.
Michels, A.A., Robitaille, A.M., Buczynski-Ruchonnet, D., Hodroj, W., Reina, J.H., Hall, M.N., and
Hernandez, N. (2010). mTORC1 Directly Phosphorylates and Regulates Human MAF1. Mol. Cell. Biol.
30, 3749.
Moir, R.D., and Willis, I.M. (2013). Regulation of pol III transcription by nutrient and stress signaling
pathways. Biochim. Biophys. Acta BBA - Gene Regul. Mech. 1829, 361–375.
Moqtaderi, Z., Wang, J., Raha, D., White, R.J., Snyder, M., Weng, Z., and Struhl, K. (2010). Genomic
Binding Profiles of Functionally Distinct RNA Polymerase III Transcription Complexes in Human Cells.
Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 17, 635–640.
Natsume, T., Kiyomitsu, T., Saga, Y., and Kanemaki, M.T. (2016). Rapid Protein Depletion in Human
Cells by Auxin-Inducible Degron Tagging with Short Homology Donors. Cell Rep. 15, 210–218.
Nguyen, V.T., Giannoni, F., Dubois, M.F., Seo, S.J., Vigneron, M., Kédinger, C., and Bensaude, O.
(1996). In vivo degradation of RNA polymerase II largest subunit triggered by alpha-amanitin. Nucleic
Acids Res. 24, 2924–2929.
Oler, A.J., Alla, R.K., Roberts, D.N., Wong, A., Hollenhorst, P.C., Chandler, K.J., Cassiday, P.A., Nelson,
C.A., Hagedorn, C.H., Graves, B.J., et al. (2010). Human RNA Polymerase III transcriptomes and
relationships to Pol II promoters, enhancer-binding factors and chromatin domains. Nat. Struct. Mol.
Biol. 17, 620–628.
Orioli, A., Pascali, C., Pagano, A., Teichmann, M., and Dieci, G. (2012). RNA polymerase III
transcription control elements: Themes and variations. Gene 493, 185–194.
Orioli, A., Praz, V., Lhôte, P., and Hernandez, N. (2016). Human MAF1 targets and represses active
RNA polymerase III genes by preventing recruitment rather than inducing long-term transcriptional
arrest. Genome Res. 26, 624–635.
Palazzo, A.F., and Lee, E.S. (2015). Non-coding RNA: what is functional and what is junk? Front.
Genet. 6.
Pang, Y.L.J., Abo, R., Levine, S.S., and Dedon, P.C. (2014). Diverse cell stresses induce unique patterns
of tRNA up- and down-regulation: tRNA-seq for quantifying changes in tRNA copy number. Nucleic
Acids Res. 42, e170–e170.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Pavon-Eternod, M., Gomes, S., Geslain, R., Dai, Q., Rosner, M.R., and Pan, T. (2009). tRNA overexpression in breast cancer and functional consequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, 7268–7280.
Pavon-Eternod, M., Gomes, S., Rosner, M.R., and Pan, T. (2013). Overexpression of initiator
methionine tRNA leads to global reprogramming of tRNA expression and increased proliferation in
human epithelial cells. RNA 19, 461–466.
Pombo, A., Jackson, D.A., Hollinshead, M., Wang, Z., Roeder, R.G., and Cook, P.R. (1999). Regional
specialization in human nuclei: visualization of discrete sites of transcription by RNA polymerase III.
EMBO J. 18, 2241–2253.
Raha, D., Wang, Z., Moqtaderi, Z., Wu, L., Zhong, G., Gerstein, M., Struhl, K., and Snyder, M. (2010).
Close association of RNA polymerase II and many transcription factors with Pol III genes. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107, 3639–3644.
Rak, R., Dahan, O., and Pilpel, Y. (2018). Repertoires of tRNAs: The Couplers of Genomics and
Proteomics. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 34, 239–264.
Reina, J.H., Azzouz, T.N., and Hernandez, N. (2006). Maf1, a New Player in the Regulation of Human
RNA Polymerase III Transcription. PLOS ONE 1, e134.
Rideout, E.J., Marshall, L., and Grewal, S.S. (2012). Drosophila RNA polymerase III repressor Maf1
controls body size and developmental timing by modulating tRNAiMet synthesis and systemic insulin
signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109, 1139–1144.
Roeder, R.G., and Rutter, W.J. (1969). Multiple Forms of DNA-dependent RNA Polymerase in
Eukaryotic Organisms. Nature 224, 234.
Sagi, D., Rak, R., Gingold, H., Adir, I., Maayan, G., Dahan, O., Broday, L., Pilpel, Y., and Rechavi, O.
(2016). Tissue- and Time-Specific Expression of Otherwise Identical tRNA Genes. PLOS Genet. 12,
e1006264.
Schramm, L., and Hernandez, N. (2002). Recruitment of RNA polymerase III to its target promoters.
Genes Dev. 16, 2593–2620.
Shor, B., Wu, J., Shakey, Q., Toral-Barza, L., Shi, C., Follettie, M., and Yu, K. (2010). Requirement of the
mTOR Kinase for the Regulation of Maf1 Phosphorylation and Control of RNA Polymerase IIIdependent Transcription in Cancer Cells. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 15380.
Torrent, M., Chalancon, G., Groot, N.S. de, Wuster, A., and Babu, M.M. (2018). Cells alter their tRNA
abundance to selectively regulate protein synthesis during stress conditions. Sci Signal 11, eaat6409.
Turowski, T.W., Leśniewska, E., Delan-Forino, C., Sayou, C., Boguta, M., and Tollervey, D. (2016).
Global analysis of transcriptionally engaged yeast RNA polymerase III reveals extended tRNA
transcripts. Genome Res. 26, 933–944.
Vannini, A., Ringel, R., Kusser, A.G., Berninghausen, O., Kassavetis, G.A., and Cramer, P. (2010).
Molecular Basis of RNA Polymerase III Transcription Repression by Maf1. Cell 143, 59–70.
Wansink, D.G., Schul, W., Kraan, I. van der, Steensel, B. van, Driel, R. van, and Jong, L. de (1993).
Fluorescent labeling of nascent RNA reveals transcription by RNA polymerase II in domains scattered
throughout the nucleus. J. Cell Biol. 122, 283–293.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/764605; this version posted September 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Werner, M.S., and Ruthenburg, A.J. (2015). Nuclear Fractionation Reveals Thousands of ChromatinTethered Noncoding RNAs Adjacent to Active Genes. Cell Rep. 12, 1089–1098.
Wichtowska, D., Turowski, T.W., and Boguta, M. (2013). An interplay between transcription,
processing, and degradation determines tRNA levels in yeast. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. RNA 4, 709–722.
Wuarin, J., and Schibler, U. (1994). Physical isolation of nascent RNA chains transcribed by RNA
polymerase II: evidence for cotranscriptional splicing. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14, 7219–7225.
Yeganeh, M., Praz, V., Cousin, P., and Hernandez, N. (2017). Transcriptional interference by RNA
polymerase III affects expression of the Polr3e gene. Genes Dev. 31, 413–421.
Zheng, G., Qin, Y., Clark, W.C., Dai, Q., Yi, C., He, C., Lambowitz, A.M., and Pan, T. (2015). Efficient and
quantitative high-throughput tRNA sequencing. Nat. Methods 12, 835–837.

31

Figure 1
A

B
-Flag-AID-V5- mKO2

E

Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA

Parental
TagRPB1 Ctl

230
136
Ctl

DA

Counts

Clone #7

1h Auxin

230

α-RPB1

2h Auxin

F

mKO2

3h Auxin
Phase
contrast

Fluorescence (Log10)

G

H
DA (log2)

Dox (log2)

15
10
5
R = 0.999

0
0

5
R = 0.997

0

0
5 10 15 20
Ctl (log2)
Unaffected
Down>2-fold

J

5 10 15 20
Ctl (log2)
Up>2-fold
tRNA

DA
37
18
150
23
4
99
331

Prot coding up
tRNA up
Non-coding up
Prot coding down
tRNA down
Non-coding down
Changed >2-fold

L

RNA levels relative to Ctl

10 kb
1.5

1.5
#7
Nascent
RNA #19

0.5

10.0Kb

TES

TSS

-0.5
-10.0Kb

RPB3 scores

t½ = 33.2 min
±1.8 min

Out of a total of 59,795 expressed

K
2.5

Pol II
ChIP

#7
#19

#19

#7 #12 #19
Dox

10

#12

Ctl
Dox
30' Aux
1h Aux
2h Aux
3h Aux

16
0
33
0
0
10
59

15

#7

100%
75%
50%
25%
0%

I

20

20

4000
3000
2000
1000
0

2h

Ctl
Dox
30' Aux
1h Aux
2h Aux
3h Aux
Parental

D

Mean Fluo (a.u.)

C

12h

1 day

% Fluo cells

Flag-HA- hRPB1

ddH2O (Ctl) or
Dox (2μg/ml) Auxin (500 μM)

Plating

[0-1350]
[0-1550]

Ctl
DA

0.98
0.89
1

7
19
0.78
0.77

[0-35]
[0-25]

0.5

0

7Ctl
19Ctl

7DA
19DA

Ctl DA Ctl DA
Total Nascent

Figure 2
Nascent RNA scores

7Ctl
7DA
19Ctl
19DA

[0-3976]

Nascent #7
RNA #19
#7
Pol II
ChIP #19

[0-3976]
[0-456]
[0-456]

MST1L
U1-4

MST1L lncRNA

E

#7

500

0
[0-70]
[0-50]

20kb

150

snRNA genes

7Ctl
7DA
19Ctl
19DA

100
50
0

150

Stably paused
7Ctl
7DA
19Ctl
19DA

100
50
0

H
8WG16

M2 V5

Relative levels

N-20
M2
Flag-HA- Core

Flag-V5-Degron-mKO2
CTD

α-Flag

(N20)

(M2)

7 12 19

7 12 19

7 12 19

230140967346H1>
Core
hist{

α-V5
<
7 12 19

Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA

α-RPB1

Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA

α-CTD
(8WG16)

1.5

Pol II levels – NP
*
*

RPB2
RPB3

1
0.5
0
Ctl

I
Relative levels

G

20kb

TES

#19

0

Nascent RNA scores

Nascent #7
RNA #19

50

F

25 kb

Ctl DA

100

Nascent RNA scores

D

20 kb

Ctl DA

7Ctl
7DA
19Ctl
19DA

TES

30kb

TES

TSS

0

All genes

20kb

50

150

TES

100

C

Pol II
ChIP

B

Upregulated genes

150

-30kb

Nascent RNA scores

A

1.5

Dox

Pol I levels

DA
1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0
Ctl Dox DA

Pol III levels
NP
NE

Ctl Dox DA

Figure 3
A

Stably paused or
snRNA gene
CTD

tRNA locus

CTD

Pol II

Pol II

DRB

CTD

tRNA gene

Local Pol II

Pol III
DRB

CTD

Pol II

?

Effects of pause-release
inhibition?

Transcribing Pol II or Paused?
Pol III Positive or negative effect?

Pol II
DA-treatment
CTD-less Pol II

Pol III

Pol III

B

DRB/DA-sensitive tRNA genes
DA up & DRB up
DRB up
DRB down

(8 genes)
(36 genes)
(11 genes)

Fold change
(Log2)

Effects of mislocalization of transcribing Pol II
at tRNA genes?

Effects of loss of Pol II at tRNA genes?

6
4
2
0
-2
-4

tRNA-Thr-CGT-2-1
tRNA-SeC-TCA-1-1

tRNA-Ala-TGC-7-1

C

4

2

2

2

0

0

0

-2

-2

-2

tRNA

tRNA

2kb

4

-2kb

4

tRNA

2kb

tRNA

2kb

200
150
100
50
0

-2kb

tRNA

(3) DRB down

-2kb

900
600
300
0

2kb

2kb

-2kb

tRNA

2kb

Pol II ChIP

7Ctl
7DA
19Ctl
19DA

-2kb

Nascent RNA

900
600
300
0

(2) DRB only up

-2kb

(1) DA up & DRB up

Figure 4

Ctl

Pol III ChIP
Nascent RNA
Pol II ChIP
Nascent RNA
from Werner &
Ruthenburg (2015)

tRNA-Thr-CGT-2-1
15 kb

DA

#7 & #19
#7
#19
#7
#19

[0-50]

[0-10]

[0-2000]

[0-70]

[0-450]

[0-2000]

[0-70]

[0-450]

[0-13]

[0-13]

[0-13]

[0-13]

[0-13]

[0-13]

6014

202

11802

0

0

0

Mock #1
Mock #2
DRB #1

8
*

6
4

*

*

*
*

2
0

DMSO Ctl
DMSO DA
DRB Ctl
DRB DA

ns

Fold-difference

Relative expression

ns ns
ns

D
30%

DRB

2

* *

* *

Pol III ChIP
Ctl
DA

*

20%
10%

0

0%

Pre-Thr Pre-Ala Pre-SeC

Dox or
ddH2O (ctl)

RT total RNA

EthynylUridine (EU)

Aux
12h

2h

1h

RNA

F

DNAse

AlkB

EU Biotin
labelling

Capture & RT
on beads

G
2.5

Relative levels

40%

Ratio DA/Ctl
*
DMSO

4

2
1.5
1
0.5
0

*

Pol II and Pol I
*
*
*
*

2.5

*

Total
EU labelled

*

Relative levels

E

C

Pre-tRNA levels

tRNA-Ala-TGC-7-1
15 kb

[0-50]

DRB #2
Refseq
tRNA

B

tRNA-SeC-TCA-1-1
15 kb

% Input

A

2
1.5
1
0.5
0

Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA
PGK1 PPIA GAPDH MYC
JUN
45S
Pol II Stable mRNA
Pol II Unstable Pol I
mRNA

*

*
*

Pol III tRNAs
*
*

Total
EU labelled

*
*

Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA
Mature Pre- Mature Pre- Mature PretRNA
tRNA
tRNA
Thr-CGT-2-1 Ala-TGC-7-1 SeC-TCA-1-1

Figure 5
B

D

AV
#7
#12
#19

1
0.5
0

Ctl Dox DA

E
Dox D+A

#7
#12
#19
#7
#12
#19
#7
#12
#19

Nuclear
extracts

2

MAF1 levels
(cytoplasm)

1
0
Ctl Dox DA
AV
#7

Cytoplasmic
extracts

Relative levels

2
*

*

Ctl

DA

Ctl

*
*

ns

*

DA

Ctl Starved (log2)

20
15

1

5

202
R = 0.967

0
0

5

10

15

Ctl Serum (log2)

20

DMSO
Rapa before
Rapa after
*

1
0

Ctl

DA

Ctl

*
*
*

Ctl

DA

Ctl

*
*
DA

Ratio DA/Ctl
10

*
ns

Serum
Starved

*

8
6

*

4
ns

2
0

DA

Unaffected
Down>2-fold
Up>2-fold

10

*

*
*

2

*

0

I

3

Serum
Starved

ns

1

*

H

*
*

1

Pre-tRNA levels
4

#12
#19

Pre-tRNA levels
4
3

*
*

siCtl Ctl
siCtl DA
siMyc Ctl
siMyc DA

0

Fold-difference

G

*
2

F

Relative levels

Ctl

α-MAF1

3

Relative levels

α-MYC

1.5

Pre-tRNA levels

C

MYC levels

Relative levels

Dox D+A

#7
#12
#19
#7
#12
#19
#7
#12
#19

Ctl

Relative levels

Nuclear extracts

J

20
DA starved (log2)

A

15

Thr-CGT

10

16

5

Unaffected
Down>2-fold
Up>2-fold

50
Ala-TGC
R = 0.983

0
0

5

10

15

DA Serum (log2)

20

Figure 6
A

10 kb

10 kb

10 kb

input
Pol II

HeLa-S3
ChIP
(Data from
ENCODE)

input
Pol II-S2P
RefSeq
tRNAs

2
Relative levels

C

HeLa-S3
mRNA levels

1.5

*
*
*

*
*
*

1
0.5

*

PGK1

MYC

6
*
*
*
*

4
2

*
*
*

0

JUN

D

DMSO
LDC
DRB
Trip

8

0
PPIA

HeLa-S3
pre-tRNA
levels
*

10
DMSO
LDC
DRB
Trip

Relative levels

B

E
tRNA genes
repressed by
Pol II in
HEK293

21

23 101

tRNA genes
with TCF4
bound in
HCT-116

β-Catenin
TCF
Pol II

G

Relative expression

RNA expression (HCT-116)
DMSO
DRB
LDC
Trip

*
*
*

5
4
3
2
1

*
*
*

*
*
*

MYC

JUN

*
*
*

0
Unstable
mRNAs

Pre-Thr Pre-Ala Pre-Glu
pre-tRNAs

Relative expression

F

Pol III

RNA expression (HCT-116)
2

p<0.005

EGFP
EGFP+ΔN-TCF4

1.5
1
0.5
0
MYC

JUN

Unstable
mRNAs

pre-Thr pre-Ala pre-Glu
pre-tRNAs

Figure 7
A

DA-treatment
↗
→*
↘

DRB, LDC, Trip
↗
↗
↘

Pre-Thr
Pre-SeC
Pre-Ala
* read-through transcription from FOSB gene

siMYC
→
→
↘

Pol II function
Direct
Direct
Indirect

B
Direct control of Pol III by Pol II :

Pol III
Pol II
promoter
TFIIIB

Pol III
MAF1

Slow

TTTT

Loss of Pol II
transcription

TFIIIC
tRNA gene

Pol III

TFIIIB
Pol III
TTTT
Pol II

MAF1

Pol III

Pol III
MAF1

TFIIIB

TTTT
TFIIIC
MAF1

Fast
TFIIIB

Pol III
TTTT
TFIIIC

Figure S1
Puro
selection
Tet-OsTIR1 HEK
+CMV-TagRPB1
PGK-Puro

KO2+
Cells

mKO2 fluo

mKO2 fluo

88.6%
11.4%

Phase
contrast

12.5%
mKO2
fluo

Phase
contrast

C

#19
#10

#10

mKO2
fluo

87.5%

+Dox
+Auxin

Ctl

B

CAS9-GFP +
endoRPB1 gRNA
KO2+
KO2GFP+
Cells
Cells

DOX + Auxin

#19
Parental
Parental
+ TagRPB1

A

Ctl

α-RPB1 230
136

Dox
+
Aux

KO

T
E

KO

230
136
α-RBP3

D

Cytoplasmic
Fraction

Nuclear extract

NP-40 lysis
Nuclei isolation in
sucrose cushion

Extraction with 1X
NUN Buffer
(300 mM NaCl, 1M
Urea, 1% NP-40)

31
+Trizol

Nascent RNA
+Urea buffer
(8M Urea, 5%
SDS, 0.5M DTT)

Chromatin
pellet
fraction

Elongating Pol I, II, III

Total / Chromatin ratio

1000

4

14

6

tRNA northern blot
tRNA iMet
5.8S
5S

―150
―80

tRNAs

2

1
0.1

pre-SeC

81 71

64

100

1

pre-Ala

pre-Thr

pre-MYC

225

133

10

F

Pol III

MYC

pre-PGK

pre-PPIA

Pol II

PPIA

45S

Pol I

PGK

E

Total/Chromatin Ctl
Total/Chromatin DA

―50
EtBr staining
0.5 μg Nascent RNA
correspond to 12.5 μg total

Figure S2

Nuclear
extracts (NUN)

B
Pol II
αRPB1
< endo RPB1-P (IIO)
< endo RPB1 (IIA)
< Flag-RPB1-ΔCTD (IIB)

230

α-RPB1 199

Ctl

Dox D+A

αRPB2
αRPB3
Pol I

137
199

α-Flag

Dox D+A

#7
#12
#19
#7
#12
#19
#7
#12
#19

Ctl

#7
#12
#19
#7
#12
#19
#7
#12
#19

A

Chromatin
pellets

αRPA194
Pol III
αRPC53

137

C
NO serum

Dox or ddH2O (ctl)
6h
12h

Aux

20% FCS
2h
RNA: 0

Serum starvation

30’

60’

120’

Relative levels

D
FOS mRNA
Ctl
*
DA

0.003
0.002

*

0.001

0.06

JUN mRNA

0.04

*

*

0.02

*

*
0
0

60
120
Time (min)

*

0.04

0.02 *

0

MYC mRNA

0.06

*

*

*

0
0

60
120
Time (min)

0

60
120
Time (min)

E
330
320
310
300
50
40
30
20
10
0

Serum response of protein coding genes induced >3-fold in Ctl
condition

DA

ERRFI1

RGS16

NR4A1

RHOB

ADAMTS1

FAM43A

FOS

ARC

CYR61

TRIB1

ID3

ID1

RGS2

ATF3

BTG2

NR4A3

DUSP1

NR4A2

EGR3

JUNB

FOSB

EGR1

Ctl

Figure S3
DA up only

DA down only

DRB

100

300

50

150

0

0

DA

(371 total)
35 up
11 down

1
46 8
25

(290 total)
1 up
12 up
15 down

8 up

tRNA

7Ctl
7DA
19Ctl
19DA

tRNA

2kb

450

2kb

150

-2kb

DRB/DA-sensitive tRNA genes
(>1.5-fold change with FDR <0.05)

-2kb

B

A

Pol II transcripts

D

C
RPC62 (Pol III) ChIP
Clone #7
Clone #19
DA & DRB
Up

15 kb
50
40
30

DRB
Up

20
10

DRB
Down

Pol III ChIP
Nascent RNA
Pol II ChIP
Nascent RNA
from Werner &
Ruthenburg (2015)

#7 & #19

DA

[0-70]

#7

[0-400]

#19

[0-400]

#7

[0-15]

#19

[0-15]
1169

Mock #1
Mock #2
DRB #1
DRB #2
Refseq

-2kb
2kb -2kb
2kb
tRNA
tRNA

Ctl

tRNA

0

Figure S4
Nuclear
extracts

Chromatin
pellets

3
2

ns

*
*

Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA

1

Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA
Ctl
DA

C

Pre-tRNA levels

4

*

DMSO Ctl
DMSO DA
LDC Ctl
LDC DA

ns
ns

*
*
ns

0

Ratio DA/Ctl
*

3

Fold-difference

B

A

DMSO
LDC

2
1

*

* *

0

IIO
IIA
IIB

αRPB1
αRPB2

4
3

ns

*
*

2

DMSO Ctl
DMSO DA
Trip Ctl
Trip DA

ns
ns
ns

*
*

1

E

Pre-tRNA levels

ns
0

G

Pol III

Total
EU labelled

2
1.5
1
0.5
0

Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA Ctl DA
5S

VT1-1

7SK

Type I Type II

Ctl
DA
Fit Ctl
Fit DA

0.5
0
0

* *

1

*

0

EU labelled RNA
28-fold

1.5
42-fold

1

79-fold

0.5
0

AV
#7
#12
#19

28-fold

1
0.5
0

Ctl DA Ctl DA
Thr

Ctl DA Ctl DA

Pre-Thr

Thr

Pre-Thr

Type III

15 30 45
Time (min)

K

Pre-tRNA half-life

Pre-Thr Decay

1

2

2

1.5

Y3

J

1.5
% initial levels

Y1

30
Half-Life (min)

I

U6

2

DMSO
Trip

H

Total RNA

22
17
18 18

20
10
0

88

Ctl
DA

Fold-difference

Relative levels

2.5

Relative levels

F

Ratio DA/Ctl
*

3

Fold-difference

D

αRPB3

Ratio DA/Ctl-like
4
3

DMSO
CHX

ns
ns

2
ns

1
0

Figure S5
B

22h

C

DA

RNA

Aux
12h

2h

mRNA levels
* 500

1.5

siCtl

Dox or
ddH2O

siRNA
trsfx

Ctl

Relative levels

A

siMyc

1

*

0.5

250

0

0
MYC

E

D
DMSO Aux
Rapa

Before
Rapa
After

11h

F

Pre-Thr levels

0.0015
Relative levels

2h

1h

*
*

0.001
*

3
2
1

Pre-SeC levels
*

0.0008
0.0006

0.02

*

DMSO
Rapa before
Rapa after

0

Pre-Ala levels

0.03

*

0.0004

0.0005

0.01

0

0
0

1h
RNA

30 60 90 120

OsTIR1

Ratio DA/Ctl

4
Fold-difference

Dox or
ddH2O (Ctl)
DMSO

*

0.0002

*

*

*

0
0

30

60

*

*

90 120

Time following serum addition (min)

0

30 60 90 120

Ctl
DA

Figure S6
A

10 kb
MIR
Pol III ChIP
Nascent RNA

#7 & #19
#7
#19

Pol II ChIP

Ctl

DA

[0-1243]
[0-1243]

#7

[0-35]

#19

[0-35]

Mock #1
Nascent RNA
from Werner &
Ruthenburg (2015)

[0-50]

1737

Mock #2
DRB #1
DRB #2

0

Refseq
tRNA

B

C
HCT-116
EGFP + myc-ΔN-TCF4

Local Pol II factors:
POLR2A (Pol II)
GF2F1 (TFIIF)
TAF1 & TAF7 (TFIID)
CCNT2 (P-TEFb)
Examples of TFs:
TCF4, SRF, CREB, STAT5,
RXRA, HSF1, CEBPβ & δ,
ATF3, NF-κB, NANOG,
REST, HNF4α, MEF2C

D
Whole cell extracts
EGFP
EGFP Myc-ΔN-TCF4
1 2 3 1 2 3
967346-

α-Myc

0%
AGC
CGC
TGC
ACG
CCG
CCT
TCG
TCT
GTT
GTC
GCA
CTG
TTG
CTC
TTC
CCC
GCC
TCC
GTG
AAT
TAT
eM CAT
iM CAT
AAG
CAA
CAG
TAA
TAG
CTT
TTT
GAA
AGG
CGG
TGG
TCA
ACT
AGA
CGA
GCT
TGA
AGT
CGT
GGC
TGT
CCA
ATA
GTA
AAC
CAC
TAC
A

R

25%
1/4

NDC Q

E

G

H I

L

K F

P

U

S

T

W Y

0/10
0/4

0/4
0/1

0/1

0/9

0/1

1/5
2/11

1/8

2/5

2/6

1/3

1/3

2/7

1/4

50%

0/15
1/12
1/8
0/8
0/4
0/5

0/9
0/5

1/5
0/7
0/11
1/10
0/9
0/4
0/8
0/10
0/4
1/8

0/3
0/18
0/7
1/21
1/16

2/26

1/2
2/3
5/8

4/6

3/5

5/7

75%

0/5

0/4
0/9

Figure S7
% expressed tRNA isodecoders upregulated in DRB (FDR <0.05)

100%

V

