bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

LncRNA-dependent nuclear stress bodies promote intron retention through SR
protein phosphorylation

Kensuke Ninomiya1, Shungo Adachi2, Tohru Natsume2, Junichi Iwakiri3, Goro Terai3,
Kiyoshi Asai3, and Tetsuro Hirose1,4

1

Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

2

Molecular Profiling Research Center, National Institute for Advanced Industrial Science

and Technology (AIST), 135-0064, Koto-Ku, Tokyo, Japan.
3

Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, 277-8562, Japan.

4

Corresponding author: Tetsuro Hirose, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido

University, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan. Phone: +81-11-70-6-5071, Fax +81-11-706-7540,
e-mail: hirose@igm.hokudai.ac.jp

Running title: Function of nuclear stress bodies

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
A number of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are induced in response to specific
stresses to construct membrane-less nuclear bodies; however, their function remains
poorly understood. Here, we report the role of nuclear stress bodies (nSBs) formed on
highly repetitive satellite III (HSATIII) lncRNAs derived from primate-specific satellite III
repeats upon thermal stress exposure. A transcriptomic analysis revealed that depletion
of HSATIII lncRNAs, resulting in elimination of nSBs, promoted splicing of 533 retained
introns during thermal stress recovery. A HSATIII-Comprehensive identification of
RNA-binding proteins by mass spectrometry (ChIRP-MS) analysis identified multiple
splicing factors in nSBs, including serine and arginine-rich pre-mRNA splicing factors
(SRSFs), the phosphorylation states of which affect splicing patterns. SRSFs are rapidly
dephosphorylated upon thermal stress exposure. During stress recovery, CDC like
kinase 1 (CLK1) was recruited to nSBs and accelerated the re-phosphorylation of
SRSF9, thereby promoting target intron retention. Our findings suggest that
HSATIII-dependent nSBs serve as a conditional platform for phosphorylation of SRSFs
by CLK1 to promote the rapid adaptation of gene expression through intron retention
following thermal stress exposure.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Keywords: Noncoding RNA/nuclear stress bodies/intron retention/splicing factors/
phosphorylation

Introduction
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have recently been recognized as fundamental
regulators of gene expression, but their mechanisms of action remain largely unknown.
Among the tens of thousands of human lncRNAs, a subset of architectural RNAs
(arcRNAs) function as structural scaffolds of membrane-less subnuclear organelles or
nuclear bodies (NBs) (Chujo, Yamazaki et al., 2016). NBs are usually located in
inter-chromatin spaces in the highly organized nucleus and consist of specific factors
that function in various nuclear processes (Banani, Lee et al., 2017). ArcRNAs
sequestrate sets of specific RNA-binding proteins to initiate building of specific NBs
near transcription sites (Chujo et al., 2016, Clemson, Hutchinson et al., 2009). Nuclear
stress bodies (nSBs) were primarily reported 30 years ago (Mahl, Lutz et al., 1989) as
primate-specific NBs that respond to thermal and chemical stresses. The assembly of
nSBs is initiated alongside HSF1-dependent transcription of the primate-specific highly
repetitive satellite III (HSATIII) lncRNA (Jolly, Usson et al., 1999) and heat
shock-induced HSF1 aggregation (Jolly, Morimoto et al., 1997). HSATIII lncRNAs are
transcribed from pericentromeric HSATIII repeated arrays on several human
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

chromosomes (Denegri, Moralli et al., 2002, Jolly, Konecny et al., 2002). These arrays
are usually located in heterochromatinic regions that are transcriptionally silent;
however, upon exposure to thermal stress, they are rapidly euchromatinized and
produce HSATIII lncRNAs (Biamonti & Vourc'h, 2010). HSATIII lncRNAs are retained on
chromosomes near their own transcription sites for several hours, even after stress
removal, and recruit various RNA-binding proteins, including SAFB, HNRNPM, SRSF1,
SRSF7, and SRSF9 (Denegri, Chiodi et al., 2001, Metz, Soret et al., 2004, Weighardt,
Cobianchi et al., 1999), as well as specific chromatin-remodeling factors (Hussong,
Kaehler et al., 2017, Kawaguchi, Tanigawa et al., 2015) and transcription factors (Jolly,
Metz et al., 2004), which results in the assembly of nSBs.
SRSF1, SRSF7, and SRSF9 are serine and arginine-rich (SR) pre-mRNA splicing
factors (SRSFs) that contain one or two RNA recognition motifs and a signature RS
domain, an intrinsically disordered stretch of multiple SR (in part, SP or SK) dipeptides,
near the C-terminus (Long & Caceres, 2009, Shepard & Hertel, 2009). The RS domain
is required for protein-protein interactions with other SRSFs or RS domain-harboring
proteins (Xiao & Manley, 1997). In addition, the functions of SRSFs in pre-mRNA
splicing and mRNA export are modulated through phosphorylation of the RS domain
(Cao, Jamison et al., 1997). Notably, the phosphorylation state of the RS domain is

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

dynamically changed in response to environmental transitions, such as thermal stress
or circadian changes in body temperature (Guil & Caceres, 2007, Preussner,
Goldammer et al., 2017). Upon exposure to thermal stress, protein phosphatase 1 is
activated to de-phosphorylate the RS domains of SR proteins, leading to modulation of
a wide variety of pre-mRNA splicing events (Shi & Manley, 2007). Concomitantly,
CDC2-like kinases 1 and 4 (CLK1 and CLK4), members of the nuclear SR protein
kinase family, are induced upon thermal stress exposure to promote re-phosphorylation
of SRSFs after stress removal (Ninomiya, Kataoka et al., 2011). These reports raise the
intriguing possibility that nSBs are involved in the regulatory network of thermal
stress-responsive pre-mRNA splicing by concentrating or sequestering SRSFs;
however, the function of nSBs remains poorly investigated.
Here, we performed a genome-wide transcriptomic analysis of HeLa cells
following knockdown of HSATIII lncRNAs to deplete nSBs, and found that HSATIII
mainly promotes intron retention by hundreds of genes. Further investigation revealed
that nSBs accelerate intron retention specifically during recovery from thermal stress.
We also explored the protein composition of nSBs using chromatin isolation by
Comprehensive identification of RNA-binding proteins by mass spectrometry
(ChIRP-MS) and an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) of HSATIII lncRNA as a stable

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

core component of nSBs. This analysis identified 141 proteins as putative nSB
components in HeLa cells. Among them, we focused on CLK1, a SR protein kinase that
is specifically recruited to nSBs during thermal recovery to re-phosphorylate SRSFs.
Notably, we found that nSBs accelerate the rate of re-phosphorylation of SRSFs after
stress removal. Phosphorylated SRSFs then promote retention of the HSATIII target
introns. Based on our findings, we propose that nSBs serve as a platform to control the
temperature-dependent phosphorylation states of selected SRSFs to regulate intron
retention by hundreds of pre-mRNAs. The transcriptomic and subcellular proteomic
analyses described here unveil the molecular events occurring in nSBs, which have
remained enigmatic for the 30 years since their discovery.

Results
HSATIII lncRNAs facilitate intron retention in hundreds of mRNAs during stress
recovery
To investigate the role of nSBs in stress-dependent gene expression, particularly
splicing regulation, we analyzed global transcriptomic changes in HSATIII-depleted
HeLa cells. Defective nSB formation was confirmed in HSATIII ASO-treated (HSATIII)
cells exposed to thermal stress at 42C for 2 h and recovery at 37C for 1 h (Figure 1A).

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Subsequently, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was used to compare the transcriptomes of
control and HSATIII cells. To efficiently detect changes in splicing patterns, nuclear
poly(A)+ RNAs were prepared from the isolated nuclei of control and HSATIII cells
during the thermal stress recovery phase, and the expression levels of each annotated
exon and intron were compared. The expression levels of 533 introns in 434 genes and
3 exons in 3 genes were significantly decreased upon HSATIII knockdown
(HSATIII/control<0.5) (Figure 1C and 1D). In addition, the expression levels of 17
introns in 17 genes and 4 exons in 4 genes were significantly increased upon HSATIII
knockdown (HSATIII/control>2) (Figure 1C and 1D). For example, HSATIII knockdown
reduced the expression levels of introns 2 and 3 of TAF1D (Figure 1E, blue bars), and
decreased and increased the expression levels of intron 2 (blue bar) and exon 3 (red
bar) of DNAJB9, respectively (Figure 1F). These findings suggest that HSATIII lncRNAs
mainly promote intron retention of pre-mRNAs in thermally stressed cells.
We noticed that the sizes of the exons adjacent to HSATIII-targeted introns tended
to be longer than the average size of exons (Figure 1G, see also Figure EV4F). To avoid
sampling bias caused by the first and the last exons, which tend to be longer than
internal exons, we compared the sizes of the exons adjacent to 399 HSATIII-targeted
internal introns with those adjacent to 175,923 whole annotated human internal introns.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Overall, 8.8% of the exons upstream and 10.3% of the exons downstream of
HSATIII-targeted introns were longer than 1 kb (Figure 1G). By contrast, only 0.7% of
exons adjacent to the whole annotated internal introns were longer than 1 kb,
confirming that the exons adjacent to HSATIII-targeted introns tended to be longer than
the average exon size.
A gene ontology analysis of 434 genes in which intron retention was promoted by
HSATIII revealed a significant enrichment (FDR<0.05) of genes associated with multiple
functions, including DNA/RNA metabolism, biosynthesis, stress response, and cell cycle
(Table EV1). Only 57 and 30 of the 533 HSATIII-targeted introns were previously
identified as retained introns (also referred to as detained introns) in the human
ENCODE database and a human glioblastoma cell line, respectively (Table EV2,
discussed later) (Boutz, Bhutkar et al., 2015, Braun, Stanciu et al., 2017).

HSATIII lncRNAs promote intron retention during thermal stress recovery
To validate the RNA-seq data, we indiscriminately selected 11 introns that were
affected by HSATIII knockdown (10 down-regulated and 1 up-regulated; FPKM>0.5 in
the control) and used quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) to analyze their levels in total
RNAs from control and HSATIII cells. The levels of the intron-retaining pre-mRNAs

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

were examined under three conditions: normal (37C), thermal stress at 42C for 2 h,
and thermal stress at 42C for 2 h followed by recovery at 37C for 1 h (Figure 2A). For
all down-regulated introns examined, the levels of intron retention were comparable in
control and HSATIII cells during thermal stress, but were significantly lower in
HSATIII cells than in control cells during the recovery phase (Figure 2A, upper panel).
Notably, we recognized two distinct classes of intron retention during temperature
transition: class 1 introns were retained at substantial levels under normal conditions,
excised during thermal stress, and re-accumulated during stress recovery; and class 2
introns were mostly excised under normal and thermal stress conditions, but retained
during stress recovery (Figure 2A). Intron 1 of PFKP was an exceptional up-regulated
intron that was retained during stress recovery of HSATIII cells (Figure 2A). A
qRT-PCR analysis of subcellularly fractionated nuclear and cytoplasmic RNAs
confirmed that all of the intron-retaining pre-mRNAs mentioned above were retained in
the nucleus (Figure 2B), suggesting that mRNA export is prevented by the intron
retention. In contrast to the marked effect on the levels of intron-retaining pre-mRNAs,
HSATIII knockdown scarcely affected the levels of the cognate intron-removed (spliced)
mRNAs. As exceptions, the levels of the spliced DNAJB9, CLK1, and PFKP mRNAs
were significantly higher (CLK1, DNAJB9) or lower (PFKP) in HSATIII cells than in

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

control cells (Figure 2A, lower panel).
Next, the levels of the intron-retaining pre-mRNAs and the spliced mRNAs were
measured in newly synthesized nascent RNA pools captured by pulse-labeled RNAs
with ethinyl uridine (see Figure 2C and STAR methods). As shown in Figure 2D and 2E,
with the exception of PFKP, the levels of the intron-retaining pre-mRNAs were lower in
HSATIII cells than in control cells. By contrast, with the exceptions of EP400 and PFKP,
the levels of the spliced mRNAs were significantly higher in HSATIII cells than in
control cells. Overall, these data suggest that HSATIII promotes intron retention by
suppressing splicing of newly synthesized transcripts.

HSATIII affects the kinetics of accumulation of intron-retaining pre-mRNAs during
thermal recovery
Among the retained introns regulated by HSATIII, a subpopulation of the CLK1
mRNA reportedly localizes in the nucleus as a partially unspliced pre-mRNA that retains
introns 3 and 4 (Figure 3A) (Duncan, Howell et al., 1995, Ninomiya et al., 2011).
Excision of retained introns is induced by thermal and osmotic stresses, neuronal
activity, and inhibition of CLK1 kinase activity to produce mature mRNAs (Mauger,
Lemoine et al., 2016, Ninomiya et al., 2011). We also detected another spliced isoform

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of the CLK1 mRNA produced by skipping of exon 4, which is committed to
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (Figure 3A). Consequently, we examined the effect of
HSATIII knockdown on thermal stress-responsive excision of the retained introns of the
CLK1 pre-mRNA at several time points using semi-quantitative RT-PCR. As reported
previously (Ninomiya et al., 2011), the retained introns were excised to form the mature
mRNA in both control and HSATIII cells after a 2 h thermal stress exposure (Figure 3B,
42C, 2 h). In control cells, the level of the intron 3 and 4-retaining CLK1 pre-mRNA was
restored within 1 h after stress removal (Figure 3B, lanes 6–10, and Figure 3C). Notably,
this process was markedly delayed in HSATIII cells, in which restoration of the original
level of the intron 3 and 4-retaining CLK1 pre-mRNA took longer than 4 h (Figure 3B,
lanes 1–5, and Figure 3C).
Like CLK1, TAF1D has two HSATIII target introns (Figure 1E) that border a
cassette-type exon 3 (Figure EV1A). Semi-quantitative RT-PCR confirmed that the
partially unspliced TAF1D pre-mRNA retaining introns 2 and 3 underwent splicing upon
thermal stress and was rapidly re-accumulated after stress removal in control cells
(Figure EV1B). However, this re-accumulation was markedly delayed in HSATIII cells
(Figure EV1B). In addition, we also examined the levels of the DNAJB9 mRNA, another
intron-retaining RNA that harbors a single HSATIII target intron (Figure EV1A), and

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

found that intron retention was detectable in control cells but not HSATIII cells (Figure
EV1B). We also confirmed that the thermal stress-responsive alternative splicing of the
HSP105 and TNRC6a mRNAs reported previously (Yamamoto, Furukawa et al., 2016,
Yasuda, Nakai et al., 1995) was barely affected by HSATIII knockdown (Figure EV1C),
indicating selectivity of target pre-mRNAs by HSATIII lncRNAs.
To further support the proposal that HSATIII lncRNAs promote intron retention, we
used a gain-of-function approach using a somatic hybrid Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)
cell line possessing human chromosome 9 (CHO (His9)) (Tanabe, Nakagawa et al.,
2000). Since HSATIII is primate-specific, these lncRNAs are only expressed from
human chromosome 9 in CHO (His9) cells upon thermal stress, and form nSB-like
granules with hamster SRSF1 (Figure 3D and 3E). A time course analysis of the splicing
pattern of the endogenous hamster Clk1 mRNA revealed that re-accumulation of the
intron-retaining pre-mRNA after stress removal was markedly faster in CHO (His9) cells
than in control CHO cells (Figure 3F and 3G). Notably, HSATIII knockdown abolished
the acceleration effect in CHO (His9) cells (Figure 3H). Taken together, these data
suggest that HSATIII lncRNAs are required and sufficient for acceleration of intron
retention of the CLK1 pre-mRNA during stress recovery, and this process was likely
acquired in primate species.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Multiple SRSFs and SR-related proteins interact with HSATIII in nSBs
To examine the molecular mechanism of intron retention by HSATIII lncRNAs, we
attempted to comprehensively identify the proteins associated with HSATIII, which likely
correspond to

nSB

components.

ChIRP was

employed

to

pull

down

the

ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes of HSATIII using a biotinylated ASO (Figure 4A).
Because HSATIII lncRNAs consist of multiple GGAAU repetitive sequences (Jarmuz,
Glotzbach et al., 2007, Valgardsdottir, Chiodi et al., 2005), HSATIII RNP complexes
could be efficiently captured by a single biotinylated HSATIII ASO consisting of four
tandem repeats of ATTCC. ChIRP was carried out using formaldehyde-crosslinked
HeLa cells that were treated at 42C for 2 h followed by recovery at 37C for 1 h. A
RT-PCR analysis revealed efficient (>10%) and specific precipitation of HSATIII with the
HSATIII ASO from thermally stressed cells (Figure 4B). As a negative control, neither
the NEAT1 nuclear lncRNA nor the GAPDH mRNA was precipitated with the HSATIII
ASO (Figure 4B). Silver staining of the coprecipitated proteins in a SDS-PAGE gel
identified multiple bands that were strongly detected in the stressed cells, but were only
detected as faint background signals in the control samples (Figure 4C). A liquid
chromatography mass spectrometry analysis revealed that 141 proteins, most of which

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

that have not yet been reported as nSB components, were specifically coprecipitated
with HSATIII lncRNAs from the stressed cells (Table EV3). Most of these proteins are
likely RNA-binding proteins that possess canonical RNA-binding domains. A gene
ontology analysis revealed significant enrichment of proteins functionally associated
with nuclear RNA processing, such as pre-mRNA splicing, 3’-end processing, and
export of mRNAs (Table 1). Notably, most SRSFs and HNRNPs, including known nSB
components (SAFB, SRSF1, SRSF7, SRSF9, and HNRNPM), were identified as major
components. In addition to SRSFs, non-classical SR proteins and RNA-binding
SR-related proteins, which harbor one or more clusters of SR and SP dipeptides, such
as TRA2A, TRA2B, U2AF35, U2AF65, LUC7L, SRRM1, BCLAF1, THRAP3, and
PPHLN1 (Castello, Fischer et al., 2012, Long & Caceres, 2009), were also identified
(Table EV3). Although the number of peptides was limited, the CLK1 SR protein kinase
was detected in the ChIRP fraction (described below). By contrast, some previously
reported nSB-localized proteins, such as HSF1, CBP, SWI/SNF components, and BRD4,
were undetectable in our ChIRP-MS analysis (Table EV3). The nSB localization of the
proteins identified above was confirmed by western blotting of the ChIRPed proteins
(Figure 4D) and/or immunofluorescence (Figure 4E). The SR-related TRA2B and
THRAP3 proteins interacted and colocalized with HSATIII in nSBs (Figure 4D and 4E).

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The transiently expressed PPHLN1 protein was also colocalized with HSATIII in nSBs
(Figure 4E). These results indicate that SR-related proteins, as well as SRSFs,
selectively interact with HSATIII in nSBs.

CLK1 is recruited to nSBs during thermal stress recovery
As described above, CLK1 was detected in the HSATIII-ChIRP fraction (Table
EV3). CLK1 is a nuclear SR protein kinase that phosphorylates and modulates the
activity of SRSFs in pre-mRNA splicing (Duncan, Stojdl et al., 1997), raising the
intriguing possibility that phosphorylation of SRSFs in nSBs is modulated by CLK1.
Consequently, we monitored its interaction with HSATIII by ChIRP at five time points
during temperature transitions from 37C to 42C for 1, 2, or 3 h, or 37C to 42C for 2 h
followed by recovery at 37C for 1 h. CLK1 was specifically coprecipitated with HSATIII
following recovery after 2 h exposure to thermal stress (Figure 5A). By contrast, CLK1
was poorly detected after thermal stress for 2 or 3 h without recovery at 37C (Figure
5A), suggesting that the temperature shift from 42C to 37C is required to recruit CLK1
onto HSATIII. The nSB components SRSF7 and SRSF9 interacted with HSATIII after a
2 h exposure to thermal stress alone (Figure 5A), suggesting that, unlike CLK1, they do
not require the subsequent temperature shift to 37C for this interaction.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Next, we examined the localization of CLK1 in HeLa cells following thermal stress
at 42C for 2 h and recovery at 37C for 1 h. We confirmed that transiently expressed
FLAG-CLK1 mimicked the behavior of endogenous CLK1 (Figure 5D left). An
immunofluorescence analysis revealed that FLAG-CLK1 predominantly localized in
nuclear speckles with SRSF2 under normal conditions (Figure EV2A). FLAG-CLK1 was
poorly detectable in nSBs after exposure to thermal stress for 2 h, but relocated to nSBs
after recovery at 37C (Figure 5B). These data indicate that the nSB localization of
CLK1 occurs during stress recovery and correlates with the interaction with HSATIII
lncRNAs.
To obtain mechanistic insights into the temperature-dependent recruitment of
CLK1 to nSBs, we used HSATIII-ChIRP to examine the interaction of various CLK1
mutants with nSBs during stress recovery (Figure 5C). The catalytically inactive CLK1
mutant, in which the ATP-binding pocket of the kinase domain was mutated by
replacement of lysine 191 with arginine (Flag-CLK1KR) (Colwill, Pawson et al., 1996),
interacted with HSATIII and localized to nSBs during stress recovery (Figure 5D, right,
and Figure EV2B and EV2C), indicating that the temperature-dependent recruitment of
CLK1 to nSBs does not require its catalytic activity. CLK1 interacts with substrate
proteins such as SRSFs and homo-dimerizes via its N-terminal intrinsically disordered

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

region (IDR) (Duncan et al., 1995, Keshwani, Hailey et al., 2015). In addition, the
C-terminal kinase domain phosphorylates the substrates (Bullock, Das et al., 2009).
The C-terminal truncated CLK1 mutant (FLAG-CLK1C in Figure 5C) localized to
nuclear speckles under both normal and stressed conditions, and relocated to nSBs
after stress removal (Figure EV2D and EV2E); however, the N-terminal truncated CLK1
mutant (FLAG-CLK1N in Figure 5C) was diffusely localized in the nucleoplasm and
located to neither nuclear speckles nor nSBs (Figure EV2F and EV2G). The CLK1N
mutant possessed a SV40 nuclear localization signal instead of the original NLS present
in the deleted N-terminal domain and was properly imported into the nucleus (Figure
EV2F–EV2H). CLK1C was coprecipitated with HSATIII much more efficiently under the
stress recovery condition than under the thermal stress condition, whereas CLK1N
was poorly precipitated under any condition (Figure 5E), indicating that the N-terminal
domain of CLK1 is necessary and sufficient for its temperature-dependent interaction
with HSATIII. We also examined whether SRSFs anchor CLK1 to nSBs.
SiRNA-mediated knockdown of SRSF9, one of the major nSB-localized SRSFs,
resulted in a significant reduction in the interaction of CLK1C with HSATIII (Figure 5F
and 5G), indicating that SRSF9 contributes to the recruitment of CLK1 at nSBs.
The amino acid sequences of the C-terminal kinase domains of CLK family

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

proteins (CLK1–4) are highly conserved. By contrast, the N-terminal IDRs are similar in
CLK1 and CLK4, but are only partly conserved between CLK1/4 and CLK2.
Consequently, we examined the involvement of the N-terminal IDRs of ubiquitously
expressed CLK2 and CLK4 in nSB recruitment. The N-terminal IDRs of CLK2 and CLK4
were coprecipitated with HSATIII by ChIRP and colocalized with HSATIII after 1 h
thermal stress recovery (Figure EV2I and EV2J), indicating that both proteins are able
to relocate to nSBs during stress recovery through their poorly conserved N-terminal
IDRs.

nSBs are platforms for the rapid re-phosphorylation of SRSFs by CLK1 during
thermal recovery
Next, we examined the subnuclear localization of CLK1 and SRSFs during
thermal stress and recovery. First, we confirmed that SRSF1 and SRSF9 colocalized
with HSATIII in nSBs after 2 h thermal stress exposure and after stress removal (Figure
6A and Figure EV3A), which is consistent with the ChIRP results (Figure 5A). We also
confirmed that the SRSF9 foci were diminished and diffused throughout the
nucleoplasm in HSATIII cells (Figure EV3B), and did not overlap with SRSF-rich
nuclear speckles (Figure 6B). Moreover, we confirmed colocalization of CLK1 and

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SRSF9

in

nSBs

during

stress

recovery

(Figure

6C).

SRSFs

are

rapidly

de-phosphorylated upon thermal stress (Shi & Manley, 2007); therefore, it is possible
that CLK1 is recruited to nSBs during stress recovery to promote re-phosphorylation of
SRSFs. To analyze the phosphorylation states of SRSFs after thermal stress and
recovery, we examined SRSF9, which possesses a short RS domain with four SRs and
three

SPs.

Western

blotting

followed

by

Phos-tag

SDS-PAGE

(Kinoshita,

Kinoshita-Kikuta et al., 2008) revealed multiple bands corresponding to different
phosphorylation states of SRSF9 (Figure 6F). Under normal conditions (37C), five
discrete SRSF9 bands were detected (Figure 6F, lane 1). After thermal stress at 42C
for 2 h (Figure 6F, lane 3), two fast migrating bands (likely hypo-phosphorylated SRSF9)
appeared and the upper bands (likely hyper-phosphorylated SRSF9) were diminished
(Figure 6F, indicated by arrowheads and arrows, respectively). After recovery at 37C
for 1 h, the band pattern was mostly restored to its original state (Figure 6F, lane 4);
however, this restoration was abolished by administration of the CLK1 inhibitor
KH-CB19 (Fedorov, Huber et al., 2011) at the beginning of the stress recovery phase
(Figure 6D and 6F, lane 5). These findings suggest that the observed band shift to lower
positions after heat stress and subsequent restoration after stress removal were caused
by thermal stress-induced de-phosphorylation and CLK1-dependent re-phosphorylation

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of SRSF9, respectively. To determine whether nSBs affect CLK1-dependent
re-phosphorylation of SRSF9, we examined the Phos-tag band pattern of SRSF9 in
HSATIII and control cells (Figure 6E). Restoration of the band pattern of SRSF9 after
stress removal was markedly delayed in HSATIII cells (Figure 6F, right). The
hyper-phosphorylated band (Figure 6F, arrow a) was mostly restored after 1 h recovery
in control cells, but this restoration was delayed until 4 h after stress removal in
HSATIII cells. In addition, the hypo-phosphorylated bands (Figure 6F, arrowheads c
and d) were rapidly diminished after 1 h recovery in control cells but this process was
delayed in HSATIII cells.
To confirm that CLK1-dependent re-phosphorylation of SRSF9 occurs within nSBs,
we performed Phos-tag western blotting followed by HSATIII-ChIRP analyses of HeLa
cells exposed to control conditions (37C), 42C for 2 h, or 42C for 2 h followed by
recovery for 1 h at 37C (Figure 6G and 6H). In the HSATIII-ChIRP fractions,
de-phosphorylated SRSF9 (the lower band marked by arrowhead d) was diminished
and phosphorylated SRSF9 (marked by arrow a) was markedly increased during the 1 h
recovery (Figure 6H, lanes 2, 4, 6, and 8). Notably, these changes were partially
inhibited in the presence of KH-CB19 (Figure 6H, lane 8). Western blot analyses of the
HSATIII-ChIRP samples revealed that the amount of coprecipitated SRSF9 did not

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

change markedly during the 1 h recovery, regardless of the presence or absence of
KH-CB19 (Figure EV3C). Taken together, these data suggest that CLK1 recruited
during stress recovery re-phosphorylates SRSF9 within nSBs. Although differentially
phosphorylated bands were not clearly separated on the Phos-tag gel, stress-induced
mobility shifts of nSB-localized SRSF1 and SRSF7 were restored after stress removal in
a

CLK1-dependent

manner

(Figure

EV3D),

suggesting

that

CLK1

rapidly

re-phosphorylates various SRSFs, and probably SR-related proteins, in nSBs during
stress recovery.

CLK1-dependent phosphorylation of SRSF9 in nSBs underlies the promotion of
intron retention during stress recovery
The findings described above raised the intriguing possibility that recruitment of
CLK1 to nSBs for rapid re-phosphorylation of SRSFs promotes intron retention of
mRNAs during thermal stress recovery. To address this possibility, we investigated the
effect of SRSF knockdown on intron retention. Depletion of SRSF7 or SRSF9 barely
affected nSB integrity; however, depletion of SRSF1 remarkably disrupted nSBs (Figure
EV4A and EV4B), such that we were unable to investigate the effect of SRSF1 on
nSB-dependent splicing regulation. Consequently, we investigated the effect of SRSF9

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

knockdown on intron retention of HSATIII target mRNAs using newly synthesized
nascent RNA pools (Figure 7A). With the exception of PFKP, SRSF9 knockdown
reduced the levels of the intron-retaining mRNAs (Figure 7A) and increased the levels
of the spliced forms of the mRNAs (Figure 7B). These results suggest that SRSF9
suppresses pre-mRNA splicing to promote HSATIII-dependent intron retention. RT-PCR
analyses revealed that SRSF9 depletion diminished the prominent accumulation of the
CLK1 and TAF1D mRNAs retaining two sequential introns after 1 h recovery from
thermal stress (Figure 7C and 7D). Consistently, publicly available eCLIP data showed
that multiple eCLIP tags of SRSF9 mapped to the exons adjacent to the retained introns
of the CLK1 and TAF1D mRNAs in HepG2 cells (Figure EV4C).
Next, we examined the possibility that CLK1-dependent re-phosphorylation of
SRSF9 in nSBs is responsible for the regulation of intron retention. To investigate its
requirement for the changes in intron retention after stress removal, CLK1 kinase
activity was impeded by KH-CB19 during thermal stress recovery (Figure 7E and 7F).
HSATIII-dependent intron retention (and the opposite effect on the PFKP mRNA) was
impaired in the presence of KH-CB19 (EP400 was an exception), which supports our
hypothesis that CLK1-dependent re-phosphorylation of SRSFs is required for the
promotion of intron retention. To directly investigate the role of phosphorylation of

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SRSF9 in splicing regulation, we compared the effects of wild-type SRSF9 (SRSF9-WT)
and its de-phosphorylated mutant (SRSF9-mut), in which all SP and SR dipeptides were
replaced by AP and AR, respectively (Figure 7G and Figure EV4D), on splicing of the
TAF1D and DNAJB9 splicing reporter minigenes. Western blot analyses of a Phos-tag
gel detected multiple FLAG-SRSF9-WT protein bands that shifted to lower hypo- or
de-phosphorylated bands after thermal stress (Figure 7G). By contrast, the SRSF9-mut
was detected as a single band with the same mobility as the thermal stress-induced
de-phosphorylated WT protein, even at 37C (Figure 7G, arrowhead), and was no
longer shifted by thermal stress (Figure 7G), indicating that the SRSF9-mut mimics
de-phosphorylated SRSF9.
To replace endogenous SRSF9 with FLAG-SRSF9-WT or the de-phosphorylated
mutant, HeLa cells were co-transfected with SRSF9 siRNA and siRNA-resistant
FLAG-SRSF9 expression plasmids (Figure EV4E). These cells were also transfected
with splicing reporter TAF1D and DNAJB9 plasmids, and the splicing patterns were
examined after exposure to thermal stress for 2 h followed by recovery for 1 h (Figure
7H and 7I). SRSF9-WT suppressed splicing of the reporter RNAs, whereas SRSF9-mut
did not, suggesting that phosphorylation of the RS domain of SRSF9 is required to
promote intron retention of the TAF1D and DNAJB9 mRNAs by suppressing splicing.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Taken together, these findings suggest that the re-phosphorylation of the RS domain of
SRSF9 by CLK1 in nSBs promotes intron retention of target mRNAs during thermal
stress recovery.

Discussion
In this study, next-generation sequencing-based screening of the regulatory
targets of nSBs identified a major molecular function of nSBs in promoting intron
retention by more than 400 mRNAs during thermal stress recovery. In recent years, a
number of studies have examined conditional intron retention in the nucleus and its
biological functions, such as regulation of stress responses, the cell cycle, neuronal
activity, learning and memory, spermiogenesis, and tumor growth (Boutz et al., 2015,
Braun et al., 2017, Dominguez, Tsai et al., 2016, Gill, Park et al., 2017, Mauger et al.,
2016, Naro, Jolly et al., 2017). Thus, nuclear intron retention is being accepted as a
regulatory mechanism that fine tunes gene expression under various biological
conditions. Here, we found that nSBs constructed with HSATIII arcRNA scaffolds are
novel molecular machineries that regulate nuclear intron retention during thermal stress
recovery. Comparison of the 533 retained HSATIII-targeted introns identified here with
the 3968 retained introns previously reported in the U87 human glioblastoma cell line

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

revealed an overlap of only 30 introns (Table EV2). It is possible that different introns are
selected for retention under different physiological conditions, presumably through the
use of distinct regulatory factors.
We confirmed that SRSF9 promotes intron retention of HSATIII-targeted
pre-mRNAs (Figure 7A). SRSFs are generally considered to promote splicing in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner; however, SRSF9 is a repressor of 3’ splice site
utilization (Simard & Chabot, 2002). In this case, SRSF9 suppresses splicing by
recognizing a specific intronic CE9 element; however, no sequence motif similar to CE9
was found in the HSATIII-dependent retained introns that we identified. According to the
public eCLIP database, multiple peaks of SRSF9 eCLIP tags were detectable in the
HSATIII-targeted retained introns, as well as adjacent upstream and downstream
exons; however, no significant enrichment of SRSF9 eCLIP tags compared with the
average numbers in general introns and exons was detected (Figure EV4F), suggesting
that SRSF9 is required but not sufficient for HSATIII-dependent intron retention.
Consistent with previous reports (Boutz et al., 2015, Ninomiya et al., 2011), we
found that the catalytic activity of CLK1 is required for HSATIII-dependent intron
retention. We also found that CLK1 phosphorylates SRSF9 during thermal stress
recovery; this phosphorylation was detected in the HSATIII-ChIRP fraction, suggesting

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

that it occurs within nSBs. Furthermore, the results of a splicing reporter assay using
model constructs for intron retention support the proposal that CLK1-dependent
phosphorylation of the serine residues of SR/SP repeats in SRSF9 promotes intron
retention (Figure 7G–I). Among the tested introns, the retention of PFKP intron 1 was
exceptionally down-regulated by HSATIII, SRSF9, and the catalytic activity of CLK1,
suggesting that a common molecular mechanism can have opposing effects on a minor
population of target introns. Intron retention of EP400 moderately required SRSF9 but
not CLK1 activity (Figure 7A and 7F), suggesting the existence of a CLK1-independent
mechanism to promote intron retention. We propose a model of nSB function (Figure
7J) in which SRSFs are globally de-phosphorylated upon thermal stress at 42C (Shin,
Feng et al., 2004), and HSATIII arcRNAs are simultaneously synthesized to form nSBs
that sequestrate the de-phosphorylated SRSFs. Under this condition, the retention of
class 1 introns is canceled to produce mature mRNAs. Following recovery to normal
conditions (37C), CLK1 is recruited to nSBs, where it re-phosphorylates the
sequestrated SRSFs, which then act to rapidly promote retention of class 1 and 2
introns within 1 h (Figure 7J). These intron retention events may occur outside of nSBs
since the intron-retaining pre-mRNAs were barely detected in the HSATIII-ChIRP
fraction. Therefore, the re-phosphorylated SRSFs likely relocate from nSBs to the

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

nucleoplasm, which is analogous to the mechanism of mobilization of SRSFs from
nuclear speckles to the nucleoplasm through phosphorylation by CLK1 (Colwill et al.,
1996). Consequently, we argue that nSBs act as a platform for phosphorylation of
sequestrated SRSFs by CLK1 to promote intron retention during thermal stress
recovery.
Recruitment of CLK1 to nSBs in response to a temperature change from 42C to
37C is considered a critical step for rapid re-phosphorylation of SRSFs within nSBs.
This temperature-sensitive recruitment of CLK1 requires its N-terminal IDR. CLK family
kinases commonly contain long flexible N-terminal IDRs that resemble the RS domains
of SRSFs. The N-terminal IDR of CLK1 contacts both the kinase domain and the RS
domain of SRSF1 to induce hyper-phosphorylation of SRSF1 (Aubol, Plocinik et al.,
2014). We observed that recruitment of CLK1 to nSBs requires the presence of SRSF9,
suggesting that the analogous interaction between the CLK1 N-terminal IDR and
SRSF9 is responsible for recruitment of CLK1 to nSBs. The mechanism by which the
CLK1 N-terminal IDR senses the temperature change remains elusive. It is possible that
thermal stress induces a structural change in the N-terminal IDR of CLK1 that interferes
with its contact with the RS domains of SRSF9. The N-terminal IDRs of CLK2 and CLK4
also associate with nSBs in a similar temperature-sensitive manner, suggesting that

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

other CLK family kinases contribute to the phosphorylation of SRSFs in nSBs. The
amino acid sequences of the N-terminal IDRs are poorly conserved among CLK family
kinases, suggesting that short stretches and/or the compositional property of amino
acids among the IDRs might be responsible for the temperature-sensitive recruitment of
CLKs to nSBs. CLKs are localized in nuclear speckles at normal temperatures, where
they phosphorylate SRSFs and SR-related proteins (Colwill et al., 1996, Gui, Lane et al.,
1994). The localization of CLK1 to nuclear speckles is maintained under thermal stress,
suggesting that the mechanism used to localize CLK1 to nSBs differs from that used for
nuclear speckle localization. This variation may be due to the different compositions of
SRSFs in nSBs and nuclear speckles.
In addition to classical SRSFs, we identified other SR-related proteins, including
TRA2B and BCLAF1/THRAP3, that also have SR/SP dipeptides as potential sites of
phosphorylation by CLKs (Aubol, Plocinik et al., 2013). These SR-related proteins
reportedly form a complex with SRSF1, SRSF9, SAFB, and CLKs (Nayler, Stratling et
al., 1998, Tai, Geisterfer et al., 2003), raising the possibility that multiple SR and
SR-related proteins interact through the IDRs to form the massive membrane-less
structure of nSBs, where they are collectively re-phosphorylated by CLKs. The effect of
HSATIII on the intron retention of CLK1 and TAF1D pre-mRNAs was limited to within 4 h

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

after stress removal (Figure 3B, 3C, and Figure EV1B). This time course of intron
retention correlates with that of SRSF9 re-phosphorylation (Figure 6F). It is likely that
nSBs function to rapidly fix the proper levels of intron-retaining pre-mRNA in the nucleus
during stress recovery. In addition to the role of intron retention as a regulatory
mechanism for fine tuning gene expression, it was recently reported that a subset of
introns act as ncRNAs that trap the spliceosome and decrease global splicing upon
nutrient depletion in yeast (Morgan, Fink et al., 2019, Parenteau, Maignon et al., 2019).
In addition, a role of introns in prevention of R-loop and DNA damage accumulation has
also been reported (Bonnet, Grosso et al., 2017). Further investigations will reveal the
biological significance of HSATIII-dependent intron retention to cellular and
physiological events. Multiple proteins associated with other RNA processing events,
including 3’-end processing, nuclear export, stability control, and modification of mRNAs
(Table 1 and Table EV3), are found in nSBs, suggesting the involvement of nSBs in
controlling mRNA processing events other than splicing during thermal stress and
recovery.

Further

elucidation

of

the

cellular

and

physiological

roles

of

HSATIII-dependent nSBs will give important clues to understand the significance of the
satellite repeat expansion that specifically occurs in primate genomes.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture
HeLa cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM)
(Nacalai Tesque) supplemented with antibiotics (100 U/ml streptomycin and 100 g/ml
penicillin; Sigma) and 10% fetal calf serum (Sigma) at 37C in 5% CO2. CHO cells were
cultured in DMEM/Ham’s F-12 medium (Nacalai Tesque). CHO (His9) cells (JCRB Cell
Bank) were grown in medium containing 10 mM L-histidinol (Sigma) to maintain human
chromosome 9, and cultured in normal medium from the day before the analysis. For
thermal stress induction, the cells were incubated at 42C in an incubator with 5% CO2.

Plasmid construction
To construct plasmids expressing FLAG-tagged full-length and partial proteins,
each DNA fragment was amplified from human cDNA by PCR and introduced in-frame
into the pcDNA5/FRT/TO-FLAG vector. The FLAG-SRSF9 expression plasmid
(pcDNA3-FLAG-SRSF9) was kindly provided by Dr. Kataoka (Univ. Tokyo). Inverted
PCR-based mutagenesis was used to construct plasmids expressing the CLK1 KR
mutant or the SRSF9 mutant and its siRNA-resistant mutants. To construct the splicing
reporter plasmids, TAF1D and DNAJB9 intron-containing DNA fragments were amplified

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

by PCR from human genomic DNA and introduced in-frame into the pEGFP-C1 vector.

ChIRP
ChIRP was performed as described previously (Chu, Quinn et al., 2012). Cultured
cells at 80–90% confluence (one or two 10 cm culture dishes for each sample) were
immediately crosslinked in 10 ml of 1% paraformaldehyde (PFA)/PBS per 10 cm dish for
15 min at room temperature, and the crosslinking reaction was stopped by adding 1 ml
of 1.5 M glycine. The crosslinked cells were then washed with 10 ml of ice-cold PBS
twice, suspended in 1 ml of ice-cold PBS using a scraper, and collected in microtubes
by microcentrifugation. After removing the PBS, the cells were resuspended in 350 l of
lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.0, 10 mM EDTA, 1% SDS, 1 mM PMSF, cOmplete™
Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma), and RNAse inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) and
disrupted using a Bioruptor (Cosmo Bio) (15 sec ON, 45 sec OFF, 118 cycles).
Subsequently, the insoluble fraction was removed by microcentrifugation for 10 min at
15C, and the supernatant was used for ChIRP. Two volumes of hybridization buffer
(750 mM NaCl, 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.0, 1 mM EDTA, 15% (v/v) formamide, 1
mM PMSF, cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma), and RNAse inhibitor) and
the HSATIII antisense or control oligonucleotide were added. The mixture was

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

incubated at 37C for 4 h, mixed with Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Thermo
Fisher Scientific), and incubated for 30 min. The beads were then washed five times for
5 min at 37C with 0.8 ml of wash buffer (2× SSC and 0.5% SDS). The bound proteins
were eluted and reverse-crosslinked by boiling in SDS sample buffer (95C for 30 min).
For mass spectrometry, the bound proteins were eluted with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0)
and 2% SDS. For silver staining, the eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and
stained using the SilverQuest Silver Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to
the manufacturer’s manual. For Phos-tag western blotting of ChIRP samples, the eluate
and input proteins were collected by trichloroacetic acid precipitation and resuspended
in new SDS sample buffer. The bound RNAs were eluted by protease K treatment (50C
for 45 min) followed by heating (95C for 10 min) and purification as described below.

Mass spectrometry
To remove the SDS from eluted samples, the methanol-chloroform protein
precipitation method was used. Briefly, four volumes of methanol, one volume of
chloroform, and three volumes of water were added to the eluted sample and mixed
thoroughly. The samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min, the water phase was
carefully removed, four volumes of methanol were added, and the samples were

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 10 min. Subsequently, the supernatant was removed and
the pellet was washed once with 100% ice-cold acetone. The precipitated proteins were
re-dissolved in guanidine hydrochloride, reduced with Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
hydrochloride,

alkylated

with

iodoacetamide,

and

then

digested

with

lysyl

endopeptidase and trypsin. The peptide mixture was applied to a Mightysil-PR-18
(Kanto Chemical) frit-less column (45 x 0.150 mm ID) and separated using a 0–40%
gradient of acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid for 80 min at a flow rate of 100
nL/min. The eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a mass spectrometer (Triple TOF
5600+;

AB

Sciex).

MS

and

MS/MS

spectra

were

obtained

using

the

information-dependent mode. Up to 25 precursor ions above an intensity threshold of 50
counts/s were selected for MS/MS analyses from each survey scan. All MS/MS spectra
were searched against protein sequences of the RefSeq (NCBI) human protein
database (RDB) using the Protein Pilot software package (AB Sciex), and decoy
sequences were then selected with a false discovery rate <1%.

Nucleus/cytoplasm fractionation
Nucleus/cytoplasm fractionation was performed as described previously (Mili, Shu
et al., 2001), with minor modifications. Cultured cells on a 35 mm dish were suspended

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

in 200 l of RSB-100 (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, and 2.5 mM MgCl2)
containing 40 g/ml digitonin, and centrifuged at 2,000 g for 2 min at 4C. The
supernatant was collected as the cytoplasmic fraction. The pellet (nuclear fraction) was
resuspended in 200 l of RSB-100 buffer. The fractions were lysed in 600 l of TRI
Reagent LS for RNA analysis or 200 l of 2× SDS sample buffer (200 mM dithiothreitol,
100 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 4% SDS, and 20% glycerol) for western blot analysis.

Transfection and knockdown
For transfection followed by cell staining or ChIRP, plasmids were transfected into
cells using TransIT-LT1 reagent (Mirus) 16–18 h before the assay (0.2 g of plasmid,
100 l of opti-MEM, and 1 l of TransIT reagent were used per 1 ml of culture medium).
For siRNA knockdown, Stealth siRNA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was transfected at a
final concentration of 10 nM using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
48 h before the experiments. For the splicing reporter assay, the cells were transfected
using 12 pmol of Stealth siRNA, 50 ng of splicing reporter plasmid, 300 ng of
SRSF9-expressing plasmid, 200 l of opti-MEM, and 2 l of Lipofectamine 2000
reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) per 1 ml of culture medium, and cultured for 48 h. For
nuclear RNA knockdown, a modified antisense or control oligonucleotide (1 M) was

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

transfected into 3 × 106 cells using Nucleofector technology (Lonza) 16–18 h before the
assay. ASOs and siRNAs are listed in Appendix Table S1.

Western blotting
Cell lysate in 1× SDS sample buffer was boiled for 5 min, separated by
SDS-PAGE, and transferred to a PVDF membrane (Millipore) by electroblotting. After
incubation with primary and HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies, the signals on the
membranes were developed by a chemiluminescence reaction using the ImmunoStar
Kit (Wako Chemicals), detected with a ChemiDoc imaging system (BioRad), and
analyzed using ImageJ software (NIH). For analysis of the phosphorylation statuses of
SR proteins, the samples were separated in a SDS-PAGE gel containing Phos-tag
acrylamide (Fuji Film) and then transferred to a membrane according to the
manufacturer’s manual. Antibodies are listed in Appendix Table S1.

Quantitative and semi-quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNAs were prepared from cultured cells, subcellular fractions, or ChIRP
samples using TRI Reagent or TRI Reagent LS (Molecular Research Center, Inc.),
according to the manufacturer’s manual. The RNAs were treated with RQ1 RNase-free

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DNase (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s manual. First-strand cDNA was
synthesized using High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kits (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). For quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (qRT-PCR), the sample and
reference cDNAs were amplified using LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master Mix
(Roche)

and

monitored

using

the

LightCycler

480

System

(Roche).

For

semi-quantitative RT-PCR, cDNAs were amplified by PCR to unsaturated levels,
separated by electrophoresis, and stained with ethidium bromide. Images were
obtained with a ChemiDoc system (BioRad) and analyzed with ImageJ software (NIH).
Primers for PCR are listed in Appendix Table S2.

Nascent RNA purification
Labeling and capturing of newly synthesized RNAs was performed using the
Click-iT Nascent RNA Capture Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. Labeling was performed in the presence of 0.4 mM 5-Ethynyl
Uridine (EU) for the indicated period. The purified RNAs were reverse-transcribed and
analyzed by quantitative or semi-quantitative PCR as described above.

FISH and immunofluorescence

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

For HSATIII RNA in situ hybridization, cells cultured on cover glasses were
washed with ice-cold PBS and fixed in 4% PFA/PBS for 10 min at room temperature.
Subsequently, the cover glasses were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and
permeabilized in cold 70% ethanol for at least 1 h at 4C. Next, the cover glasses were
washed with 10% formamide/2× SSC, hybridized with a Dig-labeled HSATIII antisense
oligonucleotide in hybridization buffer (10% formamide, 2× SSC, and 10% dextran) for
16 h at 37C, incubated in 10% formamide/2× SSC for 30 min at 37C, and then washed
in 2× SSC for 5 min. After blocking in 3% BSA/TBST for 30 min, the cover glasses were
incubated in 3% BSA/TBST containing an anti-dig antibody and an antibody against the
protein of interest. After washing in TBST, the cover glasses were incubated in 3%
BSA/TBST with Alexa 488- or Alexa 568-conjugated secondary antibodies. For
immunostaining, the fixed cells were permeabilized in cold PBS containing 0.1% Triton
X100 for 15 min, followed by the antibody reaction as described above. Images were
obtained using a confocal laser scanning microscope, FLUOVIEW FV1000 (Olympus).
Probes and antibodies are listed in Appendix Table S1.

Bioinformatics analyses of RNA-seq data
Total RNAs of HeLa nuclear fractions were prepared as described above. Poly

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(A)+ RNA purification and library construction were performed using 200 ng of nuclear
total RNAs and the Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA HT Sample Prep Kit. Subsequently,
RNA-seq was performed using the Illumina Hiseq3000 system with the 36 bp single end
method. Raw RNA-seq reads containing low quality and ambiguous bases were filtered
out using cutadapt (version 1.9.1) (Martin, 2011) with the following parameters: -q 30
--max-n 0 -m 30. After this filtering, the remaining reads were mapped to the hg38
human reference genome using STAR aligner (version 2.5.3a) (Dobin, Davis et al.,
2013) with the parameters --runThreadN 10 --outSAMtype BAM SortedByCoordinate
--twopassMode Basic, and Gencode release27 annotation (Frankish, Diekhans et al.,
2019).
For unambiguous counting of mapped reads with exon/intron resolution rather
than transcript/gene levels, a single transcript was selected per gene using CGAT
scripts (version 0.3.2) (Sims, Ilott et al., 2014) with the following parameters: gtf2gtf
--method=filter --filter-method=representative-transcript. In these parameters, the
“representative transcript” that shared the most exons with the other transcripts in the
same gene was used. In the representative transcripts, the genomic coordinates of
introns were calculated from the coordinates of exons using CGAT script with the
parameters gtf2gtf --method=exons2introns, and these coordinates were merged into a

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

single GTF file for the read counting process. For each intron annotation in the GTF file,
a unique ID (ENSIxxxx; this ID is named after the upstream exon ID defined as
ENSExxxx in the Gencode annotation) was added; “exon” was set into the feature field
(third field in GTF format) for the counting process. The mapped reads were counted
using the featureCounts algorithm (subread-1.4.6) (Liao, Smyth et al., 2014) with the
following parameters: -s 2 -T 10 -t exon -g exon_id. Using these count data, differential
expression analysis with exon/intron resolution was conducted using DESeq2 (version
1.10.1) (Love, Huber et al., 2014) with default parameters. Using the DESeq2 results,
HSATIII target introns were selected according to the following criteria: fold-change
(HSATIII-KD / control) <0.5 and adjusted p-value <0.01.

Data analyses of RNA-seq and eCLIP
SRSF9 eCLIP peak data were obtained from the ENCODE website (ID:
ENCFF432ASF, ENCFF327JJE) (Van Nostrand, Pratt et al., 2016). Regions that
overlapped between the SRSF9 eCLIP peaks and the HSATIII target introns/adjacent
exons were counted using bedtools (v2.28.0) (Quinlan & Hall, 2010) with the following
parameters: intersect -s -c –F 0.5. As the control introns for the HSATIII target introns,
overlaps between the SRSF9 peaks and all introns in the representative transcripts

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

annotated in Gencode release 27 (for details, see above section “Bioinformatics
analyses of RNA-seq data”) were also investigated.
Previously reported human (U-87 MG) or mouse (mESC) detained introns were
obtained from the Supplemental Data of previous studies (Boutz et al., 2015; Braun et
al., 2017). The genomic coordinates (based on hg19 or mm9) of these introns were
converted to hg38 coordinates using the UCSC liftOver tool (Hinrichs, Karolchik et al.,
2006) with default settings. The regions that overlapped between these introns and the
HSATIII target introns were counted using bedtools with the following parameter:
intersect –s.

Gene ontology analysis
The gene ontology (GO) functional enrichment analyses were performed using
DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8 (LHRI).

Quantification and Statistical analysis
For quantification, the experiments were performed as biological triplicate.
Quantification of quantitative RT-PCR was performed using Lightcycler 480 software,
version 1.5 (Roche). Quantification of semi-quantitative RT-PCR and western blot was
performed using ImageJ software (NIH). The statistical significance of two-group and

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

multiple comparisons was tested using GraphPad Prism7 software (GraphPad
Software), as indicated in each figure legend. Non-adjusted (two-group comparison)
and adjusted (multiple comparison) P-values were indicated in each figure.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Prof. Y. Suzuki (University of Tokyo) for conducting the RNA-seq
analysis, Dr. N. Kataoka (University of Tokyo) for providing the SRSF9 expression
plasmid, Dr. H. Maita (Hokkaido University) for providing the CHO cell line, and the
members of the Hirose laboratory for valuable discussions. The computational analysis
was partially performed on the NIG supercomputer at the ROIS National Institute of
Genetics. This research was supported by MEXT KAKENHI Grant [to TH (JP26113002,
JP16H06279, JP17H03630, and JP17K19335) and to NK (JP19K06478)] and the Tokyo
Biochemical Research Foundation (to T.H.).

Author contributions
KN and TH conceived and designed the study. KN conducted most of the experiments.
SA and TN performed the mass spectrometry analyses. JI, GT, and KA analyzed the
bioinformatics data from the RNA-seq and eCLIP experiments. KN and TH wrote the
manuscript.

Conflict of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Aubol BE, Plocinik RM, Hagopian JC, Ma CT, McGlone ML, Bandyopadhyay R, Fu XD,
Adams JA (2013) Partitioning RS domain phosphorylation in an SR protein through the
CLK and SRPK protein kinases. J Mol Biol 425: 2894-909
Aubol BE, Plocinik RM, Keshwani MM, McGlone ML, Hagopian JC, Ghosh G, Fu XD,
Adams JA (2014) N-terminus of the protein kinase CLK1 induces SR protein
hyperphosphorylation. Biochem J 462: 143-52
Banani SF, Lee HO, Hyman AA, Rosen MK (2017) Biomolecular condensates:
organizers of cellular biochemistry. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18: 285-298
Biamonti G, Vourc'h C (2010) Nuclear stress bodies. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2:
a000695
Bonnet A, Grosso AR, Elkaoutari A, Coleno E, Presle A, Sridhara SC, Janbon G, Geli V,
de Almeida SF, Palancade B (2017) Introns Protect Eukaryotic Genomes from
Transcription-Associated Genetic Instability. Mol Cell 67: 608-621 e6
Boutz PL, Bhutkar A, Sharp PA (2015) Detained introns are a novel, widespread class of
post-transcriptionally spliced introns. Genes Dev 29: 63-80
Braun CJ, Stanciu M, Boutz PL, Patterson JC, Calligaris D, Higuchi F, Neupane R,
Fenoglio S, Cahill DP, Wakimoto H, Agar NYR, Yaffe MB, Sharp PA, Hemann MT, Lees
JA (2017) Coordinated Splicing of Regulatory Detained Introns within Oncogenic
Transcripts Creates an Exploitable Vulnerability in Malignant Glioma. Cancer Cell 32:
411-426 e11
Bullock AN, Das S, Debreczeni JE, Rellos P, Fedorov O, Niesen FH, Guo K,
Papagrigoriou E, Amos AL, Cho S, Turk BE, Ghosh G, Knapp S (2009) Kinase domain
insertions define distinct roles of CLK kinases in SR protein phosphorylation. Structure
17: 352-62
Cao

W,

Jamison

SF,

Garcia-Blanco

MA (1997)

Both

phosphorylation

and

dephosphorylation of ASF/SF2 are required for pre-mRNA splicing in vitro. RNA 3:
1456-67
Castello A, Fischer B, Eichelbaum K, Horos R, Beckmann BM, Strein C, Davey NE,
Humphreys DT, Preiss T, Steinmetz LM, Krijgsveld J, Hentze MW (2012) Insights into
RNA biology from an atlas of mammalian mRNA-binding proteins. Cell 149: 1393-406
Chu C, Quinn J, Chang HY (2012) Chromatin isolation by RNA purification (ChIRP). J
Vis Exp
Chujo T, Yamazaki T, Hirose T (2016) Architectural RNAs (arcRNAs): A class of long

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

noncoding RNAs that function as the scaffold of nuclear bodies. Biochim Biophys Acta
1859: 139-46
Clemson CM, Hutchinson JN, Sara SA, Ensminger AW, Fox AH, Chess A, Lawrence JB
(2009) An architectural role for a nuclear noncoding RNA: NEAT1 RNA is essential for
the structure of paraspeckles. Mol Cell 33: 717-26
Colwill K, Pawson T, Andrews B, Prasad J, Manley JL, Bell JC, Duncan PI (1996) The
Clk/Sty protein kinase phosphorylates SR splicing factors and regulates their
intranuclear distribution. EMBO J 15: 265-75
Denegri M, Chiodi I, Corioni M, Cobianchi F, Riva S, Biamonti G (2001) Stress-induced
nuclear bodies are sites of accumulation of pre-mRNA processing factors. Mol Biol Cell
12: 3502-14
Denegri M, Moralli D, Rocchi M, Biggiogera M, Raimondi E, Cobianchi F, De Carli L,
Riva S, Biamonti G (2002) Human chromosomes 9, 12, and 15 contain the nucleation
sites of stress-induced nuclear bodies. Mol Biol Cell 13: 2069-79
Dobin A, Davis CA, Schlesinger F, Drenkow J, Zaleski C, Jha S, Batut P, Chaisson M,
Gingeras TR (2013) STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29:
15-21
Dominguez D, Tsai YH, Weatheritt R, Wang Y, Blencowe BJ, Wang Z (2016) An
extensive program of periodic alternative splicing linked to cell cycle progression. Elife 5
Duncan PI, Howell BW, Marius RM, Drmanic S, Douville EM, Bell JC (1995) Alternative
splicing of STY, a nuclear dual specificity kinase. J Biol Chem 270: 21524-31
Duncan PI, Stojdl DF, Marius RM, Bell JC (1997) In vivo regulation of alternative
pre-mRNA splicing by the Clk1 protein kinase. Mol Cell Biol 17: 5996-6001
Fedorov O, Huber K, Eisenreich A, Filippakopoulos P, King O, Bullock AN, Szklarczyk D,
Jensen LJ, Fabbro D, Trappe J, Rauch U, Bracher F, Knapp S (2011) Specific CLK
inhibitors from a novel chemotype for regulation of alternative splicing. Chem Biol 18:
67-76
Frankish A, Diekhans M, Ferreira AM, Johnson R, Jungreis I, Loveland J, Mudge JM,
Sisu C, Wright J, Armstrong J, Barnes I, Berry A, Bignell A, Carbonell Sala S, Chrast J,
Cunningham F, Di Domenico T, Donaldson S, Fiddes IT, Garcia Giron C et al. (2019)
GENCODE reference annotation for the human and mouse genomes. Nucleic Acids
Res 47: D766-D773
Gill J, Park Y, McGinnis JP, Perez-Sanchez C, Blanchette M, Si K (2017) Regulated
Intron Removal Integrates Motivational State and Experience. Cell 169: 836-848 e15
Gui JF, Lane WS, Fu XD (1994) A serine kinase regulates intracellular localization of
splicing factors in the cell cycle. Nature 369: 678-82

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Guil S, Caceres JF (2007) Stressful splicing. Mol Cell 28: 180-1
Hinrichs AS, Karolchik D, Baertsch R, Barber GP, Bejerano G, Clawson H, Diekhans M,
Furey TS, Harte RA, Hsu F, Hillman-Jackson J, Kuhn RM, Pedersen JS, Pohl A, Raney
BJ, Rosenbloom KR, Siepel A, Smith KE, Sugnet CW, Sultan-Qurraie A et al. (2006)
The UCSC Genome Browser Database: update 2006. Nucleic Acids Res 34: D590-8
Hussong M, Kaehler C, Kerick M, Grimm C, Franz A, Timmermann B, Welzel F, Isensee
J, Hucho T, Krobitsch S, Schweiger MR (2017) The bromodomain protein BRD4
regulates splicing during heat shock. Nucleic Acids Res 45: 382-394
Jarmuz M, Glotzbach CD, Bailey KA, Bandyopadhyay R, Shaffer LG (2007) The
Evolution of satellite III DNA subfamilies among primates. Am J Hum Genet 80: 495-501
Jolly C, Konecny L, Grady DL, Kutskova YA, Cotto JJ, Morimoto RI, Vourc'h C (2002) In
vivo binding of active heat shock transcription factor 1 to human chromosome 9
heterochromatin during stress. J Cell Biol 156: 775-81
Jolly C, Metz A, Govin J, Vigneron M, Turner BM, Khochbin S, Vourc'h C (2004)
Stress-induced transcription of satellite III repeats. J Cell Biol 164: 25-33
Jolly C, Morimoto R, Robert-Nicoud M, Vourc'h C (1997) HSF1 transcription factor
concentrates in nuclear foci during heat shock: relationship with transcription sites. J
Cell Sci 110 ( Pt 23): 2935-41
Jolly C, Usson Y, Morimoto RI (1999) Rapid and reversible relocalization of heat shock
factor 1 within seconds to nuclear stress granules. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:
6769-74
Kawaguchi T, Tanigawa A, Naganuma T, Ohkawa Y, Souquere S, Pierron G, Hirose T
(2015)

SWI/SNF

chromatin-remodeling

complexes

function

in

noncoding

RNA-dependent assembly of nuclear bodies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112: 4304-9
Keshwani MM, Hailey KL, Aubol BE, Fattet L, McGlone ML, Jennings PA, Adams JA
(2015) Nuclear protein kinase CLK1 uses a non-traditional docking mechanism to select
physiological substrates. Biochem J 472: 329-38
Kinoshita E, Kinoshita-Kikuta E, Matsubara M, Yamada S, Nakamura H, Shiro Y, Aoki Y,
Okita K, Koike T (2008) Separation of phosphoprotein isotypes having the same
number of phosphate groups using phosphate-affinity SDS-PAGE. Proteomics 8:
2994-3003
Liao Y, Smyth GK, Shi W (2014) featureCounts: an efficient general purpose program
for assigning sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics 30: 923-30
Long JC, Caceres JF (2009) The SR protein family of splicing factors: master regulators
of gene expression. Biochem J 417: 15-27
Love MI, Huber W, Anders S (2014) Moderated estimation of fold change and

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol 15: 550
Mahl P, Lutz Y, Puvion E, Fuchs JP (1989) Rapid effect of heat shock on two
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein-associated antigens in HeLa cells. J Cell Biol
109: 1921-35
Martin M (2011) Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput
sequencing reads. In EMBnet journal, pp 10-12.
Mauger O, Lemoine F, Scheiffele P (2016) Targeted Intron Retention and Excision for
Rapid Gene Regulation in Response to Neuronal Activity. Neuron 92: 1266-1278
Metz A, Soret J, Vourc'h C, Tazi J, Jolly C (2004) A key role for stress-induced satellite
III transcripts in the relocalization of splicing factors into nuclear stress granules. J Cell
Sci 117: 4551-8
Mili S, Shu HJ, Zhao Y, Pinol-Roma S (2001) Distinct RNP complexes of shuttling
hnRNP proteins with pre-mRNA and mRNA: candidate intermediates in formation and
export of mRNA. Molecular and cellular biology 21: 7307-19
Morgan JT, Fink GR, Bartel DP (2019) Excised linear introns regulate growth in yeast.
Nature 565: 606-611
Naro C, Jolly A, Di Persio S, Bielli P, Setterblad N, Alberdi AJ, Vicini E, Geremia R, De la
Grange P, Sette C (2017) An Orchestrated Intron Retention Program in Meiosis Controls
Timely Usage of Transcripts during Germ Cell Differentiation. Dev Cell 41: 82-93 e4
Nayler O, Stratling W, Bourquin JP, Stagljar I, Lindemann L, Jasper H, Hartmann AM,
Fackelmayer FO, Ullrich A, Stamm S (1998) SAF-B protein couples transcription and
pre-mRNA splicing to SAR/MAR elements. Nucleic Acids Res 26: 3542-9
Ninomiya K, Kataoka N, Hagiwara M (2011) Stress-responsive maturation of Clk1/4
pre-mRNAs promotes phosphorylation of SR splicing factor. J Cell Biol 195: 27-40
Parenteau J, Maignon L, Berthoumieux M, Catala M, Gagnon V, Abou Elela S (2019)
Introns are mediators of cell response to starvation. Nature 565: 612-617
Preussner

M,

Goldammer

G,

Neumann

A,

Haltenhof

T,

Rautenstrauch

P,

Muller-McNicoll M, Heyd F (2017) Body Temperature Cycles Control Rhythmic
Alternative Splicing in Mammals. Mol Cell 67: 433-446 e4
Quinlan AR, Hall IM (2010) BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic
features. Bioinformatics 26: 841-2
Shepard PJ, Hertel KJ (2009) The SR protein family. Genome Biol 10: 242
Shi Y, Manley JL (2007) A complex signaling pathway regulates SRp38 phosphorylation
and pre-mRNA splicing in response to heat shock. Molecular cell 28: 79-90
Shin C, Feng Y, Manley JL (2004) Dephosphorylated SRp38 acts as a splicing
repressor in response to heat shock. Nature 427: 553-8

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Simard MJ, Chabot B (2002) SRp30c is a repressor of 3' splice site utilization. Mol Cell
Biol 22: 4001-10
Sims D, Ilott NE, Sansom SN, Sudbery IM, Johnson JS, Fawcett KA, Berlanga-Taylor
AJ, Luna-Valero S, Ponting CP, Heger A (2014) CGAT: computational genomics analysis
toolkit. Bioinformatics 30: 1290-1
Tai HH, Geisterfer M, Bell JC, Moniwa M, Davie JR, Boucher L, McBurney MW (2003)
CHD1 associates with NCoR and histone deacetylase as well as with RNA splicing
proteins. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 308: 170-6
Tanabe H, Nakagawa Y, Minegishi D, Hashimoto K, Tanaka N, Oshimura M, Sofuni T,
Mizusawa H (2000) Human monochromosome hybrid cell panel characterized by FISH
in the JCRB/HSRRB. Chromosome Res 8: 319-34
Valgardsdottir R, Chiodi I, Giordano M, Cobianchi F, Riva S, Biamonti G (2005)
Structural and functional characterization of noncoding repetitive RNAs transcribed in
stressed human cells. Mol Biol Cell 16: 2597-604
Van Nostrand EL, Pratt GA, Shishkin AA, Gelboin-Burkhart C, Fang MY, Sundararaman
B, Blue SM, Nguyen TB, Surka C, Elkins K, Stanton R, Rigo F, Guttman M, Yeo GW
(2016) Robust transcriptome-wide discovery of RNA-binding protein binding sites with
enhanced CLIP (eCLIP). Nat Methods 13: 508-14
Weighardt F, Cobianchi F, Cartegni L, Chiodi I, Villa A, Riva S, Biamonti G (1999) A
novel hnRNP protein (HAP/SAF-B) enters a subset of hnRNP complexes and relocates
in nuclear granules in response to heat shock. J Cell Sci 112 ( Pt 10): 1465-76
Xiao SH, Manley JL (1997) Phosphorylation of the ASF/SF2 RS domain affects both
protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions and is necessary for splicing. Genes Dev
11: 334-44
Yamamoto K, Furukawa MT, Fukumura K, Kawamura A, Yamada T, Suzuki H, Hirose T,
Sakamoto H, Inoue K (2016) Control of the heat stress-induced alternative splicing of a
subset of genes by hnRNP K. Genes Cells 21: 1006-14
Yasuda K, Nakai A, Hatayama T, Nagata K (1995) Cloning and expression of murine
high molecular mass heat shock proteins, HSP105. J Biol Chem 270: 29718-23

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure legends
Figure 1. HSATIII lncRNAs control intron retention of a specific set of genes
A

HSATIII ASO-mediated depletion of nSBs. HeLa cells were transfected with a

HSATIII ASO (HSATIII) or HSATIII sense oligonucleotide (control), exposed to thermal
stress (42C for 2 h and recovery for 1 h at 37C), and then visualized by HSATIII-FISH
(green) and immunofluorescence using an anti-SAFB antibody (magenta). The nuclei
were stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar: 10 m. NGS, next-generation sequencing.
B

The method used to screen for HSATIII-regulated genes during thermal stress

recovery.
C

The expression levels of all detected introns in control and HSATIII cells (n=3).

Magenta dots indicate introns that were experimentally validated in subsequent
experiments.
D

The numbers of introns and exons that were affected by HSATIII knockdown (fold

change>2).
E, F

Examples of RNA-seq read maps of HSATIII target RNAs. Affected introns and

exons are indicated by blue (down-regulated upon HSATIII knockdown) and magenta
(up-regulated) boxes.
G

Cumulative frequency curves of the lengths of adjacent exons of 399

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

HSATIII-up-regulated internal introns. The lengths of whole annotated internal introns
are shown as a reference.

Figure 2. HSATIII lncRNAs control intron retention by regulating splicing.
A Validation of HSATIII target introns by qRT-PCR. The graphs show the relative
amounts of the intron-retaining (IR) (upper) and spliced (lower) forms in control and
HSATIII knockdown cells under three conditions: 37C (normal), 42C for 2 h (thermal
stress), and thermal stress followed by recovery at 37C for 1 h. Expression levels were
calculated as the ratio of each RNA to GAPDH mRNA and were normalized to the levels
in control cells under normal conditions (37C). Data are shown as the mean±SD (n=3);
*p<0.05 (Sidak’s multiple comparison test).
B

Nuclear localization of the intron-retaining RNAs. The relative amounts of

intron-retaining RNAs in the nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were quantified by
qRT-PCR and are represented as the ratio (% of the total). GAPDH mRNA and U1
snRNA were used as cytoplasmic and nuclear controls, respectively. Data are shown as
the mean±SD (n=3).
C

Overview of the qRT-PCR analysis of newly synthesized RNA within 1 h after

thermal stress removal. CHX, Cycloheximide; EU, 5-Ethynyl uridine

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

D, E

The levels of HSATIII target introns in newly synthesized RNAs within 1 h after

thermal stress removal, as determined by qRT-PCR. The graphs show the changes in
the expression levels of the intron-retaining (IR) (D) and spliced (E) forms. Expression
levels were calculated as the ratio of each RNA to GAPDH mRNA and were normalized
to the level in the control cells. Data are shown as the mean±SD (n=3); *p<0.05
(multiple t-test modified by Holm-Sidak’s method).

Figure 3. The HSATIII lncRNA is necessary and sufficient to promote nuclear intron
retention
A Splicing isoforms of the CLK1 pre-mRNA. The retained introns are indicated by red
lines. An asterisk indicates the position of the premature termination codon in the
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay-targeted isoform.
B

Time course analysis of the splicing pattern of CLK1 pre-mRNAs in control and

HSATIII knockdown (HSATIII) cells by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Arrows indicate the
positions of PCR primers. The GAPDH mRNA was used as an internal control.
C

Quantification of the data shown in (B). Data are shown as the mean±SD (n=3);

*p<0.05 (Sidak’s multiple comparison test).
D

Thermal stress-induced expression of HSATIII in CHO (His9) cells. The cells were

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

visualized by HSATIII-FISH (green), and the nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue).
E

Ectopic HSATIII-induced nSB assembly in CHO (His9) cells. The nSBs were

visualized by HSATIII-FISH (green) and immunofluorescence using an anti-SRSF1
antibody (magenta). The nuclei were stained with DAPI. Scale bar: 10 m.
F

Time course analysis of the splicing pattern of Chinese hamster Clk1 pre-mRNAs in

control (CHO) and CHO (His9) cells by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Arrows indicate the
positions of PCR primers. The GAPDH mRNA was used as an internal control.
G

Quantification of the data shown in (F). Data are shown as the mean±SD (n=3);

*p<0.05 (Sidak’s multiple comparison test).
H

The effect of HSATIII knockdown on pooling of intron-retaining RNAs in control

(CHO) and CHO (His9) cells (42C for 2 h and recovery for 1 h at 37C).

Figure 4. Identification of HSATIII-interacting proteins by ChIRP.
A Overview of the ChIRP procedure used to identify HSATIII-interacting proteins in
thermal stress-exposed cells. HSATIII-interacting proteins were crosslinked and
captured with a biotinylated HSATIII ASO. As a negative control, the same procedure
was performed using control (37C) cells and/or a control probe.
B

RT-PCR validation of the specific precipitation of HSATIII by ChIRP. The NEAT1

ncRNA and GAPDH mRNA were used as negative controls. Input: 100%.
50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

C

Silver staining of the coprecipitated proteins. The predicted mobilities of five known

nSB proteins are indicated. Input: 0.1%.
D

Western blot analyses of proteins identified by the HSATIII-ChIRP experiment.

Known nSB proteins (SAFB, SRSF1, SRSF7, SRSF9, and HNRNPM) were used as
positive controls, and -tubulin was used as a negative control. TRA2B and THRAP3
are newly identified nSB components.
E–G

Colocalization of novel nSB proteins with HSATIII. Endogenous TRA2B (E),

THRAP3 (F), and FLAG-tagged PPHLN1 (G) were stained with anti-TRA2B,
anti-THRAP3, and anti-FLAG antibodies, respectively (magenta). HSATIII was
visualized by RNA-FISH using a dig-labeled HSATIII ASO (green), and the nuclei were
stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar: 10 m.

Figure 5. CLK1 is recruited to nSBs during thermal stress recovery
A

Specific interaction of CLK1 with HSATIII during thermal stress recovery.

HSATIII-ChIRP at various time points during and after thermal stress exposure.
Endogenous CLK1, SRSF7, and SRSF9 were detected using anti-CLK1, anti-SRSF7,
and anti-SRSF9 antibodies, respectively. HSATIII was detected by ChIRP-RNA
purification, followed by RT-PCR. Input: 0.1% for CLK1, 1% for SRSF7 and SRSF9, and

51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

100% for HSATIII.
B

Re-translocation of FLAG-CLK1 to nSBs after thermal stress removal. HeLa cells

were transfected with a FLAG-CLK1 expression vector, cultured for 16 h, and then
exposed to thermal stress (42C for 2 h) with or without recovery (37C for 1 h).
FLAG-CLK1 was visualized with an anti-FLAG antibody (magenta). Nuclear stress
bodies (green) and nuclei (blue) were visualized by HSATIII-FISH and DAPI staining,
respectively. Scale bar: 10 m.
C

The domain structures of wild-type (WT) CLK1, the catalytically inactive mutant

(CLK1 KR), and the N- and C-terminal partial fragments (CLK1C and CLK1N).
D, E

Recovery phase-specific interaction of HSATIII with CLK1 proteins.

HSATIII-ChIRP/western

blotting was

performed

using

HeLa

cells

expressing

FLAG-CLK1 WT or the mutants. FLAG-tagged proteins and SRSF9 were detected by
western blotting using an anti-FLAG and anti-SRSF9 antibody, respectively. HSATIII
was detected by ChIRP followed by RT-PCR. Input: 1% for western blotting, 100% for
RT-PCR. Asterisk: an unidentified partial fragment of FLAG-CLK1N.
F

Dependency of the CLK1C interaction with HSATIII on SRSF9. HSATIII-ChIRP

was performed using control and SRSF9-depleted cells expressing FLAG-CLK1C
(42C for 2 h and recovery for 1 h at 37C). Input: 1%.

52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

G

Coprecipitation ratio of CLK1C with HSATIII in the control and SRSF9-depleted

cells described in (F). Data are shown as the mean±SD (n=3); *p<0.05 (Student’s
t-test).

Figure 6. The HSATIII lncRNA accelerates CLK1-dependent re-phosphorylation of
SRSF9
A Localization of SRSF9 with HSATIII during thermal stress and recovery.
B

The subnuclear distribution of nSBs and nuclear speckles. HeLa cells (42C for 2 h

and 37C for 1 h) were stained with an anti-SRSF9 antibody, an anti-SRSF2 antibody,
and a HSATIII-FISH probe. The nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue).
C

Recovery phase-specific colocalization of CLK1 and SRSF9. HeLa cells were

transfected with a FLAG-CLK1 expression vector, cultured for 16 h, and exposed to
thermal stress (42C for 2 h) followed by recovery (37C for 1 h). FLAG-CLK1 (green)
and SRSF9 (magenta) were co-stained using anti-FLAG and anti-SRSF9 antibodies,
respectively, and the nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar: 10 m.
D

Scheme of sampling references for analysis of the phosphorylation states of SRSF9

in (F). The CLK1 inhibitor KH-CB19 (10 M) or DMSO as a control was administrated
during the recovery period. The numbers correspond to the lane numbers in (F).

53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

E

Conditions tested in the time course analysis of the phosphorylation states of SR

proteins. HeLa cells were transfected with a HSATIII ASO or control SO, cultured for 16
h, exposed to thermal stress (42C for 2 h), and cultured at 37C for the indicated period.
F

The effect of HSATIII knockdown on time course-dependent changes in SRSF9

phosphorylation. The phosphorylation states were estimated by Phos-tag SDS-PAGE,
followed by western blotting using an anti-SRSF9 antibody. The arrows and arrowheads
indicate the normal phosphorylated forms and thermal stress-induced hypo- and
de-phosphorylated forms, respectively.
G

Scheme of Phos-tag western blotting coupled with HSATIII-ChIRP used to validate

the phosphorylation states of SRSF9 within nSBs.
H

The re-phosphorylation status of SRSF9 within nSBs. Phosphorylated (arrows) and

hypo- and de-phosphorylated (arrowheads) SRSF9 in the nSB fractions (lanes 4, 6, and
8) were analyzed by western blotting on Phos-tag gels. KH-CB19 (10 M) or DMSO as
a control was administrated during the recovery period. The lower panel shows a
shorter exposure image of the phosphorylated forms. The asterisks indicate bands
different from band (a) or (d). Input: 5%.

Figure 7. The role of SRSF9 re-phosphorylation in controlling HSATIII-dependent intron

54

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

retention
A, B

Validation of the effect of SRSF9 on retention/splicing of HSATIII target introns by

qRT-PCR. The relative expression levels of intron-retaining (IR) forms (A) and spliced
forms (B) of newly transcribed RNAs during the recovery period are shown. See also
the scheme in Figure 2B. Expression levels were calculated as the ratio of each RNA to
GAPDH mRNA and were normalized to the control. Data are shown as the mean±SD
(n=3); *p<0.05 (multiple t-test modified by Holm-Sidak’s method).
C

Time course analysis of the splicing patterns of CLK1 and TAF1D intron-retaining

RNAs in control and HSATIII knockdown cells by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Arrows
indicate the positions of primers for RT-PCR. GAPDH mRNA was used as an internal
control. The experiment was performed in triplicate.
D

Quantification of the data shown in (C); *p<0.05 (Sidak’s multiple comparison test).

E

Scheme for analyzing the effect of CLK1 inhibition on intron retention by newly

transcribed RNAs after stress removal. CHX, Cycloheximide; EU, 5-Ethynyl uridine.
F

Validation of the requirement of CLK1 catalytic activity for promotion of intron

retention by qRT-PCR.
G

The diagrams show the domain structures of wild-type (WT) and mutant (mut)

SRSF9, in which all SR/SP dipeptides were replaced by AR/AP. FLAG-SRSF9-WT and

55

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FLAG-SRSF9-mut were extracted from transfected HeLa cells under normal (37C) and
thermal stress (42C for 2 h) conditions, separated in a Phos-tag gel, and detected by
western blot using an anti-FLAG antibody. The arrowhead indicates the thermal
stress-induced de-phosphorylated form of FLAG-SRSF9-WT.
H, I

The role of phosphorylation of SRSF9 on splicing of the TAF1D (H) and DNAJB9

(I) reporters. Each splicing reporter plasmid was transfected into HeLa cells along with a
siRNA (control or SRSF9-specific) and a siRNA-resistant SRSF9-WT or SRSF9-mut
expression plasmid (or pEGFP-C1 vector as the empty vehicle (-)) 48 h before the
assay. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR analyses revealed the splicing patterns of the reporter
RNAs purified from the thermal stress-exposed cells (42C for 2 h and 37C for 1 h).
The positions of the PCR primers are indicated by arrows. Graphs represent the relative
changes in the spliced/unspliced ratios, normalized to the control sample with control
siRNA and empty plasmid (-). Data are shown as the mean±SD (n=3); *p<0.05
(Dunnett's multiple comparison test).
J

A model for the function of nSBs in splicing control. Thermal stress-induced HSATIII

integrates de-phosphorylated SRSFs and SR-related proteins. After stress removal,
CLK1

relocates

to

nSBs

to

re-phosphorylate

SRSFs,

especially

SRSF9.

Re-phosphorylated SRSF9 suppresses splicing of target introns to accumulate

56

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

intron-retaining RNAs in the nucleus.

57

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1

A

Control

B

ΔHSATIII

Control

ΔHSATIII

HSATIII

AAAAA

AAAAA

Nuclear fractionation

AAAAA

SAFB

AAAAA

42ºC 2h
37ºC 1h (Recovery)

AAAAA

AAAAA

AAAAA

AAAAA

AAAAA

Merge/ DAPI

AAAAA

NGS analysis

Expression level in control
(FPKM)

10

3

E

102

intron
(down)
intron
(up)
exon
(down)
exon
(up)

101
1

10-1

10-2
10-3

10-4
10-5

10-5

10-4

10-3

10-2

10-1

1

101

102

103

intron
exon

gene

533

434

17

17

3

3

4

4

TAF1D

ΔHSATIII

D

104

Control

C

PolyA (+) RNA preparation

104

Expression level in ΔHSATIII (FPKM)
E1

F

G

Control

ΔHSATIII

DNAJB9

Upstream exon

E3

E4 E5 E6

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0

>1000
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100

100

>1000
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100

E2

E3

Downstream exon

100

Exon length (bp)

E1

E2

Exon length (bp)

HSATIII target introns
Whole introns

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2

0

4

0

0

0

40

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1

1.0

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0.0

0

0

80

*

0

0

0

P<0.0001 1.5

*

0

1

0

PFKP
intron 1

P=0.0003 4

*

2

2

0

0

1.5

3

1

2

0.5

1

0

0

P=0.012

*

P=0.0004

*

42°C 2h
1h
37°C

EU labeling
with CHX

40
20
U1 snRNA

GAPDH mRNA

STK4 intron 1

PFKP intron 1

RBM48 intron 3

EP400 intron 2

DNAJB9 intron 2

TSR1 intron 5

ABHD5 intron 5

TAF1D intron 3

RNA prep
TAF1D intron 2

0

*

2

0

Control
or
ΔHSATIII

P=0.001

*

4

0.5

Nucleus

60

4
2

STK4
intron 1

P=0.0081 4

6

*

2

5

Cytoplasm

P<0.0001

20

10

C

CLK1 intron 3

80

5

P<0.0001 6

*

(%)
100

DAB2 intron 9

Nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio

100

1

*

P=0.0038 60

RBM48
intron 3

37ºC
42ºC
Recovery

0.5

0

37ºC
42ºC
Recovery

5

P<0.0001 10

EP400
intron 2

37ºC
42ºC
Recovery

1

B

0.5

2

DNAJB9
intron 2

37ºC
42ºC
Recovery

P=0.0052 1.5

10

37ºC
42ºC
Recovery

15

*

1

0

0

*

ABHD5
intron 5

37ºC
42ºC
Recovery

0

*

1

1

0.5

P<0.0001

P=0.0081 1.5

*

2

1

Spliced

P<0.0001 2

3

TSR1
intron 5

TAF1D
intron 3

37ºC
42ºC
Recovery

*

TAF1D
intron 2

37ºC
42ºC
Recovery

P=0.005

2
1.5

IR

DAB2
intron 9

37ºC
42ºC
Recovery

Control
CLK1
ΔHSATIII intron 3

Class 2

37ºC
42ºC
Recovery

Class 1

37ºC
42ºC
Recovery

A

Biotinylation
Nascent RNA prep

IR

Control
ΔHSATIII

Control
ΔHSATIII

*

P=0.038

STK4
intron 1

*

P=0.038

*

RBM48
intron 3

P=0.0062

TSR1
intron 5

*

P=0.029

P<0.0001

*

TAF1D
intron 3

*

P=0.0031

*

*

*

PFKP
intron 1

EP400
intron 2

DNAJB9
intron 2

0

ABHD5
intron 5

2
TAF1D
intron 2

PFKP
intron 1

STK4
intron 1

RBM48
intron 3

EP400
intron 2

DNAJB9
intron 2

ABHD5
intron 5

TSR1
intron 5

TAF1D
intron 3

TAF1D
intron 2

0

DAB2
intron 9

0.5

4

P=0.0049

1

6

DAB2
intron 9

*

8

P=0.038

*

Spliced

12
10

P=0.0046

*

P=0.0012

P=0.0076

*

*

Expression levels

1.5

*

P=0.0046

2

P=0.008

2.5

CLK1
intron 3

Expression levels

3

E

CLK1
intron 3

D

P=0.036

qRT-PCR

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3

A

CLK1

Intron-retaining

1

2

3

Protein coding

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

NMD target

1

2

*
3 5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13

6

7

8

AAAAA

9 10 11 12 13

9 10 11 12 13

Control

AAAAA

AAAAA

C

37°C
42ºC 2h
Recovery 1h
Recovery 2h
Recovery 4h
37°C
42ºC 2h
Recovery 1h
Recovery 2h
Recovery 4h

ΔHSATIII

5

CLK1 intron-retaining RNA
4

1

CLK1

2

4

3

4

5

6

2

3

4

5

2

3

5

6

6

0.2

1.2

RNA levels

HSATIII/DAPI

Clk1 intron-retaining RNA

HSATIII
(human)

1
0.8

5

6
P=0.0002

P=0.005

*

P=0.0047

*

0.6

*

0.4
0.2
0

37°C 42ºC 1h 2h 4h
37°C recovery

SRSF1
(hamster)

CHO WT
CHO (His9)

H

CHO

WT His9
Control
ΔHSATIII
Control
ΔHSATIII

Merge/DAPI

CHO

Clk1
Gapdh

CHO(His9)

37°C
42ºC 2h
Recovery 1h
Recovery 2h
Recovery 4h
37°C
42ºC 2h
Recovery 1h
Recovery 2h
Recovery 4h

F

37°C 42°C 1h 2h 4h
37°C recovery
Control
ΔHSATIII

G

CHO(His9)

*

0.4

4

CHO

P<0.0001

0.6

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

E

6

0.8

0

CHO(His9)
37°C 42°C2h,37°C1h

*

1

GAPDH

D

5

P<0.0001

1.2

RNA levels

B

4

4

Clk1
Gapdh
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

5

6

2

3

4

5

2

3

5

6

6

4

5

6

Figure 4
A

37°C

B

42°C 2h + 37°C 1h

Temperature change
42°C 2h
+
37°C 37°C 1h

Sonication

Input
HSATIII
Control
Input
HSATIII
Control

Crosslinking
HSATIII lncRNA

HSATIII

Hybridization

Purification

NEAT1
HSATIII ASO

Control oligo

HSATIII ASO

GAPDH

Control oligo

1 2 3 4 5 6

Elution

SAFB

HNRNPM

SRSF1
SRSF7

45

SRSF9

FLAG-PPHLN1

THRAP3

G

merge

merge

DAPI

DAPI

HSATIII

TRA2B

37°C

42°C 2h
+
37°C 1h

Merge

HSATIII

F

DAPI

42°C 2h
+
37°C 1h

α-tubulin

HSATIII

21.5

37°C

SRSF9
HNRNPM
TRA2B
THRAP3

SRSF7
SRSF1

31

E

Control

HSATIII

Input (0.1%)

Input (1%)

Control

HSATIII

SAFB

116
97
66.2

Input (0.1%)

200

42°C 2h
+
37°C 1h

37°C
Input (1%)

HSATIII
Control
Input

kDa

Input

37°C

D

42°C 2h
+
37°C 1h
HSATIII
Control

C

37°C

42°C 2h
+
37°C 1h

Figure 5

B

42°C
1h 2h 3h
37°C 1h

37°C

37°C

42°C
1h

42°C 42°C 2h 42°C
+
2h 37°C 1h 3h

I

I

I

P

P

P

I

P

I

37°C

HSATIII FLAG-CLK1

A

P ChIRP:HSATIII

42°C 2h
+
37°C 1h

42°C 2h

Merge

CLK1
SRSF9
SRSF7

Western blot

DAPI

HSATIII
RT-PCR

C

D
Target-binding
CLK1

Kinase

42°C

484

Putative NLS

FLAG-CLK1WT FLAG-CLK1 KR

FLAG-CLK1WT
FLAG

42°C
+
37°C 42°C 37°C

K191R

FLAG-CLK1KR

37°C 1h

37°C

I P I P I P

42°C
+
37°C 42°C 37°C

I P I P I P ChIRP: HSATIII
FLAG-CLK1

161

FLAG-CLK1ΔC

SRSF9

162

FLAG-CLK1ΔN

Western blot

484

HSATIII

RT-PCR

SV40 NLS

E

F

G

FLAG-CLK1ΔC FLAG-CLK1ΔN

l
SF
9
SRSF9

FLAG-CLK1ΔC
SRSF9

RT-PCR

HSATIII

Western blot
HSATIII
RT-PCR

Co-ChIRP efficiency (%)

SR

I P I P ChIRP: HSATIII
FLAG-CLK1ΔC

*

Western blot

*

tro
FLAG-CLK1ΔN

C
on

I P I P I P ChIRP: HSATIII

si

I P I P I P

FLAG-CLK1ΔC

42°C
+
37°C 42°C 37°C

si

42°C
+
37°C 42°C 37°C

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

siControl siSRSF9

Figure 6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

42°C 2h

42°C 2h
+
37°C 1h

FLAG-CLK1

SRSF9

37°C

DAPI

Recovery 4h

Recovery 2h

Recovery 4h
37°C
42°C 2h

Recovery 2h

Recovery 1h

Recovery 1h

Control

ΔHSATIII

37°C
42°C 2h

DAPI
Recovery +DMSO

DMSO
KH-CB19

37°C + KH-CB19
42°C 2h

Recovery

3
4
5

37°C + DMSO

42°C 2h

1
2

C

Merge

Merge

SRSF2
Merge
DAPI

F

1h

37°C

42°C 2h
+
37°C 1h

HSATIII

SRSF9

SRSF9
HSATIII
Merge
DAPI

D

E

42°C 2h
+
37°C 1h

Recovery + KH-CB19

42°C 2h

37°C

B

42°C 2h
+
37°C 1h

SRSF2

A

a

37°C 42°C 2h 37°C recovery
0h 1h 2h
ΔHSATIII
Control

4h

b

9

10

c
d

12 13 14

15

6
11

7 8

G
37°C 42°C 2h
0h 1h

Recovery

SDS-PAGE
1 2 3 4 5

6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

H

42°C 2h
+
37°C 1h

42°C
2h DMSO KH-CB19
P I P I P I P ChIRP: HSATIII

37°C

DMSO
KH-CB19

I

*

HSATIII-ChIRP

a

b
Phos-Tag SDS-PAGE

c
d

*

Western blot
1

2

3 4 5

6 7

8

*

a

Figure
7 preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
bioRxiv
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

4

P=0.013 P=0.017

P=0.04

*

*

3

P=0.013

*

*

2
1
0

FLAG

WT

RRM RRM

SR/SP repeat

mut

RRM RRM

AR/AP repeat

0

TAF1D minigene
EGFP

2

3

siControl + - - siSRSF9 - + + +
SRSF9 - - WT mut

2
1.5
1
0.5
0

P
P
P

P

PFKP
intron 1

STK4
intron 1

RBM48
intron 3

EP400
intron 2

DNAJB9 minigene

4

EGFP

EGFP

2

EGFP

2 3 4

3

nSB

P

De-phosphorylation

1.5
1
0.5
0

Recovery
Re-phosphorylation
P
P

P

3

P=0.027P=0.0098

Thermal stress
HSATIII lncRNA

2

siControl + - - siSRSF9 - + + +
SRSF9 - - WT mut

P=0.12 P=0.08

P

P

DNAJB9
intron 2

I

Spliced
/unspliced
SRSFs
SR-related proteins

ABHD5
intron 5

0.5

37°C
42°C

Normal

TSR1
intron 5

1.0

H

FLAG-SRSF9
WT mut
37°C
42°C

1.5

KH-CB19

FLAG-SRSF9

1h 4h
Recovery

DMSO
KH-CB19

Spliced
/unspliced

G

siControl
siSRSF9

PFKP
intron 1

or

37°C 42°C

STK4
intron 1

DMSO

3

10

RBM48
intron 3

EU labeling with CHX

20

IR

2.0

2

*

0

37°C 42°C 1h
4h
Recovery

1

P=0.03

EP400
intron 2

1h

TAF1D

30

DNAJB9
intron 2

42°C 2h

Expression level

F
+

TAF1D
intron 3

*

GAPDH

37°C

DAB2
intron 9
P=0.011

Expression level

3

4

ABHD5
intron 5

2

3

TSR1
intron 5

1

4

2

TAF1D
intron 3

TAF1D

3

1

TAF1D
intron 2

2

CLK1

3

DAB2
intron 9

1

Expression level

37°C
42°C 2h
Recovery 1h
Recovery 4h

CLK1

E

CLK1
intron 3

PFKP
intron 1

STK4
intron 1

RBM48
intron 3

EP400
intron 2

ABHD5
intron 5

TSR1
intron 5

TAF1D
intron 3

TAF1D
intron 2

DAB2
intron 9

DNAJB9
intron 2

D

siSRSF9

37°C
42°C 2h
Recovery 1h
Recovery 4h

siControl

0

TAF1D
intron 2

1

C

J

siControl
siSRSF9

P=0.035

2

*

1
0

*

Expression level

2

siControl
siSRSF9

P=0.0017

Spliced

4

CLK1
intron 3

3

B

IR

CLK1
intron 3

Expression level

A

P
P
P

P
P
P

nSB assembly

AAAA

AAAA

CLK1

Promotion of nuclear
inton retention

EGFP

2

EGFP

2 3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/681056; this version posted June 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1 Functional enrichment of HSATIII-interacting proteins
GO ID

Term

Count

P-value

Fold

FDR

Enrichment
GO:0000398

mRNA splicing, via spliceosome

53

3.04E-63

29.05

4.53E-60

GO:0006397

mRNA processing

33

2.90E-34

22.43

4.32E-31

GO:0008380

RNA splicing

30

9.60E-31

21.99

1.43E-27

GO:0031124

mRNA 3'-end processing

21

1.54E-29

51.11

2.29E-26

GO:0006369

termination of RNA polymerase II

22

8.55E-29

41.83

1.27E-25

transcription
GO:0006406

mRNA export from nucleus

23

8.30E-26

27.99

1.24E-22

GO:0006405

RNA export from nucleus

19

8.91E-25

42.04

1.33E-21

GO:0048025

negative regulation of mRNA

13

1.46E-20

75.33

2.18E-17

splicing, via spliceosome
GO:0010467

gene expression

15

1.10E-18

38.03

1.64E-15

GO:0006376

mRNA splice site selection

10

2.81E-15

71.58

4.13E-12

GO:0000381

regulation of alternative mRNA

12

7.06E-15

38.43

1.06E-11

10

6.84E-11

27.65

1.02E-07

splicing, via spliceosome
GO:0010501

RNA secondary structure
unwinding

GO:0006396

RNA processing

11

6.46E-09

13.80

9.62E-06

GO:0000380

alternative mRNA splicing, via

6

6.34E-08

52.15

9.44E-05

6

9.45E-08

48.67

1.41E-04

6

1.57E-06

29.20

0.0023

7

4.43E-06

16.07

0.0066

spliceosome
GO:0048026

positive regulation of mRNA
splicing, via spliceosome

GO:0000375

RNA splicing, via
transesterification reactions

GO:0045727

positive regulation of translation

