medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

A Comprehensive Typing System for Information
Extraction from Clinical Narratives
J. Harry Caufield1,2∗, Yichao Zhou3 , Yunsheng Bai3 , David A. Liem1,2,4 ,
Anders O. Garlid1,2 , Kai-Wei Chang3,5 , Yizhou Sun1,3,5 , Peipei
Ping1,2,4,5,6 , and Wei Wang1,3,5,6
1

The NIH BD2K Center of Excellence in Biomedical Computing
2
3
4
5

Department of Physiology

Department of Computer Science

Department of Medicine/Cardiology
Scalable Analytics Institute (ScAi)
6

UCLA Bioinformatics

University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA

October 11, 2019
Abstract
We have developed ACROBAT (Annotation for Case Reports using Open Biomedical Annotation Terms), a typing system for detailed information extraction from
clinical text. This resource supports detailed identification and categorization of
entities, events, and relations within clinical text documents, including clincal case
reports (CCRs) and the free-text components of electronic health records. Using
ACROBAT and the text of 200 CCRs, we annotated a wide variety of real-world
clinical disease presentations. The resulting dataset, MACCROBAT2018, is a rich
collection of annotated clinical language appropriate for training biomedical natural
language processing systems.
Keywords: annotation; biomedical information extraction; clinical case reports

∗

corresponding author, jcaufield@mednet.ucla.edu

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

1

Introduction

A diverse set of text documents embodies our expanding knowledge of biological phenomena, including human health and disease. Every type of observation, from the semistructured results in experimental studies to the detailed narratives in clinical case reports
(CCRs) or electronic health records (EHR), is growing in volume, variety, and complexity. Any single human reader must therefore perform extensive labor when using clinical
narratives to comprehensively answer biomedical questions, especially when comparing
observations across medical subdomains. The structured data yielded by foundational
advances in biomedical information extraction (BioIE) is of great assistance in addressing
this challenge: they can consistently identify concepts and events within specific domains
and tasks. However, interpreting biomedical text with the greatest accuracy depends
upon (sub)domain knowledge: e.g., the word “elongated” may describe different types
of clinically concerning but surgically correctable deformities, such as an elongated tricuspid valve leaflet in the heart or an elongated styloid process in the skull (i.e., Eagle’s
syndrome (1)). Identification of specialized terminology with highly contextual semantics
within biological and clinical text remains an open challenge for BioIE methods.
Recognizing the need for resources supporting adaptation of BioIE to clinical narratives, we seek to standardize the entity, event, and relation types within clinical text with
a high degree of granularity. Previous work toward addressing this challenge has defined
entities though both comprehensive lexicons and high-level types (e.g., the UMLS Semantic Network’s 133 semantic types and 54 relationship types (2), the MeSH (3) controlled
vocabulary, or terms in the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (4)). These
resources support thorough biomedical document indexing but face limitations as a basis
for clinical IE, particularly as they are intended to represent general biomedical phenomena and observations. More specific clinical coding systems (e.g., LOINC (5), HL7 FHIR
(6), ICD-10 (7), or the newly released ICD-11 (8)) exhaustively represent medical events
but may require more detail than that afforded by clinical text: a report stating that “microscopic examination of a biopsy revealed a typical LCH” first requires understanding
that the LCH is the rare cancer Langerhans-cell histiocytosis, yet accurate assignment of
an ICD-10 code demands knowledge of this disease’s progression through the body (i.e.,
whether it is unifocal or disseminated). Extensive knowledge of each coding system’s
intricate hierarchy is therefore necessary for their application to IE in clinical narratives.
We therefore sought to design a typing system for clinical text capable of reflecting
the diverse vocabulary and phenomena described within a clinical document without
requiring direct connections to curated concepts or terminology. We believe this approach
is ideal for designing practical BioIE systems as it primarily reflects the semantics of
terminology as it is used rather than an exact correspondence between a set of vocabulary
and their expected meaning. A context-driven approach is also intuitive for clinical

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

domain experts. In the above example with the word “elongated”, for example, it is
crucial to consistently identify elongated as a modifier of a specific anatomical entity
in each case, rather than simply the entities as elongated tricuspid valve leaflet and
elongated styloid process. Though the distinction imparted by this level of granularity
appears minor, it is not common practice among the few clinical text datasets available
for public use.
Our result is a system for Annotation for Case Reports using Open Biomedical Annotation Terms (ACROBAT). ACROBAT is a set of concepts, categories, and relations
(in short, a typing system) for representation of medical language. We have specifically
designed this system to identify terms and spans within CCRs, though the types are
sufficiently broad to afford generalization to other document types written in biomedical
language. This system does not correspond to a single ontology, i.e., it does not incorporate a controlled vocabulary or lexicon. Regarding IE methods, we see this system
as foundational to implementation of model-driven BioIE, and with this goal in mind
we have completed a set of annotations for each of 200 CCRs. To our knowledge, this
collection is the only collection of CCRs deeply annotated for both entities and relations.
The number of documents in our corpus exceeds that of other deeply-annotated biomedical corpora (e.g., the 97 documents within the CRAFT corpus (9), though we note our
documents include only case report text rather than complete manuscript text) while
remaining a manageable size for a variety of biomedical IE explorations. All data are
available on Figshare (https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.4652765).

2
2.1

Methods
General design of the ACROBAT clinical typing system

ACROBAT is appropriate for manual annotation, automated labeling (i.e., named entity
recognition and relation extraction), or a combination of both. For each document in
a corpus, ACROBAT should be used to label all words and phrases in the document
corresponding to one or more of the types described in Tables 1 and 3 below. We make a
distinction between events and entities: events occur during specific points in time (i.e.,
they may be arranged into a timeline) while entities are other meaningful text spans,
often those modifying or describing properties of events. As a general guideline, the
smallest span describing a single entity or event is labeled: for example, in the phrase
massive heart attack, the labeled event is heart attack, as “heart attack” refers to a specific
condition and attack alone is too general. The term massive describes is an entity in its
own right; the term is a modifier of the Severity type. Words and phrases are labeled
even if they do not specifically discuss a patient, e.g., if the authors discuss hypothetical
situations or a patient’s family members. This increases the total number of annotated
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

instances and therefore the total pool of potential training examples. Labels may also
overlap where appropriate or when multiple labels apply.
ACROBAT incorporates relations for semantic purposes, coreference resolution, and
temporal order (see Table 4). Semantic relations cover all instances in which an entity
modifies or results from another event or entity in any manner. For coreferences, an
event/entity and any of its coreferences within a single document are linked through
pairwise relations. Temporal order defines events within a continuous time series (e.g.,
event 1 → event 2 → event 3 ). Directionality is meaningful in ACROBAT and all
relations (with the exception of Identity relations) are directed. ACROBAT also supports
event properties for indication of changes over time or event negation (see Table 2). In
cases where an abbreviation is present (e.g., optical coherence tomography (OCT)), the full
name (optical coherence tomography and the abbreviation (OCT ) are labeled as separate
events and connected with an Identity relation.

2.2

Events in the clinical typing system

Events (Table 1) include words or phrases indicating a discrete activity or occurrence in
a document. In this section, we describe each event category, delineate annotation rules,
and provide examples. See Table 1 for summaries of event types and Figure 1 for an
example of event annotation.

Figure 1: Example visualization of event annotation in a clinical case report. The source
report describes a case of Still’s disease, a rare autoinflammatory condition (10). All
annotations shown here are events, with the exception of institution, which is a Nonbiological location. Labels are colored by type.

2.2.1

Activity

These events include any word or phrase describing a physical activity performed by a
subject once, multiple times, or regularly (e.g., a habit), outside an explicitly clinical
context. These activities may or may not refer to accidents, e.g., the phrase fell out of
bed. Additional examples include dancing, falling from a bicycle, smoking, drinking, or
eating.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 1: Event types.
Type
Activity
Clinical event

Description
Patient actions and habits.
A clinical activity other than a medical procedure, often
involving a change of Nonbiological location.
Diagnostic procedure Any procedure done primarily in order to obtain more
information.
Disease disorder
Any disease. Essentially a higher-level medical condition
potentially including a collection of symptoms.
Lab value
Any result of a laboratory test or a diagnostic result,
including any units or values present.
Medication
Any pharmaceutical treatment. Used with Administration and Dosage entities.
Outcome
The patient’s clinical outcome.
Sign symptom
Any symptom or clinical finding.
Therapeutic procedure Any procedure done primarily in order to address or
alleviate a symptom or disease. This includes surgery,
long-term therapies, and supporting procedures (e.g., intubation).
Time expressions
Date
A time expression ending at a specific day in time.
Duration
A time expression describing a period of time, generally
specifying an event has occurred continuously over the
given duration.
Time
A time expression describing a specific point in time.
Other event
Any event with clinical relevance that does not fit into
any of the above categories.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

2.2.2

Clinical event

These events include any word or phrase describing clinical events relating to administrative procedures and practices outside a diagnostic or therapeutic context. A change
in Nonbiological location is often involved or implied. Examples include presented, transferred, admitted, or discharged.
2.2.3

Diagnostic procedure

These events include any word or phrase comprising the name of any procedure performed for diagnostic purposes, i.e., to collect more information about a patient or any
symptom. The definition of a diagnostic procedure in this scheme is intentionally broad
in order to capture numerous terminology variations and implicit tests: it includes formal
names of procedures, physical examinations, imaging, lab tests, and diagnostic screens
for specific conditions. For example, in the phrase “C-reactive protein was not elevated”,
C-reactive protein is a diagnostic procedure due to context despite the lack of an explicitly stated test. Procedures may yield qualitative and/or quantitative results, expressed
as Lab value events connected to the Diagnostic procedure through a MODIFY relation.
Subprocedures are defined using the SUB PROCEDURE relation type. Additional examples include clinical examination, colonoscopy, iron concentration, ultrasonography, or
electrocardiogram.
2.2.4

Disease disorder

These events include any word or phrase comprising the name of a disease, health disorder, or injury. These include specific names (e.g., type 2 diabetes), high-level conditions
(e.g., infection; metastasis), categories of disease (e.g., mitochondrial disease), infective
agents (e.g., Salmonella enterica), anatomical abnormalities (e.g., stenosis), and specific
varieties of neoplastic growth (e.g., adenocarcinoma). In general, Disease disorder events
describe conditions which may involve a collection of signs or symptoms. Additional
examples include myocardial infarction, hydrocephalus, autonomic dysregulation, speech
deficits, or perforation.
2.2.5

Lab value

These events include any word of phrase comprising, in any format, any result of a
diagnostic procedure, e.g., a blood pressure of 130/100 mmHg, ejection fraction of 40%,
low platelet count, or slowly regained renal function. Lab value events may also relate
to signs and symptoms, e.g., 5 tumors, tachycardic to 170 bpm, or enlarging mass.
Additional examples include: histological examination was normal, body mass of 60 kg,
positive for adipophilin, or cancer (T3N1M0 ).

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

2.2.6

Medication

These events include all names of medications and pharmaceutical treatments, including general classes of compounds and drug therapies. Examples include medication,
chemotherapy, vancomycin, Tris-hydroxymethyl aminomethane, or sedation.
2.2.7

Outcome

These events include any brief but explicit explanation of a case outcome. This is contextual, as any description of a patient’s state at the beginning of a disease progression is
by definition not an outcome. Outcome events are therefore located near or at the end of
documents. Clinical cases may frequently omit patient outcomes, particularly if they are
not known or are indicated by other events (e.g., an autopsy, though not labeled as an
outcome, implicitly states a patient has died). Examples include asymptomatic, excellent
result, death, or expired.
2.2.8

Sign symptom

These events include any description of a symptom or clinical finding. These words or
phrases may include general conditions whether they are localized or not (e.g., pain,
fever, rash, or dizziness); descriptions of abnormal or unexpected conditions, potentially
accompanied by specific diagnostic procedures and Lab value events (e.g., anemia, weight
loss, tachycardia, or leukocytosis); localized conditions dependent upon anatomical context (e.g., extremities were warm, stenosis of the left main coronary artery, or enlarged
gallbladder); or uncharacterized abnormal growths (e.g., mass, lesions, or tumor ). Results of diagnostic procedures, histological examinations, and imaging describing clinically
concerning findings are also Sign symptom events, e.g., foam cells, contrast defect was
observed, or abnormality. Additional examples include unable to move, erythematous
mucosa, gastrointestinal symptoms, or metastases in the right adrenal gland.
2.2.9

Therapeutic procedure

These events include any word or phrase comprising the name of any procedure performed
for therapeutic treatment purposes, i.e., to address the cause or symptoms of a disease
or disorder. These procedures may support other procedures (e.g., intubation), including
surgery (e.g., opened, drainage tube, or cleaned ). Additional examples include radiation
therapy, arterial embolization, surgical repair, anastomosis, or blood transfusions.
2.2.10

Time expressions

Date events are time expressions including any word or phrase denoting a specific day,
whether in absolute or relative time (i.e., specifying an exact date or a day with a date
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

contingent on knowing other dates or times, respectively). These are similar to Duration
expressions in practice but have discrete endpoints and may describe events that did not
occur continuously during the specified time (e.g., A happened, then B happened on this
date). Examples include April 7 1982, Monday, or two months later.
Duration events are time expressions including any word or phrase denoting a period
of time. They generally indicate a seperate event has occured continuously or regularly
over the course of the time period. Examples include one week, two months, or overnight.
Time events include any work or phrase describing a specific point in time at granularity more specific than days. Examples include 3 PM, 15 minutes later, 40 hours later,
or a few minutes later.
2.2.11

Other event

Other events of clinical note occur regularly among labeled events. These events are labeled when they relate to specific patients (e.g., do not describe general phenomena across
patient populations or medical practice), extenuating circumstances, and/or when their
meaning cannot be determined from the surrounding text. Examples include national
shortage, difficulty in operating surgical equipment, resistance, or earthquake.

2.3

Properties in the clinical typing system

Properties (Table 2) are attributes of a single event. All events may include values for
neither, one, or both properties.
The Polarity property indicates negation or how certain a document’s author’s are
regarding the reported event. All events implicitly have a Polarity of POS by default,
indicating no uncertainty; a value of NEG indicates an event was specified but did not
happen (e.g., the patient reported no pain; surgery was not performed). Polarity values
of MAYBE POS, MAYBE NEG, or UNCERTAIN indicate an event may have, may not have, or
has little certainty to have completely occurred, respectively (e.g., influenza was suspected but not confirmed; almost complete resolution of bilateral infiltrates, suspicion of
embolism).
The Trend property indicates change in an event over time. Its value is one of DEC, INC,
or STAY, representing any stated decrease, increase, or constancy, respectively. Examples
include: symptoms subsided over time, progressive dysphagia, or fever was sustained.

2.4

Entities in the clinical typing system

Entities include words or phrases that do not completely constitute a clinical event on
their own but generally modify an event or subject. See Figure 2 for an example of their
usage along with event annotations.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 2: Property types.
Type
Polarity

Trend

Description
Expresses certainty and/or completeness of an event’s
occurrence (MAYBE POS, MAYBE NEG, UNCERTAIN) or its
negation (NEG).
Expresses whether a event has decreased (DEC), increased (INC), or remained the same (STAY) over time,
as explicitly stated within the text.

Figure 2: Example visualization of entity annotation in a clinical case report. The source
is a clinical case report describing a case of breast cancer (and, later in the report,
cardiomyopathy) (11). Relations are omitted and labels are colored by type.
2.4.1

Physical description modifiers

These entities include any word or phrase serving as a modifier of an event’s physical
properties. Where applicable, entities include both values and units. Multiple sets of
units and values may be present. Values may be expressed quantitatively or qualitatively.
Physical description modifier entities include the following types:
• Area: any expression of two-dimensional space or surface area. Examples include
10 cm2 , 2 cm x 7 cm, or 2.5 cm x 2.4 cm in diameter.
• Color: examples include red, salmon-colored, pigmented, or yellowish.
• Distance: any expression of one-dimensional length. Examples include 3.6 cm in
height, up to 15 mm in diameter, or 50 mm long.
• Mass: examples include 50 mg or ten kg.
• Shape: examples include ovoid, spindle-shaped, crystalline, or bubbly.
• Texture: examples include soft, smooth, or ground-glass.
• Volume: any expression of three-dimensional space. Examples include 50 ml, 2.8
cm x 2.8 cm x 2.5 cm, or 600 cc.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 3: Entity types.
Type
Administration
Age
Area
Biological structure

Description
Mode of administration of a drug or other therapy.
Demographics. Patient age at time of presentation.
Any area. Includes value and units.
Any part of the body, from the cellular level to general
areas.
Color
A color.
Detailed description
Any detail of an event or other entity.
Diagnostic standard
A single qualitative or qualitative standard used to make
a diagnostic conclusion.
Distance
Length, width, height or other 1-dimensional attributes.
Includes value and units.
Dosage
A complex numerical expression describing medication
or therapy dosage. Minimally requires an amount and
frequency, including values and units. May be expressed
by weight.
Frequency
An expression describing how often an event occurs. For
drug dosages, prefer the Dosage entity.
Gene or protein
The name or other identifier of a gene or protein.
Mass
Any measurement of physical mass. Includes value and
units.
Nonbiological location Any physical location other than those on or within a
patient’s body.
Occupation
Any description of a subject’s daily activities.
Personal background
Demographics. Any description of subject ethnicity or
national background.
Qualitative concept
A detail of an event or other entity describing it in general terms. A high-level category for which other labels
may be appropriate.
Quantitative concept A numerical value. A high-level category for which other
labels may be appropriate.
Severity
Degree of a disease or symptom’s severity.
Sex
Demographics. Patient sex at time of presentation.
Shape
A shape.
Subject
Any individual related to or of medical relevance to the
patient. Does not include clinical personnel.
Texture
A texture.
Volume
Any volume, including that of bodily fluids. Includes
value and units.
History expressions
History
Any description of subject medical history.
Family history
Any description of a patient’s family medical history.
Other entity
Any event with clinical relevance that does not fit into
any other type.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

2.4.2

Procedure modifiers

These entities modify Medication events or relevant procedures (e.g., radiation therapy).
They have the types Administration and Dosage. Administration includes any expression
indicating how a material or procedure is administered to a patient, including method or
mode of entry; examples include injection, intravenous, mouth rinse, parenteral, or p.o.
(i.e., by mouth). Dosage includes any expression indicating amount and/or frequency of
a material’s administration. Please note that, in absence of context, these values may
appear identical to Mass or Volume entities; examples include 500 mg daily for 3 days,
60 UI/kg/day, 5000 cGY in 25 fractions, high dose, 4 boluses/month, four infusions, or
800 mg.
2.4.3

Patient modifiers

These entities modify the patient. For this reason, they do not generally participate in
relationships, but are instead implicitly understood to modify the document’s primary
subject. These entities include:
• Age: examples include 65-year-old, 20 years old, newborn, or teenage.
• Family history: any set of words or phrases describing medical history and events
experienced by someone related to the patient. Note that events within these spans
are also annotated as necessary, e.g., the span heart failure within his brother died
of heart failure is a Disease disorder event. Examples include family history of
hypertension, her aunt was a carrier of the mutation, his parents and two older
brothers were healthy, or parents were cousins.
• History: any set of words or phrases describing the patient’s medical history. As
with Family history, events within the span receive their own annotations. Examples include pregnancy, diabetes, no history of smoking, past medical history was
unremarkable, or history of controlled hypertension.
• Occupation: any expression describing the patient’s daily activities or surrounding
environment. Examples include police officer, student, office worker, works on a
farm, or worked in a chemical plant for 30 years.
• Personal background: any expression describing the patient’s national, cultural, or
ethnic background. Examples include Japanese, Caucasian, from the UAE, American, Spanish descent, or African-American.
• Sex: any expression describing the patient’s biological sex at the time of the report.
This may be implicit in documents describing generally sex-specific diseases such
as obstetric conditions, e.g., primipara is a valid annotation for Sex as it implicitly
states the patient is female. Additional examples include woman, male, or boy.
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

2.4.4

Biological structure

Entities of this type include any words or phrases describing an anatomical location of any
size. Examples include blood vessel, left femoral vein, liver, left side of body, mitochondria,
subcutaneous, or mediastinal lymph nodes.
2.4.5

Detailed description

These entities include any modifier not included in other entity types. They often include
phrases differentiating Sign symptom, Disease disorder, or procedure events: they may
describe conditions (e.g., sudden cardiopulmonary arrest), extent (e.g., right-sided paralysis), subtype (e.g., group B streptococcus; pleomorphic carcinoma), or type of diagnostic
(e.g., serum uric acid). Additional examples include emergent intubation, fiberoptic bronchoscopy, spontaneous mesenchimal haematoma, congenital bleeding disorder, or recent
travel.
2.4.6

Frequency

Entities of this type describe how often an event occurs. Examples include twice a week,
daily, occasionally, or intermittent.
2.4.7

Nonbiological location

These entities include any description of a location in physical, geographic, non-anatomical
terms. These terms include names of clinical practitioners (e.g., cardiologist) as these
statements generally refer to a specific location as well. Examples include our hospital,
cardiac intensive care unit, Boston, home, or emergency department.
2.4.8

Severity

Entities of this type include any description of a symptom or disease’s degree of severity.
Examples include severe, mild, slight, extensive, or profuse.
2.4.9

Subject

These entities identify individuals in the document other than the patient. They may
include family members. They generally do not include clinical personnel. Examples
include his uncle, mother, or her cousin.
2.4.10

Other entity and general modifiers

Entities of clinical relevance but not appropriate for other types are labeled with either
Qualitative concept or Quantitative concept if they modify another event or entity. All

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

others receive Other entity annotations.
2.4.11

Entities supporting knowledgebase linkage

Two entity types, Diagnostic standard and Gene or protein, support connections to biomedical knowledge bases. Neither is used in clinical report annotation as they are rarely
stated explicitly and therefore constitute domain knowledge. Diagnostic standard entities include any standard to which the result of a diagnostic procedure (i.e., a Lab value)
is compared. They may be expressed in natural language, e.g., normal lactate concentration is less than 1.6 mMol/L. We note that diagnostic standards are often contextual
and subject to patient background, including sex, ethnic background, and presence of comorbidities. Linkage to diagnostic standards is therefore intended to serve as a means of
additional interpretative context rather than a means of diagnosis. For Gene or protein,
any identifier of a human gene, protein, or non-coding transcript constitutes an entity.
Examples include BRCA2, P51587 (a UniprotKB identifier), or PHF8.

2.5

Relations in the clinical typing system

Relations are connections between entities or events. There are two general categories of
relations: those used to express the temporal order of events (BEFORE, AFTER, and
OVERLAP), and those used to define more specific relationships. Nearly all relationships, unless otherwise specified, are defined through the MODIFY relation. Examples
include lumbar MODIFY→ hernias, moderate MODIFY→ hypokinesis, clinical examination ←MODIFY tachypnea, or respiratory rate ←MODIFY 16 breaths per minute.
Note that relation directionality is relevant, and in cases where a procedure yields another
event, the source of the relation is the result (e.g., the Lab value 16 breaths per minute)
while the origin (e.g., the Diagnostic procedure respiratory rate) is the target. Several
relation types and their contexts are illustrated in Figure 3.
2.5.1

Temporal relations

All events are connected by three temporal order relations: BEFORE, OVERLAP, and
AFTER. Events happening within the same general timeframe are connected by OVERLAP relations. A new time frame begins if and when the text describes an event as
being before or after another, if a time period of more than 24 hours is indicated, or
the patient is moved somewhere (e.g., transferred to a different department, generally
noted as a new Nonbiological location). These changes are annotated with BEFORE or
AFTER relations. For example, in the case of “A happens. B happens. C happens.” the
connecting temporal relations are (A BEFORE→ B) and (B BEFORE→ C); there is no
(A BEFORE→ C) relation included. Time is assumed to progress continuously across

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 4: Relation types.
Type
MODIFY

Temporal relations
AFTER
BEFORE
OVERLAP
Causal relations
CAUSE
Identity
IDENTICAL
Subprocedures
SUB PROCEDURE
Relations
supporting
knowledgebase linkage
ENCODES

INTERACTS WITH

INVOLVES ANATOMY

INVOLVES GENE

IS A PROCEDURE

IS COMPARED TO

Description
A generic relationship in which one entity or event
modifies another entity or event, including instances
where an entity is identified following an event.
Defines temporal order.
Defines temporal order.
Defines temporal order.
An explicitly stated relationship of cause and effect.
A relation indication that two entities or events refer
to the same concept.
A relation in which one procedure is a component of
another, rather than a new procedure in its own right.

A relation stating that a gene encodes a protein. Primarily sourced from knowledge beyond the case report.
A relation describing a protein-protein interaction.
Primarily sourced from knowledge beyond the case
report.
A relation describing explicit or implicit involvement
of an anatomical location in an entity or event. Primarily sourced from knowledge beyond the case report.
A relation describing the potential for involvement of
a gene in a disease event, including if disruption of
the gene or its product is associated with the disease.
Primarily sourced from knowledge beyond the case
report.
A relation stating that a stated event is implicitly
a procedure or the result of a procedure. Primarily
sourced from knowledge beyond the case report.
A relation between a Lab value and a Diagnostic standard.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 3: Example visualization of relation annotation in a clinical case report. The
source is a clinical case report describing a case of acute dilated cardiomyopathy (12).
Temporal, identity, and modifier relations are all included, as are subprocedures (i.e.,
the arterial blood gas procedure has four subprocedures mentioned in the document: pH,
pCO2, paO2, and BE ).
sentences. The direction of arrows for temporal order relations is always forward, i.e.
from a previous entity to a later one.
2.5.2

Causal relations

Causality is annotated only when expressed explicitly in the text. Examples include death
←CAUSE exsanguination or pericardial effusion CAUSE→ cardiac tamponade.
2.5.3

Identity

Words or phrases referring to identical concepts or events are connected with the IDENTICAL relation type. These include coreferences (e.g., tissue samples (...) IDENTICAL→
the samples) and instances where an acronym follows an event or entity (e.g., left eye
IDENTICAL→ LE ).
2.5.4

Subprocedures

Therapeutic or diagnostic procedures performed as part of a more general procedure are
connected with the SUB PROCEDURE relation type. Examples include:
blood test ←SUB PROCEDURE white blood cell count or
laboratory evaluations ←SUB PROCEDURE hemoglobin.
2.5.5

Relations supporting knowledgebase linkage

The following relation types support connections to biomedical knowledge bases. They
are not used in clinical report text annotation.
ENCODES: this relation type supports links between genes and proteins, where both
source and target are Gene or protein entities, e.g.
HSD17B10 ENCODES→ 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase type-2.
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

INTERACTS WITH: this relation type supports representation of protein-protein interactions, e.g. 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase type-2 INTERACTS WITH→ Eukaryotic
initiation factor 4A-III. Both source and target are Gene or protein entities.
INVOLVES ANATOMY: this relation type represents involvement of a Sign symptom or
Disease disorder event in an anatomic context, i.e., a connection to a Biological structure
entity beyond those described in the document. Examples include:
pulmonary hypertension INVOLVES ANATOMY→ pulmonary artery or
pyloric stenosis INVOLVES ANATOMY→ pylorus.
INVOLVES GENE: this relation type represents conceptual association between a Disease disorder and a Gene or protein, as defined through domain knowledge. Examples
include hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia INVOLVES GENE→ ENG or cerebral cavernous malformations-1 INVOLVES GENE→ CCM1.
IS A PROCEDURE: this relation type represents a connection between an implied procedure and an explicitly defined one. The source event may be a Diagnostic procedure or a
Sign symptom implying a procedure was performed, e.g., lactates IS A PROCEDURE→
blood lactate concentration.
IS COMPARED TO: this relation type supports connections between Diagnostic standard
entities and Lab value events, e.g. 140 bpm IS COMPARED TO→ normal adult resting
heart rate is 60 to 100 bpm.

2.6

Coreferences

Rather than denoting specific events, Coreferences label words or phrases referring to
previously defined events or entities (i.e., linguistic anaphora). Annotating a coreference
therefore defines a relation but takes the form of an event in our system to accomodate
labeling of the corresponding text spans. Coreferences must be linked to the last instance
of their corresponding referenced term (i.e., their antecedent) with an IDENTICAL relation. Examples include it, they, the samples, such that the terms may refer to carcinoma,
the patient’s parents, or biopsy results, respectively. Coreference tags are also used in
instances where an equivalent term is used instead of that used previously (e.g., if a carcinoma is referred to as a tumor two sentences later, tumor is labeled as a Coreference)
and instances where an identical phrase is repeated but refers to the same event rather
than a new occurrence.

2.7

Annotation of clinical case reports

In order to prepare a deeply annotated resource of clinical text, we sought to annotate
clinical case reports using the schema described above. This work follows from creation
of our Metadata Acquired from Clinical Case Reports, or MACCR, set (13): each source
document in the new set corresponds to a single entry, and therefore a collection of higher16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

level metadata, in our MACCR dataset. We therefore refer to our set of deeply annotated
CCRs as MACCROBAT2018. For each of 200 documents, we obtained open-access text
from PubMed Central, limiting the text portion to that comprising the clinical case (i.e.,
we did not include any other sections including introduction, discussion, figure/table
legends, or supplementary materials). The document count was chosen based on manageability; subsequent releases will add more annotated documents. Each document in
the set is named based on the respective PubMed identifier of their source document. All
documents were selected based on the following criteria:
• They are present in the MACCR set.
• They concern only a single, human patient each (or, a single mother and child).
• They are in English.
All documents were annotated by at least one of six annotators, all either senior
undergraduate university students or post-doctoral researchers. All annotators had previous experience reading biomedical and clinical language. Annotations were checked
for format and type consistency upon completion. Annotation was performed through
an implementation of the brat tool (14); all annotation visualizations presented in this
manuscript were created with brat. An example of annotation of a CCR is provided in
Figure 4.
The MACCROBAT2018 set can be downloaded at the following location through
Figshare: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.4652765

3

Results

The MACCROBAT2018 is intended to serve multiple purposes. This collection of annotations serves as both a demonstration of the ACROBAT scheme: each document is
annotated with all appropriate event and entity types as well as relations, thereby providing numerous contextual examples of the typing scheme’s implementation. The set
is also ideal for training/testing BioIE methods as it covers a variety of disease presentations and corresponding vocabulary: the 200 documents in the set contain an average
of 22.7 sentences, or 4,541 sentences in total, with sentences containing an average of
21.6 single-word tokens and 98,038 tokens in total. Because the text is annotated with
multiple label and relation types, it may be used for the initial training of joint models
(e.g., a tagger for both diagnostic procedure events and their results).
The MACCROBAT2018 set contains a total of 3,652 sentences and 59,164 annotations
of any kind, including event/entity labels and relations. Further counts of annotations
by type are detailed in Table 5 for events/entities and Table 6 for relations. Out of all
categories and all 200 CCRs, Diagnostic procedure events occur most frequently, with
17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 4: Example visualization of a selection of an ACROBAT annotated document.
The source is a clinical case report describing a case of esophageal cancer (15). Labels
are colored by type. Labels with asterisks indicate those with property values, e.g.,
malnutrition in the first line has a POLARITY of NEG as this event is mentioned as not
having been observed.
an average of more than 45 occurrences per document. The set also includes more than
6,700 annotations of signs/symptoms and more than 3,500 lab values.
As compared to other annotated corpora in biomedicine, MACCROBAT includes far
more entity and relation types, as well as explicitly defined types for integration with
knowledgebases. Sets with similar or greater numbers of coreferences (e.g., the GENIA
(16), 2011 i2b2 Coreference Challenge (17), ODIE (18), or CRAFT (9) corpora) have been
completed but do not exclusively focus on clinical language and, in some cases, are freely
available in their entirety. As coreferences are not the primary focus of our annotations,
it may be appropriate to use our set along with other corpora for applications in training
coreference resolution models.

4

Discussion

A consistent set of concept types is a valuable resource for biomedical informatics in both
philosophy and practice. We see the diverse event, entity, property, and relationship
types defined by ACROBAT as a way to formalize the specific details particular to a
clinical case report or clinical narrative, such that the text within these documents can

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 5: Event and entity annotation counts.
Type
Activity
Administration
Age
Area
Biological structure
Clinical event
Color
Coreference
Date
Detailed description
Diagnostic procedure
Disease disorder
Distance
Dosage
Duration
Family history
Frequency
History
Lab value
Mass
Medication
Nonbiological location
Occupation
Other entity
Other event
Outcome
Personal background
Qualitative concept
Quantitative concept
Severity
Sex
Shape
Sign symptom
Subject
Texture
Therapeutic procedure
Time
Volume

19

Count
216
175
207
43
2,931
1,252
53
626
1,462
2,901
9,135
2,724
122
362
560
81
77
392
3,565
2
2,152
354
13
20
44
84
57
41
31
369
191
65
6,718
54
46
2,010
114
33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 6: Relation annotation counts.
Type
AFTER
BEFORE
CAUSE
IDENTICAL
MODIFY
OVERLAP
SUB PROCEDURE

Count
387
1,984
149
780
11,471
1,997
1,362

be treated as structured data. Our goal in designing this system is to provide a means to
enforce structure on a variety of concept types within clinical text while not mandating
mapping of entities to a particular vocabulary (e.g., terms may or may not be present
in SNOMED CT or MeSH) or coding system (e.g., concepts may or may not correspond
to ICD-10/11 codes). Additionally, events and entity types may vary in frequency of
occurrence in a given text corpus, as is seen with our annotated MACCROBAT2018
resource. We hold that these realities reflect the nature of biomedical language: it is
far more variable in its semantics between documents, subjects, and authors than any
single index, typing system, or ontology can capture. Therefore, we see ACROBAT and
MACCROBAT2018 as a way to manually or computationally enforce structure upon
biomedical language, and in doing so, produce resources for training and developing
systems for better understanding the concepts within clinical documents and publications.

5

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Sanjana Murali for insightful input and feedback during
the design of ACROBAT, as well as help with annotation. We are also grateful for
annotation assistance from Jessica Lee, Linda Do, and Jonathan Quach. No competing
interests are declared.

6

Funding

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants U54GM114833 and
R35HL135772.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

References
[1] L. Balbuena, D. Hayes, S. G. Ramirez, and R. Johnson. Eagle’s syndrome (elongated
styloid process). Southern Medical Journal, 90(3):331–4, Mar 1997. ISSN 0038-4348.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1097/00007611-199703000-00014.
[2] A. T. McCray, A. R. Aronson, A. C. Browne, T. C. Rindflesch, A. Razi, and S. Srinivasan. UMLS knowledge for biomedical language processing. Bulletin of the Medical
Library Association, 81(2):184–94, Apr 1993. ISSN 0025-7338.
[3] U.S. National Library of Medicine. Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) Fact Sheet,
2019. URL https://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/.
[4] E. G. Brown, L. Wood, and S. Wood. The Medical Dictionary for Regulatory
Activities (MedDRA). Drug Safety, 20(2):109–117, 1999. ISSN 0114-5916. doi:
10.2165/00002018-199920020-00002.
[5] C. J. McDonald. LOINC, a Universal Standard for Identifying Laboratory Observations: A 5-Year Update. Clinical Chemistry, 49(4):624–633, Apr 2003. ISSN
0009-9147. doi: 10.1373/49.4.624.
[6] D. Bender and K. Sartipi. HL7 FHIR: An Agile and RESTful approach to healthcare
information exchange. In Proceedings of the 26th IEEE International Symposium on
Computer-Based Medical Systems, pages 326–331. IEEE, Jun 2013. ISBN 978-14799-1053-3. doi: 10.1109/CBMS.2013.6627810.
[7] CDC/National Center for Health Statistics.
ICD-10-CM Official Guidelines
for Coding and Reporting, 2017. URL https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/icd/
10cmguidelines_fy2018_final.pdf.
[8] World Health Organization. ICD-11 Reference Guide, 2019. URL https://icd.
who.int/icd11refguide/en/index.html.
[9] K. B. Cohen, A. Lanfranchi, M. J.-Y. Choi, M. Bada, W. A. Baumgartner, N. Panteleyeva, K. Verspoor, M. Palmer, and L. E. Hunter. Coreference annotation and
resolution in the Colorado Richly Annotated Full Text (CRAFT) corpus of biomedical journal articles. BMC Bioinformatics, 18(1):372, Dec 2017. ISSN 1471-2105.
doi: 10.1186/s12859-017-1775-9.
[10] P. Carrilho-Ferreira, D. Silva, M. de Jesus Silva, R. André, M. G. Varela, and A. N.
Diogo. Adult-Onset Still’s Disease and Cardiac Tamponade: A Rare Association.
Texas Heart Institute Journal, 42(3):277–280, jun 2015. ISSN 0730-2347. doi: 10.
14503/THIJ-14-4101. URL http://thij.org/doi/10.14503/THIJ-14-4101.
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009118; this version posted October 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

[11] S. Kumar, R. Marfatia, S. Tannenbaum, C. Yang, and E. Avelar. Doxorubicininduced cardiomyopathy 17 years after chemotherapy. Texas Heart Institute Journal,
39(3):424–427, 2012.
[12] T.-B. Nymark, A. Hovland, H. Bjørnstad, and E. W. Nielsen. A young man with
acute dilated cardiomyopathy associated with methylphenidate. Vascular Health and
Risk Management, 4(2):477–479, 2008. doi: 10.2147/VHRM.S2410.
[13] J. H. Caufield, Y. Zhou, A. O. Garlid, S. P. Setty, D. A. Liem, Q. Cao, J. M. Lee,
S. Murali, S. Spendlove, W. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Sun, A. Bui, H. Hermjakob, K. E.
Watson, and P. Ping. A reference set of curated biomedical data and metadata from
clinical case reports. Scientific Data, 5:180258, Nov 2018. ISSN 2052-4463. doi:
10.1038/sdata.2018.258.
[14] P. Stenetorp, S. Pyysalo, G. Topić, T. Ohta, S. Ananiadou, and J. Tsujii. brat: a
Web-based Tool for NLP-Assisted Text Annotation. In Proceedings of the Demonstrations Session at EACL 2012, 2012. URL http://brat.nlplab.org.
[15] I. Botrugno, V. Jemos, L. Cobianchi, G. Fiandrino, S. Brugnatelli, V. Perfetti,
A. Vercelli, M. Maestri, and P. Dionigi. A metachronous splenic metastases from
esophageal cancer: a case report. World Journal of Surgical Oncology, 9:105, Sep
2011. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-9-105.
[16] J.-D. Kim, T. Ohta, Y. Tateisi, and J. Tsujii. GENIA corpus–a semantically annotated corpus for bio-textmining. Bioinformatics, 19(Suppl 1):i180–i182, Jul 2003.
ISSN 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg1023.
[17] O. Uzuner, A. Bodnari, S. Shen, T. Forbush, J. Pestian, and B. R. South. Evaluating
the state of the art in coreference resolution for electronic medical records. Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA, 19(5):786–791, Sep 2012.
ISSN 1527-974X. doi: 10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000784.
[18] G. K. Savova, W. W. Chapman, J. Zheng, and R. S. Crowley. Anaphoric relations in
the clinical narrative: corpus creation. Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association : JAMIA, 18(4):459–465, Jul 2011. ISSN 1067-5027. doi: 10.1136/
amiajnl-2011-000108.

22

