medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Novel delivery of cellular therapy to reduce ischaemia reperfusion injury in
kidney transplantation
One Sentence Summary: Ex-vivo reconditioning of human kidneys using Multipotent Adult
Progenitor Cell therapy delivered during normothermic machine perfusion.
Authors: Emily R Thompson1*, Lucy Bates1, Ibrahim K Ibrahim1, Avinash Sewpaul1, Ben Stenberg2, Andrew
McNeill2, Rodrigo Figueiredo1, Tom Girdlestone1, Georgina C Wilkins1, Ellen A Irwin1, Samuel J Tingle1, William
E Scott III1, Henrique Lamos3, Andrew L. Mellor3, Valerie D. Roobrouck4, Anthony E. Ting5, Sarah A Hosgood6,
Michael L Nicholson6, Andrew J Fisher1,3, Simi Ali1,3, Neil S Sheerin1,3, Colin H Wilson1,3
1
NIHR Blood and Transplant Research Unit in Organ Donation and Transplantation, Institute of Transplantation,
Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; 2Department of Radiology, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne,
UK; 3Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, UK; 4ReGenesys, Leuven, Belgium; 5Athersys Inc.,
Cleveland, OH, USA; 6NIHR Blood and Transplant Research Unit, Department of Surgery, Addenbrooke’s Hospital,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

* Institute of Cellular Medicine
Newcastle University
UK, NE2 4HH
Tel 00441912339693
Emily.Thompson3@ncl.ac.uk
ORCID 0000-0002-7449-6294

Abstract: Ex-vivo normothermic machine perfusion (NMP) of donor kidneys prior to
transplantation provides a platform for direct delivery of cellular therapeutics to optimise organ
quality prior to transplantation. Multipotent Adult Progenitor Cells (MAPC®) possess potent
immunomodulatory properties which could prove beneficial in minimising subsequent ischaemia
reperfusion injury. We investigated the potential reconditioning capability of MAPC cells in
kidney NMP. Methods: Pairs (5) of human kidneys from the same donor were simultaneously
perfused for 7 hours. The right or left kidney was randomly allocated to receive MAPC treatment.
Serial samples of perfusate, urine and tissue biopsies were taken for comparison with the control
paired kidney. Results: MAPC-treated kidneys demonstrated improved urine output (p<0.01),
decreased expression of the kidney injury biomarker NGAL (p<0.01), improved microvascular
perfusion on contrast enhanced ultrasound (cortex p<0.05, medulla p<0.01), downregulation of
IL-1β (p<0.05) and upregulation of IL-10 (p<0.05) and Indolamine-2, 3-dioxygenase (p<0.05). A
mouse model of intraperitoneal chemotaxis demonstrated decreased neutrophil recruitment when
stimulated with perfusate from MAPC-treated kidneys (p<0.01). Immunofluorescence revealed
pre-labelled MAPC cells home to the perivascular space in the kidneys during NMP. MAPC
therapy was not associated with detrimental physiological or embolic events. Conclusion: We
report the first successful delivery of cellular therapy to a kidney during NMP. Kidneys treated
with MAPC cells demonstrate improvement in clinically relevant functional parameters and injury
biomarkers. This novel method of cell therapy delivery provides an exciting opportunity to
recondition organs prior to clinical transplantation.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Currently the UK kidney transplant waiting list stands at over 5000 patients and the average
waiting time is 3 years1. The organ shortage has led to increased use of organs from donation after
circulatory death (DCD) and extended criteria donors (ECD) to bridge the gap between supply
and demand 2. Concerns regarding inferior transplant outcomes from DCD & ECD organs can
lead to under utilization of this valuable resource 3, 4. DCD & ECD organs are more susceptible to
damage from ischaemia reperfusion injury (IRI) manifesting as delayed graft function (DGF) and
this can diminish graft survival

5, 6

. IRI is the result of hypoxia followed by restoration of blood

flow resulting in microvascular dysfunction, inflammation, immune activation and tissue injury 7.
IRI is an unavoidable consequence of solid organ transplantation and results in DGF in up to 50%
of kidney transplants 8. As the transplant community becomes increasing reliant on marginal
donors, new therapeutic approaches to reduce IRI and optimise utilisation of ECD kidneys are
leading to a greater focus on improving organ preservation.
Normothermic Machine Perfusion (NMP) is a method of organ preservation that facilitates
restoration of cellular metabolism, reviving the organ ex vivo to resume normal physiological
functions 9. This method has many potential benefits over traditional, static cold storage (SCS),
including the opportunity to undertake real-time objective assessments of organ quality prior to
transplantation. Over the past 10 years, a number of NMP techniques and commercially available
devices have been adopted into clinical practice for kidney, heart, liver and lung transplantation 10,
11

. Nasralla et al recently reported the first international, multicentre, randomised controlled trial

of 220 liver transplants investigating liver NMP for organ preservation. This study clearly
demonstrated NMP had significant advantages compared with SCS. There was a 50% reduction
in graft injury (measured by hepatocellular enzyme release), a 50% reduction in organ discard, and

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

a safe increase in preservation times

12

. This promising study has confirmed NMP as a viable,

realistic technology with wider implications for its translation into other solid organ types and
organ reconditioning.
Kidney NMP was first described in 2008 13. In this system, a paediatric cardiopulmonary bypass
machine and membrane oxygenator provides an ex vivo kidney with oxygenated red blood cells
suspended in crystalloid at 37oC 14. A national multicentre phase 3 randomised controlled trial is
currently underway to investigate the effectiveness of this technology in reducing DGF rates15.
NMP provides a unique opportunity to deliver organ-directed, reconditioning therapies. By
establishing an isolated ex vivo platform with a metabolically active organ, therapies targeting
ischaemia reperfusion injury can be delivered to the kidney

16

. This could prove to be

transformative, allowing delivery of stem cell or gene therapies directly to the kidney reducing
off-target, systemic effects in recipients.
Multipotent Adult Progenitor Cells (MAPC) are adult, bone-marrow derived stromal cells first
described in 2002 17. MAPC cells represent an attractive ‘off-the-shelf’ cell therapy option as they
lack MHC Class II, or co-stimulatory molecules (CD80, CD86 & CD40) and have low levels of
MHC Class I expression meaning they are non-immunogenic

18

. MAPC cells release anti-

inflammatory, immunomodulatory and pro-tolerogenic cytokines thereby limiting infiltrating
pathogenic immune cells

19

. MAPC cells have also demonstrated potent in vitro

immunosuppressive effects on T-cell proliferation 20. Maximal immunosuppressive effects were
achieved in the most pro-inflammatory environments suggesting possible benefit in the highly
inflammatory, marginal organ.
These in vitro findings have been validated by a number of animal models confirming the
immunomodulatory capacity of MAPC cells in a transplant setting. In a rat allogeneic heterotopic
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

heart transplant model (Lewis-into ACI) allogeneic MAPC cells could successfully replace
standard pharmacological immunosuppression to maintain long-term graft survival mediated by
local heart-specific effects of T regulatory cells 21.
There have also been a number of successful clinical trials harnessing the immunomodulatory
potential of MAPC treatment for Graft versus Host Disease
Syndrome 23, Myocardial Infarction

24

22

, Acute Respiratory Distress

and Ischaemic Stroke 25. The studies in ischaemic stroke

are currently the most advanced and there is an ongoing phase III study. In 2015, the first
successful use of allogeneic MAPC therapy in human liver transplantation was reported

26

.

Interestingly, the recipient’s leucocyte population was profiled and revealed an increase in
regulatory T cells on day 4 post-transplant. Associated with this was a downregulation of MHC
Class II expression by CD14+ monocytes possibly representing diminished immune activation.
A number of animal models have explored the possibility of delivering a cell therapy during ex
vivo NMP. A porcine model of lung NMP compared MAPC cells delivered intrabronchially to the
left lung and demonstrated a reduction in pro-inflammatory cytokines and neutrophils in the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid after 6 hours of treatment when compared with the untreated right
lung27. To date there have been no reported studies successfully administering a cell therapy to a
human organ during ex vivo perfusion.
Our study aims to investigate the possible benefit of delivering MAPC cell therapy directly to
marginal human kidneys in a pre-clinical NMP model.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Results
Kidneys included in pre-clinical series
5 pairs of kidneys (n=10) were included in the study (Table 1). The donors included represent a
heterogeneous cohort with ages ranging from 52 to 77 years, but all were from either DCD donors
or had characteristics consistent with ECD status. Cold ischaemic times were significantly
extended due to the delays inherent in a kidney being offered for research only purposes. All the
pairs of kidneys were declined for transplant due to a suspicion of non-renal malignancy identified
at the retrieval operation.
Establishing feasibility of cell therapy delivery during kidney NMP
Renal Physiology
Serial measurements of physiological parameters were recorded during NMP. Perfusate samples
were analysed in real-time to assess adequate oxygenation, metabolic requirements and
biochemical parameters. These were compared between the pairs of kidneys, control vs MAPC
treated, and demonstrated equivalent organ physiology associated with MAPC cell infusion. For
clinically relevant markers, potassium, lactate, renal blood flow & renal resistance, the kidneys
were well matched throughout the 7-hour perfusion timeline (Figure 1 Panel A-D).
During NMP the ureter of the kidney was cannulated and attached to a urometer to facilitate hourly
urine output measurement and sampling. In the kidneys treated with MAPC cells there was
significantly higher urine output compared to control kidneys during NMP, p<0.01 (Figure 1,
Panel E).
Kidney Injury Biomarkers

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

There are a number of validated biomarkers regularly used in kidney transplant or acute kidney
injury research, including Kidney Injury Marker 1 (KIM-1) and Neutrophil Gelatinase-Associated
Lipocalin (NGAL)

28

. With the advent of NMP technologies we can analyse these biomarkers

during perfusion to evaluate reconditioning. In this study, we assessed both the levels of urinary
KIM-1 and NGAL over time and compared control kidneys with the paired MAPC treated kidneys.
This demonstrated that the MAPC treated kidneys showed a significantly lower urinary
concentration of NGAL over the course of 7 hours NMP, p<0.01 (Figure 1, Panel F).
Concentrations of urinary KIM-1 were matched between both treatment groups throughout
perfusion (supplementary figure 1, Panel A).
Ex vivo Ultrasound
To determine if the administration of a MAPC cell bolus was associated with any effects on the
renal microvasculature we performed a number of imaging studies using ultrasound. MicroFlow
Imaging (MFI) Doppler ultrasound was performed. MFI is an ultrasound technology that can
provide high resolution detail on blood flow within small vessels. This technique was used to
assess blood flow following MAPC treatment and revealed restored blood flow within the renal
medulla 4 hours after MAPC cell infusion (Figure 1, Panel G, indicated by white arrow). The same
effect was not seen in control kidneys.
Alongside MFI, contrast enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) was performed after 60 minutes of NMP
(before MAPC cell infusion) and 4 hours later. This was primarily to investigate if the cell bolus
was associated with micro-emboli or occlusion of the renal microvasculature as the mean diameter
of a MAPC cell is greater than a capillary. CEUS provides a quantifiable assessment of
microvascular perfusion and, demonstrated a significant improvement in both cortical and

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

medullary perfusion after 4 hours of MAPC treatment during NMP, compared to the control
kidneys, p<0.05 (Figure 1 Panel H & I).
Evaluating the immunomodulatory potential of MAPC therapy during NMP
Cytokine Profiling
MAPC cells are reported to mediate their immunomodulatory capacity through increasing antiinflammatory cytokines and down regulating pro-inflammatory cytokines. A panel of cytokines
were measured at serial time points during perfusion (time-zero, 1hr, 2hr, 4hr & 7hrs) to evaluate
this phenomenon during NMP. This panel revealed MAPC treated kidneys had a significant
reduction in IL-1β, p<0.05 (Figure 2 Panel A). There was also a significant increase in antiinflammatory cytokine IL-10, p<0.05 (Figure 2, Panel B). There was also a non-significant
reduction in other pro-inflammatory cytokines; IL-6, IL-1α, IL-17 & IL-8 but his was not the case
for all cytokines; TNFα, MIP-1β, IL-2, IFNγ. (Supplementary Figure 1, Panel B)

Indolamine-2, 3-dioxygenase activity
MAPC cells in vitro and in vivo are reported to regulate T cells via indolamine-2,3-dioxygenase
(IDO) (19). Cells expressing IDO catabolize tryptophan (Trp) to suppress effector T cells and
activate Foxp3-lineage regulatory CD4 T cells (Tregs) 29. IDO activity was assessed by measuring
Trp and the catabolite kynurenine (Kyn) in the perfusate using HPLC. Data revealed that MAPC
treated kidneys had significantly higher IDO activity (elevated Kyn:Trp ratio) following 7 hours
of perfusion when compared to IDO activity in paired control kidneys, p<0.05 (Figure 2, Panel C).

MAPC perfusate secretome effect on HMEC-1 endothelial cell line model

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

An in vitro endothelial cell line model was used to better understand the impact of the MAPC
secretome on kidney vascular endothelium and microvascular integrity. As MAPC cells are a
biologically reactive product, the secretome produced by the cells is dependent upon the
microenvironment in which they are delivered. Indeed, this is one of the attractive mechanisms of
action we hope to harness through MAPC cell delivery to a marginal kidney during NMP - the
cells should react to this pro-inflammatory, ischaemic environment and produce the required
growth factors and mediators for optimum reconditioning. To model this in vitro, samples of
acellular perfusate taken after 7 hours of NMP were added to Human Microvascular Endothelial
Cells (HMEC-1) cells in culture. ICAM-1 (activation status) and S1PR1 (microvascular barrier
integrity) expression was analysed in the HMEC-1 cells in response to perfusate from pairs of
kidneys (untreated vs MAPC treated) (Figure 2 Panel D-G). ICAM-1 protein expression was
significantly increased in the control group, p<0.001. However, in the MAPC treated group this
upregulation was not as marked, p<0.05. In contrast, S1PR1 gene and protein expression in
HMEC-1 cells was downregulated by control perfusate, however, MAPC perfusate maintained
S1PR1 gene expression at unstimulated levels, p<0.05; and increased protein expression when
compared with control perfusate, p<0.001). This preservation of S1PR1 protein was also seen on
immunofluorescence in the tissue of NMP perfused kidneys, p<0.05 (Figure 2, Panel H-J).
MAPC secretome effect on mouse intraperitoneal chemotaxis assay
To evaluate if the MAPC secretome in the perfusate during NMP had an impact on leucocyte
chemotaxis we used a small animal model. Samples of acellular perfusate were injected
intraperitoneally to mice. There were 4 treatment groups, each containing 5 mice, as described in
the methods section. Six hours after injection the intraperitoneal space was lavaged to harvest the
immune cell infiltrate which was analysed using flow cytometry (supplementary figure 1, Panel
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

C-E). CD45+ was used as a leucocyte marker and Ly6G+ for neutrophils. Control perfusate led to
a significant increase in peritoneal neutrophils compared to crystalloid injections alone. This
increase was not seen in perfusate from MAPC treated kidneys, p<0.01 (Figure 2, Panel J-L).

Determining the physical distribution of NMP administered MAPC cells
MAPC cells were pre-labelled with a red fluorescent dye in order to understand cell fate following
intra-arterial delivery during kidney NMP. To achieve this, following 7 hours of perfusion, the
kidneys were de-cannulated and anatomical regions of interest sampled. Samples were taken from
the cortex, medulla, artery and collecting system of the kidney and visualised using fluorescent
immunohistochemistry and confocal microscopy. Nuclear counter-staining was with DAPI (blue).
Additional staining for endothelial cell marker (CD31 - green) and a proximal tubular epithelial
cell marker (Aquaporin-1) was performed to aid co-localisation of MAPC cells within the kidney’s
architecture. This revealed that the majority of the red labelled MAPC cells were to be found in
the glomeruli and around the peritubular capillaries kidneys, (Figure 3, Panel A-D). MAPC cells
were also seen in the perivascular interstitial space, (Figure 3, Panel E).
The tissues sections could only account for the fate of MAPC cells within the kidney; there was
also a proportion of MAPC cells that remained circulating within the perfusate. To evaluate this a
cell filter was added to the perfusion circuit after 7 hours of NMP to capture circulating MAPC
cells. Captured cells were flushed from the filter and analysed on flow cytometry, (supplementary
Figure 1, Panel G). This revealed a small population of red positive cells alongside a separate
population of unlabelled cells, assumed to be passenger leucocytes mobilising out of the kidney
during NMP. A DAPI live/dead stain was performed and revealed the mean proportion of

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

circulating live MAPC cells to be 21%. In contrast, the passenger leucocyte population had a mean
live proportion of 44%.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1: Clinical characteristics of donor kidney pairs included in study. DBD – Donation after Brainstem Death,
DCD – Donation after Circulatory Death, CIT – Cold Ischaemic Time, L- left kidney, R – Right kidneys, A – artery,
V – Vein, QAS – Quality Assessment Score (composite measure of kidney quality comprised of renal blood flow,
urine output and macroscopic perfusion appearance. Scored 1-5(best = 1, worst = 5, suitable for transplant if score ≤3)

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1: Establishing the feasibility of MAPC therapy during kidney NMP. Panels A-D depict real-time
physiological parameters measured during the NMP timeline. Panel (A) electrolyte balance (potassium), (B) cellular
metabolism (lactate), (C) renal blood flow and (D) intrarenal resistance recorded throughout the perfusion timeline.
Panel E depicts the impact of MAPC treatment on urine output; n=5pairs, paired t-test, **p<0.01 (MAPC treated
kidneys mean urine output 1436mL±281 vs control 960mL±189). Panel F demonstrates MAPC treatment effect on a
biomarker of kidney injury NGAL concentration measured at serial time points during perfusion, repeated-measures
two-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparison’s post-hoc test, *p<0.05 **p<0.01 (MAPC treated mean NGAL
concentration 7196pg/ml ± 379 vs control 12400pg/ml ± 1014 at 7 hours). Panel G demonstrates still images taken
from one pair of kidneys recorded during Doppler Ultrasound MicroFlow Imaging. Blue colouring represents overlaid
Doppler signal from blood flow within microvasculature. Image A – Control kidney after 60 minutes of NMP, Image
B – the same control kidney scanned after 4 hours of NMP. Image C MAPC treated kidney after 60 minutes of NMP
before MAPC cell infusion, Image D- the same kidney scanned 4 hours after MAPC cell infusion demonstrating new
blood flow within the medullary pyramid (white arrow). CEUS performed during NMP to assess the impact of MAPC
cell therapy on microvascular perfusion in ischaemic kidneys. Panel H depicts objective AUC analysis of cortex
perfusion comparing Contrast Enhanced Ultrasound scans performed at 60 minutes and 4 hours. Panel I depicts AUC
analysis of medulla perfusion comparing CEUS scans performed at 60 minutes and 4 hours. n=3, paired t-test, *p<0.05
**<0.01 (MAPC treated mean cortex perfusion AUC 0.97±0.13 vs control 0.34±0.11).

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2: Evaluating the immunomodulatory capability of MAPC therapy during kidney NMP. Panels A & B
depict significant results from custom Mesoscale Discovery™ panel analyzing perfusate cytokine concentrations
comparing control (blue) with MAPC treated (red) NMP kidneys. Results are expressed as the mean fold change
calculated relative to time zero from each kidney. Panel A demonstrates a significant decreased expression of cytokine
IL-1β, paired t-test, n=5pairs, *p<0.05 (MAPC treated mean fold change 6.9±2.1 vs control 26.8±7.7). Panel B
demonstrates a significant increase cytokine IL-10 in the MAPC treated group, paired t-test, n=5 pairs, *p<0.05
(MAPC treated mean fold change 949.4±288.6 vs control 252.9±71.3). Panel C compares IDO activity in paired
kidneys after 7 hours of NMP, paired t-test, n=5 pairs, *p<0.05 (MAPC treated K/T ratio 0.34±0.02 vs control
0.29±0.03). Panel D & E depict qPCR results from stimulated HMEC-1 cells treated with aceullular perfusate taken
after 7 hours NMP from kidney pairs (control kidneys vs MAPC treated). Gene expression was calculated in reference
to housekeeping gene GAPDH and unstimulated HMEC-1 cells grown to confluence. Panel D demonstrates the impact
of MAPC perfusate secretome on HMEC-1 cell ICAM-1 gene expression, paired t-test, n=5 pairs, p=ns (MAPC treated
mean fold change on qPCR 9.6±3.1 vs 6.5±0.9). Panel E demonstrates the impact of MAPC treated perfusate on
HMEC-1 cell S1PR1 gene expression, paired t-test, *p<0.05 (MAPC treated mean fold change on qPCR -4.9±1.7 vs
control 0.6±0.6). Panel F & G depict HMEC-1 cells immunohistochemistry staining for ICAM-1 & SIPR1 protein
expression after stimulation with acellular perfusates and the percentage of positive staining cells (control vs MAPC
treated). Graph F demonstrates comparison of ICAM-1 protein expression between treatment groups (MAPC treated
23.9±3.3 vs control perfusate 37.3±9.2). Graph G demonstrates comparison of S1PR1 protein expression between
treatment groups (MAPC treated 76.5±4.7 vs control perfusate 57.6±4.9). Analysed with one-way ANOVA and
Tukey’s test post-hoc analysis, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. Panel H & I depict S1PR1 staining visualized using
fluorescence microscopy on kidney biopsies taken during NMP, blue stain is DAPI, red is S1PR1. Panel J
demonstrates a significant upregulation of S1PR1 protein expression as quantified by mean fluorescence intensity,
paired t-test, n=5 pairs, *p<0.05 (MAPC treated 0.11±0.01 vs control 0.18±0.02). Panels K&L demonstrate the results
from the mouse intraperitoneal chemotaxis experiments. Panel K depicts typical flow cytometry scatter plots
examining staining for Ly6G+ neutrophils isolated from peritoneal lavage for the different treatment groups. Panel L
demonstrates the mean number of Ly6G+ cells isolated from the lavage samples. There is a significant reduction in
intraperitoneal neutrophil recruitment in those mice stimulated with MAPC perfusate when compared to control
perfusate, paired t-test, n=5 pairs, **p<0.01 (MAPC 2990±506 neutrophils vs control mice 8849±1675 neutrophils).

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3: Determining MAPC cell fate and physical distribution following delivery during kidney NMP. MAPC
cells were pre-labelled with a red cytoplasmic fluorescent dye (CellTracker Red CMPTX, ThermoFisher) to facilitate
tracking of the cells through the kidney following 7 hours of perfusion. The red labelled cells are the MAPC cells as
noted by white arrows. Counter nuclear staining in blue with DAPI. The green staining is endothelial marker CD31
and highlights the kidneys vasculature. The pink staining is Aquaporin 1 a marker for proximal tubular cells. Panels
A & B are sections taken from the kidney cortex after 6 hours of MAPC treatment during NMP. These represent

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

typical confocal microscopy image from kidneys treated with MAPC cells. The white letter (G) identifies the
glomerulus. Panel C is a typical section taken from the kidney’s medulla, vessels identified by the CD31 green stain
are identified by the green (V). Panel D is a high magnification image taken of 3 MAPC cells that are resident in the
interstitium next to a peritubular capillary. Panel E depicts the confocal images of a blood vessel from the renal cortex
with a MAPC cell in the lumen and cells that have mobilised out of the vessel into the nearby tissue.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Discussion
MAPC therapy has demonstrated significant promise in treating a number of clinical conditions
associated with inflammation and ischaemia 23, 24, 25, 30 . Clinical trials have demonstrated MAPC
cells have a robust safety profile.

Therefore, the translation of MAPC therapy to minimise

ischaemia reperfusion injury in kidney transplantation represents a promising avenue for further
exploration. Here we have described the first reported series of human kidneys successfully treated
with a cellular therapy using normothermic machine perfusion.
Kidneys treated with MAPC therapy demonstrated an improvement in functional parameters and
biomarkers of kidney injury. A higher volume of urine output and lower urinary NGAL during
NMP has previously been correlated with improved clinical outcomes following transplantation
31, 32

. Improving these key parameters with MAPC treatment is suggestive of less tissue damage

and improved cellular metabolism. We have also demonstrated a significant improvement in
microvascular perfusion during NMP using CEUS. The improved blood flow seen in MAPC
treated kidneys could be mediated by PGE2 or IDO, both potent vasodilators, which are reported
to be part of the MAPC cell secretome in pro-inflammatory environments 33.
Cytokine profiling revealed that MAPC therapy during kidney NMP was associated with an antiinflammatory, pro-tolerogenic cytokine profile. This included decreased expression of IL-1β, a
pro-inflammatory cytokine associated with endothelial activation. Our group have previously
correlated lower levels of IL-1β during ex vivo lung perfusion with better clinical outcomes
following lung transplantation

34

. There was also upregulation of pro-tolerogenic, anti-

inflammatory IL-10 and this was accompanied by increased IDO activity. MAPC cells modulating
differential cytokine expression in perfusate may be key in their potential role of minimising IRI.

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Tracking the MAPC cells after delivery in the NMP circuit has revealed cells could be found
throughout the kidney. Previous studies demonstrated MAPC cells have a powerful ability to home
to hypoxic, damaged areas of the endothelium where they migrate into the tissue, taking up
residence within the perivascular space 35, 36, 37. Indeed, in a pre-clinical study of acute myocardial
infarction the cells actively migrated into the ischaemic, damaged myocardium following
transarterial delivery 38. This may be mirrored in our NMP model - MAPC cells are homing to
hypoxic areas within a marginal kidney where they take temporary residence. In this environment,
the cells release an anti-inflammatory secretome which is having beneficial effects, resulting in
increased blood flow, improved urine output and reduced tubular injury. The proportion of
circulating non-viable MAPC cells may also have an important immunomodulatory role. Previous
studies have demonstrated that apoptotic MSCs induce a significant immunosuppressive response
mediated by recipient phagocytes 39.
The findings of this study reflect similar work investigating pig kidneys treated with human
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) during NMP 40, 41. These studies have similarly demonstrated
tracked cells mainly localising to the glomeruli. However, the authors are yet to demonstrate the
reconditioning capability and changes to the inflammatory milieu that we have described in this
study. This may be due to the limitations of the xenogeneic experimental model.
NMP provides a platform for direct delivery of MAPC therapy, overcoming the limitations of
systemic delivery. Systemic intravenous delivery often results in entrapment of cells in the lungs
or liver of the recipient, reducing delivery to the target site

42, 43

. During NMP, the pro-

inflammatory marginal kidney provides a microenvironment to prime MAPC cells, licensing them
to take on the desired immunosuppressive phenotype. The combination of a direct delivery

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

platform that can correctly license cells could provide the solution to a previous significant barrier
in MSC/MAPC therapy translation 44.
However, there are a number of limitations in this study. NMP as an experimental system is limited
in its ability to measure the post-transplantation effects of a therapy and these issues would need
to be addressed in further studies. Additionally, we cannot determine the fate and persistence of
the MAPC population after transplantation of the kidney. Other animal studies investigating
systemic MSC therapy have demonstrated cells are no longer traceable in the recipient at 21 days,
indeed the majority are lost from the system by 72 hours 30. Also, determining the immunogenicity
of the MAPC cells in the NMP setting would be important. It has been previously demonstrated
that the in vitro immunosuppressive activity of MAPC cells was independent of MHC matching
and therefore they could be used as a universal donor product 45. In other clinical circumstances
where allogeneic MAPC cells have been used there was no evidence of development of new antiHLA antibodies in 16 previously unsensitised patients treated after myocardial infarction 24 or in
18 immunosuppressed bone marrow transplantation patients

22

. These studies are promising,

however, understanding if these positive findings would be replicated with NMP delivery will be
essential going forward.
In 2018-19, 320 kidneys were not transplanted in the United Kingdom. The vast majority of these
organs were rejected because of anticipated failure at reperfusion from excessive IRI. In addition,
an unknown number of kidneys were not retrieved because of fears over primary non-function,
despite adequate function in the donor prior to death. Previous attempts at discovering a
pharmacological therapy to effectively minimise IRI have been unsuccessful (46) due to the high
levels of redundancy inherent in IRI pathways. We have shown that MAPC therapy combined with
EVNP interacts with multiple pathways and improves physiological function in a measurable and
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

reassuring way. Based on these results we believe up to 50% of discarded kidneys and an unknown
number of un-retrieved kidneys could be transplantable with MAPC therapy during EVNP
Conclusion
This is the first reported series of cell therapy successfully delivered directly to human donor
kidneys in an isolated ex vivo perfusion platform. Kidneys treated with MAPC cells during NMP
demonstrate improvement in clinically relevant functional parameters and a reduction in injury
and pro-inflammatory biomarkers. This may be mediated by changes to circulating cytokines or
through secreted soluble anti-inflammatory mediators. NMP represents a novel cell therapy
delivery system. This is a paradigm shift, providing an exciting opportunity to directly treat organs
prior to transplantation to minimise ischaemia reperfusion injury. A future clinical trial evaluating
this modality of delivery could result in the transplantation of otherwise discarded organs, thereby
reducing the transplant waiting list and offering hope to patients with renal failure.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Materials and Methods
Ethics
Ethical approval for the use of human donor kidneys declined for transplantation was granted by
local Research Ethics Committee (16/NE/0230). Consent for recruitment of the organ into a
research study was obtained from the donor’s next of kin by specialist nurses in organ donation.
Currently 15% of kidneys retrieved from organ donors across the UK are deemed unsuitable for
transplant and can be offered for research purposes. The allocation of a kidney to this research
project was overseen by NHS Blood & Transplant’s Research Innovation and Novel Technologies
Advisory Group (RINTAG).
Human Kidney Normothermic Machine Perfusion
On arrival at our centre kidneys were surgically prepared on ice. The renal artery was cannulated
to facilitate connection to the NMP circuit. The ureter was also cannulated so urine output could
be measured and sampled. Kidney pairs were perfused simultaneous for 7 hours with an
oxygenated red-cell-based perfusate at a mean temperature of 36.5oC and mean arterial pressure
of 75mmHg, according to published protocols 46. The volume of perfusate in the circuit was kept
constant by matching the urine output with a crystalloid solution via continuous infusion. All
physiological parameters accessible during NMP were recorded and analysed including:
perfusate blood gas analysis, biochemical analysis, urine production, flow rate, and scored
according to the validated quality assessment tool (7).
MAPC treatment
The MAPC cells used in this study were obtained in collaboration with Athersys Inc, Ohio, and
were provided as pre-dosed cryovial aliquots of 25x106 cells. The MAPC cells were research grade

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Human MultiStem® cultures that were isolated from human bone marrow with consent from a
healthy donor as previously described
express phenotypic markers

48

47

. Prior to release, the MAPC cells were confirmed to

, be of >95% purity, and were fluorescently labelled with

cytoplasmic dye CellTracker Red CMPTX (ThermoFisher).
For MAPC treatment of kidneys during NMP, following 60 minutes of perfusion, the right or left
kidney was randomly allocated to a prescribed MAPC dose (50x106 cells). In the 60 minutes
preceding infusion the MAPC aliquots were gently thawed in a water bath at 37oC and then kept
on ice until ready for delivery. Immediately prior to delivery cells were re-suspended in 10ml of
perfusate. Control kidneys simply received a 10mL bolus of perfusate. The chosen MAPC dose
was extrapolated from previous phase 2/3 clinical trials using MAPC cells for systemic infusion
and calculated based on the average weight of a human kidney and volume of fluid in the perfusion
circuit 27.
Contrast Enhanced Ultrasound
Contrast Enhanced Ultrasound (CEUS) was performed during NMP. This technique utilises
microbubbles of inert gas (sulphur hexafluoride in a phospholipid shell) to increase ultrasound
signal return. Each bubble is approximately 2-3μm in diameter, allowing it to pass through the
capillary bed but not the interstitium. CEUS has made it possible to assess the distribution of
perfusion at a microcirculation level49. We have previously had success with this technique on
porcine kidneys on a cold perfusion circuit and in NMP livers (16). This technique investigated
whether MAPC cells cause microemboli within the microcirculation by comparing CEUS on
kidneys pre and post MAPC infusion. One minute CEUS clips obtained were analysed using QLab
8.1 (Philips, Bothwell, WA, USA) CEUS quantification software. CEUS was performed using a
Philips EPIQ7 Ultrasound machine. During NMP CEUS recordings were taken at 60 minutes
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(before MAPC infusion) and 4 hours later. A sterile sheath covered the CEUS probe and it was
placed directly onto the perfusing kidney. The probe was kept stationary in a longitudinal section
during contrast infusion. Contrast media (0.5mL bolus of Sonovue) was delivered via a 3-way tap
on the renal artery cannula. Cineloops were acquired of the renal parenchyma and 3 standardised
5mm regions-of-interest (ROI) were captured (the interlobar artery, cortex and medulla) to record
perfusion gradients. To quantify perfusion during CEUS, the Area Under the Curve (AUC) was
calculated for each ROIs. A ratio of the parenchymal ROI AUC (medulla or cortex) was calculated
in reference to the vessel ROI. These ratios (rAUC) were used to quantify differences in tissue
perfusion. The rAUC from the start and end of perfusion were compared.
MicroFlow Imaging Ultrasound was also performed using the Philips EPIQ7 machine. MFI
Ultrasound is designed to detect blood flow within the small vessels at high resolution with
minimal artefact. This is displayed using overlaid blue Doppler signal and can aid in subjective
interpretation of perfusion.
ELISA
Commercially available sandwich ELISA kits (R&D) were used to measure levels of IL-8
(DY208-05) in perfusate and KIM-1 (DY1750B) & NGAL (DY1757) in the urine of the
perfused kidneys according to manufacturer’s instructions.
Mesoscale Discovery™ Multiplex
To facilitate the measurement of multiple proteins of interest in one assay, a custom electrochemiluminescent Mesoscale Discovery™ (MSD) Multiplex was performed on perfusate samples to
quantify cytokine expression during kidney perfusion. The 10-plex panel includes: IL-1β, IL-1α,
IL-2, IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, TNF-α, MIP-1, IFNγ & IL-8. These assays were performed according to

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

manufacturer’s instructions alongside technical support from an experienced MSD technician. The
method of detection utilised an electrochemi-luminescent label conjugated to the detection
antibody.
High Performance Liquid Chromatography
Culture supernatants and perfusate were acidified with sodium acetate, pH=4, to give a final
concentration of 15mM. Protein was precipitated with 1:10 perchloric acid 60%; samples were
centrifuged, filtered and, then, analysed by HPLC to quantify kynurenine and tryptophan as
described 50.
In vitro endothelial cell line perfusate stimulation model
An Immortalised endothelial cell line (HMEC-1 cells, ATCC) was used to investigate the impact
of the MAPC perfusate secretome on endothelial function. HMEC-1 cells were cultured to
confluence and were treated with acellular perfusate diluted in modified MCDB131 media. In
chamber slides, cells were stimulated with 25µl of acellular perfusate to evaluate protein
expression using immunohistochemistry. In 6-well plates, HMEC-1 cells were stimulated with 250
µl of acellular perfusate to evaluate gene expression using RT-qPCR. In both situations cells were
stimulated for 4 hours. RNA extraction was performed on-column using Qiagen RNeasy Plus
Mini-kit as per manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA synthesis was carried out using the Tetro cDNA
synthesis kit. RNA sequence quantification was carried out using TaqMan RT-qPCR on a
StepOnePlus™ Real-Time PCR System. Per well 2μl of cDNA, 7μl RNase free water, 10μl
SensiFAST™ Probe Hi-ROX Kit and 1μl of primer (ICAM1 TaqMan Hs00164932_m1,
S1PR1TaqMan Hs00173499_m1) was added in a 96 well PCR plate. GAPDH was utilised as a
housekeeping gene (TaqMan Hs02786624_g1).
Mouse Intraperitoneal Chemotaxis Assay
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

All animal experiments were performed in accordance with the Home Office regulations
(PPL60/4521). Eight-week-old female BALB/c mice received an intraperitoneal injection of 0.5mL
of crystalloid (Ringer’s lactate), control or MAPC perfusate (n=5 mice per group). An additional
5 mice were not injected. Mice were euthanized after 6 hours treatment and 8ml of PBS-EDTA
was injected into peritoneal cavity for lavage. A midline incision was made and lavage fluid
collected. Lavage samples were centrifuged at 500g for 5 mins, the supernatant discarded and resuspended in 100ul of FACS buffer ready for staining. For characterisation of leucocytes the cell
suspension was stained with Ly6g-APC (Biolegend 127613) for neutrophils and CD45-PE
(Biolegend 304007) to identify all leucocytes. This was incubated at 4oC for 1 hour. The cells were
then washed in 200ul of FACS buffer, spun down and re-suspended in 100ul. Analysis was
performed on Accuri Flow Cytometer at a rate of 14ul/min, recording 1000000 events. Results
were analysed using Flow Jo software.
MAPC tracking in kidney tissue
MAPC cells were pre-labelled with CellTracker CMPTX Red fluorescent dye (CT24552)
facilitating cell tracking to evaluate partitioning and engraftment within the organ
fluorescence microscopy. Core biopsies were taken at time zero, one hour, 4 hours after cell
infusion and wedge biopsies at the end of perfusion. Wedge biopsies were taken by bisecting
the kidney and large sample segments of cortex, medulla, collecting system and vessels.
Samples were fixed in formalin and stored as paraffin embedded blocks. These were cut into
4µM sections at a later date for fluorescence microscopy imaging using a Zeiss Axioimager.
Immunofluorescence co-localisation staining of tissue sections.
Cut sections of perfused kidneys were de-waxed for 10 minutes in Xylene. The sections were then
rehydrated through graded ethanol (99%, 90%, and 70%). Sections were placed in a container into
26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

a pressure cooker with 1.5L of Tris/EDTA and heated for 2mins. Blocking was performed with
10% Goat serum, 100ul per slide for 30 minutes at room temperature. Blocking buffer was
removed and 100ul of primary antibody diluted in added ((S1PR1, ThermoFisher Scientific PA11040, 1:50; CD31, Abcam, ab182981, 1:2000; Aquaporin-1 Abcam ab168387, 1:100). Slides were
incubated in the fridge at 4°C overnight. The primary antibody was washed three times in 0.05%
Tween for 5 minutes. Then 100ul of the relevant secondary antibody (anti-rabbit Cy5
ThermoFisherer Scientific 1:100; anti-rabbit FITC, Abcam, ab97050 1:200, anti-rabbit Dylight550,
Immunoreagents 1:100) was added and incubated for 1hour at room temperature. Following a

further 3 washes, slides were incubated with 0.1% Sudan Black B in 70% EtOH to quench tissue
auto-fluorescence. Coverslips were mounted with Vectashield Antifade Mounting medium with
DAPI (Vectorlabs) and sealed. Since fluorescent staining fades over time it was ensured that
sections were imaged and analysed taken within 2 weeks. Fluorescent imaging was performed
using a Zeiss Axioimager or for high resolution Leica SP2 UV AOBS. Images were processed and
analysed using Zen, LAS X or Fiji software.
Cell filter studies
At the end of the NMP experiment a leucocyte filter (Haemonetics™) was attached to the
perfusion circuit in line with the direction of blood flow. This was kept in place for 15 minutes
and then disconnected. To washout the erythrocytes 250ml of cold PBS was flushed through
the filter in the same direction as the blood flow. To capture the leucocytes and MAPC cells
250ml of cold PBS was then flushed in a retrograde direction and the fluid collected. This
fluid was spun down in a 4oC centrifuge at 500G for 10min. To quantify the cell population
the pellet was resuspended in 150ul of FACS buffer. For live/dead stain the samples were

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

incubated with 1:2000 DAPI for 15 minutes prior to analysis. Flow cytometry was performed
using the BD Fortessa X20 and the results analysed using FlowJo™ software.
Statistical analysis
Continuous variables are reported as mean ± standard deviation where appropriate. When
comparing between control and MAPC treated kidney pairs from the same donor a two-sided
paired t-test was used. If another treatment group was included analysis was carried out using oneway analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a Dunnett’s post-hoc multiple comparisons correction
for continuous data. When recording multiple variables over time from the same kidney a repeated
measures two-way ANOVA with appropriate matching was used with Sidak’s post-hoc test for
multiple comparisons. P-values of less than 0.05 were deemed statistically significant. Analyses
were performed using GraphPad Prism 8.0.

Acknowledgements
We thank all the member of the perfusion and theatre team at the Freeman Hospital for technical
support. Funding: This study was supported by Kidney Research UK, the National Institute for
Health Research (NIHR) Newcastle Biomedical Research Centre and the NIHR Blood and
Transplant Research Unit in Organ Donation and Transplantation at the University of Cambridge,
in collaboration with Newcastle University and in partnership with National Health Service Blood
and Transplant (NHSBT). The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Health Services. Author contributions ET, AF, NS, SA & CW conceived the
study. ET, LB, IKI, TG, GW, EAI, SJT, RF, BS, AM, KC & HdL performed the experiments and
data analysis. AS, SA & MLN provided technical expertise and training in perfusion. VDR & AT

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

provided the MAPC cells and scientific advice during the project. ET, NS, SA & CW prepared
and revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Competing
interests: VDR and AT are employees of ReGenesys and Athersys, Inc, respectively and are both
shareholders of Athersys stock.

The other authors declare that they have no competing

interests. Data and materials availability: All data related to this study are present in the paper
or the Supplementary Materials. All reagents and perfusion consumables were commercially
available. MAPC cells were obtained through the material transfer agreement between Newcastle
University and Athersys Inc.
.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Material

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary figure 1: Panel A depicts urinary biomarkers of renal injury (KIM-1) measured serially during the
perfusion timeline. Panel B depicts impact of MAPC therapy on the other cytokines included in the MSD panel (TNFa,
IL-6, IL-1α, MIP-1β, IL-17, IL-2, IL-8 & IFNƴ). Panel C depicts the gating strategy for the mouse intraperitoneal
chemotaxis experiments. Panel D depicts the corresponding flow plots for Ly6G+ cells in the unstimulated and
crystalloid control groups from the mouse intraperitoneal chemotaxis experiments. Panel E is a graph demonstrating
the mean number of CD45+ cells isolated from the peritoneal lavage samples following 6hour stimulations. Panel G
(i-iv) depicts the results from the cell filter flow cytometry experiments designed to isolate circulating MAPCs from
the perfusate at the end of NMP. Panel G (i) is the flow cytometry scatter plot of forward vs side scatter and
demonstrates two distinct cell populations. Panel G (ii) examines these two cell populations staining for CellTracker
Red CMPTX the MAPC fluorescent label. Panel G (iii) demonstrates a DAPI live/dead stain to quantify the proportion
of live circulating cells. Panel G (iv) depicts the mean proportion of circulating cells within these 4 these four
categories.

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1.

NHSBT Statistics. Organ Donation and Transplantation Annual Activity Report NHS. NHS Blood &
Transplant (2018).

2.

Johnson RJ, Bradbury LL, Martin K, Neuberger J. Organ donation and transplantation in the UK-the last
decade: a report from the UK national transplant registry. Transplantation 97 Suppl 1, S1-s27 (2014).

3.

Summers DM, et al. Analysis of factors that affect outcome after transplantation of kidneys donated after
cardiac death in the UK: a cohort study. Lancet 376, 1303-1311 (2010).

4.

Singh SK, Kim SJ. Epidemiology of Kidney Discard from Expanded Criteria Donors Undergoing Donation
after Circulatory Death. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 11, 317-323 (2016).

5.

Mallon DH, Summers DM, Bradley JA, Pettigrew GJ. Defining delayed graft function after renal
transplantation: Simplest is best. Transplantation 96, 885-889 (2013).

6.

Summers DM, Johnson RJ, Hudson A, Collett D, Watson CJ, Bradley JA. Effect of donor age and cold
storage time on outcome in recipients of kidneys donated after circulatory death in the UK: a cohort study.
Lancet 381, 727-734 (2013).

7.

Eltzschig HK, Eckle T. Ischemia and reperfusion—from mechanism to translation. Nature Medicine 17, 1391
(2011).

8.

Perico N, Cattaneo D, Sayegh MH, Remuzzi G. Delayed graft function in kidney transplantation. The Lancet
364, 1814-1827 (2004).

9.

Hosgood SA, Heurn E, Nicholson ML. Normothermic machine perfusion of the kidney: better conditioning
and repair? Transplant International 28, 657-664 (2015).

10.

Reddy SP, Brockmann J, Friend PJ. Normothermic perfusion – a mini-review. Transplantation 87, 631-632
(2009).

11.

Chandak P, et al. Dissemination of a novel organ perfusion technique: ex vivo normothermic perfusion of
deceased donor kidneys. Artificial organs, (2019).

12.

Nasralla D, et al. A randomized trial of normothermic preservation in liver transplantation. Nature 557, 5056 (2018).

13.

Bagul A, Hosgood SA, Kaushik M, Kay MD, Waller HL, Nicholson ML. Experimental renal preservation
by normothermic resuscitation perfusion with autologous blood. Br J Surg 95, 111-118 (2008).

14.

Nicholson ML, Hosgood SA. Renal transplantation after ex vivo normothermic perfusion: the first clinical
study. Am J Transplant 13, 1246-1252 (2013).

15.

Hosgood SA, Saeb-Parsy K, Wilson C, Callaghan C, Collett D, Nicholson ML. Protocol of a randomised
controlled, open-label trial of ex vivo normothermic perfusion versus static cold storage in donation after
circulatory death renal transplantation. BMJ Open 7, (2017).

16.

Fondevila C, et al. Liver transplant using donors after unexpected cardiac death: novel preservation protocol
and acceptance criteria. Am J Transplant 7, 1849-1855 (2007).

17.

Jiang Y, et al. Pluripotency of mesenchymal stem cells derived from adult marrow. Nature 418, 41-49 (2002).

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

18.

Jacobs SA, et al. Human Multipotent Adult Progenitor Cells Are Nonimmunogenic and Exert Potent
Immunomodulatory Effects on Alloreactive T-Cell Responses. 22, 1915-1928 (2013).

19.

Reading JL, et al. Clinical-grade multipotent adult progenitor cells durably control pathogenic T cell
responses in human models of transplantation and autoimmunity. Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md :
1950) 190, 4542-4552 (2013).

20.

Ryan JM, Barry FP, Murphy JM, Mahon BP. Mesenchymal stem cells avoid allogeneic rejection. Journal of
Inflammation 2, 1-11 (2005).

21.

Eggenhofer E, et al. Heart Grafts Tolerized Through Third-Party Multipotent Adult Progenitor Cells Can Be
Retransplanted to Secondary Hosts With No Immunosuppression. Stem Cells Translational Medicine 2, 595606 (2013).

22.

Maziarz RT, et al. Single and multiple dose MultiStem (multipotent adult progenitor cell) therapy
prophylaxis of acute graft-versus-host disease in myeloablative allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation:
a phase 1 trial. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 21, 720-728 (2015).

23.

Jacono F, et al. Primary Analysis of a Phase 1/2 Study to Assess MultiStem® Cell Therapy, a Regenerative
Advanced Therapy Medicinal Product (ATMP), in Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (MUST-ARDS).
American Thoracic Society Journal, A7353-A7353.

24.

Penn MS, et al. Adventitial delivery of an allogeneic bone marrow-derived adherent stem cell in acute
myocardial infarction: phase I clinical study. Circ Res 110, 304-311 (2012).

25.

Hess DC, et al. Safety and efficacy of multipotent adult progenitor cells in acute ischaemic stroke
(MASTERS): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. Lancet Neurol 16, 360-368
(2017).

26.

Soeder Y, et al. First-in-Human Case Study: Multipotent Adult Progenitor Cells for Immunomodulation
After Liver Transplantation. Stem Cells Translational Medicine 4, 899-904 (2015).

27.

Martens A, et al. Immunoregulatory effects of multipotent adult progenitor cells in a porcine ex vivo lung
perfusion model. Stem Cell Res Ther 8, 159 (2017).

28.

Devarajan P. Neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin: a promising biomarker for human acute kidney
injury. Biomarkers in medicine 4, 265-280 (2010).

29.

Munn DH, Mellor AL. Indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase and metabolic control of immune responses. Trends
Immunol 34, 137-143 (2013).

30.

Maziarz RT, et al. Single and Multiple Dose MultiStem (Multipotent Adult Progenitor Cell) Therapy
Prophylaxis of Acute Graft-versus-Host Disease in Myeloablative Allogeneic Hematopoietic Cell
Transplantation: A Phase 1 Trial. Biology of Blood and Marrow Transplantation 21, 720-728 (2015).

31.

Hosgood SA, Thompson E, Moore T, Wilson CH, Nicholson ML. Normothermic machine perfusion for the
assessment and transplantation of declined human kidneys from donation after circulatory death donors. BJS
105, 388-394 (2018).

32.

Hosgood SA, Nicholson ML. An Assessment of Urinary Biomarkers in a Series of Declined Human Kidneys
Measured During Ex Vivo Normothermic Kidney Perfusion. Transplantation 101, 2120-2125 (2017).

33.

Carty F, et al. Multipotent Adult Progenitor Cells Suppress T Cell Activation in In Vivo Models of
Homeostatic Proliferation in a Prostaglandin E2-Dependent Manner. Frontiers in Immunology 9, 645 (2018).

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005546; this version posted September 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

34.

Andreasson ASI, et al. The role of interleukin-1β as a predictive biomarker and potential therapeutic target
during clinical ex vivo lung perfusion. The Journal of Heart and Lung Transplantation 36, 985-995 (2017).

35.

Ryu JC, et al. Molecular imaging of the paracrine proangiogenic effects of progenitor cell therapy in limb
ischemia. Circulation 127, 710-719 (2013).

36.

da Silva Meirelles L, Chagastelles PC, Nardi NB. Mesenchymal stem cells reside in virtually all post-natal
organs and tissues. J Cell Sci 119, 2204-2213 (2006).

37.

Sohni A, Verfaillie CM. Mesenchymal Stem Cells Migration Homing and Tracking. Stem Cells International
2013, 8 (2013).

38.

Medicetty S, et al. Percutaneous adventitial delivery of allogeneic bone marrow-derived stem cells via
infarct-related artery improves long-term ventricular function in acute myocardial infarction. Cell Transplant
21, 1109-1120 (2012).

39.

Galleu A, et al. Apoptosis in mesenchymal stromal cells induces in vivo recipient-mediated
immunomodulation. Sci Transl Med 9, (2017).

40.

Pool M, et al. Infusing Mesenchymal Stromal Cells into Porcine Kidneys during Normothermic Machine
Perfusion: Intact MSCs Can Be Traced and Localised to Glomeruli. International journal of molecular
sciences 20, (2019).

41.

Sierra Parraga JM, et al. Effects of Normothermic Machine Perfusion Conditions on Mesenchymal Stromal
Cells. Front Immunol 10, 765 (2019).

42.

Toma C, Wagner WR, Bowry S, Schwartz A, Villanueva F. Fate of culture-expanded mesenchymal stem
cells in the microvasculature: in vivo observations of cell kinetics. Circ Res 104, 398-402 (2009).

43.

Schrepfer S, Deuse T, Reichenspurner H, Fischbein MP, Robbins RC, Pelletier MP. Stem cell transplantation:
the lung barrier. Transplant Proc 39, 573-576 (2007).

44.

Krampera M. Mesenchymal stromal cell ‘licensing’: a multistep process. Leukemia 25, 1408 (2011).

45.

Jacobs SA, et al. Human Multipotent Adult Progenitor Cells Are Nonimmunogenic and Exert Potent
Immunomodulatory Effects on Alloreactive T-Cell Responses. Cell Transplantation 22, 1915-1928 (2013).

46.

Hosgood SA, Nicholson ML. First in man renal transplantation after ex vivo normothermic perfusion.
Transplantation 92, 735-738 (2011).

47.

Vaes B, et al. Culturing protocols for human multipotent adult stem cells. Methods in molecular biology
(Clifton, NJ) 1235, 49-58 (2015).

48.

Roobrouck VD, et al. Differentiation potential of human postnatal mesenchymal stem cells, mesoangioblasts,
and multipotent adult progenitor cells reflected in their transcriptome and partially influenced by the culture
conditions. Stem cells (Dayton, Ohio) 29, 871-882 (2011).

49.

Quaia E. Assessment of tissue perfusion by contrast-enhanced ultrasound. European Radiology 21, 604-615
(2011).

50.

Lemos H, et al. STING Promotes the Growth of Tumors Characterized by Low Antigenicity via IDO
Activation. Cancer Res 76, 2076-2081 (2016).

34

