medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Exploring the effects of a lack of pocketmoney onthe learning activities of undergraduate
health sciences students in their clinical year
Running Head: Pocket money and undergraduate clinical learning
Author: Marema Jebessa Kumsa
Co-authors: Bizuayehu NigatuLemu & Taklehaimanot Mezgebe Ketema
Abstract
Background: In Ethiopia, there is little understanding of students' university expenses and how
the lack of pocket money affects undergraduate learning. This is particularly evident for
undergraduate health sciences students that need additional money when they start their clinical
placement.
Objectives: We aimed to explore the economic challenges that clinical year undergraduate
health sciences students face with limited pocket money, as well as how students perceive these
limited funds as affecting their learning activities and their ability to meet challenges.
Methods: This descriptive qualitative study was conducted at the Department of Medical
Radiology Technology (MRT), College of Health Sciences (CHS) at Addis Ababa University
(AAU). Ten participants were recruited through purposive and snowball methods, and semistructured interviews were conducted between January 28, 2019 and February 1, 2019. The semistructured questions explored participants' experiences and perceptions regarding the challenges
of a lack of pocket money and its impacts on their learning activities. Their reaction to financial
challenges was also assessed.
Results: Four themes that are related to impact of lack of money on learning activities emerged
from the interviews and they revolved around the students’ challenges in obtaining pocket
money, their difficulty in affording daily needs, their self-management and their ability to have
an adequate social life.
Conclusion: Based on our data, the underlying causes that lead students to face financial
hardships can be solved by increasing public awareness of university expenses, clarifying the
cost sharing system to the public, redesigning the cost sharing policy, and improving university
services In addition, training students self-management and pocket money management, as well
giving providing adequate transportation services, cash-money, and consultations for students
during clinical placement.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Keywords:
Undergraduate students, higher education, pocket money, learning, Ethiopia, health science,
socioeconomic status, clinical placement

Abbreviations
AAU: Addis Ababa University
CHS: College of Health Sciences
MRT: Medical Radiologic Technology
SES: socioeconomic status

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Addis Ababa University
College of Health Sciences School of Medicine
Department of Health Sciences Education
Exploring the effects of a lack of pocketmoney onthe learning activities of undergraduate
health sciences students in their clinical year
PI: Marema Jebessa
Department of Medical Radiology Technology, College of Health Sciences, School of
Medicine, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Email: marem.jabessa@aau.edu.et
Mobile number:+251910622577

Co-PI:
1. Bizuayehu Nigatu (MSc, Lecturer)
Department of Medical Radiology Technology,College of Health Sciences, School of
Medicine,Addis Ababa University,Addis Abab, Ethiopia
Email: nigatulemu@gmail.com
Mobile number: +251911662044
2. Taklehaimanot Mezgebe Ketema(MSc, Lecturer)
Department of Medical Radiology Technology, College of Health Sciences, School of
Medicine, Addis Ababa University, Addis Abab, Ethiopia
Email: cumeltekle@gmail.com
Mobile number:+251912023681

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization’s World Conference on
Higher Education (1) states that "higher education needs to be a fundamental right for all,"
regardless of a student's economic status. However, students from low socioeconomic status
(SES) backgrounds have lower educational aspirations, persistence rates, and educational
achievements during college (2-5). Moreover, several previous studies suggest that during
clinical placements; students face increased financial costs such as transportation, food expenses,
clothing, and other material needs (6-8)
In Ethiopia, we currently lack an understanding of how insufficient discretionary funds for
undergraduate health sciences students from low SES backgrounds impacts their learning
activities within a clinical setting. Ethiopian Higher Education Proclamation and the Cost
Sharing Regulations(9), cost-sharing is an open policy: provides food , dormitory and tution fee;
however, it does not allow students to get discretionary money. Pocket money may be defined as
the income that the student receives from a parent or guardian(10) and this definition used in this
paper.
The aim of this study was to explore the impact of a lack of pocket money on undergraduate
health sciences students' learning activities during their years in the clinic. This research helped
identify the challenges that undergraduate health sciences students faced due to the lack of
pocket money and the perceived effects of their financial hardships on their learning activities.

Methods
Study design and setting
This study was a descriptive qualitative study that was used to explore the impacts of a lack of
pocket money on undergraduate students’ clinical learning activities. Semi-structured interviews
were used to gather data and the questions aimed to determine the students' perceptions of the
effects of their financial hardships on their learning activities. This study was conducted with
third- and fourth-year students from the Department of MRT, College of Health Sciences, AAU
in Ethiopia.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ethical considerations
Ethical clearance was obtained from AAU’s Department of Medical Education Ethical Review
Committee. Informed consent was obtained from each study participant.

Participant recruitment and data collection
We used purposive and snowball sampling techniques for participant recruitment. First, we
invited those who have submitted letters to the department seeking financial support. Upon their
arrival, they were briefed on the project and asked for self-declaration of their financial status.
Then, snowball sampling was used in order to obtain other potential study participants. During
all interviews, participants were asked to self-declare their financial status.
In the end, five participants from year four and seven participants from year three of their health
sciences degree were interviewed. During transcribing the participants' interviews, we found that
two of the participants self-declared that they were in financial hardship but it disproved from
what they respond and thus they were dropped from the data. Therefore, interviews from ten
participants were transcribed verbatim, and translated. The participants' descriptions are
summarized in Table1.

Interviews
The semi-structured interviews were designed using Pierre Bourdieu’s concepts of social capital
(15). Two pilot interviews (not included in the analysis) were carried out to help refine the
interview questions. An emphasis was placed on the lack of pocket money and its impacts on
learning activities. The interviewer was selected from the Department of Nursing, and the
interviews began on January 28, 2019 and were completed on February 1, 2019.The participants
were interviewed in their language of choice (11 in Amharic and one in Afaan Oromo).
Interview length ranged between 10 and 25 minutes. Participants were thanked for their
participation and were given a notebook and 50 Ethiopian birr worth of mobile cards each.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Data analysis
Researchers used a qualitative content analysis method (11-13) , and thematically analyzed the
interviews to explore the effects of low SES and a lack of discretionary money on health sciences
students’ learning activities while in the clinic. The audio-recordings were transcribed verbatim
and translated into English by the researchers. We held four meetings to transcribe and translate
the data. The data were assessed by researchers at multiple levels. The three levels of data
analyses (code, category, and theme) taken as appropriate for coding the data(13). After
assessing the data, the codes, themes, and categories were formulated and were modified
throughout the entire research process, with the full participation of all researchers. Table 2
contains a sample of the coded, categorized, and themed the data.
Accordingly, four main themes explaining ways in which lack of pocket money affects learning
activities were emerged. These are:
1. Challenges in finding pocket money and its impacts on learning activities
2. Effects of unable to afford very important needs on learning activities
3. Challenges in Self-management during financial hardships and its effects learning
activities
4. Difficulty in maintaining a social life and its effects on learning activities
To explore the causes and challenges that students from low SES backgrounds face, their
experiences and reactions to challenges, and the impacts of a lack of pocket money on learning
activities, we applied Pierre Bourdieu's concepts of habitus, cultural, and social capital (14) in
analyzing the data.

Theoretical approach: The Bourdieusian concept of habitus, cultural,
and social capital
The Bourdieusian concept of habitus, cultural, and social capital was used to analyze the
students' experience of financial problems and its impacts on their learning activities. Bourdieu
defines habitus as a property of actors that comprises a "structured and structuring
structures"(14). Bourdieu defines habitus as one’s worldview, which is dictated by a person’s
past and present circumstances, such as family upbringing and educational experiences.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cultural capital refers to family-based cultural traits such as work habits, basic learning
orientations, prevailing cultural norms, values, attitudes, and parenting styles and practices (15).
This concept was developed by Pierre Bourdieu and Jean-Claude Passeron to analyze the impact
of culture on the class system. This concept was developed by Pierre Bourdieu and Jean-Claude
Passeron to assess the differences between student academic achievements (14).
Lastly, Bourdieu defines social capital as the 'aggregate of actual or potential resources which are
linked to possession of a durable network of more or less institutionalized relationships of mutual
acquaintance and recognition'(14).With respect to social capital, proximity plays an important
role in establishing a relationship.Proximity can be geographic in nature or it can be two persons’
closeness in blood, faith, profession, interest, study, culture, language, economy, or social
proximity(16).

Results
All participants discussed their perceived experiences of a lack of pocket money as
undergraduate students and conceptualized its impact on their learning process. They also
explained the means by which they overcame these problems in order to succeed in their studies.
Participants' responses were categorized into four themes, each of which was correlated to their
effects on student learning activities:
1. Challenges in finding pocket money and its impacts on learning activities
2. Effects of unable to afford very important needs on learning activities
3. Challenges in Self-management during financial hardships and its effects learning
activities
4. Difficulty in maintaining a social life and its effects on learning activities
Theme 1: Challenges in finding pocket money and its impacts on learning activities
Nearly all of participants mentioned that getting pocket money for their various expenses in the
university was a significant problem and identified a lack of awareness and absolute poverty as
the main causes. Based on the data collected from the participants, we identified three categories
that contribute to challenges in accessing enough discretionary money, and those categories are
discussed below.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Category 1: Poor understanding of university expenses
Several participants mentioned that most their parents have the idea that once their children join
public universities, all their expenses are going to be paid by the government. The students
identified this as being the most important factor that contributes to their financial troubles.
One of participant described the situation as:
'…from my parents' perspective, they thought that there were no expenses in a governmental
university and my opinion was the same at that time. We talked about the government covering
everything. However, after coming here (a governmental university) it was evident that this was
not the case.' D.
And another participant said:
'My parents believe that once you joined a university everything you need is provided by the
government. And they assume that you only need money from them only for soaps and other
smaller things.' I
These descriptions clearly show that there is a general misunderstanding of expenses for students
at university among different families in the country.
Category 2: Absolute parental Poverty
Some students explained that even though some of their parents know the expenses at university,
their economic status does not allow them to cover those costs. This financial burden is a
significant obstacle for those students in trying to get the most out of their education.
One of the participants described their case:
'My parents believe that we can be changed by education. However, they do not have and cannot
provide us with better things.' H
Absolute parental or related family members' poverty directly affects student financial status and
hence, students become unable to by pens, books, afford for printing of handouts, additional food
and transportation to and from clinical practice sites. This has negative effects on their daily
learning activities.
Category 3: Poor skills in asking for money
Participants explained that considering their community’s understanding of university expenses,
they felt that they must develop the ability to persuade parents and family members in order to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

get the pocket money. Unfortunately, several participants did not ask parents or family members
for money because of the lack of cultural acceptance for that sort of behaviour.
One of participant described their experience as:
'…you have to convince your family and others which we lack due to ...the other is you have
asked for financial aid...there is no well established financial aid.' I
Another participant also explained it as:
'My parents do not know about handouts, assignments, and that I went to clinical placements
using transportation...they do not know and have no experience with higher education.' B
To summarize many participants asking for pocket money is real problem and they mentioned
that this has a significant contribution in making them not afford what they need. Thus, this has a
huge impact on their learning activities.
Theme 2: Effects of unable to afford very important needs on learning
Several study participants indicated that the lack of pocket money had a tremendous impact on
their daily lives, particularly affecting their ability to accomplish their learning goals. Most
participants stated that the small amount of pocket money that they had almost went to fulfilling
basic needs. Based on the data, Theme 2 was divided into three categories and each of them are
discussed below separately.
Category 1: Transportation expenses
Many participants mentioned that most of their pocket money is spent on transportation. In
addition to transportation between two campuses and from home to the university, these students
must also absorb the cost of transportation to their clinical practice away from their campus.
Some of the participants even mentioned that they were forced to go on foot to their clinic
placement as there was no access to transportation from the university and they had run out of
pocket money. This greatly influenced their ability to acquire the necessary clinical skills.
One participant said the following:
'...when I received a clinical placement, I found that there was no convenient transportation
service. I remember that I had to go on foot many times to my clinical practice because I had no
money in my pocket…but attendance was taken at the clinical practice area.' D
Another participant said:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

'...when I ran out of pocket money I went on foot. Sometimes I arrived late to class and this
greatly affected my focus in class. Another time I missed class altogether.' A
Category 2: Food expenses
Food is one of the biggest expenses for university students. Several participants described
different situations: unfavourable timing of food service from the university cafeteria,
unfavourable food of the university cafeteria, during time of illness, during clinical placement
and during night times. They explained that they buy food out of university campus when they
had money and stay hungry when they run out of pocket money.
One of participants mentioned:
'My expenses increased after I joined AAU. Before I joined here, I ate food from home...and
when I could not afford food here at the university, I stayed hungry and had a hard time
studying.' H
Another participant said:
'...for example, I use the university cafeteria. However, since the food is not very good, I
sometimes eat outside the campus.' C
As described by several participants, a lack of pocket money forced them to go without food,
which makes it very difficult to study or attend classes. Hence, a lack of pocket money can
greatly influence a student’s ability to effectively get an education.
Category 3: Educational resources
Educational resources can also be another significant drain on a student’s discretionary money.
The educational resources on which participants spent their pocket money included necessities
like stationery materials and internet access. These are further detailed below:
Subcategory 1: Stationery materials
Participants indicated that they spent money on buying pens, notebooks, copying and printing
handouts, and printing assignments almost daily.
One of the participants described student spending on stationary materials as the following:
'...on a daily basis, we pay out of pocket for things such as pens, notebooks, copying handouts,
and printing assignments.' E
Several participants indicated that their inability to afford educational materials affected their
overall learning activities.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Subcategory 2: Access to the internet
Many of the participants specified that the campus where they live does not provide internet
access and thus they needed to either use mobile data or go to an internet café, both of which
require money.
One participant said:
'I cannot assess materials on the internet in my dorm... so I have to wait until I come to another
university campus to use the internet. Look, if I had enough money, I would just use my mobile
phone’s internet access to get on the internet at any time and place.” B
Another participant said:
'...at our campus there is no good internet connectivity…if you want to use the internet you will
need to pay for it....' E
Here, the participants identified internet access as an important part of their learning process.
Unfortunately, they do not have access to free internet services and are generally unable to pay
for it out of pocket.
Theme 3: Self-management
Several participants mentioned that leaving their family and living at the university was the most
challenging aspect of getting their education. Most of them discussed it as it relates to challenges
of self-control and pocket money management. These aspects are further explored below.
Category 1: Self-control
University is a place where students start to exercise self-control. Most of the participants
indicated that when someone does not have enough pocket money and has poor self-control it is
very difficult to be successful at university. In addition, they mentioned that self-control helps
reduce the stress that develops due to a lack of pocket money and therefore improves proper
learning.
One participant mentioned:
"University is a place where a person confronts some of life’s greatest challenges. It is where
one faces a crossroad: a way to bad and good. So, it is better to control oneself eventhough you
struggle financially...." A
Another participant said:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

"....You have to manage everything. Here, there is no family around who to guide you. There are
so many students and some smoke and some drink alcohol. You have to decide your future for
yourself.” B
Many of the participants focused on self-management and its importance in being successful at
university. They believed that even though many students have financial problems it is possible
to be successful at university if self-management is practiced effectively. Interestingly, most of
the participants mentioned that they have developed good self-management.
Category 2: Pocket money management
The effective use of the small amount of discretionary money that the students have while in
university is very important, as was discussed by the participants.
One of participant said:
'...One has to use the small amount of pocket money received sparingly...' I
Another participant mentioned:
'In general, using the money provided to you effectively is very difficult, as is getting my
education.' B
Theme 4: Difficulty in maintaining a social life and its effects on learning activities
Participants believed that success in pursuing a higher education is highly dependent on having a
reliable network of people around the student. They stated that their lack of pocket money
affected their ability to make connections with peers and noted that the lack of a social life
affected their learning activities.
One interviewee expressed:
"... When I left my family and started to live on my own, I had to think about many things...in
University, it is better to have a good relationship with other students has it has many benefits.”
J

Discussion
Various factors contribute to students’ financial challenges at university. Here, we investigated
how the lack of pocket money influences students learning by discussing the topic with several

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

health sciences students at AAU. More specifically, we used Bourdieu's concepts of habitus,
cultural, and social capital to explore what contributes to the financial pressures experienced by
undergraduate health sciences students during their time in clinic, and the impact of these
challenges on their daily learning activities.
This study showed that the familial habitus of the participants’ affected their life at university.
Participants described that many of their challenges based from the significant changes that
accompanied moving away from their home and into a university environment. For instance,
they went from having their lives mainly managed by their parents and families to selfmanagement. Moreover, they went from living with students with similar lifestyles to living with
students of different backgrounds. With all these changes, the lack of pocket money added
another stress to their university life.
Several participants mentioned that the absence of a government policy that entitles students to
get financial support during their undergraduate studies increased their financial hardship, which
is similar to the findings of a study done in the United Kingdom(8). These financial stresses can
be buoyed by a positive social structure. For instance, a previous study demonstrated that
students with low SES and good self-management benefit from gaining social capital(15).
Findings from our study support this idea and indicate that there does indeed appear to be a link
between social bonding and achieving relief from financial crisis. This was observed by several
participants that described the benefits of developing a culture of borrowing from friends.
This study found that students perceived self-management as the most important thing to combat
the financial pressures encountered at university. Bourdieu’s concept of habitus (14), describing
the way of acting, feeling and being, is related to the participants idea of self-control and pocket
money management.
Similar to study done in Australia(17), most participants in this study had expected financial
hardship to be a substantial concern at the beginning of their degree, however many of them
experienced acute financial hardship during clinical placements. We found that students, who
relocated for educational purposes, including placements, were economically disadvantaged and
experienced financial stress (6). Furthermore, this study indicated that financial stress increased
student stress overall, which was also observed in Greece(18)and in another location in
Ethiopia(19).Of course, this increased stress negatively impacted student learning, as it is known
to do. Several Participants expressed that even though their families misunderstood the expenses

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

associated with a higher education, they overcame the challenges and worked toward attaining
their educational goals(20).

Unlike the studies presented by Bennett (21) and Trombitas (22), this study does not support the
idea that financial pressure causes students to drop-out or quit their education. Instead of
dropping out the participants reported different methods of overcoming their acute financial
problems, including borrowing from friends and developing strong self-management skills (i.e.,
prioritizing their basic and urgent needs and compromising other non-essentials). That said,
further research is necessary to determine the relationship between financial hardship for
Ethiopian health sciences undergraduate students and dropout rates.
Strengths and Limitations
The main limitation to this study is that it included students from one department and from one
institution. However, with this limitation, the current study contributes to a broader overview of
the effects of financial hardship on undergraduate success and provides a better understanding of
its causes.

Conclusion
This study revealed that student financial hardships at AAU occurred mainly due to the lack of
understanding about university expenses from families, absolute poverty, and poor university
administrative services. This study also indicated that the cost-sharing system is not helpful in
supporting financially disadvantaged students. Moreover, the lack of student pocket money had a
negative impact on students’ theoretical learning activities and clinical skill acquisition. These
findings indicate that the department, the school, the college, and the university need to find
adequate solutions to these problems. This study also recommends that the Ethiopian
government, specifically the Ministry of Science and Higher Education, should revise the
Ethiopian cost-sharing system.

References List
1.

Altbach PG, Reisberg L, Rumbley LE. Trends in Global Higher Education : Tracking an
Academic Revolution. United Nations Educ Sci Cult Organ [Internet]. 2009;22. Available
from: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0018/001832/183219e.pdf

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2.

Alexander W. Astin. What matters in college? Vol. 79, Liberal Education. 1993. p. 4.

3.

DiMaggio P, Mohr J. Cultural Capital , Educational Attainment , and Marital Selection
Author ( s ): Paul DiMaggio and John Mohr Source : American Journal of Sociology , Vol
. 90 , No . 6 ( May , 1985 ), pp . 1231-1261 Published by : The University of Chicago
Press Stable URL. Am J Sociol. 1985;90(6):1231–61.

4.

Lareau A. Home Advantage: Social Class and Parental Intervention in Elementary
Education [Internet]. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers; 2000. Available from:
https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Yb8cAAAAQBAJ

5.

McDonough PM. Choosing Colleges: How Social Class and Schools Structure
Opportunity [Internet]. State University of New York Press; 1997. Available from:
https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=AVjdTBQdpJwC

6.

Sayer M, De Saintonge MC, Evans D, Wood D. Support for students with academic
difficulties. Med Educ. 2002;36(7):643–50.

7.

Heller DE. Student Price Response in Higher Education: An Update to Leslie and
Brinkman.

J

Higher

Educ

[Internet].

1997;68(6):624–59.

Available

from:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/2959966
8.

Moreau MP, Leathwood C. Balancing paid work and studies: Working (-class) students in
higher education. Stud High Educ. 2006;31(1):23–42.

9.

FDRE (Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia). Higher Education Proclamation No.
351/2003, Negarit Gazette, Addis Ababa.

10.

Worley and Kitto 2001. Hypothetical model of the financial impact of student attachments
on rural general practices. Rural Remote Heal. 2001;1(1):Epub 83.

11.

Sandelowski M. What’s in a name? Qualitative description revisited. Res Nurs Health.
2010;33(1):77–84.

12.

Ritchie J, Spencer L, O’ Connor W. ‘Carrying Out Qualitative Analysis’ IN: Ritchie, J.
and Lewis, J. - Qualitative research practice: a guide for social science students and
researchers, pp. 219-262. In: Ritchie J, Lewis J, editors. Qualitative research practice: a
guide for social science students and researchers [Internet]. London: SAGE; 2003.
Availablefrom:
http://www.library.mmu.ac.uk/secure/index.php?cat_file=&filename=y_21010010_ritchie
_carrying.pdf

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

13.

Saldaña J. The coding manual for qualitative researchers. The coding manual for
qualitative researchers. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Ltd; 2009. xi, 223–xi,
223.

14.

Bourdieu P. Outline of a of Practice. 1977;

15.

Bourdieu P. Pierre Bourdieu 1986 - The forms of capital. Handb Theory Res Sociol Educ.
1986;241–58.

16.

Coleman JS. Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital. Am J Sociol [Internet].
1988 Jan 1;94:S95–120. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1086/228943

17.

Wray N, McCall L. Money matters: Students’ perceptions of the costs associated with
placements. Med Educ. 2007;41(10):975–81.

18.

Mouza A-M. Perceived Stress of the Undergraduate Students in Greece Due to the
Economic Crisis. Procedia - Soc Behav Sci [Internet]. 2015;177(July 2014):265–72.
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.02.331

19.

Dachew BA, Bisetegn TA, Gebremariam RB. Prevalence of mental distress and associated
factors among undergraduate students of University of Gondar, Northwest Ethiopia: A
cross-sectional institutional based study. PLoS One. 2015;10(3):1–10.

20.

Sewell WH, Hauser RM. Agricultural & Applied Economics Association Causes and
Consequences of Higher Education : Models of the Status Attainment Process Published
by : Oxford University Press on behalf of the Agricultural & Applied Economics
Association Stable URL : http://www. Am J Agric Econ. 1972;54(5):851–61.

21.

Bennett R. Determinants of Undergraduate Student Drop Out Rates in a University
Business Studies Department. J Furth High Educ [Internet]. 2003 May 1;27(2):123–41.
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1080/030987703200065154

22.

Trombitas K. Financial stress: An everyday reality for college students. Inceptia.
2012;(July):12.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1: Participants' characteristics.
Participants Gender
Label

Year of Place of
Age Study
Origin

Parental job

I
E

Male
Male

20
22

B

Male

23

Farmers
Government
employer
Farmers

F

Female

21

A

Male

21

H

Male

21

C

21

G

Male

D

Male

J

Female

21

20

3 Oromia
3 Oromia
Region
4 Oromia
region
3 Addis
Ababa
4 Addis
Ababa

3 Addis
Ababa
4 Amhara
Region
3 Amhara
Region
4 Oromia
Region
3 Amhara
Region

Business

Monthly Income
(In Ethiopian
Birr)
500
500
500
1000

Supported by 500
siblings(Gove
rnment
employed)
Self-employed 500
Business men

800

Teachers

500

Farmers

1500

Teachers

1000

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 2: Summary of codes, categories, themes, and quotes.




Codes

Verbatim Quotes

Sub-Categories

Government
covers
expenses,
No expenses

'…from my parents' side, there is thinking that
there are no expenses in the governmental
university and my opinion was the same at that
time... However, after coming here it is beyond
my expectations.' D
'My parents believe that we can be changed by
education. However, they do not have and
cannot provide me better things. They give me
little from what they have.' H
'…you have to convince your family and others
who you think can help or you have to ask for
financial aid; I do not like to ask.' I

Poor
Understanding of
University
Expenses

Poor family,
Little support

Afraid to ask
for money,
Persuading
parents,
Convincing
skills

Increased
expenses with
years of study
Clinical
placement
transportation
cost
Lack of
transportation
Coming late
to class

Clinical
placement

' ... when I go for a clinical practice site there is
no convenient transport service. I remember
that I went on foot for many days to clinical
practice. Because I had no money in my pocket
and there was no transport service, but there
was attendance at the clinical practice area;
therefore, the only choice I had was to go on
foot.' D
"... when I ran out of pocket money I went on
foot. I sometimes came late to the class and this
made me not to attend the class attentively. And
other time I miss class totally." A
'Because, the learning-teaching method and the
environment where you stay differs from your
pre-clinical year and clinical year… in our
case, during our first year there is no place that
we need to go...however in the second year we
start our clinical practice. The service
(transportation which is provided by the
government) is not suitable or available when
we need it. Therefore, we are forced to pay
fortransportation'.E

Poverty

Themes
Challenges in
finding pocket
money and its
impacts on
learning
activities

Poor Skills in
Asking for Money

Transportation
Expenses

Effects of
unable to
afford very
important
needs on
learning
activities

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

expenses

Unable to
afford food,
stay hungry,
stop studying
when hungry

Cost of
stationery
materials

Cost for
internet

Selfmanagement
Peer influence
Self-control

Worry about
managing
money

'My expenses increased after I joined AAU.
Food Expenses
Before I joined, I ate food from home...and when
I could not afford food, I could not eat; I get
hungry and I cannot study.' H

'... in our daily activities starting from the very
smaller things like payment to buy pen,
notebook, copying handouts and printings
assignments; we pay out of our pocket.' E
'I cannot assess materials on the internet in my
dorm; as my balance does not allow me... so I
have to wait until I come to the University
campus to download learning materials from
the internet. Look if I have enough money; I can
full my mobile balance and access on my phone
at any time and place.' B
'University is a place where great life challenge
is. It is a place where you face a crossroad: a
way to bad and good. So, it is better to control
one-self.' A
'...You have to manage everything. Here, no
family who guides you. There are so many
students. Some smokes and some drink alcohols.
It is you who decide your future.' B
'...when I was with my parents, there were very
few things I had to worry about. Here, I have to
worry about how to manage my money ...' J

Educational
Resources

Self-control

Challenges in
Selfmanagement
during
financial
hardships and

Pocket Money
Management

its effects
learning
activities

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009985; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Relationships

"... When I depart from my family and start to
live on my own, I have to think about many
things...in University, it is better to have a good
relationship with other students.” J

Difficulty in
maintaining
a social life
and its
effects on
learning
activities

