medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.10.19013938; this version posted December 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A novel art of continuous non-invasive
blood pressure measurement
Jürgen Fortin1*, Dorothea Rogge2, Christian Fellner1, Doris Flotzinger1,
Julian Grond1, Katja Lerche1, Bernd Saugel2,3
1

CNSystems Medizintechnik GmbH, Reininghausstrasse 13, 8020 Graz, Austria

2 Department of Anesthesiology, Center of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany
3

Outcomes Research Consortium, Cleveland, Ohio, USA

* Corresponding author: juergen.fortin@cnsystems.com
Submitted: 19 November 2019

ABSTRACT
Wearable sensors to continuously measure blood pressure (BP) and derived cardiovascular
variables have the potential to revolutionize patient monitoring. Current wearable methods
analyzing time components (e.g., pulse transit time) still lack clinical accuracy, whereas existing technologies for direct BP measurement are too bulky. Here we present a new art of continuous non-invasive arterial blood pressure monitoring (CNAP2GO). It directly measures BP
by using a new “volume control technique” and could be used for small wearable sensors integrated in a finger ring. As a software prototype, CNAP2GO showed excellent BP measurement performance in comparison with invasive BP in 46 patients having surgery. The resulting pulsatile BP signal carries information to derive cardiac output and other hemodynamic
variables. We show that CNAP2GO can be miniaturized for wearable approaches. CNAP2GO
potentially constitutes the breakthrough for wearable sensors for blood pressure and flow
monitoring in both ambulatory and in-hospital clinical settings.

of wearable miniaturized monitoring sensors will be
to provide measurements with clinically acceptable
accuracy, precision, and reliability and to ensure clinical usability and patient safety. At the moment,
wearable sensors for continuous BP monitoring still
show poor measurement performance [6] and have,
therefore, not been adopted into clinical practice.

INTRODUCTION

The digital revolution is about to bring major innovations to physiologic monitoring [1 ]. Innovative wearable sensors for the monitoring of cardiovascular
dynamics have the potential to revolutionize the
monitoring of vital signs and their response to therapy in both ambulatory and in-hospital clinical setMost current wearable BP monitoring systems estitings. Continuous real-time monitoring of cardiovasmate BP based on time information. Pulse time intercular dynamics – including arterial blood pressure
vals or pulse velocity methods use a proximal and a
(BP) and advanced hemodynamic variables that are
distal sensor for the measurement of the pulse transit
derived from its waveform (stroke volume, cardiac
time (PTT) or pulse arrival time (PAT) [7]. Other
output (CO), and dynamic cardiac preload variables)
time-based methods for BP estimation use sensors
– is a mainstay of patient care in perioperative and
that decompose the pulse into a forward and a backintensive care medicine but, for the most part, still
ward wave to analyze their time differences [8, 9].
requires invasive or stationary non-invasive sensors
There are also attempts to use photo-plethysmo[2 , 3]. With the availability of non-invasive and weargraphic (PPG) [10 ] or piezoelectric [11] pulse detecable sensors, advanced cardiovascular monitoring
tion for the estimation of BP based on amplitude and
may become part of patient surveillance on the nor4
5
time information. However, a direct translation of the
mal ward [ ] and even outside the hospital [ ]. For
pulse signal – which is a surrogate for volume
these clinical applications, wearable sensors have to
changes
– into
continuous
BP istochallenging
because
NOTE:all
This
preprint reports
research
that hasof
not
been certified by
peer review
and should
not be used
guide clinical practice.
fulfill
regulatory
and new
clinical
demands
medicalof confounding effects of the cardiovascular, respiragrade devices – just as their stationary counterparts.
tory, and autonomic nervous systems. By enhancing
Major challenges for future developments in the field
1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.10.19013938; this version posted December 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The basic idea behind our novel art of continuous
non-invasive BP measurement, “CNAP2GO”, is to
perform the blood volume control substantially slower to be able to use slow-moving and, therefore,
small-scaled hardware. Most importantly, such novel
hardware requires neither a pump nor a valve. The
basic principle of the CNAP2GO method is the “volume control technique” (VCT). In contrast to the
VUT, which keeps the blood volume in the finger
artery constant on a millisecond basis to accurately
follow the full cardiac circle, the VCT keeps the volume constant on a time scale of cardiac cycles. Blood
volume is allowed to oscillate over heart beats, balancing inflow and outflow of blood in the finger
artery over each heart cycle. Controlling blood volume by VCT without fast oscillations poses a nontrivial control engineering problem, which is solved
using a set of signal processing algorithms. Most
importantly, as we will demonstrate, this method is
resistant to changes in vasomotor tone.

model complexity (e.g., using machine learning and
neural network tools), the measurement performance
of these approaches may be improved [10, 12 , 13]. Although their sensor hardware is very simple, significant work is still needed to achieve clinically acceptable performance [7, 10, 14 , 15 ]. The difficulty with
time-based approaches for wearable BP measurement
devices seems to be that the variables of the mathematical models need to change along with changes in
vasomotor activity of the vascular smooth muscles
which are determined by the autonomic nervous system. Without a proper detection of changes in vasomotor activity, current models require frequent recalibration, for example using cuff-based sphygmomanometers, rendering them unfeasible for wearable
wireless monitoring [16 ].
Besides time-based approaches, stationary finger-cuff
devices have been successfully introduced for direct
continuous non-invasive BP monitoring in various
medical fields, especially in critical care and anesthesiology [17 ]. These devices are based on the “vascular
unloading technique” (VUT), also referred to as
“volume clamp” or “Peňáz” method [18 , 19 , 20 ]. The
VUT directly measures BP and derives the complete
pulsatile BP waveform by controlling fast inflation
and deflation of a finger cuff. As with time-based
technologies, the VUT is influenced by changes in
vasomotor activity; different devices have found differing methods to detect and compensate for changes
in vasomotor tone [21 , 22, 23]. Existing systems are,
however, too bulky to be used for wearable monitoring devices because the systems consist of mechanical elements like pumps, valves, and air hoses to follow the pulsatile nature of BP with high fidelity.

In this paper, we first describe the elements of
CNAP2GO and how they interact to derive a continuous BP waveform from the directly measured mean
BP (mBP) and the PPG-signal. We will show that the
BP waveform can be used to estimate advanced hemodynamic variables using pulse wave analysis. Currently, the VCT was implemented in software and
placed on the hardware of an existing VUT-device
that emulates slow VCT. The accuracy of the
CNAP2GO software prototype was clinically validated in comparison with invasive BP measurements
obtained using a radial arterial catheter in patients
having surgery with general anesthesia. The
CNAP2GO method can, in the future, be used for
small wearable sensors integrated in a finger ring
utilizing a light transmitter (LED) and a receiver
(photodiode). The contact pressure of LED and photodiode can be modified by an actuator changing the
ring diameter with a rate-of-change as fast (or rather:
as slow) as mBP.

It was generally believed that, for correct BP measurement based on VUT, a constant (or "clamped")
blood volume in the finger over the complete period
of pulsation and therefore full vascular unloading of
the blood vessels is essential. Whether this is indeed
physiologically or metrologically necessary was never examined.

LED

Finger
p(t)
Photodiode
v(t)

Fig. 1: Within CNAP2GO, the element for constant pressure coupling is a simple, slow-moving actuator that
can vary the contact pressure p(t) of the light elements as fast as mBP may change.
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.10.19013938; this version posted December 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

An LED-light (λ=890nm) is directed through a finger
and light absorption is measured by a photodiode
with corresponding wave-length characteristics. The
resulting PPG signal v(t) is an inverse surrogate for
blood volume changes inside the finger artery: Rising
blood volume increases absorption and therefore decreases the amount of light transmitted through the
finger.

RESULTS
Basic CNAP2GO considerations
The CNAP2GO sensor is a PPG-probe which comprises an LED and a photodiode. The contact pressure of these light elements to the skin can be modified. Even simple PPG-probes (e.g. pulsoxymeter)
have elements that couple the light components to the
body with pressure: this is usually a spring, Velcro, or
another simple clamp mechanism. A constant pressure (around 20-30 mmHg) ensures good light coupling. Within CNAP2GO, a simple actuator can vary
the contact pressure of the light elements as fast as
mBP may change (Fig. 1). As a consequence, the
system wins an additional degree of freedom which
is needed for continuous BP measurement.

The contact pressure pc(t) of the light elements can
be altered by the actuator and is measured by a pressure gauge. v(t) is led into digital filters producing
vPulse(t), vRhythm(t), and vVCT(t). The signal components vRhythm(t) and vVCT(t) are used to control pc(t),
whereas vPulse(t) together with pc(t) are needed for the
calculation of the pulsatile blood pressure signal
pC2G(t). The control loop between the controller and
the pressure is closed using anti-resonance elements.
Note that v(t) and its components are dimensionless
digital signals representing a surrogate of arterial
volume in the finger.

The basic idea of varying contact pressure is also
implemented in all existing devices based on the
VUT. When using the VUT, the speed and amplitude
of the changes in contact pressure must match pulsatile arterial BP, requiring pressure changes of 30 –
100 mmHg per beat to ensure high-fidelity pressure
waveforms. For example, the pressure system of the
CNAP Monitor HD (CNSystems Medizintechnik,
Graz, Austria) can apply pressure changes of up to
1500 mmHg/sec.

Finding the initial set-point
Closing the CNAP2GO control loop requires an initial open-loop phase to determine the initial value of
mBP by altering the contact pressure and detecting
the corresponding PPG pulse-amplitudes from the
signal vPulse(t). Figure 3 shows how a typical oscillometric curve including its envelope is obtained. Figure 3a shows the resulting v(t) when a pressure ramp
pc(t) is applied. The p-v transfer function corresponds
to an S-shaped arcus tangent with superimposed
pulses [24]. The upper asymptote of v(t), where pc(t)

CNAP2GO block diagram and signal flow
The CNAP2GO contact pressure is determined by a
“closed-loop” control system using the PPG-signal
and its components as input signals. Figure 2 shows
the block diagram and the signal flow of CNAP2GO.

pc(t) Pressure gauge

LED

Controller

Resonance
Filter

Actuator

pa(t)

PIDRhythm ó VCT

Resonance
Detector

Finger

vRhythm(t)

Photodiode

Rhythm Filters

v(t)

VLF

pC2G(t)

+

pc(t)

f

Pulse

vPulse(t)
VCT Filter

Pulse Filter

-k
Pulse

f

VLF

vVCT(t)
f

Fig. 2: Block diagram and signal flow of CNAP2GO: An LED-light is directed through a finger and its absorption is measured by a photodiode. The resulting photo-plethysmographic signal v(t) is led into digital filters
producing vPulse(t), vRhythm(t) and vVCT(t). Signal components vRhythm(t) and vVCT(t) are used to control pc(t),
whereas vPulse(t) together with pc(t) are needed for the calculation of the pulsatile blood pressure signal pC2G(t).
The control loop is closed using anti-resonance elements.
3

S-shaped p-v transfer function

Oscillometric envelope

pC (t) [mmHg]

v(t) [1]

pC (t) [mmHg]

200

1

200

160

0.8

160

vPulse(t) [1]

High-pass filtered vPulse(t)
pC(t)

120

v(t)

80

Highest vPulse(t) amplitude:
pC(t) equals mBP

40

0.6

120

0.4

80

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

mBP
dBP

pc(t)
0.2

0

sBP

0
14

40

0
t [sec]

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

t [sec]

Fig. 3: Depiction of a typical oscillometric curve including its envelope. (a) shows the resulting v(t) when a
pressure ramp pc(t) is applied. (b) amplitudes of vPulse(t) are fitted using a Gaussian-style envelope curve. See
text for further explanation.
is far above systolic BP (sBP), corresponds to the
maximum light that can be detected from the finger
when all blood is squeezed out and no pulses can be
detected. The lower asymptote is at pc(t) = 0 where
no deformation of the finger and its artery occurs
(although this is a theoretical point of measurement
because a minimum contact pressure is needed for
proper light coupling). The amplitudes of the v(t)pulses are derived from the high-pass filtered vPulse(t).
The amplitudes of vPulse(t) are fitted using a Gaussian-style envelope curve, as can be seen in Figure 3b.
The peak of this envelope indicates mBP according
to the maximum oscillation rule [25], a principle
which also holds true when using PPG signals [26, 27,
28]. After oscillometric envelope determination, the
system applies mBP as initial contact pressure pc(t)
and stores this value as the starting set-point p0 and
its PPG-companion v0.

tote for pC(t) << diastolic BP (dBP) shows a higher
v(t) because finger blood volume decreases during
vasoconstriction. This results in a set-point lower
than the inflection point and a change from v0(t) to a
smaller but “fat” v1(t) with the negative half-wave of
the “fat” pulsatile being greater than the positive
half-wave. On the other hand, vasodilation increases
the set-point over the inflection point, thus producing
a “spiky” signal.
For both fat and spiky pulses, the integral of the pulsatile volume signal over a beat is no longer equal to
zero. The CNAP2GO controller is responsible for
restoring this condition of balanced volume control:
In particular, the set-point p0 and resulting pC(t) need
to be altered after each heart-beat until balance is
achieved (Fig. 4c). A “proportional-integral” (PI)
control approach results in an adaptive formula for
set-point correction as can be seen in the methods
section below. The summation of the “I” (integral)
part of the control approach is the memory for the
set-points p1,2,…,n that allows for the reconstruction of
long-term BP information.

While this open-loop phase is very similar to the
standard VUT, the closed loop of CNAP2GO differs
in almost all fundamental aspects.

Tracking mean BP

This mechanism not only works for vasomotor
changes but also for pure mBP changes. An increase
in mBP – which is a shift of the p-v transfer function
to the right – tends to move the setpoint towards the
lower asymptote of the p-v transfer function. The
integral over the beat will be negative resulting in an
increase of the set-point pn. Vasodilation shifts the Scurve in the opposite way and VCT decreases pn.
Figure 5 shows the frequency domain of the
CNAP2GO control signals. Beside the high-pass
filtered pulses vPulse(t), also the very-low-frequency
components below 10-2 Hz of v(t) are removed from
vVCT(t) and vRhythm(t) by a special digital filter design.
In these very slowly changing frequency components, blood volume and thus v(t) is not only influenced by BP but also by vasomotor activity. In the
case of vasoconstriction, smooth vascular muscles
close the arteries and arterioles and finger blood volume decreases (i.e., v(t) goes up), although BP typically rises during vasoconstriction (i.e., v(t) should

After the closed-loop phase, the mean cuff pressure is
perfectly located on the inflection point of the Sshaped p-v transfer function. As can be seen in Figure 4a, the ideal pulsatile vPulse(t) (light blue trace)
has maximum amplitude and the integral of vPulse(t)
over a full beat is zero. Thus the main condition of
the VCT, which keeps blood volume flow in the finger artery balanced over a heart cycle, is fulfilled.
As soon as BP or vasomotor changes occur, the situation becomes different. If the applied pressure is lower than mBP (p<), vPulse(t) has a lower amplitude
(green trace) and differs in pulse shape: the pulses are
“fat”. In contrast, if the applied pressure is higher
than mBP (p>), vPulse(t) has also a lower amplitude,
but the pulses are “spiky” (dark blue trace).
Figure 4b shows how vasoconstriction influences the
p-v transfer function: while the upper asymptote for
pC(t) >> sBP remains unchanged, the lower asymp4

v [1]

Pressure (p>) is
higher than
MBP

Fig. 4: (a) The optimum pulsatile vPulse(t)
(light blue trace) has maximum amplitude
with an integral over a full beat of zero.
Suboptimal signals are either "spiky" (dark
blue trace) or "fat" (green trace).

Signal at p> has smaller amplitude and “spiky pulses”

(b) shows how vasoconstriction alters the Sshaped p-v transfer function.
Ideal signal

Pressure (p<)
is lower than
MBP

(c) shows how the set-point p0 and resulting
pC(t) are altered after each heart beat. See
text for further explanation.

Signal at p< has smaller amplitude and “fat pulses”

pC(t) [mmHg]

p0 p>

p<
v [1]

v [1]
VCT increases the set-point from p0 to p2 until the
shape of the BP-signal is equal to the initial signal

Resulting PPG-signal is not obtained at the inflection point. Its
amplitude is smaller, and the shape changes also to a “fat
pulse”. “Fat pulses” indicates, that the set-point is too low

Vasoconstriction

VCT

The S-shaped transfer
function is reduced due
to vasoconstriction

pC(t) [mmHg]

pC(t) [mmHg]

p0 p1,2,…,n

p0

go down). The opposite behavior occurs during vasodilation. This means that the information from the
PPG signal v(t) below 10-2 Hz is not reliable. Therefore, this frequency range is removed from all further
calculations by filtering. The above-mentioned “I”
summation of the VCT control approach reconstructs
BP information below 10-2 Hz.

ciple, where actuator changes shall be slow, pulsatile
blood volume is not clamped. Rather, the pulsatile
frequencies are cut off, and the “differential” controller part acts as a second band-pass filter producing non-pulsatile vdRhythm(f).

Anti-resonance
The complex control system outlined above follows
the inflection point and thus mBP is tracked by pC(t).
As a result, the speed of tracking is limited to the cutoff frequency of vRhythm(f) and vdRhythm(f). This produces the control engineering problem that the stability of the system is reduced if the actuator is slow.
Slowly-reacting pC(t) creates a so-called pole in the
z-plane indicating a tendency to oscillate. These oscillations especially occur when the patient calms
down, parasympathetic tone increases, and the
breathing frequency (about 0.2Hz to 0.3Hz) appears
in the BP signal. A digital anti-resonance system was
developed that makes this pole ineffective. The basic
considerations of this system were inspired by a
method for suppressing mechanical resonance in high
track density hard-disk drives [31 ].

Tracking physiological rhythms
VCT ensures a stable long-term tracking of mBP,
corrects for vasomotor activity and reconstructs BP
information. In addition, a mechanism for tracking
fast mBP changes and physiologic BP rhythms is
needed. Figure 5 shows vRhythm(f), which covers
physiological rhythms in BP that are related to
breathing as well as to “Traube-Hering-Mayer
waves” [ 29, 30]. The signal vRhythm(t) is led into a kind
of a “proportional-integral-differential” (PID) control
mechanism in order to keep vRhythm(t) as small as
possible by altering pc(t). Note that a rise in BP increases blood volume in the finger and thus decreases
v(t), whereas a fall in BP increases v(t). The PIDcontrol coefficients provoke negative feedback: if BP
rises, pc(t) rises too while blood volume in the finger
(indicated by vRhythm(t)) is kept constant.

From CNAP2GO's need for anti-resonance we see
that a major benefit of pulsatile VUT control systems
is to inhibit this kind of resonance: Even in very fast
pressure generators, pressure in the finger cuff will
always lag behind true pulsatile BP. However, the
resulting pole in a VUT control system is ineffective
as long as the system can be faster than the BP signal.

Tracking pronounced BP changes
The so-called “differential” part of the controller,
vdRhythm(f), also takes care of pronounced BP changes
(e.g. Valsalva maneuver, hyperventilation, blood loss,
etc.). In order to follow the overall CNAP2GO prin5

v(f) [dB]

Amplitude response

5

Pulse Filter
vPulse(f)

VCT Filter
vVCT(f)

0

-5

Rhythm Filter
vRhythm(f)

-10

dRhythm Filter
vdRhythm(f)

-15
log f [Hz]
-20
10-3

10-2

DC-components

10-1

Rhythms

!(f)

100

Pulses

Frequency response

90
45
0
-45

log f [Hz]

-90
10-3

10-2

10-1

100

Fig. 5: The frequency domain of the control signals, indicating which part of the BP rhythms is represented by
the control signals. See text for further explanation.
Our anti-resonance system inhibiting the resonances
also for non-pulsatile control is thus a major leap
forward in the development of miniaturized BP measurement devices with acceptable clinical accuracy.

There were three reasons for this approach: First, the
hardware of the CNAP Monitor HD has international
regulatory approval for the use in patients. Second,
the experiments could be performed prior to expensive investments into miniaturization. And finally, the
CNAP Monitor HD allows calculation of all hemodynamic variables derived from the BP waveform.

Calibration
CNAP2GO's pC(t) tracks mBP and, with a simple
calculation, the pulsatile nature of blood pressure can
be superimposed using vPulse(t):
pC2G (t) = pC (t) + k ∙ vPulse(t)

wh er ea s k =

CNAP2GO was implemented as software code (C++)
and loaded as firmware on the CNAP Monitor HD.
The combined system was granted a CE-mark for the
use on patients in the OR. The sphygmomanometer
of the CNAP Monitor HD was used for calibration.

sBPinit − d BPinit
vsys − vdia

sBPinit and dBPinit are calibration values obtained
before starting CNAP2GO and vsys and vdia are maxima and minima of vPulse(t) during the initial phase.

Lab tests versus CNAP Monitor HD
For obtaining CE-mark, lab tests in 20 healthy subjects were performed (Table 1). In Figure 6a, the BP
and CO trends of the standard CNAP Monitor HD
(VUT) and the CNAP2GO are shown. Both devices
were initially calibrated to the same sBP/dBP values
using the sphygmomanometer of the CNAP Monitor
HD. In order to provoke the cardiovascular system
and induce changes in BP and vasomotor activity, the
subjects performed several physiological maneuvers
(deep breathing, fast breathing, submersion of contralateral hand into ice water, stroop test, passive leg
raining) within 30 min.

CNAP2GO prototype implementation
We implemented the CNAP2GO mechanism as a
software prototype into existing hardware. A commercially available CNAP Monitor HD was adapted
via software (see Methods section) to turn its VUT
into CNAP2GO. Although the CNAP hardware in
principle allows for the fast pulsatile BP changes as
necessary for VUT, the speed of pressure changes
was inherently limited by the software design of
CNAP2GO as described before.

6

120
110
100
mmHg

90
80
70

Vals

PLR

Stroop

Ice

DB

50

FB

60

40
10
9
8

L/min

7
6
5

Vals

PLR

Ice

FB

2

DB

3

Stroop

4

1
Bland Altman plot: mBP ID1-46

40
60

30

Color mapping: data of one patient have the same color

40

20
10

delta-CNAP2GO-BP [mmHg]

– IBPcorrected)
[mmHg]
CNAP2GOCNAP2GO
(post-hoc
- IBP [mmHg]

0
50

95% of all
Data points

0
-10
-20

0

-20

-40

-30
-40
40

20

50
60
70
80
90
100 110 120
(CNAP2GO
+ IBP) / 2 corrected)
[mmHg]
(CNAP2GO
(post-hoc
+ IBP)/2 [mmHg]

-60
-60

130

-40

-20
0
20
delta-IBP-BP [mmHg]

40

60

Fig. 6: (a) Sample BP and CO trend traces taken from lab test measurements during physiological activities:
DB – deep breathing, FB – fast breathing, Ice – submersion of hand in ice water, Stroop – colour stroop test,
PLR – passive leg raising, Vals – valsalva test. The upper trace shows beat-to-beat sBP, dBP and mBP values
derived by CNAP Monitor HD (dark blue) and by CNAP2GO (light blue). The lower trace shows CO derived
by CNAP Monitor HD (dark blue) and by CNAP2GO (light blue).
(b) Left panel: Bland Altman plot for mean BP from the clinical study: same-color points stem from the same
patient. The plot includes indication of bias together with limits of agreement which define the range in which
95% of all data points are expected to lie. Right panel: Concordance plot of spontaneous changes in mBP
found within 5 mins by invasive reference (IBP) and CNAP2GO.

7

Table 1: Lab tests versus CNAP Monitor HD. Patient characteristics and results of Bland Altman analysis for
mean arterial pressure. sBP – systolic blood pressure, dBP – diastolic blood pressure, mBP – mean arterial pressure, SD – standard deviation
Pa#ent characteris#cs
Male/female, n

14/6

Age, median (range) [years]

36 (23–49)

Actual body weight, median (range) [kg]

79 (56–130)

Height, median (range) [cm]

177 (161–189)

CNAP Monitor HD sBP, median (range) [mmHg]

108 (74–141)

CNAP Monitor HD dBP, median (range) [mmHg]

64 (47–102)

CNAP Monitor HD mBP, median (range) [mmHg]

82 (63–116)

Bland Altman analysis for mBP
Mean of the diﬀerences ± SD [mmHg]

0.3 ± 4.4

95% limits of agreement [mmHg]

-8.3 to 8.9

Table 2: Clinical study versus invasive reference method. Patient characteristics and results of Bland Altman
analysis for mean arterial pressure. sBP – systolic blood pressure, dBP – diastolic blood pressure, mBP – mean
arterial pressure, SD – standard deviation
Pa#ent characteris#cs
Male/female, n

19/27

Age, median (range) [years]

56 (25–79)

Actual body weight, median (range) [kg]

77.5 (46–130)

Height, median (range) [cm]

171.5 (157–192)

Invasive sBP, median (range) [mmHg]

104 (60–172)

Invasive dBP, median (range) [mmHg]

56 (29–103)

Invasive mBP, median (range) [mmHg]

78 (48–131)

Bland Altman analysis for mBP
Mean of the diﬀerences ± SD [mmHg]

-1.0 ± 7.0

95% limits of agreement [mmHg]

-14.8 to 12.7

8

The difference between mBP measured with
CNAP2GO and mBP measured with CNAP Monitor
HD was 0.3 ± 4.4 mmHg. The bias between
CNAP2GO CO and CNAP Monitor HD CO was 1.4
± 0.6 L/min with a percentage error of 22%. As
shown in the sample trace of Figure 6a, there was an
inherent parallel shift in the CO trend. This may be
caused by a different shape of CNAP2GO's BP pulse
which is directly derived from the superimposed
PPG-signal. The percentage error of 22% is below
the 30% threshold that was defined by Critchley and
Critchley to define clinically acceptable agreement
between CO measurement devices [32].

mmHg per beat or 1.3 mmHg/sec, the maximum values were 24.4 mmHg per beat or 25 mmHg/sec.
Figure 7 shows the spectra of the contact pressure
pc(t) in comparison with the frequency content of the
whole pulsatile BP signal, demonstrating how much
the control was slowed down for CNAP2GO.

Important findings for the miniaturized actuator
The results of the clinical study reveal important
findings for miniaturization of CNAP2GO. Miniaturized CNAP2GO requires an actuator with a maximum speed of at most 25-30 mmHg/sec. Actuators
such as small printable piezo-electric motors are
available with two important features: Low power
consumption, but high enough stall torque to keep the
actuator in its current position when no movement is
needed. This has the effect that no energy is needed if
mBP does not change.

Clinical study versus invasive reference
method
We included 46 patients having neurosurgery with
general anesthesia in a clinical study. We compared
mBP measured using CNAP2GO and mBP measured
using a radial arterial catheter (invasive reference
method, clinical gold standard) (Table 2). In the
Bland Altman plot (Fig. 6b), we used color coding to
illustrate measurements from the same patient, thus
visualizing patient-specific offsets. Clustering indicates that patient-specific offsets remained similar
throughout the recording which, in turn, indicates
that CNAP2GO BP measurements were stable over
the measurement period.

We made basic calculations for a wearable CNAP2GO sensor using the data from a commercially available step motor (PCBMotor ApS, Ballerup, Denmark) to check whether the required pressure
changes are feasible. We chose a printable motor with
an outer diameter of 30 mm that can be integrated in
the plate of a CNAP2GO finger ring. This motor can
change contact pressure to the light elements via a
gear from the motor. With a transmission ratio higher
than 20.27, this component has a high enough stall
torque so that no energy is needed if mBP does not
change. With such a transmission system, the motor
can theoretically change contact pressure of 1 mmHg
within 5.82 ms. Assuming additional time due to control loops and further tolerances, we assume that a
rate of pressure changes of 100 mmHg/sec can be
easily achieved with this particular piezo motor.

The rate of actuator pressure change, which according to the VCT follows mBP, was analyzed in detail.
The absolute changes in mBP of consecutive heart
beats (N=97.432) were inspected together with the
corresponding pulse intervals and resulting need for
actuator speed. The contact pressure of CNAP2GO
required a median changing speed of about 1.4

In miniaturized CNAP2GO, readjustments of pc(t) to
follow mBP will be done as soon as the beat detector
of the system has found a beat (usually about 100ms
after the systolic peak). Then the VCT criteria are
used to derive the resulting new pc(t). In the previous
experiments, pc(t) was adjusted using the CNAP
pressure system and the finger cuff. In miniaturized
CNAP2GO, the actuator will be activated until the
new pc(t) is applied to the finger. Then the actuator
stops and keeps pc(t) constant, at best, without power
until the next beat is detected.

Average Amplitude Spectra: IBP waveform - red, CNAP2GO actuator speed - blue
1.6

1.4

1.2

|Y(f)|

1

0.8

0.6

We have performed estimations on the power consumption of such a step motor. Assuming that it will
follow the mBP profile of the 46 patients during
anesthesia, the power needed to run the actuator is
44.83 mW. Together with the PPG system (5.64
mW), a low-power bluetooth microcontroller (1.66
mW) and a motion sensor (0.04 mW), the power
requirement of the CNAP2GO system is less than 60
mW.

0.4

0.2

0
-2
10

-1

10

0

10

1

10
Frequency (Hz)

2

10

3

10

Fig. 7: The spectra of CNAP2GO's contact pressure pc(t)
(blue) in comparison to the frequency content of the
whole pulsatile BP signal (red).

9

DISCUSSION

DATA AVAILABILITY

We have introduced the CNAP2GO method based on
the new art of VCT which requires only slowly
changing actuators and is robust against vasomotor
changes. We discovered that the pulsatile control in
the standard VUT mainly avoids control system resonances. For CNAP2GO, we achieved prevention of
resonances by adaptive anti-resonance filters.

Data that support hypotheses, plots and other findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The study was financed by CNSystems Medizintechnik GmbH, Austria. A major part of the investment
came from a crowdfunding initiative (https://www.lionrocket.com/cnsystems) and the authors thank all
crowd investors.

We were able to demonstrate validity of CNAP2GO.
mBP differed by 1.0 ± 7.0 mmHg in comparison with
the intra-arterial gold standard, which is well within
the limits of 5 ± 8 mmHg demanded in the ISO
81060-2 standard for intermittent non-invasive
sphygmomanometers [33 ].

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
CNSystems Medizintechnik GmbH (Graz, Austria)
develops, manufactures and markets the non-invasive
CNAP-Technology. JF is CEO and founder of CNSystems, receives salary and has equity interests. CF,
DF, JG and KL are employees of CNSystems. JF, CF,
JG and KL are inventors and named on one or more
patents regarding continuous non-invasive technologies. BS has received institutional restricted research
grants, honoraria for giving lectures, and refunds of
travel expenses from CNSystems. DR has no conflicts to declare.

There are still some challenges regarding the implementation of this method in a wearable solution:
First, we didn’t perform our experiments using the
final wearable hardware. Miniaturization will be a
key task with this new sensor. Based on the present
data set, all steps of miniaturization and technological refinement can be assessed and monitored in Labtests.
Second, for the wearable solution of CNAP2GO, the
measured mBP needs a correcting element for orthostatic pressure whenever the finger level differs from
heart level. Heart level correction can be done using
a low-power motion sensor that measures the vertical
difference between the heart and the finger. Knowing
the density of blood, hydrostatic pressure can be calculated and simply subtracted from pC(t). This simple
form of heart level correction has advantages compared to time-based wearable approaches, where the
influence of this phenomenon is evident but solutions
are unclear [34].
Third, for calibration, CNAP2GO must obtain initial
absolute values of sBP and dBP. This may be
achieved during the initial phase with the CNAP2GO
sensor directly at the finger. Together with the initial
mBP, a calibration function may be calculated from
the measured oscillometric envelope and associated
sBP and dBP.
In conclusion, we were able to demonstrate that the
CNAP2GO method enables mBP to be measured
with clinically acceptable accuracy and precision.
Miniaturization of the hardware components can be
realized using PPG sensors with an LED and a photodiode. The contact pressure of the light elements to
the skin is modifiable by a slow and thus low-energy
actuator, all of which make wearable CNAP2GO
sensors feasible. CNAP2GO potentially constitutes
the breakthrough for wearable sensors for blood pressure and flow monitoring in both ambulatory and inhospital clinical settings.

10

Beat-based volume control technique

METHODS

Within the VCT algorithm pulses are inspected
whether they have become “spiky” or “fat” within
the previous beat by calculating an integral. If the
area over the negative half-wave differs from that
over the positive half-wave, the integral over the
complete beat is different from zero. This then triggers an adjustment of the set-point Pn:

Hardware
To obtain a CNAP2GO protoype, we modified a
standard CNAP Monitor HD, especially its core unit
(the CNAP module). The CNAP Module is an electronic system where almost all components are implemented as software on a 32-Bit digital signal processor (DSP; TMS320F2810, Texas Instruments,
Dallas, USA). Attached to the CNAP module is a
double finger sensor system for the alternating use on
the index and middle finger. Each CNAP sensor contains a PPG system utilizing an LED (λ=890nm) as
well as a “light-to-frequency” converter (TSL245R,
ams, Unterpremstätten, Austria) for light detection
that produces a digital pulse-width modulation signal.
This signal goes directly to a timer input of the DSP
producing the digital PPG (i.e. the time series v(t))
[35 ]. The output of the DSP controls two valves (separate inlet and outlet valves). Both valves are arranged
like transistors of a CMOS gate having one valve
always closed. This allows for a high-fidelity contact
pressure of the PPG-elements in the finger sensor
[36 ].

Pn = P0 − cBI ∙

n

∑
0

Vn − cBP ∙ Vn

where cBI and cBP are constants for the beat-based
integral (BI) and beat-based proportional (BP) control approach, respectively. The continuous summation starting with the first beat allows for the reconstruction of the long-term BP information that is filtered away from vVCT(t).
The integral function for the beat is:

Vn =

Algorithm overview
The original CNAP Monitor HD software in the
module was replaced by the CNAP2GO/VCT
method described in this article. All supporting functions (such as basic operating system, ambient light
removal, valve controlling system, beat detector, data
transmission, etc.) remained the same as in the original CNAP Monitor HD software V5.2.14.

1 tb
vVCT (t)d t
PI ∫t
b−1

tb:

time t at which beat b is detected and

PI:

the pulse interval from tb−1 to tb

Continuous control mechanisms
The CNAP2GO control system continuously keeps
track of the required contact pressure with the following control structure:

yPD = cP ∙ vRhythm + cD ∙ vdRhythm

Initialization: Open-loop phase

yI = cI ∙

In the open-loop phase, a Gaussian-style oscillometric envelope is calculated by using the amplitudes of
vPulse(t) obtained at different contact pressures pc(t).
The set-point p0 and its PPG-counterpart v0 are found
according to the maximum amplitude rule. The filter
variables of the cascades vFilt[1, 2, .., N] are then set
to v0.

n

∑
0

yPD

The final CNAP2GO contact pressure is:

pC (t) = Pn − yI − yPD
cP , cD and cI are constants for the proportional, differential, and integral approach of the continuous
control system, respectively, that keeps pc(t) at the
inflection point of the S-curve and thus makes it
equal to mBP.

Filter cascade
After ambient light removal, v(t) has a sampling frequency (fs) of 250 Hz. A recursive digital IIR-filter
was designed to obtain vPulse(t), vRhythm(t) ), vdRhythm(t)
and vVCT(t). Each filter cascade contains a first order
IIR low-pass filter (yi = (1-UC)*yi-1 + UC*xi). The
recursive function provides down-sampling functionality to enable reasonable filter parameters for low
cut-off frequencies. In Figure 5, the frequency response of the filters is shown.

The anti-resonance system
The resonance detector indicates frequency and amplitude of a resonance oscillation in pc(t), which typically occurs between 0.1Hz to 1Hz. This information
tunes a high-sensitive IIR notch filter which eliminates resonance phenomena.

Lab tests versus CNAP Monitor HD

Closed-loop phase

Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. We performed measurements with the participants lying in supine position. The finger sensor
of the CNAP2GO system was attached to the same
hand as the CNAP Monitor HD sensor. Study measurements were performed over 30 min and included
6 physiological maneuvers.

After initialization in the open-loop phase, the filter
adapts the relevant v-signals with every new data
point. Signals “forget” the initial set-point v0 with an
update coefficient UC [1, 2, .., N]. This corresponds
to the fact that very low-frequency changes may be
influenced by vasomotor activity. The information
for low frequency BP changes is reconstructed by
VCT [37 , 38 ].

11

For statistical analysis, simultaneously obtained mBP
values measured with the CNAP2GO and with the
CNAP Monitor HD were averaged over 10 sec to
reduce the number of comparisons and de-correlate
consecutive data. We performed Bland-Altman
analysis accounting for multiple measurements per
patient [39] and calculated the bias (mean of the differences between CNAP2GO mBP values minus
CNAP Monitor HD mBP values), the standard deviation of the differences, and the 95% limits of agreement (Table 1).

The finger sensor of the CNAP2GO system was attached to the hand opposite to the arterial catheter.
CNAP2GO continuous noninvasive BP measurements and invasive reference measurements using a
radial arterial catheter were recorded simultaneously
over a period of 45 minutes. According to clinical
standards, general anesthesia was maintained with
remifentanyl and propofol. Norepinephrine was given whenever clinically indicated. For statistical
analysis, mBP measured with CNAP2GO and mBP
obtained using an radial arterial catheter were synchronised in time before being averaged over 10 secs
to reduce the number of comparisons and de-correlate consecutive data. We plotted mBP measured with
the CNAP2GO system against invasively measured
mBP values in scatter plots for visual assessment of
the distribution and relationship of the BP data. In
order to evaluate the agreement between mBP measured with CNAP2GO and mBP obtained using an
radial arterial catheter we used Bland-Altman analysis accounting for multiple measurements per patient
[39] and calculated the bias (mean of the differences
between CNAP2GO mBP values minus invasively
assessed mBP values), the standard deviation of the
differences, and the 95% limits of agreement (see
Table 2 and Fig. 6b left panel). Furthermore, we calculated the changes in BP (delta-BP) occurring over a
period of 5 mins and investigated the concordance
between changes in CNAP2GO mBP and changes in
invasive reference mBP (see Fig. 6b, right panel).

Clinical study versus invasive reference
The clinical prospective method comparison study
comparing mBP measured using CNAP2GO and
mBP measured using a radial arterial catheter (invasive reference method, clinical gold standard) was
performed in the Department of Anesthesiology, Center of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
(Hamburg, Germany) after approval by the ethic's
committee (Ethikkomission der Ärztekammer Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany). We obtained written informed consent from all patients. Adult patients
scheduled for neurosurgical procedures in whom
continuous blood pressure monitoring with an invasive arterial catheter was planned, independently of
the study, were eligible for study inclusion. Exclusion
criteria were the presence of vascular abnormalities
or anatomical deformities of the upper extremities or
peripheral edema.

REFERENCES
Michard, F. (2017). Innovations in Monitoring. ICU Management & Practice, 17(3), 148–150.
De Backer, D., Bakker, J., Cecconi, M., Hajjar, L., Liu, D. W., Lobo, S., … Vincent, J. L. (2018). Alternatives to the Swan–
Ganz catheter. Intensive Care Medicine, 44(6), 730–741.
3 Teboul, J.-L., Saugel, B., Cecconi, M., De Backer, D., Hofer, C. K., Monnet, X., … Scheeren, T. W. (2016). Less invasive
hemodynamic monitoring in critically ill patients. Intensive Care Medicine, 42(9), 1350–1359.
4 Sessler, D. I., & Saugel, B. (2019). Beyond ‘failure to rescue’: the time has come for continuous ward monitoring. British
Journal of Anaesthesia, 122(3), 304–306.
5 McGillion, M. H., Duceppe, E., Allan, K., Marcucci, M., Yang, S., Johnson, A. P., … Devereaux, P. J. (2018). Postoperative
Remote Automated Monitoring: Need for and State of the Science. Canadian Journal of Cardiology, 34(7), 850–862.
6 Urrea, B., Miller, E. R., MacFarlane, Z. T., Appel, L. J., Blumenthal, R. S., Martin, S. S., & Plante, T. B. (2016). Validation
of the Instant Blood Pressure Smartphone App. JAMA Internal Medicine, 176(5), 700.
7 Mukkamala, R., Hahn, J.-O., Inan, O. T., Mestha, L. K., Kim, C.-S., Töreyin, H., & Kyal, S. (2015). Towards Ubiquitous
Blood Pressure Monitoring via Pulse Transit Time: Theory and Practice. IEEE Transactions on Bio-Medical Engineering,
62(8), 1879–1901.
8 Baruch, M. C., Warburton, D. E. R., Bredin, S. S. D., Cote, A., Gerdt, D. W., & Adkins, C. M. (2011). Pulse Decomposition
Analysis of the digital arterial pulse during hemorrhage simulation. Nonlinear Biomedical Physics, 5(1), 1–15.
9 Addison, P. S. (2016). Slope Transit Time (STT): A Pulse Transit Time Proxy requiring only a Single Signal Fiducial Point.
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 63(11), 2441–2444.
10 Khalid, S. G., Zhang, J., Chen, F., & Zheng, D. (2018). Blood Pressure Estimation Using Photoplethysmography Only :
Comparison between Different Machine Learning Approaches. Journal of Healthcare Engineering, 2018.
11 Dagdeviren, C., Su, Y., Joe, P., Yona, R., Liu, Y., Kim, Y., … Rogers, J. A. (2014). Conformable amplified lead zirconate
titanate sensors with enhanced piezoelectric response for cutaneous pressure monitoring. Nature Communications, 5, 4496.
12 Xing, X., & Sun, M. (2016). Optical blood pressure estimation with photoplethysmography and FFT-based neural networks. Biomedical Optics Express, 7(8), 3007–3020.
13 Sola, J., Bertschi, M., & Krauss, J. (2018). Measuring pressure: Introducing oBPM, the optical revolution for blood pressure monitoring. IEEE Pulse, 9(5), 31–33.
1
2

12

Gao, M., Olivier, N. B., & Mukkamala, R. (2016). Comparison of noninvasive pulse transit time estimates as markers of
blood pressure using invasive pulse transit time measurements as a reference. Physiological Reports, 4(10), e12768.
15 Proenca, J., Muehlsteff, J., Aubert, X., & Carvalho, P. (2010). Is pulse transit time a good indicator of blood pressure
changes during short physical exercise in a young population? Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, 2010, 598–601.
16 Ding, X., Zhang, Y., & Tsang, H. K. (2016). Impact of heart disease and calibration interval on accuracy of pulse transit
time-based blood pressure estimation. Physiological Measurement, 37(2), 227–37.
17 Thiele, R. (2015). Cardiac Bulldozers, Backhoes, and Blood Pressure. Anesthesia & Analgesia, 121(6), 1417–1419.
18 Jan Peňáz: Photoelectric Measurement of blood pressure, volume and flow in the finger. Digest of the 10th intl conf. on
med. & biol. eng. – 1973 Dresden.
19 Imholz, B. P., Wieling, W., van Montfrans, G. a, & Wesseling, K. H. (1998). Fifteen years experience with finger arterial
pressure monitoring: assessment of the technology. Cardiovascular Research, 38(3), 605–616.
20 Fortin, J., Marte, W., Grüllenberger, R., Hacker, A., Habenbacher, W., Heller, A., … Skrabal, F. (2006). Continuous noninvasive blood pressure monitoring using concentrically interlocking control loops. Computers in Biology and Medicine,
36(9), 941–957.
21 Wesseling, K. H., Hoeven, G. M. A. Van Der, Goudoever, J. Van, Settels, J. J., Centre, A. M., & Hoeven, A. Van Der.
(1995). Physiocal, calibrating finger vascular physiology for Finapres. Homeostasis, 36(2–3), 67–82.
22 Fortin, J., Wellisch, A., & Maier, K. (2013). CNAP – Evolution of Continuous Non-invasive Arterial Blood Pressure Monitoring. Biomed Tech, 58(Suppl. 1).
23 Fortin, J., Fellner, C., Mocnik, N., Grond, J., Brunner, T., & Flotzinger, D. (2017). The importance of VERIFI (“Vasomotoric Elimination and Reconstructed Identification of the Initial set-point”) for the performance of the CNAP technology.
IFMBE Proceedings 65, 65, 663–666.
24 Langewouters, G. J., Wesseling, K. H., & Goedhard, W. J. (1984). The static elastic properties of 45 human thoracic and 20
abdominal aortas in vitro and the parameters of a new model. Journal of Biomechanics, 17(6), 425–435.
25 Mauk, G., Smith, C. R., Geddes, L., & Bourland JD. (1980). The Meaning of the Point of Maximum Oscillations in Cuff
Pressure in the Indirect Measurement of Blood Pressure—Part II. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, 102(1), 28.
26 Yamakoshi, K., Shirnazu, H., Shibata, M., & Kamiya, A. (1982). New oscillometric method for indirect measurement of
systolic and mean arterial pressure in the human finger. Part 1: model experiment. Med. & Biol. Eng. & Comput, 20(May),
307–313.
27 Yamakoshi, K., Shirnazu, H., Shibata, M., & Kamiya, A. (1982). New oscillometric method r for indirect measurement of
systolic and mean arterial pressure in the human finger. Part 2: model experiment. Med. & Biol. Eng. & Comput, 20(May),
314–318.
28 Shaltis, P. A., Reisner, a T., & Asada, H. H. (2008). Cuffless blood pressure monitoring using hydrostatic pressure changes.
IEEE Transactions on Bio-Medical Engineering, 55(6), 1775–1777.
14

Traube L.: Ueber periodische Thätigkeits-Aeusserungen des vasomotorischen und Hemmungs-Nervencentrums. Centralblatt für die medicinischen Wissenschaften, Berlin, 1865, 3: 881-885.
29

Mayer S.: Studien zur Physiologie des Herzens und der Blutgefässe 6. Abhandlung: Über spontane Blutdruckschwankungen. Sitzungsberichte Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien. Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Classe, Anatomie, 1876,
74: 281-307.
31 Kang, C. I., & Kim, C. H. (2005). An adaptive notch filter for suppressing mechanical resonance in high track density disk
drives. Microsystem Technologies, 11(8–10), 638–652.
32 Critchley, L. A., & Critchley, J. A. (1999). A meta-analysis of studies using bias and precision statistics to compare cardiac
output measurement techniques. Journal of Clinical Monitoring and Computing, 15(2), 85–91.
33 ISO 81060-2:2018 Non-invasive sphygmomanometers -- Part 2: Clinical investigation of intermittent automated measurement type, https://www.iso.org/standard/73339.html.
34 Muehlsteff, J., Aubert, X. A., & Morren, G. (2008). Continuous cuff-less blood pressure monitoring based on the pulse
arrival time approach: the impact of posture. In Conference proceedings : ... Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. Annual Conference (Vol.
2008, pp. 1691–1694).
35 Fortin J., Grüllenberger R.: Digital control method for measuring blood pressure. US 8,343,062.
36 Fortin J., Skrabal F.: Continuous non-invasive sphygmomanometer. US 6,669,648.
37 Fortin J.: Method and apparatus for continuous non-invasive determination of blood pressure. US 10,098,554.
38 Fortin J.: Wearable hemodynamic sensor. US 10,285,599.
39 Bland, J. M., & Altman, D. G. (2007). Agreement between methods of measurement with multiple observations per individual. Journal of Biopharmaceutical Statistics, 17(4), 571–582.
30

13

