medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A Multiomics Approach to Heterogeneity in Alzheimer’s Disease:
Focused Review and Roadmap

AmanPreet Badhwar, PhDa,b, G. Peggy McFall, PhDc , Shraddha Sapkota, PhDe , Sandra E.
Black, MDe,f, Howard Chertkow, MDg, Simon Duchesne, PhDh,i, Mario Masellis, MD, PhDf,
Liang Li, PhDj, Roger A. Dixon, PhDc,d*, Pierre Bellec, PhDa,b*
a

Centre de Recherche de l'Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal, Canada; bUniversité
de Montréal, Canada; cDepartment of Psychology, University of Alberta, Canada;
d

Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute, University of Alberta, Canada; eHurvitz Brain

Sciences Research Program, Sunnybrook Research Institute, University of Toronto, Canada;
f

Department of Medicine (Neurology), Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, University of

Toronto, Canada; gBaycrest Health Sciences and the Rotman Research Institute, University
of Toronto, hCentre CERVO, Quebec City Mental Health Institute, Quebec, Canada,
i

Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, Canada; jDepartment of
Chemistry, University of Alberta, Canada * equal contribution

Corresponding Author
Dr. AmanPreet Badhwar
Centre de Recherche, Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal
Université de Montréal
Montréal, QC, Canada H3W 1W5
Tel: 514-340-3540 ext. 3367
Fax: 514-340-2802
Email: amanpreet.badhwar@criugm.qc.ca

Short running title: Multiomics heterogeneity in Alzheimer’s

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

Abstract
Etiological and clinical heterogeneity is increasingly recognized as a common characteristic of
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias. This heterogeneity complicates diagnosis,
treatment, and the design and testing of new drugs. An important line of research is discovery
of multimodal biomarkers that will facilitate the targeting of subpopulations with homogeneous
pathophysiological signatures. High-throughput ‘omics’ are unbiased data driven techniques
that probe the complex etiology of Alzheimer's disease from multiple levels (e.g. network,
cellular, and molecular) and thereby account for pathophysiological heterogeneity in clinical
populations. This review focuses on data reduction analyses that identify complementary
disease-relevant perturbations for three omics techniques: neuroimaging-based subtypes,
metabolomics-derived metabolite panels, and genomics-related polygenic risk scores.
Neuroimaging can track accrued neurodegeneration and other sources of network impairments,
metabolomics provides a global small-molecule snapshot that is sensitive to ongoing
pathological processes, and genomics characterizes relatively invariant genetic risk factors
representing key pathways associated with Alzheimer's disease. Following this focused review,
we present a roadmap for assembling these multiomics measurements into a diagnostic tool
highly predictive of individual clinical trajectories, to further the goal of personalized medicine
in Alzheimer's disease.

Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, multiomics biomarkers, neuroimaging subtype, metabolite panel,
polygenic risk score

Abbreviations
Aβ or Aβ42
APOE
ADNI
CN
FDG
fMRI
GWAS
lvPPA
MAF
MCI
NDDs
NGS
PCA
PET
PRS
SNPs

amyloid beta or amyloid beta 42
apolipoprotein E
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
cognitively normal
fluorodeoxyglucose
functional MRI
genome-wide association studies
logopenic progressive aphasia
minor allele frequency
mild cognitive impairment
neurodegenerative diseases
next-generation genome sequencing
posterior cortical atrophy
positron emission tomography
polygenic risk score
single nucleotide polymorphisms

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease is a complex, multifactorial pathology that manifests itself along a
continuum of conditions, ranging from asymptomatic, to mild cognitive impairment (MCI), to
dementia (specifically Alzheimer's disease dementia). Trials of disease-modifying therapies
remain unsuccessful, and these persistent failures have been attributed to (1) intervention late
in the disease process (i.e. symptomatic stage), by which time extensive irreversible damage
has accrued, and (2) lack of precision intervention targets in a multifactorial condition.
Accordingly, an important line of current research is directed at the discovery of multimodal
biomarkers that will help facilitate the detection of Alzheimer's disease in asymptomatic
populations, and the adaptation of intervention regimens to different target subpopulations in
prevention trials (Anstey et al., 2015; Olanrewaju et al., 2015). This work reviews recent datadriven approaches to biomarker discovery, in three omics fields that capture complementary
aspects of neurodegeneration and Alzheimer's disease risk factors. We further propose a
roadmap for integrating these multiomics biomarkers to advance our understanding of
heterogeneity in Alzheimer's disease, and promote efficacy in intervention trials.
Established Alzheimer's disease biomarkers currently capture three facets of the disease
pathophysiology: amyloidosis, tauopathy, and specific aspects of neurodegeneration (Jack et
al., 2018). Although these biomarkers have been usefully applied to the crucial goal of early
Alzheimer's disease detection (Sperling et al., 2011), they fall short in explaining the
heterogeneity of individual clinical trajectories, and their ability to predict differential cognitive
decline is modest (Dumurgier et al., 2017). Predicting progression to dementia is challenging,
as patients diagnosed with probable Alzheimer's disease dementia show considerable
heterogeneity in the cognitive domains impaired (Scheltens et al., 2016), and the presence or
severity of established Alzheimer's disease biomarkers. For example, amyloidosis-andtauopathy-defined ‘pure Alzheimer's disease neuropathology’ is observed in only 30-50
percent of patients with probable Alzheimer's disease dementia (Beach et al., 2012; Robinson
et al., 2018). The remaining cases show co-occurrence of multiple brain pathologies that
overlap with other NDDs of aging, such as cerebral small vessel disease, and Lewy body
dementia. Minimum to above-threshold levels of Alzheimer's disease pathology are also
observed in a considerable proportion (39%) of dementia patients not clinically diagnosed as
probable Alzheimer's disease (Beach et al., 2012). Alzheimer's disease pathology has also been
demonstrated in postmortem studies of CN older adults (Bennett et al., 2006), and it remains

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

unclear if such individuals would have developed Alzheimer's disease symptoms with time,
should they have lived longer (Jagust, 2013). Overall, “top-down” clinical labels, based
primarily on cognitive symptoms, imperfectly align with biomarkers of neurodegeneration.
Additional biomarkers are thus urgently needed to characterize the clinico-pathological
heterogeneity of Alzheimer's disease, and to disambiguate it from other age-related NDDs and
normal aging (Jack et al., 2018).
A radically different paradigm to NDDs is to move away from “top-down” clinical labels, and
concentrate on pathological signatures built “bottom up”, using unsupervised machine learning
algorithms and high-throughput ‘omics’ metrics that screen global facets of an organism. These
data-driven approaches provide new opportunities to probe the complex etiology of
Alzheimer's disease from multiple levels (example network, cellular, and molecular), and to
identify biomarker signatures with high diagnostic/prognostic value. This review focuses on
the following omics approaches: brain connectomics, metabolomics, and genomics. These
omics data capture complementary information on Alzheimer's disease emergence and
progression: brain connectomics (and morphometry) can track accrued neurodegeneration and
other sources of network impairments, metabolomics provides a global small-molecule
snapshot that is sensitive to ongoing pathological processes, and genomics characterizes
relatively invariant genetic risk factors representing key pathways associated with Alzheimer's
disease (Jack et al., 2018). The high-dimensional nature of omics “big data” can prove
challenging to process, manipulate, and visualize, even when a single modality is involved.
Multiple redundancies are often present in these measures, and not all data points provide
independent information as they tend to covary due to shared biological processes. We focus
this review on three omics data reduction techniques that capture disease-relevant population
heterogeneity with a limited number of indicators: neuroimaging-based subtypes, metabolite
panels, and polygenic risk score or PRS. Neuroimaging subtypes are based on data-driven
algorithms that identify patient subgroups with homogeneous brain imaging features.
Metabolite panels are developed via data-driven algorithms applied to thousands of small
molecules representing global biochemical events and distinguishing clinical phenotypes. PRS
and other empirically derived representations of interactive or multi-gene risk may represent
key domains of mechanisms and pathways to Alzheimer's disease. Following this focused
review, we discuss the rationale and challenges for assembling multiomics diagnostic tools
highly predictive of individual clinical trajectories, and in particular, the importance of
pathophysiological heterogeneity in research clinical cohorts.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

Materials and Methods
We conducted parallel focused reviews of PubMed articles published between January 2011 to
June 2018 in three omics domains: brain connectomics (and morphometry), metabolomics, and
genomics. We included studies investigating Alzheimer's disease in human and published in
English. Additional articles (that met criteria) were identified by scanning the reference lists of
selected PubMed articles. Described in the following three sections are search characteristics
specific to each omics domain. We have provided in Supplementary Material (Supplementary
Tables S1, S2, and S5) characteristics of the 40 domain-specific omics studies included.

Brain morphology and connectomics
Search term combinations used for brain morphology and connectomics in neuroimaging are
provided in were: (1) alzheimer’s disease OR alzheimer pathology AND subtype, (2) mild
cognitive impairment OR amnestic mild cognitive impairment OR MCI OR amnestic MCI
AND hierarchical clustering; resting-state AND functional MRI AND alzheimer AND
clustering, (3) alzheimer’s disease OR alzheimer pathology AND structural subtype, (4)
alzheimer’s disease OR alzheimer pathology AND structural MRI AND clustering, (5) restingstate AND functional MRI AND alzheimer AND hierarchical clustering, (6) diffusion MRI
AND alzheimer AND clustering, (7) diffusion MRI AND alzheimer AND hierarchical
clustering; diffusion MRI AND hierarchical clustering. To these we applied the “common”
exclusion criteria. Thereafter, only studies reporting AD spectrum subgroups identified using
data-driven methods were included. It should be noted that neuroimaging-based subtyping is
an emergent field and there is still a lack of consistent terminology. Therefore, to avoid missing
relevant studies due to stringent use of terminology, search combinations 1 and 2, used relaxed
and inclusive keywords, which captured all of the morphometry based literature. In total, 12
papers met our criteria, and were reviewed.

Metabolomics
Search term combinations for metabolomics were: (1) alzheimer’s disease AND metabolomics
panels; (2) alzheimer’s disease AND metabolomics profiles; (3) alzheimer’s disease AND
metabolomics networks; (4) alzheimer’s disease AND metabolomics pathways; (5)
alzheimer’s disease AND metabolomics biomarkers. To these we applied the common
exclusion criteria. We further excluded: reviews and technical reports; articles not relevant to
AD metabolomic panels, pathways, or networks; and studies using a targeted metabolomics

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

approach. Five papers were identified from reference list scans. In total, 11 studies were
reviewed. Details on key metabolites highted in the 11 studies were compiled from three
different

databases:

Kyoto

Encyclopedia

https://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html)

of

Pathway

Genes

and

Database,

Genomes
Human

(KEGG,

Metabolome

Database (HMDB, http://www.hmdb.ca/) and PubMed. These details were used to generate
Fig. 2b and are provided in Supplementary Table S3.

Genomics
Search term combinations used for the genomics were: (Polygenic Risk Scale OR Polygenic
Risk Index OR Genetic Risk Score OR Genetic Risk Scale OR Genetic Risk Index) AND
(Alzheimer Disease OR Alzheimers Disease OR Alzheimer's Disease), which identified 264
potential papers. To these we applied the “common” exclusion criteria, followed by exclusion
of single-gene studies. In total 17 studies were reviewed. References used for the compilation
of the genes in Supplementary Table S4 are provided in the Supplemental Reference section.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

Brain Subtypes

Figure 1: Brain morphology and connectomics Alzheimer's disease-related subtypes
Neuroimaging provides insight into the effect of neurodegeneration on brain health. There exist
different tools that can capture distinct, yet complementary, aspects of brain structure and
function. The most established neuroimaging marker of neurodegeneration is grey matter
atrophy, measured by structural MRI. Structural MRI is a non-invasive technique widely used
in both research and clinical practice. To generate structural maps, individual structural MRI
scans are first spatially aligned to a reference template or atlas (1a). Then for each individual
and each voxel (smallest volume element in MRI data), a metric characterizing the local
structure of the grey matter is generated (1a), such as grey matter volume, cortical thickness or
surface area. Using these approaches, it is possible to monitor the thinning of grey matter,
which likely reflects the death of neuronal cell bodies at advanced stages of neurodegeneration.
Synaptic disruption is an early event in Alzheimer's disease (Sperling et al., 2011), and
functional networks may have the ability to compensate the impact of neurodegeneration on

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

cognitive symptoms (Franzmeier et al., 2017). For these reasons, intrinsic functional
connectivity from resting-state fMRI is an emerging Alzheimer's disease biomarker that holds
promise for early diagnosis (Sperling et al., 2011; Badhwar et al., 2017). To analyze restingstate fMRI, select regions in canonical brain networks previously established in the literature
are generally considered (1b). An individual resting-state fMRI connectivity map can be
generated for different networks, with the default-mode, limbic, and salience networks being
the key components affected by Alzheimer's disease (Badhwar et al., 2017) (1b). Structural
and functional brain maps enter a subtyping procedure, which identifies groups of individuals
with homogeneous brain maps (1c).The number of subtypes are defined a priori or through
various metrics for model selection (Seghier, 2018) (for example N=3 in 1c). A subtype map
is generated by averaging the maps within each subgroup and subtracting the grand average
(i.e. demeaned) to emphasize the features of the subtype. Chi square statistics are applied to
identify groups that include a greater number of Alzheimer's disease patients than expected by
chance (illustrated by a “*AD” annotation for subtype 2 in 1c). In 1d, the subtyping procedure
was applied on maps of grey matter density from CN and Alzheimer's disease dementia
individuals in the ADNI database (N=377). Four out of seven subtypes were identified as
Alzheimer's disease dementia-related (results adapted from Tam and colleagues (Tam et al.,
2018)). Three subtypes were consistent with previous reports: posterior (or temporo-occipitoparietal-predominant), diffuse, and temporal (or medial temporal-predominant) atrophy
subtypes. A novel language atrophy subtype was also identified. In 1e, the subtype procedure
was applied to resting-state fMRI data collected on CN, MCI, and Alzheimer's disease
dementia individuals in a dataset pooling ADNI2 with several independent samples (N=130).
Three subtypes were extracted for three resting-state networks known to be impacted by
Alzheimer's disease: default-mode, salience, and limbic. One Alzheimer's disease
dementia/MCI-related subtype was found for each network. The salience and default-mode
followed similar patterns: increased within-network connectivity, and a lower (negative)
connectivity between networks. The limbic subtypes showed lower connectivity with frontal
regions, and increased connectivity with occipital regions. Results adapted from Orban et al.
(Orban et al., 2017). The section on “Brain Subtypes” compares results from the abovementioned and other studies with similar approaches and objectives. Supplementary Table S1
provides detailed characteristics of the 12 neuroimaging subtyping studies (structural MRI and
resting-state fMRI) that met our search criteria. Abbreviations: BOLD (blood oxygen level
dependant sigal)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

Anatomical subtypes
The spatial distribution of brain atrophy on structural MRI is highly heterogeneous in MCI,
and Alzheimer's disease dementia patients (Nettiksimmons et al., 2014; Poulakis et al., 2018).
Using data-driven clustering algorithms, 11 studies have attempted to subtype and characterize
this inherent heterogeneity (Supplementary Table S1). Seven studies reported at least three
distinct atrophy subtypes in Alzheimer's disease dementia (Noh et al., 2014; Hwang et al.,
2016; Park et al., 2017; Poulakis et al., 2018; ten Kate et al., 2018), or mixed (Alzheimer's
disease dementia and CN) cohorts (Varol et al., 2017; Tam et al., 2018). Subtypes were
generally consistent across studies, and can be described as diffuse, medial temporalpredominant (temporal), and temporo-occipito-parietal-predominant (posterior) (Fig. 1d).
They were generated by applying (1) hierarchical agglomerative clustering using Ward’s
clustering linkage (Noh et al., 2014; Hwang et al., 2016; Tam et al., 2018), Louvain clustering
(Park et al., 2017), random forest clustering (Poulakis et al., 2018), or non-negative matrix
factorization (ten Kate et al., 2018) on cortical thickness or grey matter density maps, or (2)
clustering on grey matter density maps using a novel approach called HYDRA (Varol et al.,
2017). Good agreement across studies may, in part, reflect usage of the same data sample
(ADNI) for subtype identification in four studies (Hwang et al., 2016; Varol et al., 2017;
Poulakis et al., 2018; Tam et al., 2018). Some studies report two-subtype decomposition (Dong
et al., 2016; Malpas, 2016), but these lack inter-study consensus. Using model-based clustering
on regional cortical thickness measures from ADNI, Malpas reported normal and atrophicentorhinal subtypes in a sample including Alzheimer's disease dementia, and CN individuals
(Malpas, 2016). The atrophic-entorhinal subtype demonstrated considerable heterogeneity in
entorhinal thickness, suggesting the presence of additional subtypes (Malpas, 2016). Dong et
al. reported limbic-insular, and parietal-occipital atrophy subtypes using CHIMERA clustering
on brain volume data from Alzheimer's disease dementia and CN ADNI participants (Dong et
al., 2016). In a separate study, the same group reported four atrophy subtypes using
CHIMERA: normal, temporal, and two diffuse subtypes - one with predominant temporal
involvement (diffuse-temporal), and one without (diffuse) (Dong et al., 2017). Visually, the
diffuse subtype from CHIMERA shared some overlap with the posterior subtype described
previously. In general, the reported subtypes (Dong et al., 2017) fit better with the three subtype
solution, considering that, unlike previous studies, the CHIMERA study included CN
individuals. Finally, Tam et al. identified a fourth atrophy subtype involving several languagerelated areas (Tam et al., 2018).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

The choice of the number of subtypes is to some degree arbitrary. Two studies showed that
their three subtypes could be decomposed into six (Noh et al., 2014), or more (Tam et al., 2018)
homogeneous groups. Finally, an additional study looking at heterogeneity with a linear
mixture model, instead of a discrete cluster analysis, showed that most individuals tend to
express varying levels of multiple subtypes (Zhang et al., 2016). Continuous measures of
subtype similarity are thus more advisable than discrete assignment (Zhang et al., 2016; Tam
et al., 2018).
We now highlight various associations between Alzheimer's disease markers/risk-factors and
the three atrophy subtypes consistently reported. In three studies, Alzheimer's disease dementia
patients with the posterior subtype were reported to be the youngest, and had the earliest ageat-onset (Noh et al., 2014; Hwang et al., 2016; Park et al., 2017). They also demonstrated
greater PET-detectable amyloidosis (Hwang et al., 2016), and pathological levels of CSF Aβ42
and tau (Noh et al., 2014; Varol et al., 2017; ten Kate et al., 2018). Differences across subtypes
were reported with FDG-PET-detectable glucose hypometabolism (Hwang et al., 2016), and
white matter hyperintensities (ten Kate et al., 2018). Subtype-specific associations with
Alzheimer's disease-related genes were observed, specifically, APOE (Noh et al., 2014; Varol
et al., 2017), CD2AP (CD2-associated protein) (Varol et al., 2017), SPON1 (Spondin-1) (Varol
et al., 2017), LOC390956 or PPIAP59 (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase A pseudogene)
(Varol et al., 2017), though the association with APOE was not consistently found (Hwang et
al., 2016). Associations of subtypes with cognition were observed for global (Varol et al., 2017;
Tam et al., 2018) and domain-specific (e.g. episodic memory) (Noh et al., 2014; Park et al.,
2017; Poulakis et al., 2018; ten Kate et al., 2018) measures, but not by all studies (Hwang et
al., 2016). Associations between subtypes and sex were found to be significant in two (Noh et
al., 2014; Varol et al., 2017) of four (Noh et al., 2014; Hwang et al., 2016; Varol et al., 2017;
Tam et al., 2018) studies.

Functional subtypes
By coupling cluster analysis and resting-state functional MRI, a preprint report by Orban et al.
(Orban et al., 2017) investigated connectivity subtypes in CN, MCI, and Alzheimer's disease
dementia patients (Supplementary Table S1). They noted associations between functional
connectivity subtypes and cognitive symptoms in the default-mode, limbic, and salience

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

networks in MCI, and Alzheimer's disease dementia patients (Fig. 1e). Limbic subtypes were
also associated with Alzheimer's disease biomarkers (CSF Aß42 levels, APOE4 genotype) in
an independent cohort at increased risk for familial Alzheimer's disease, suggesting that
functional connectivity subtypes may be sensitive to the presence and progression of preclinical
disease (Orban et al., 2017).

Summary
Our review found convergent evidence of distinct brain atrophy subtypes in Alzheimer's
disease dementia patients, including at least three data-driven Alzheimer's disease atrophy
subtypes: diffuse, temporal, and posterior. These structural subtypes seem to associate with
established biomarkers, risk factors, and clinical symptoms of Alzheimer's disease, as well as
cognitive subtypes: temporal subtype with memory impairment, and diffuse subtype with
impaired executive function (Zhang et al., 2016). The picture emerging from fMRI data is one
of aberrant between-network connectivity initiating in the mesolimbic network at the
preclinical stage and propagating to the salience and default-mode network with Alzheimer's
disease progression (Orban et al., 2017).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

Metabolomics Panels

Figure 2: A typical Alzheimer's disease metabolomics biomarker discover pipeline
Metabolomics is a relatively recent addition to the systems biology toolkit for the study of
NDDs of aging (Wilkins and Trushina, 2017). It encompasses the global study of smallmolecules (50-1500 daltons in mass), that are substrates and products of metabolism. Together,
these metabolites (e.g. amino acids, antioxidants, vitamins) represent the overall physiological
status of the organism. An individual’s metabolic activity is influenced by an individual’s
genotype and environment (Kaddurah-Daouk et al., 2011). Analysis of the metabolome,
therefore, provides an opportunity to study the dynamic molecular phenotype of an individual.
Untargeted metabolomics approaches are increasingly used to compare two or more groups
(e.g. Alzheimer's disease dementia and CN participants) and identify metabolite profiles
associated with a disease. These profiles provide insight into underlying disease mechanisms,
as well as constitute candidates for biomarker discovery and drug development. In the field of
Alzheimer's disease research, metabolomics studies (targeted and untargeted) over the last
decade have examined several biofluids and tissues, including serum, plasma, CSF, saliva,
urine, and brain tissue (Wilkins and Trushina, 2017). Technologies include NMR (nuclear
magnetic resonance) spectroscopy and mass spectrometry. In 2a, a typical Alzheimer's disease

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

metabolomics biomarker discovery pipeline using MS-LC (mass spectrometry-liquid
chromatography) is depicted. Subsequent to metabolite extraction, identification, and
quantification, most studies apply multivariate statistical methods to the metabolome data to
identify the top discriminant metabolites. These can be further combined into metabolite-panels
to increase discriminative power (i.e. sensitivity and specificity) in Alzheimer's disease
prediction and progression (Liang et al., 2015, 2016; Huan et al., 2018). Significant
discriminative power is commonly tested with the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve
analysis (area under the curve or AUC values). Discriminant metabolite-panels are then
validated in independent samples. Following discriminant metabolite(s) discovery, researchers
conduct pathway and network analyses, which provide crucial mechanistic insights into the
sequences of processes leading to the heterogeneous phenotypes of neurodegeneration.
Pathway analysis focus on identifying sequences of processes that lead to the presence of a
discriminant metabolite. Network analysis examine how discriminant metabolites are
connected to each other within Alzheimer's disease and related dementias. In 2b, we show the
three main metabolic pathways (namely, amino acid, lipid and nucleic acid) that 90 Alzheimer's
disease-associated metabolites in our review (N=11 publications, Supplementary Table S2)
were found to belong. The text color indicates the biofluid metabolome each metabolite was
identified in: red = serum or plasma, purple = saliva, black = CSF. A larger font size indicates
that the metabolite was identified in more than one study (see Supplementary Table S3 for
details) The maximum number of studies a metabolite was detected in our review was four. *
indicates that the metabolite was identified in more than one biofluid:** indicates presence in
plasma or serum and saliva, ** indicates presence in plasma or serum and CSF. Abbreviations:
AD, Alzheimer’s disease; CN, cognitively normal; MCI, mild cognitive impairment.

Metabolite Panels
We reviewed six Alzheimer's disease studies that constructed metabolite panels from top
discriminant metabolites in biofluids: 2 plasma, 1 serum, 2 saliva, and 1 CSF (Supplementary
Table S2). Using plasma metabolome data, Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2014) constructed a sixmetabolite panel to discriminate Alzheimer's disease dementia from CN, and a five-metabolite
panel to discriminate amnestic MCI from CN. Arachidonic acid, N,N-dimethylglycine, and
thymine were present in both panels. Association of panel metabolites with lipid, amino acid,
or nucleic acid metabolism suggested specific metabolic deregulations in Alzheimer's disease.
Mapstone et al. (Mapstone et al., 2017) used a 12-plasma-metabolite panel to discriminate the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

following cohorts from CN: older adults with superior memory; amnestic MCI + Alzheimer's
disease dementia patients; and participants who converted to amnestic MCI or Alzheimer's
disease dementia in approximately two years. Similar to Wang et al. (Wang et al., 2014),
several panel metabolites were associated with lipid or amino acid metabolism. Panel
metabolites were also found to be constituents of pathways regulating oxidative stress,
inflammation, and nitric oxide bioavailability. Using serum metabolome data, Liang et al.
(Liang et al., 2016) identified a panel of two lipid metabolites (spinganine-1-phosphate, 7ketocholesterol) that discriminated MCI from Alzheimer's disease dementia. Sphinganine-1phosphate was also present in a three-metabolite panel constructed from the salivary
metabolome, and discriminated Alzheimer's disease dementia patients from CN (Liang et al.,
2015). The other two panel members, ornithine and phenyllactic acid, were amino acid
metabolites (Ogata et al., 1999) with links to the same oxidative stress pathway reported by
Mapstone et al. (Mapstone et al., 2017) A separate study using saliva reported a sevenmetabolite panel that discriminated pre-dementia (i.e. five years prior to dementia onset) from
CN (Figueira et al., 2016). Metabolites were associated with amino acid, lipid, or energy
metabolism. Czech et al. (Czech et al., 2012) assessed multiple combinations of 16 CSF
metabolites to discriminate Alzheimer's disease dementia from CN. Highest discrimination was
obtained with a 5-metabolite panel consisting of cortisol and amino acids. Our focused review
of Alzheimer's disease-associated metabolite panels highlight that the majority of discriminant
molecules detected in biofluids are involved in amino acid, lipid, or nucleic acid metabolism
(Fig. 2b).

Metabolomics Pathways and Networks
We reviewed five Alzheimer's disease studies that followed up non-targeted metabolomics
research in biofluids with pathway or network analyses: 2 plasma, 1 plasma plus CSF, and 2
serum (Supplementary Table S2). In plasma, de Leeuw et al. (de Leeuw et al., 2017) identified
26 metabolites comprised of mainly amino acids and lipids with significantly altered levels in
Alzheimer's disease dementia patients. Network analyses suggested a shift in Alzheimer's
disease towards amine and oxidative stress compounds, known to cause imbalances in
neurotransmitter production, Aβ generation, and neurovascular health. Perturbations in amino
acid metabolism (interlinked polyamine and L-arginine pathways) was also demonstrated in
the plasma metabolome of MCI to Alzheimer's disease dementia converters (Graham et al.,
2015). Changes in polyamine and L-arginine metabolism have been linked to neurotoxicity,
and deregulations in genesis and/or death of neural cells and neurotransmitter production

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

(Graham et al., 2015). Other metabolic pathways notably impacted were cholesterol, glucose,
and prostaglandin (Graham et al., 2015). Cholesterol metabolism (specifically cholesterol and
sphingolipids transport) was also found to be abnormal in both plasma and CSF from
Alzheimer's disease dementia patients (Trushina et al., 2013). In serum, metabolism of amino
acids dominated the top pathways altered in Alzheimer's disease dementia patients in one study
(González-Domínguez et al., 2015), a finding in line with plasma metabolome data (de Leeuw
et al., 2017). A second study in serum reported a 3-metabolite panel predictive of progression
from MCI to Alzheimer's disease dementia (within 27±18 months), with major contribution
from up-regulated 2,4-dihydroxybutanoic acid, a metabolite potentially overproduced during
hypoperfusion-related hypoxia (Orešič et al., 2011). Upregulation of the pentose phosphate
pathway in progressors further supported the involvement of secondary hypoxia in Alzheimer's
disease pathogenesis. More glucose is metabolized via the pentose phosphate pathway in the
brain under hypoxic conditions.

Summary
Overall, metabolite panels, and metabolomics pathway and network analyses provide the
following insights: (1) discriminant Alzheimer's disease-associated metabolites may be
narrowly or broadly interconnected (Wilkins and Trushina, 2017); (2) metabolomes of different
biofluids provide convergent and biofluid-related mechanistic insights into Alzheimer's disease
pathology (Trushina et al., 2013); (3) genotype-associated (e.g. APOE status) differences in
preclinical and clinical groups suggest different routes to Alzheimer's disease (de Leeuw et al.,
2017), (4) neurodegenerative disease subtypes can be characterized by metabolomics analyses
(de Leeuw et al., 2017).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

Genomics-derived Polygenic Risk Scores

Figure 3: Polygenic Risk Scores
High-throughput genotyping technologies have revolutionized studies in diseases with
complex genetics by enabling detection of common genetic variants with low effect sizes, and
rarer variants with relatively higher effect sizes (see 3a). In Alzheimer's disease, the prevalent
late-onset variant is genetically complex and demonstrates high heritability (up to 80%) (Gatz

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

et al., 2006), whereas the early-onset familial variant is deterministically driven by single gene
mutation(s) in PSEN1 (presenilin 1), PSEN2 (presenilin 2) or the APP (amyloid precursor
protein) (Guerreiro et al., 2013). The genetics of late-onset Alzheimer's disease has been
predominantly investigated using GWAS. Designed to rapidly scan for statistical links between
a set of known SNPs and a phenotype of interest, GWAS can identify common variants with
MAF greater than 5% (Torkamani et al., 2018) (see 3a). Up to 24 key Alzheimer's disease-risk
genes have been identified using GWAS (Supplementary Table S4). Identification of rarer
Alzheimer's disease-associated SNPs (MAF >0.5% and <5%), that often escape detection
with GWAS, is being enabled by NGS technologies, such as whole-exome sequencing and
targeted resequencing of disease-associated genes (Bras et al., 2012; Masellis et al., 2013) (see
Supplementary Table S4 for examples). NGS technologies provide transcriptome-wide
coverage without requiring any a priori knowledge of SNPs (3a). To date, Alzheimer's disease
prediction using individual high-throughput genotyping technologies identified risk genes have
been predominantly non-significant, with the exception of APOE, which accounts for up to
30% of the genetic risk (Daw et al., 2000). Therefore, the search for risk genes beyond APOE
now include polygenic risk score (PRS, also referred to as genetic risk scores, risk indexes or
scales) approaches (3b). A PRS is a calculation (e.g. weighted sum) based on the number of
risk alleles carried by an individual, where the risk alleles and their weights are defined by
GWAS-detected loci and their measured effects (Torkamani et al., 2018). In the most common
scenario, only SNPs reaching conventional GWAS significance (p < 5 x 10-8) are included (3c).
A threshold lower than the genome-wide statistical significance (e.g. p = 10-5) can also be used
to improve or estimate total predictability (Torkamani et al., 2018) (3c). SNPs representing
multiple hits among Alzheimer's disease risk genes from one or more major mechanistic
pathways can also be included into a PRS (3c). Displayed are six main mechanistic clusters,
each populated by genetic variants thought to represent the cluster (3d). Genetic variants have
been placed within the cluster according to population frequency (horizontal axis) and level of
estimated risk (vertical axis). For example, an Aβ/APP metabolism cluster is made up of rare
ADAM10 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 10) and common
APOE4+)higher risk genes, and rare PLD3 (phospholipase D family member 3) and common
PICALM (phosphatidylinositol binding clathrin assembly protein) lower risk genes. Some
genes are involved with multiple mechanisms as can be seen for PICALM’s involvement in
nervous function, basic cellular processes, and Aβ/APP metabolism. As implied in the figure,
when creating PRS, it may be very useful to select genes within mechanistic groups, and select

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

groups depending on the purpose of the research. In sum, PRS reflect a large number of SNPs
and a complex set of biological mechanisms related to Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis, and
can improve the precision of early Alzheimer's disease risk or diagnosis (Desikan et al., 2017;
Escott-Price et al., 2017; Morgan et al., 2017).

Polygenic Risk Score Approach or PRS
Constructed of multiple SNPs that implicate one or more biological mechanisms, PRS (Fig. 3)
are better at discriminating Alzheimer's disease from CN than single-gene analysis (EscottPrice et al., 2017; Torkamani et al., 2018). We reviewed 11 Alzheimer's disease PRS studies
(Supplementary Table S4, S5), the majority comprised of GWAS-detected SNPs. To identify
genetic risk beyond that of APOE alone, several studies assessed PRS with (APOE-PRS) and
without (non-APOE-PRS) APOE. Desikan et al. (Desikan et al., 2017) found that an APOEPRS associated with age-at-onset of Alzheimer's disease symptoms, decreased Aβ and
increased tau in CSF, and increased atrophy, tau, and Aβ load in brain. APOE-PRS also
associated with plasma inflammatory markers in Alzheimer's disease patients (Morgan et al.,
2017). An APOE-PRS including a rare TREM2 (triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells
2) variant discriminated Alzheimer's disease dementia and CN, with increasing scores
associating with decreasing age-at-onset, and CSF Aβ42 (Sleegers et al., 2015). Discriminative
power of APOE-PRS was found to improve with diagnostic accuracy, as demonstrated using a
pathologically confirmed Alzheimer's disease cohort (Escott-Price V, Myers, AJ, Huentelman
M, Hardy, J, 2017). In four separate studies, a non-APOE-PRS was reported to discriminate
between Alzheimer's disease dementia and CN (Xiao et al., 2015), as well as associate with
MCI (Adams et al., 2015), increased risk of Alzheimer's disease dementia (Adams et al., 2015;
Chouraki et al., 2016; Tosto et al., 2017), and earlier Alzheimer's disease onset (Tosto et al.,
2017). Inclusion of APOE either resulted in a modest increase in discriminative power (Xiao
et al., 2015), stronger clinical or biomarker associations (Adams et al., 2015; Chouraki et al.,
2016), or had no additional effect (Tosto et al., 2017). In another non-APOE-PRS study in
Alzheimer's disease patients, PRS scores correlated negatively with CSF Aβ42 levels, and
positively with temporal cortex Aβ pathology, and γ-secretase activity (Martiskainen et al.,
2015). Naj et al. (Naj et al., 2014) found that though APOE contributed to 3.7% of age-at-onset
variability in Alzheimer's disease dementia patients, adding a non-APOE-PRS accounted for
an additional 2.2%. Overall, Alzheimer's disease heritability has a large polygenic contribution

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

beyond APOE, which makes PRS approaches pivotal for Alzheimer's disease-risk prediction
(Escott-Price et al., 2015).

Mechanism-based Interaction and Network Approaches
Alzheimer's disease-risk genes can be clustered into functional/mechanistic pathways (Fig. 3d),
and the information gained utilised to improve Alzheimer's disease discrimination and/or risk
prediction (Gaiteri et al., 2016; Hu et al., 2017). We reviewed six mechanism-based
Alzheimer's disease studies (Supplementary Table S5). Functional variants of Alzheimer's
disease GWAS-significant SNPs (e.g. CELF1 or CUGBP Elav-like family member 1) was
reported to associate with human brain expression quantitative trait loci, and preferentially
expressed in specific cell-types (e.g. microglia) (Karch et al., 2016). Rosenthal et al. (Rosenthal
et al., 2014) highlighted the potential regulatory functions of non-coding Alzheimer's disease
GWAS SNPs. Protein-protein interaction network analyses highlighted that Alzheimer's
disease-risk genes whose protein-products interact physically may be under positive
evolutionary selection (e.g. PICALM or phosphatidylinositol binding clathrin assembly
protein, BIN1 or bridging integrator 1, CD2AP or CD2 associated protein, EPHA1 or EPH
receptor A1) (Raj et al., 2012). Ebbert et al. (Ebbert et al., 2014) reported that while an APOEPRS did not improve discrimination of Alzheimer's disease from CN over APOE, a model
allowing for epistatic interactions between SNPs increased discriminative power. Patel et al.
(Patel et al., 2016) applied a stratified false discovery rate approach, used to increase GWAS
power by adjusting significance levels to the amount of overall signal present in data, to identify
gene networks and provide links with sMRI phenotypes: e.g. linking genes involved in
transport (e.g. SLC4A10 or solute carrier family 4 member 10, KCNH7 or potassium voltagegated channel subfamily H member 7) with hippocampal volume. Huang et al. (Huang et al.,
2018) integrated Alzheimer's disease GWAS genes with human brain-specific gene network
using machine learning to identify additional Alzheimer's disease-risk genes.

Summary
In sum, PRSs may contribute substantially to accounting for the genetic variability that
distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from MCI and CN groups. They may also be used to probe
genetic underpinnings of Alzheimer's disease subtypes as well as related and disparate NDDs.
Thus far, research reporting PRSs in relation to conversion rates of CN or MCI to Alzheimer's
disease dementia have been mixed (Adams et al., 2015; Lacour et al., 2017), but early PRS

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

prediction of cognitive trajectories and clinical outcomes have also been reported (Sapkota and
Dixon, 2018).

Discussion
Roadmap for assembling multiomics measures into diagnostic tool
On the complementarity of multiomics biomarkers
Individuals clinically diagnosed with an NDD of aging (e.g. Alzheimer's disease) exhibit
varying loads of neurodegenerative markers (e.g. Aβ, tau, alpha-synuclein, brain atrophy,
vascular abnormalities) (Beach et al., 2012; Robinson et al., 2018). Single-domain omics
biomarkers can, to an extent, characterize this heterogeneity in vivo. Some data-driven brain
atrophy subtypes parallel established clinical diagnoses. For example, the posterior atrophy
subtype is evocative of the PCA Alzheimer's disease variant, and the language atrophy subtype
of the lvPPA variant (Ossenkoppele et al., 2015). An active area of research is to determine to
what degree the “bottom-up”, fully automated and data-driven subtypes match with established
“top-down” clinical assessments, which usually start with cognitive symptoms and then
incorporate specific neuroimaging characteristics, such as left temporoparietal atrophy in
lvPPA (Ossenkoppele et al., 2015). The fact that reviewed studies included participants with
typical late-onset Alzheimer's disease dementia, and not atypical variants such as PCA, suggest
that specific brain atrophy phenotypes comprise a spectrum of involvement that may overlap a
clinical label, but not associate uniquely with one. It is unclear how functional connectivity
subtypes tie in with atrophy subtypes, although they both associate with clinical diagnoses and
biomarkers and risk factors of Alzheimer's disease (Zhang et al., 2016; Orban et al., 2017).
Although the propagation of functional dysconnectivity parallels the Braak staging of
Alzheimer's disease, the mix of connectivity increases and decreases observed in patients may
reflect transient compensatory mechanisms as well as neurodegeneration (Badhwar et al.,
2017). To date, we are unaware of studies that have associated data-driven Alzheimer's disease
brain subtypes with PRS and/or metabolite panels, but our review strongly supports such
coordinated multiomics approaches. For example, an Alzheimer's disease PRS comprised of
genes linked to lipid metabolism and inflammatory response may associate with panels
comprised of metabolites involved in corresponding pathways. One could further speculate
whether the resulting inflammation may cause the diffuse atrophy subtype, and trigger specific

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

functional compensatory mechanisms. Testing these hypotheses will require a cohort that is
both deeply phenotyped and captures the entire spectrum of age-related dementia.
A roadmap for parsing heterogeneity in neurodegeneration
A data-driven characterization of heterogeneity across the NDDs of aging will require cohorts
representative of the spectrum of neurodegeneration. The cohort assembled by the Canadian
Consortium on Neurodegeneration in Aging (CCNA, http://ccna-ccnv.ca/) provides a new
opportunity to study the full spectrum of age-related dementia. By 2019, the cohort will include
2,310 individuals (ages 50-90) featuring the following cognitive conditions: Alzheimer's
disease, vascular, Lewy Body, Parkinson’s, frontotemporal, and mixed etiology dementias, as
well as subjective cognitive impairment, MCI, vascular MCI, and CN (Fig. 4).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

Figure 4: proposed roadmap to discovering multiomics Alzheimer's disease biomarkers
Panel 1 (COMPASS-ND): The COMPASS-ND cohort is comprised of people with various
types of dementia or cognitive complaints, as well as healthy, cognitively normal individuals.
Panel 2 (Omics data): Performing dimension reduction for omics data. Featured as examples
are some of the results of our review of the Alzheimer's disease literature as presented earlier
in the paper. Panels 3-5 (Machine Learning, Multiomics Biotypes and Prediction): demonstrate
how signatures of neurodegeneration derived from the integration of multiomics data using

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

machine learning techniques will better identify individuals on an Alzheimer's disease
spectrum trajectory. While our proposed roadmap addresses multiomics biomarkers for
Alzheimer's disease, a similar approach can be used for other neurodegenerative diseases of
aging. Abbreviations: Alzheimer’s Disease (AD), FrontoTemporal Dementia (FTD), Lewy
Body Disease (LBD), Vascular Cognitive Impairment (VCI), Mixed etiology dementia
(Mixed), Cognitively normal (CN), Subjective Cognitive Impairment (SCI), Mild Cognitive
Impairment (MCI), Imaging features (I), Metabolic features (M), Genomics features (G),
clinical and demographic features (O).
The cohort composition ensures that age-related dementias are more or less equally
represented, even for less prevalent dementia types (e.g. frontotemporal dementia). Participants
will be deeply phenotyped with extensive clinical, neuropsychological, neuroimaging,
biospecimen, and neuropathological assessments.
In Fig. 4 we present a roadmap for a multiomics approach to heterogeneity in NDD. We begin
with a heterogeneous clinical cohort design that enables the discovery of subgroups sharing a
common signature across multiple omics domains (biotypes) that are highly predictive of the
clinical status and evolution of individual patients. Multiomics biotypes will be complemented
by other important variables such as sex, presence of Aβ and tau deposits, and vascular
abnormalities. Machine learning tools will be applied to identify an optimal combination of
different biotypes and explanatory variables that either discriminate different clinical cohorts,
or are predictive of future progression of specific symptoms (Fig. 4).
Towards highly predictive multiomics signatures
Biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease dementia demonstrate limited predictive power in the
prodromal phase (Rathore et al., 2017). For example, Korolev et al. (Korolev et al., 2016)
reached about 80% accuracy (specificity 76%, sensitivity 83%) by including cognitive,
multimodal imaging, and plasma-proteomics measures in a predictive model of progression.
The best models include a combination of cognitive, sMRI, FDG-PET, and/or amyloid-PET
measures (Rathore et al., 2017). A substantial proportion of patients identified as progressors,
even by the best model, will remain stable over time. Given a 30% baseline rate of progressors
in an MCI cohort, and a prediction achieving a sensitivity and specificity of 80%, 37% of
patients identified as progressors by the model will remain stable. This limited positive
predictive value is likely explained by sample heterogeneity. For example, Dong et al. (Dong

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

et al., 2017) reported two atrophy subtypes with higher-than-expected rates of progression to
dementia, but one subtype was much more at risk than the other. Thus, an important first step
to precision medicine is to identify specific subsets of patients where an accurate prediction
can be made.
Multiomics signatures can be used to improve the accuracy of early prognosis, but they also
capture a range of information, ranging from brain networks targeted by the disease, metabolic
abnormalities in specific pathways, and distinct genetic backgrounds. The multiomics signature
thus may also help elucidate the specific pathophysiological pathways involved. Overall,
multiomics biomarkers have the potential to reshape clinical diagnosis, and define new “bottom
up” cohorts based on markers of underlying pathologies to design and evaluate drugs.

Author Contributions
AB, PB, RAD, GPM, and SS designed and wrote the manuscript. AB, GPM and SS performed
literature search and compiled tables. AB, PB, RAD, GPM and SS made the figures and MM
provided input. MM, LL, SD, HC, and SEB helped with the writing and interpretation of
specific sections of the manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. Sridar Narayanan for helpful comments on the manuscript.

Funding
This review was performed by members of the Biomarkers Team of the Canadian Consortium
on Neurodegeneration in Aging (CCNA; Team Leads: RAD and PB) which is funded by the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and partners. Additional sources of support are
as follows. AB is currently supported by a CIHR Postdoctoral Fellowship (funding reference
number #152548) and the Courtois Foundation. At the start of the project AB was supported
by the Alzheimer Society of Canada Postdoctoral Fellowship. PB is a Research Scholar from
the Fonds de recherche du Québec, and is also supported by the Courtois Foundation. SS is
supported by the Alzheimer Society of Canada Postdoctoral Fellowship. RAD and GPM are
also supported by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (National Institute on Aging, R01
AG008235). SD is a Research Scholar from the Fonds de recherche du Québec – Santé [grant
number 30801]. The Consortium d’identification précoce de la maladie d’Alzheimer – Québec

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

is financed through the Fonds de recherche du Québec – Santé / Pfizer Canada Innovation Fund
[grant number 25262].

Competing Interests
The authors report no conflict of interest with regards to submitted manuscript.

Supplementary Material
We have provided 5 tables in supplementary material: Supplementary Tables S1, S2, S3, S4,
and S5.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

References
Adams HHH, de Bruijn RFAG, Hofman A, Uitterlinden AG, van Duijn CM, Vernooij MW,
et al. Genetic risk of neurodegenerative diseases is associated with mild cognitive impairment
and conversion to dementia. Alzheimers Dement 2015; 11: 1277–1285.
Anstey KJ, Eramudugolla R, Hosking DE, Lautenschlager NT, Dixon RA. Bridging the
Translation Gap: From Dementia Risk Assessment to Advice on Risk Reduction. J Prev
Alzheimers Dis 2015; 2: 189–198.
Badhwar A, Tam A, Dansereau C, Orban P, Hoffstaedter F, Bellec P. Resting-state network
dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Alzheimers
Dement 2017; 8: 73–85.
Beach TG, Monsell SE, Phillips LE, Kukull W. Accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of
Alzheimer disease at National Institute on Aging Alzheimer Disease Centers, 2005-2010. J
Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2012; 71: 266–273.
Bennett DA, Schneider JA, Arvanitakis Z, Kelly JF, Aggarwal NT, Shah RC, et al.
Neuropathology of older persons without cognitive impairment from two community-based
studies. Neurology 2006; 66: 1837–1844.
Bras J, Guerreiro R, Hardy J. Use of next-generation sequencing and other whole-genome
strategies to dissect neurological disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 2012; 13: 453–464.
Chouraki V, Reitz C, Maury F, Bis JC, Bellenguez C, Yu L, et al. Evaluation of a Genetic
Risk Score to Improve Risk Prediction for Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 2016; 53:
921–932.
Czech C, Berndt P, Busch K, Schmitz O, Wiemer J, Most V, et al. Metabolite profiling of
Alzheimer’s disease cerebrospinal fluid. PLoS One 2012; 7: e31501.
Daw EW, Payami H, Nemens EJ, Nochlin D, Bird TD, Schellenberg GD, et al. The number
of trait loci in late-onset Alzheimer disease. Am J Hum Genet 2000; 66: 196–204.
Desikan RS, Fan CC, Wang Y, Schork AJ, Cabral HJ, Cupples LA, et al. Genetic assessment
of age-associated Alzheimer disease risk: Development and validation of a polygenic hazard
score. PLoS Med 2017; 14: e1002258.
Dong A, Honnorat N, Gaonkar B, Davatzikos C. CHIMERA: Clustering of Heterogeneous
Disease Effects via Distribution Matching of Imaging Patterns. IEEE Trans Med Imaging
2016; 35: 612–621.
Dong A, Toledo JB, Honnorat N, Doshi J, Varol E, Sotiras A, et al. Heterogeneity of
neuroanatomical patterns in prodromal Alzheimer’s disease: links to cognition, progression
and biomarkers. Brain 2017; 140: 735–747.
Dumurgier J, Hanseeuw BJ, Hatling FB, Judge KA, Schultz AP, Chhatwal JP, et al.
Alzheimer’s Disease Biomarkers and Future Decline in Cognitive Normal Older Adults
[Internet]. J Alzheimers Dis 2017Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/JAD-170511

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

Ebbert MTW, Ridge PG, Wilson AR, Sharp AR, Bailey M, Norton MC, et al. Populationbased analysis of Alzheimer’s disease risk alleles implicates genetic interactions. Biol
Psychiatry 2014; 75: 732–737.
Escott-Price V, Myers, AJ, Huentelman M, Hardy, J. Polygenic Risk Score Analysis of
Pathologically Confirmed Alzheimer Disease. Ann Neurol 2017; 82: 311–314.
Escott-Price V, Shoai M, Pither R, Williams J, Hardy J. Polygenic score prediction captures
nearly all common genetic risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 2017; 49: 214.e7–
214.e11.
Escott-Price V, Sims R, Bannister C, Harold D, Vronskaya M, Majounie E, et al. Common
polygenic variation enhances risk prediction for Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 2015; 138: 3673–
3684.
Figueira J, Jonsson P, Nordin Adolfsson A, Adolfsson R, Nyberg L, Öhman A. NMR
analysis of the human saliva metabolome distinguishes dementia patients from matched
controls. Mol Biosyst 2016; 12: 2562–2571.
Franzmeier N, Duering M, Weiner M, Dichgans M, Ewers M, Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI). Left frontal cortex connectivity underlies cognitive reserve
in prodromal Alzheimer disease. Neurology 2017; 88: 1054–1061.
Gaiteri C, Mostafavi S, Honey CJ, De Jager PL, Bennett DA. Genetic variants in Alzheimer
disease - molecular and brain network approaches. Nat Rev Neurol 2016; 12: 413–427.
Gatz M, Reynolds CA, Fratiglioni L, Johansson B, Mortimer JA, Berg S, et al. Role of genes
and environments for explaining Alzheimer disease. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006; 63: 168–174.
González-Domínguez R, García-Barrera T, Gómez-Ariza JL. Metabolite profiling for the
identification of altered metabolic pathways in Alzheimer’s disease. J Pharm Biomed Anal
2015; 107: 75–81.
Graham SF, Chevallier OP, Elliott CT, Hölscher C, Johnston J, McGuinness B, et al.
Untargeted metabolomic analysis of human plasma indicates differentially affected
polyamine and L-arginine metabolism in mild cognitive impairment subjects converting to
Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0119452.
Guerreiro R, Brás J, Hardy J. SnapShot: Genetics of Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 2013; 155:
968–968.e1.
Huang X, Liu H, Li X, Guan L, Li J, Tellier LCAM, et al. Revealing Alzheimer’s disease
genes spectrum in the whole-genome by machine learning. BMC Neurol 2018; 18: 5.
Huan T, Tran T, Zheng J, Sapkota S, MacDonald SW, Camicioli R, et al. Metabolomics
Analyses of Saliva Detect Novel Biomarkers of Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 2018;
65: 1401–1416.
Hu Y-S, Xin J, Hu Y, Zhang L, Wang J. Analyzing the genes related to Alzheimer’s disease
via a network and pathway-based approach. Alzheimers Res Ther 2017; 9: 29.
Hwang J, Kim CM, Jeon S, Lee JM, Hong YJ, Roh JH, et al. Prediction of Alzheimer’s

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

disease pathophysiology based on cortical thickness patterns. Alzheimers Dement 2016; 2:
58–67.
Jack CR Jr, Bennett DA, Blennow K, Carrillo MC, Dunn B, Haeberlein SB, et al. NIA-AA
Research Framework: Toward a biological definition of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers
Dement 2018; 14: 535–562.
Jack CR Jr, Bennett DA, Blennow K, Carrillo MC, Feldman HH, Frisoni GB, et al. A/T/N:
An unbiased descriptive classification scheme for Alzheimer disease biomarkers. Neurology
2016; 87: 539–547.
Jack CR Jr, Bernstein MA, Fox NC, Thompson P, Alexander G, Harvey D, et al. The
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI): MRI methods. J Magn Reson Imaging
2008; 27: 685–691.
Jagust W. Vulnerable neural systems and the borderland of brain aging and
neurodegeneration. Neuron 2013; 77: 219–234.
Kaddurah-Daouk R, Rozen S, Matson W, Han X, Hulette CM, Burke JR, et al. Metabolomic
changes in autopsy-confirmed Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 2011; 7: 309–317.
Karch CM, Ezerskiy LA, Bertelsen S, Alzheimer’s Disease Genetics Consortium (ADGC),
Goate AM. Alzheimer’s Disease Risk Polymorphisms Regulate Gene Expression in the
ZCWPW1 and the CELF1 Loci. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0148717.
ten Kate M, Dicks E, Visser PJ, van der Flier WM, Teunissen CE, Barkhof F, et al. Atrophy
subtypes in prodromal Alzheimer’s disease are associated with cognitive decline [Internet].
Brain 2018[cited 2018 Nov 6] Available from: https://academic.oup.com/brain/advancearticle-abstract/doi/10.1093/brain/awy264/5142624?redirectedFrom=fulltext
Korolev IO, Symonds LL, Bozoki AC, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.
Predicting Progression from Mild Cognitive Impairment to Alzheimer’s Dementia Using
Clinical, MRI, and Plasma Biomarkers via Probabilistic Pattern Classification. PLoS One
2016; 11: e0138866.
Lacour A, Espinosa A, Louwersheimer E, Heilmann S, Hernández I, Wolfsgruber S, et al.
Genome-wide significant risk factors for Alzheimer’s disease: role in progression to dementia
due to Alzheimer's disease among subjects with mild cognitive impairment. Mol Psychiatry
2017; 22: 153–160.
de Leeuw FA, Peeters CFW, Kester MI, Harms AC, Struys EA, Hankemeier T, et al. Bloodbased metabolic signatures in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 2017; 8: 196–207.
Liang Q, Liu H, Zhang T, Jiang Y, Xing H, Zhang A-H. Metabolomics-based screening of
salivary biomarkers for early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. RSC Adv 2015; 5: 96074–
96079.
Liang Q, Liu H, Zhang T, Jiang Y, Xing H, Zhang A-H. Discovery of serum metabolites for
diagnosis of progression of mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer’s disease using an
optimized metabolomics method. RSC Adv 2016; 6: 3586–3591.
Malpas CB. Structural neuroimaging correlates of cognitive status in older adults: A person-

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

oriented approach. J Clin Neurosci 2016; 30: 77–82.
Mapstone M, Lin F, Nalls MA, Cheema AK, Singleton AB, Fiandaca MS, et al. What success
can teach us about failure: the plasma metabolome of older adults with superior memory and
lessons for Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 2017; 51: 148–155.
Martiskainen H, Helisalmi S, Viswanathan J, Kurki M, Hall A, Herukka S-K, et al. Effects of
Alzheimer’s disease-associated risk loci on cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and disease
progression: a polygenic risk score approach. J Alzheimers Dis 2015; 43: 565–573.
Masellis M, Sherborn K, Neto PR, Sadovnick DA, Hsiung G-YR, Black SE, et al. Earlyonset dementias: diagnostic and etiological considerations. Alzheimers Res Ther 2013; 5: S7.
Morgan AR, Touchard S, O’Hagan C, Sims R, Majounie E, Escott-Price V, et al. The
Correlation between Inflammatory Biomarkers and Polygenic Risk Score in Alzheimer’s
Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 2017; 56: 25–36.
Naj AC, Jun G, Reitz C, Kunkle BW, Perry W, Park YS, et al. Effects of multiple genetic loci
on age at onset in late-onset Alzheimer disease: a genome-wide association study. JAMA
Neurol 2014; 71: 1394–1404.
Nettiksimmons J, DeCarli C, Landau S, Beckett L, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative. Biological heterogeneity in ADNI amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Alzheimers
Dement 2014; 10: 511–521.e1.
Noh Y, Jeon S, Lee JM, Seo SW, Kim GH, Cho H, et al. Anatomical heterogeneity of
Alzheimer disease: based on cortical thickness on MRIs. Neurology 2014; 83: 1936–1944.
Ogata H, Goto S, Sato K, Fujibuchi W, Bono H, Kanehisa M. KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 1999; 27: 29–34.
Olanrewaju O, Clare L, Barnes L, Brayne C. A multimodal approach to dementia prevention:
A report from the Cambridge Institute of Public Health. Alzheimers Dement 2015; 1: 151–
156.
Orban P, Tam A, Urchs S, Savard M, Madjar C, Badhwar A, et al. Subtypes of functional
brain connectivity as early markers of neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. bioRxiv
2017: 195164.
Orešič M, Hyötyläinen T, Herukka S-K, Sysi-Aho M, Mattila I, Seppänan-Laakso T, et al.
Metabolome in progression to Alzheimer’s disease. Transl Psychiatry 2011; 1: e57.
Ossenkoppele R, Cohn-Sheehy BI, La Joie R, Vogel JW, Möller C, Lehmann M, et al.
Atrophy patterns in early clinical stages across distinct phenotypes of Alzheimer’s disease.
Hum Brain Mapp 2015; 36: 4421–4437.
Parkinson Progression Marker Initiative. The Parkinson Progression Marker Initiative
(PPMI). Prog Neurobiol 2011; 95: 629–635.
Park J-Y, Na HK, Kim S, Kim H, Kim HJ, Seo SW, et al. Robust Identification of
Alzheimer’s Disease subtypes based on cortical atrophy patterns. Sci Rep 2017; 7: 43270.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

Patel S, Park MTM, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, Chakravarty MM, Knight
J. Gene Prioritization for Imaging Genetics Studies Using Gene Ontology and a Stratified
False Discovery Rate Approach. Front Neuroinform 2016; 10: 14.
Poulakis K, Pereira JB, Mecocci P, Vellas B, Tsolaki M, Kłoszewska I, et al. Heterogeneous
patterns of brain atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 2018; 65: 98–108.
Raj T, Shulman JM, Keenan BT, Chibnik LB, Evans DA, Bennett DA, et al. Alzheimer
disease susceptibility loci: evidence for a protein network under natural selection. Am J Hum
Genet 2012; 90: 720–726.
Rathore S, Habes M, Iftikhar MA, Shacklett A, Davatzikos C. A review on neuroimagingbased classification studies and associated feature extraction methods for Alzheimer’s disease
and its prodromal stages [Internet]. Neuroimage 2017Available from:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.03.057
Robinson JL, Lee EB, Xie SX, Rennert L, Suh E, Bredenberg C, et al. Neurodegenerative
disease concomitant proteinopathies are prevalent, age-related and APOE4-associated. Brain
2018; 141: 2181–2193.
Rosenthal SL, Barmada MM, Wang X, Demirci FY, Kamboh MI. Connecting the dots:
potential of data integration to identify regulatory SNPs in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease
GWAS findings. PLoS One 2014; 9: e95152.
Sapkota S, Dixon RA. A Network of Genetic Effects on Non-Demented Cognitive Aging:
Alzheimer’s Genetic Risk (CLU + CR1 + PICALM) Intensifies Cognitive Aging Genetic
Risk (COMT + BDNF) Selectively for APOEɛ4 Carriers. J Alzheimers Dis 2018; 62: 887–
900.
Scheltens NME, Galindo-Garre F, Pijnenburg YAL, van der Vlies AE, Smits LL, Koene T, et
al. The identification of cognitive subtypes in Alzheimer’s disease dementia using latent class
analysis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2016; 87: 235–243.
Seghier ML. Clustering of fMRI data: the elusive optimal number of clusters. PeerJ 2018; 6:
e5416.
Sleegers K, Bettens K, De Roeck A, Van Cauwenberghe C, Cuyvers E, Verheijen J, et al. A
22-single nucleotide polymorphism Alzheimer’s disease risk score correlates with family
history, onset age, and cerebrospinal fluid Aβ42. Alzheimers Dement 2015; 11: 1452–1460.
Sperling RA, Aisen PS, Beckett LA, Bennett DA, Craft S, Fagan AM, et al. Toward defining
the preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease: recommendations from the National Institute on
Aging-Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer's disease.
Alzheimers Dement 2011; 7: 280–292.
Tam A, Dansereau C, Iturria-Medina Y, Urchs S, Orban P, Breitner J, et al. A signature of
cognitive deficits and brain atrophy that is highly predictive of progression to Alzheimer’s
dementia. bioRxiv 2018: 352344.
Torkamani A, Wineinger NE, Topol EJ. The personal and clinical utility of polygenic risk
scores. Nat Rev Genet 2018; 19: 581–590.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008615; this version posted October 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
Author Submitted Version
Badhwar et al.

Tosto G, Bird TD, Tsuang D, Bennett DA, Boeve BF, Cruchaga C, et al. Polygenic risk
scores in familial Alzheimer disease. Neurology 2017; 88: 1180–1186.
Trushina E, Dutta T, Persson X-MT, Mielke MM, Petersen RC. Identification of altered
metabolic pathways in plasma and CSF in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s
disease using metabolomics. PLoS One 2013; 8: e63644.
Varol E, Sotiras A, Davatzikos C, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. HYDRA:
Revealing heterogeneity of imaging and genetic patterns through a multiple max-margin
discriminative analysis framework. Neuroimage 2017; 145: 346–364.
Wang G, Zhou Y, Huang F-J, Tang H-D, Xu X-H, Liu J-J, et al. Plasma metabolite profiles
of Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. J Proteome Res 2014; 13: 2649–2658.
Wilkins JM, Trushina E. Application of Metabolomics in Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Neurol
2017; 8: 719.
Xiao Q, Liu Z-J, Tao S, Sun Y-M, Jiang D, Li H-L, et al. Risk prediction for sporadic
Alzheimer’s disease using genetic risk score in the Han Chinese population. Oncotarget
2015; 6: 36955–36964.
Zhang X, Mormino EC, Sun N, Sperling RA, Sabuncu MR, Yeo BTT, et al. Bayesian model
reveals latent atrophy factors with dissociable cognitive trajectories in Alzheimer’s disease.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016; 113: E6535–E6544.

