medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Detection of malaria parasites in dried human
blood spots using mid-infrared spectroscopy and
logistic regression analysis
Emmanuel P. Mwanga1*#, Elihaika G. Minja1*, Emmanuel Mrimi1*, Mario González
Jiménez2*, Johnson K. Swai1*, Said Abbasi1, Halfan S. Ngowo1, 3, Doreen J. Siria1, Salum
Mapua1, 4, Caleb Stica1, Marta F. Maia5, 6, Ally Olotu5, 7, Maggy T. Sikulu-Lord8, 9,
Francesco Baldini3, Heather M. Ferguson3, Klaas Wynne2, Prashanth Selvaraj10, Simon
A. Babayan3, Fredros O. Okumu1, 3, 11.
1. Environmental Health and Ecological Sciences Department, Ifakara Health Institute,
Morogoro, Tanzania.
2. School of Chemistry, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
3. Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
4. School of life sciences, University of Keele, Keele, Staffordshire, ST5 5BG, UK.
5. KEMRI Wellcome Trust Research Programme, P.O. Box 230, 80108 - Kilifi, Kenya.
6. University of Oxford, Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, Old Road Campus Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7FZ, UK.
7. Interventions and Clinical Trials Department, Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania.
8. School of Public Health, University of Queensland, Australia.
9. Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer science, Marquette University,
Wisconsin, USA
10. Institute for Disease Modeling, Bellevue, WA 98005, USA.
11. School of Public Health, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South-Africa.
#

Corresponding author, E-mail: emwanga@ihi.or.tz and fredros@ihi.or.tz
*These authors have equal contribution

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background: Epidemiological surveys of malaria currently rely on microscopy,
polymerase chain reaction assays (PCR) or rapid diagnostic test kits for Plasmodium
infections (RDTs). This study shows that mid-infrared (MIR) spectroscopy coupled with
supervised machine learning could constitute an alternative method for rapid malaria
screening, directly from dried human blood spots.
Methods: Filter papers containing dried blood spots (DBS) were obtained from a crosssectional malaria survey in twelve wards in south-eastern Tanzania in 2018/19. The DBS
were scanned using attenuated total reflection-Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR)
spectrometer to obtain high-resolution MIR spectra in the range, 4000 cm-1 to 500 cm-1.
The spectra were cleaned to compensate for atmospheric water vapor and CO2
interference bands and used to train different classification algorithms to distinguish
between malaria-positive and malaria-negative DBS papers based on PCR test results as
reference. The analysis considered 296 individuals, including 123 PCR-confirmed malariapositives and 173 negatives. Model training was done using 80% of the dataset, after
which the best-fitting model was optimized by bootstrapping of 80/20 train/test stratified
splits. The trained models were evaluated by predicting Plasmodium falciparum positivity
in the 20% validation set of DBS.
Results: Logistic regression was the best-performing model. Considering PCR as
reference, the models attained overall accuracies of 92% for predicting P. falciparum
infections (specificity = 91.7%; sensitivity = 92.8%) and 85% for predicting mixed
infections of P. falciparum and P. ovale (specificity = 85%, sensitivity = 85%) in the fieldcollected specimen.
Conclusion: These results demonstrate that mid-infrared spectroscopy coupled with
supervised machine learning (MIR-ML) could be used to screen for malaria parasites in
dried human blood spots. The approach could have potential for rapid and high-

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

throughput screening of Plasmodium infections in both non-clinical settings (e.g. field
surveys) and clinical settings (diagnosis to aid case management). However, full utility
will require further advances in classification algorithms, field validation of this technology
in other study sites and an in-depth evaluation of the biological basis of the observed test
results. Training the models on larger datasets could also improve specificity and
sensitivity of the technique. The MIR-ML spectroscopy system is robust, low-cost, and
requires minimum maintenance.
Key words: Malaria diagnosis, Plasmodium, Ifakara Health Institute, Mid-infrared
spectroscopy, dried blood spots (DBS), supervised machine learning, attenuated total
reflection-Fourier Transform Infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectrometer, PCR.

Background
Accurate diagnosis of malaria infection in both humans and mosquitoes is essential for
understanding transmission patterns, estimating epidemiological burden and informing
appropriate management of cases. The WHO’s Global Technical Strategy for Malaria
2016-2030 (GTS) recommends that surveillance strategies should be integrated as core
interventions to provide better estimates of disease burden, improve resource allocation
and accelerate progress towards elimination [1]. The malERA Refresh Consultative Panel
on Tools for Malaria Elimination reiterated in 2017 that new diagnostic tools are as
important as new drugs, vaccines and vector control tools [2].
Given health system challenges facing many low-income malaria endemic countries, there
is particular interest in non-immunological point-of-care (POC) techniques that could be
readily scaled up with minimum effort [2]. Equally vital is the need for better
quantification and identification of asymptomatic pathogen carriers in situations of low
transmission and sub-microscopic parasitaemia [2,3]. Low-cost mass screening tools are
also vital for large cross-sectional investigations such as national malaria indicator
surveys, and for monitoring progress of interventions such as insecticide-treated bed nets
[4–6], indoor residual spraying [7], larviciding [8] and antimalarial medicines [9].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Malaria diagnosis from human samples currently relies on light microscopy with thin and
thick blood smears [10], polymerase chain reaction assays [11–13] and a variety of
antigen-detecting rapid diagnostic tests [14]. As countries approach elimination, there is
greater need for accurate detection of malaria parasites in both symptomatic and
asymptomatic individuals [15]. Microscopy is still commonly used in diagnosis to support
case management [10]. With highly-trained and experienced microscopists, it can offer
reliable results and enable identification and quantification of sexual and asexual stages
of infections by different malaria parasite species (Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax, P.

malariae and P. ovale, being the most prevalent). However, microscopy-based diagnosis
is labor-intensive and often requires more than one highly-trained person for confirmation
of conflicting results [10]. Additionally, this technique has low sensitivity in many
laboratories and misses most low-level parasitaemia cases [16].
PCR, on the other hand, is highly specific and sensitive for malaria parasite detection, but
is not widely used for primary diagnosis in most malaria endemic places because it is
expensive, requires highly skilled personnel, and is therefore impractical to implement in
rural and remote facilities [17]. Furthermore, until the impact of treating submicroscopic
parasitaemia on transmission is fully understood, WHO has recommended that PCR
should not be part of routine malaria control or elimination programs [18]. It is however
capable of identifying low-level parasitaemia that are otherwise undetectable by other
methods, and distinguishing between individual parasite species. Recent developments
in PCR applications have signaled the potential of non-invasive malaria diagnostic options
such as those relying on DNA detection in saliva, urine, sweat and even fecal excreta
[19–21]. Besides, real time PCR assays enable quantitative assessments and comparison
of infection loads [15], but are expensive for most laboratories. A related technology is
the loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP), which is also increasingly used for
diagnosis of multiple malaria species, and can be conducted at room temperatures
without PCR instruments [22].
At present, malaria rapid diagnostic tests (mRDTs) are the best option for addressing the
technical limitations of both light microscopy and DNA-based diagnosis. These tests target

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

persistent specific antigens from malaria parasites [14,23,24] and are quick and
deployable at large-scale. They also do not require highly-skilled labor, electricity or
sophisticated storage needs. Unfortunately, mRDTs can be unreliable in low transmission
settings, resulting in significant false negative and false positive results [25]. Both
microscopy and mRDTs are recommended only when the number of malaria parasites
exceed 100/µL, and are therefore not applicable for measuring low-level parasitaemia or
identifying asymptomatic cases [16]. In one example, mass mRDT screening followed by
treatment did not result in reduction of malaria incidence in the pre-elimination settings
of Zanzibar, most likely due to poor reliability of the mRDTs [26]. However, a new rapid
lateral flow technique that detects specific proteins of the infectious Plasmodium stages,
i.e. gametocytes, in saliva is showing encouraging results in detecting sub-microscopic
parasites in children and adults [27].
Recent studies have shown that non-molecular techniques such as near-infrared
spectroscopy (12,500 cm-1 to 400 cm-1 frequencies) and mid-infrared spectroscopy (4000
cm-1 to 400 cm-1 frequencies), combined with advanced data analysis, could provide
cheaper, quicker, reagent-free and potentially simpler options for surveys of mosquitoes
and mosquito-borne infections. Examples include detection of endosymbionts such as

Wolbachia bacteria, and pathogens such as Plasmodium and Zika virus in mosquitoes
[28–31]. Such approaches have also been used for estimating age of disease-transmitting
mosquitoes [32–38], distinguishing between vector species [32,38,39] and assessing
their blood feeding histories [40], all of which directly influence malaria transmission.
Khoshmanesh et al., [41] used mid-infrared (MIR) spectroscopy combined with partial
least-squares (PLS) regression to detect early ring stages of laboratory-cultured P.

falciparum with detection limits less than 1 parasite/µL. To improve this approach, Roy
et al., [42] used Plasmodium cultures to spike whole blood obtained from six uninfected
volunteers, then aliquoted these mixtures multiple times to obtain 132 specimens
containing different quantities of P. falciparum parasites, glucose and urea. Based on PLS
regressions analysis of MIR spectra from these aliquots, they correctly identified 98% of
specimens with parasitaemia densities above 0.5% (~25,000 parasites/µL). Sensitivity

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

was however only 70%, possibly because the model included only a small number of
negative samples. Though limited to laboratory cultures and small number of samples
with low genetic variability, these studies were the first to demonstrate direct potential
of MIR for malaria parasite detection.
This current study has extended the approach used by Khoshmanesh et al., [41] and Roy

et al., [42], to provide the first demonstration of MIR spectroscopy coupled with
supervised machine learning (MIR-ML) to diagnose malaria in dried human blood spots
(DBS) obtained from field surveys of naturally infected individuals in a malaria-endemic
community in Tanzania.

Methods
Study Area
Samples for this analysis were obtained from a cross-sectional malaria parasite
prevalence survey conducted in 12 administrative wards in Ulanga and Kilombero districts
in south-eastern Tanzania (Fig. 1). Average altitude of the area is 270m above sea level,
annual rainfall is 1200-1800 mm and annual temperatures range between 20℃ and 32℃.
Malaria prevalence at the time of the survey varied from <1% in the northernmost urban
wards of Ifakara town and Mlabani, to >40% in southern wards of Igota and Igumbiro
(Swai et al., unpublished). P. falciparum accounts for more than 90% of known malaria
parasites in the area.
Transmission intensities also vary and were last estimated to be ~16 infectious
bites/person/year in the Ulanga district wards [43], and <1 infectious bites/person/year
in the Kilombero district wards [44]. The dominant vector species is Anopheles funestus
followed by An. arabiensis [43]. Long-lasting insecticidal treated bed nets are the most
common prevention tool used in the study with coverage of > 80% [4].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 1: Map showing study villages in Kilombero and Ulanga districts, south-eastern
Tanzania (courtesy of Alex J. Limwagu).

Malaria parasite surveys using mRDTs
The parasite survey included 1,486 households and 3,292 individuals across the 12 study
wards (Fig. 1), and was conducted between September 2018 and February 2019. Blood
samples were taken from finger pricks of household members of all age groups and both
sexes (Swai et al., unpublished), and then tested for malaria parasites using mRDTs and
polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
The mRDTs (SD BIOLINE malaria Ag P.f/Pan 05FK60) were used to screen all individuals
and results interpreted following manufacturer’s instructions [45]. This mRDT kit detects

P. falciparum and other Plasmodium species in whole blood samples [45] by differential
detection of circulating histidine-rich antigen II (HRP-II) of P. falciparum, and common

Plasmodium lactate dehydrogenase (pLDH) of Plasmodium species [14,23,24]. All
malaria positive specimens were verified by light microscopy, and if found positive, the
individual was immediately treated by a study clinician according to Tanzania national
treatment guidelines for malaria [46].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

In addition to microscopy and mRDTs, dry blood spot (DBS) specimens were collected
from all mRDT-tested patients regardless of test results. Three to four drops of blood
were placed directly from finger prick onto Whatman 903™ card (GE Healthcare BioSciences Corp.) [47]. The DBS specimens were dried in open air for 15 minutes, and
stored in zip-locked plastic bags, with desiccants. The DBS were stored at -20°C for 2-5
months, after which further tests were done, all at once, as described below.

Mid-infrared scanning of dry blood spots
The DBS collected from individuals for which there had been a positive malaria test results
(n = 147), and a separate random selection of specimens from individuals with negative
results (n = 149) were scanned using a Bruker ALPHA Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR)
spectrometer equipped with Platinum ATR and a Platinum diamond sampling module
[48]. The individual DBS cards were placed between the anvil and crystal plate of the
spectrometer, each time ensuring that the MIR beam directly strikes the middle of the
blood spots (Fig. 2a).
The MIR spectra were captured from 4,000 to 500 cm-1 wavenumbers, with spectral
resolution set at 5 cm-1. Each individual DBS sample was scanned 32 times in 30 seconds,
and averaged to obtain a single representative spectrum. The anvil and crystal were
cleaned after each specimen scan, using velvex tissue soaked in 70% ethanol and dried
using a clean dry tissue. The spectrometer has an internal validation unit (IVU) with
reference standards, and was programmed to conduct automated instrument tests for
operational and performance qualification. However, additional performance and quality
checks were done by conducting frequent background scans before first sample scan and
after every five specimen scans. Additional details of the MIR spectrometer and the
scanning process have been described elsewhere [38,40]. All DBS samples were scanned
at the same time.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Nested PCR assays to confirm malaria infections in the dry blood
spots
DNA was extracted from the DBS papers and the presence of any of the five malaria
parasites (P. falciparum, P. ovale, P. vivax, P. malariae and P. knowlesi) examined using
nested PCR targeting 18S ssRNA sequences, according to the Snounou et al., protocol
with slight modification [49]. The first PCR reaction used 10µl of DNA, amplified with
rPLU1 and rPLU5 primers targeting fragment lengths between 1600bp and 1700bp. The
second PCR stage used 2µl of the first PCR product, plus species-specific primer pairs
(rFAL1-rFAL2, rOVA1-rPLU2, rVIV1-rVIV2, rMAL1-rMAL2, and Pmk8-Pmkr9) in five
different reactions. Amplification for all reactions was done in 20µl PCR master mix. The
PCR products were analyzed after electrophoresis in agarose gel and DNA bands
visualized using Kodak Logic 100 imaging system.

Data analysis
The OPUS software [50] was used to clean and compensate all spectra for water vapor
absorption bands and carbon dioxide (CO2) interference bands as described in Mwanga

et al., [40] and Gonzalez-Jimenez et al., [38]. A final dataset of 296 samples, including
123 PCR-confirmed Plasmodium positive and 173 Plasmodium negative individuals was
considered for further analysis in the Python programming language version 3.7 with the

scikit-learn library [51]. All wavenumbers from the spectra were included in the analysis.
Supervised machine learning algorithms were trained to map spectra to known PCR test
results, by implementing binary classification strategy, and validated on a separate set of
spectra not used for training (Fig. 2b).
Primary assessment was done against PCR as reference because of its high sensitivity
and specificity compared to mRDTs and microscopy [17,52]. At this proof-of-concept
stage, it was however not possible to balance the specimens by other variables such as
anemia, sex, age, period of storage or prevailing parasitaemia prevalence in the different
villages.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The PCR analysis had identified mostly infections of P. falciparum occurring singly, though
there were also a few cases of mixed infections consisting of P. falciparum, together with

P. ovale. The MIR-based predictions were therefore done first by excluding the mixed
infections, and second, without excluding them.

Fig. 2: Schematic Illustration specific processes of: (a) collection of blood specimens and
preparation of dried blood spots (DBS) on filter papers, scanning on mid-infrared
spectrometer, and recording sample spectra, (b) data splitting, model training, crossvalidation and evaluation of performance of final model (supervised machine learning
process).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Classifying DBS samples as positive or negative for P. falciparum,
based on PCR test results as reference
All samples with mixed Plasmodium species infections (N = 9) were excluded, so that the
remaining dataset included only P. falciparum positives and a reduced number of negative
samples (N = 260; N

positives

= 114, and N

negatives

= 146). As previously described [40],

the dataset was first partitioned into training set (80%; N = 208) and validation datasets
(20%; N = 52). The validation set was preserved for evaluating prediction accuracies of
the final model.
The training dataset was subjected to multiple rounds of randomly stratified splits into
training sets (80%) and test sets (20%), to achieve rigorous classification of the different
malaria-positive and malaria-negative samples. To provide a mix of data representation
methods and allow for both parametric and non-parametric assessment of the data,
baseline performances of seven different classification algorithms were tested. These
included: K-nearest neighbors classifier (KNN), logistic regression (LR), support vector
machine classifier (SVM), naïve Bayes (NB), random forest classifier (RF), XGBoost
classifier (XGB), and multilayer perceptron (MLP) [51]. All code was adapted from
https://github.com/SimonAB/Gonzalez-Jimenez_MIRS.
The algorithms were trained on spectral features representing malaria-positive and
malaria-negative DBS samples (Fig. 3). The best performing classification algorithm was
optimized by fitting 70 bootstrapped models, for which the outputs were aggregated to
obtain an ensemble model with highest accuracy and lowest variance. Finally, best
performing classifiers were bagged and used to compare the predicted labels against true
labels (Plasmodium positive or Plasmodium negative) using the naïve validation set
separated at the beginning.
The full analysis was repeated, this time including the mixed infections, which had been
removed from the initial model training. This way, the MIR-ML approach was evaluated

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

for predicting infection with any of the two Plasmodium species (P. falciparum and P.

ovale) occurring singly or together in a DBS.
Lastly, based on the previous spectroscopic analysis of body fluids [53,54], and the earlier
work by Roy et al. [42], Kozicki et al., [55], Khoshmanesh et al., [41], we examined
putative bands possibly responsible for the spectral differences between Plasmodiuminfected and Plasmodium-free specimen. The sensitivity of the candidate MIR bands was
assessed for lipids, proteins, carbohydrates and nucleic acids. We also extracted
prediction coefficients of the best model and plotted its most dominant features
(wavenumbers).

Results
Spectral characteristics of dried blood spots with and without

Plasmodium
Fig. 3 shows two averaged spectra obtained from dried blood spots confirmed by PCR as

Plasmodium positive or Plasmodium negative, and the features (or wavenumbers) relied
upon to predict the infection status. The specific biochemical properties associated with
major peaks in the spectra are shown in Table 1. The detectable vibrational modes show
a complex of potentially distinctive biochemical characteristics associated with lipids,
proteins, amides, sugars and the heme group (Table 1).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1: Biochemical properties associated with peaks in the mid infrared spectra
obtained from dried blood spots in Fig. 3.
Wavenumber (cm-1)

Vibrational mode

Component identification

3600 – 3000

N-H stretching

Amides (proteins, hemoglobin), urea

O-H stretching

Alcohols carbohydrates, cellulose

3332

O-H stretching

Alcohol cellulose

3293

N-H stretching

Amide (proteins, hemoglobin)

3272

O-H stretching

Cellulose

3000 - 2800

C-H stretching

Lipids, amino acids, carbohydrates

2894

C-H stretching

Cellulose, carbohydrates

1700 – 1600

C=O stretching

Amides (proteins, hemoglobin), urea

1540

N–H bending

Amides (proteins, hemoglobin)

coupled to C–N
stretching
1457

CH3 bending

Amino acids, lipids

1400 – 1310

C-H stretching

Lipids, amino acids, carbohydrates

1307

C-N stretching

Amides (proteins, hemoglobin)

1165 – 1110

C-O-C stretching

Ethers (cellulose, carbohydrates)

1070 - 950

C-O stretching

Alcohols

(cellulose,

carbohydrates,

amino-acids)
730

=C-H bending

Heme group; hemoglobin

C-H bending

Lipids, amino acids, carbohydrates

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 3. Averaged mid-infrared spectra obtained from dried blood spots confirmed by PCR
as Plasmodium positive or Plasmodium negative. Assignations of biochemical properties
of different wavelengths are shown in Table 1.

Classifying DBS samples as positive or negative for P. falciparum,
based on PCR as reference
In the first analysis, only P. falciparum infected individuals were considered in the
category of malaria positive DBS cards, and any mixed infections were excluded. Logistic
regression (LR) outperformed the other six candidate classifiers in accuracy and precision
(Fig. 4a). The best LR models predicted P. falciparum-infected and non-infected
individuals with overall accuracy up to 90% before optimization (Fig. 4a) and 91.5% after
optimization (Fig. 4b & 5a). When challenged with the validation dataset, the optimized
model achieved an overall accuracy of 92.3%, correctly identifying 92% of PCR-negative
individuals and 93% of PCR-positive individuals (Fig. 5b).
The validity of MIR-ML, is shown in Table 2. The approach was 92.8% sensitive and
91.7% specific. For comparison, the validity of the mRDTs used in the survey, when

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

compared to PCR is also shown. The mRDTs were 97.6% sensitive and 84.4% specific
for detection of Plasmodium-infected individuals in this study area.

Fig. 4: (a) Prediction accuracies and precision for different classification models, based
on PCR test results as reference. Models compared included k-nearest neighbors (KNN),
logistic regression (LR), support vector machines (SVM), naïve Bayes (NB), XGBoost
(XGB), random forest (RF), Multilayer perceptron (MLP). Logistic regression (LR) was the
best performing model; (b) distribution of per class accuracies obtained by final LR
classifiers and standard deviation from 70 bootstrapped models in predicting PCR test
results from MIR spectral data.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 5:

(a) averaged proportions of correct predictions of PCR-confirmed

Plasmodium falciparum infected individuals achieved during the training of the
models; (b) averaged proportions of correct predictions of P. falciparum infected
individuals achieved when the final model is challenged the previously unseen
validation spectra.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Selection

of

most

dominant

spectral

features

used

for

distinguishing between P. falciparum positive or negative DBS.
The LR coefficients showed the relative importance of wavenumbers, enabling selection
of those most responsible in the decision function (prediction of malaria positive and
malaria negative DBS). Fig. 6 therefore shows the wavenumbers with the strongest
likelihood in predicting the infection status of the individuals. All the top twenty
wavenumbers (features) were in the fingerprint region of the MIR spectra (1730 cm-1 883 cm-1) where lipids, amino acids and proteins is mostly detected (Table 1)

Fig. 6: Plots of twenty most dominant spectral features (wavenumbers) influencing
model prediction of Plasmodium-infection status of the DBS specimens. The positive
coefficients are those most predictive of Plasmodium positive specimens while the
negative coefficients are those most predictive of Plasmodium-negative specimen. All the
top twenty features are found in the fingerprint region (1730 cm-1 - 883 cm-1)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Predicting PCR test results from MIR spectra without excluding
mixed infections
In the second analysis, all infected individuals were considered regardless of Plasmodium
species present. Once again, LR was the best model, achieving up to 93% accuracy and
95% after bootstrapping. The final model achieved 87% overall accuracy for the
validation set, correctly identifying 91% of PCR-negative individuals and 82% of PCRpositive individuals.

Table 2: Performance of mid-infrared spectroscopy coupled with logistic regression, and the mRDT (i.e. SD BIOLINE malaria
Ag P.f/Pan 05FK60), both compared to PCR for identifying Plasmodium falciparum infected individuals from the validation
set.
PCR
Positive

Negative

Total

Mid-Infrared

Positive

26

2

28

Spectroscopy &

Negative

2

22

24

28

24

52

Positive

Negative

%

%

Sensitivity

Specificity

92.8

91.7

% Positive

% Negative

Predictive

Predictive

Value

Value

92.8

91.7

Machine
Learning [MIRML]

Total

SD BIOLINE

Positive

120

27

147

malaria Ag

Negative

3

146

149

123

173

296

P.f/Pan 05FK60
mRDT

%

%

Sensitivity

Specificity

97.6

84.4

% Positive

% Negative

Predictive

Predictive

Value

Value

86.0

97.2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Discussion
This study is an initial demonstration using field-collected blood specimens that MIR
spectroscopy coupled with logistic regression analysis, can be harnessed for detection of
infectious parasitic diseases, in this case malaria. Malaria cases were identified and
analyzed by both MIR spectroscopy and PCR, then the results were compared. As a proof
of principle, it considered 296 individual samples, to demonstrate potential application of
MIR spectroscopy for malaria detection. The main finding was that spectral signatures
collected from dried human blood spots can be relied upon to identify malaria-infected
and non-infected specimens.
Validity of this approach was verified by PCR tests, and corroborates the earlier evidence
by Khoshmanesh et al. [41] and Roy et al. [42], who first demonstrated applications MIR
spectroscopy to detect Plasmodium. Other related approaches include the use of surfaceenhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), requiring silver nanoparticles to be added to lysed
blood, and magneto-optic scanning to detect hemozoin, a waste product of Plasmodium
infection of red cells pigment, haemoglobin [56,57]. Both of these approaches have been
tested in vitro, though Newman et al., also evaluated the magneto-optic systems in a
small preclinical trial with 13 participants [58].
An important advancement in the work presented here is that it has demonstrated the
first direct application of MIR spectroscopy on field-collected dried blood specimens on
filter papers. This approach makes the technique readily applicable without any additional
reagents or pre-processing of samples. The 296 samples analyzed came from multiple
age groups of both male and females in villages with varying malaria prevalence rates,
thereby providing considerable variability between individual infections. This further
emphasizes the potential of this technology in real-world settings for epidemiological
screening, or diagnostics for patient management. When the final optimized LR model
was applied to new blood samples that had not been exposed to the classifier, they
correctly identified 92% of the malaria-free individuals and 93% of malaria-infected

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

individuals compared to PCR. The need for no additional sample preparation or reagents
is particularly important for field practicality.
This study adds to the growing evidence showing the potential role of infrared
spectroscopy and chemometrics in surveillance of mosquito-borne diseases. In a recent
study conducted using near-infrared rather than mid-infrared spectra, it was possible to
detect infectious P. falciparum sporozoites in laboratory-reared and laboratory-infected

Anopheles mosquitoes with up to 90% accuracy [31]. Earlier studies had also
demonstrated detection of various pathogens such as Wolbachia, Plasmodium and Zika
virus in different mosquito species [28–31]. Many of these earlier approaches relied on
spectroscopy at near-infrared (NIR) frequencies (12,500 cm-1 to 400 cm-1) where the
absorption intensity is due to overtone and combination bands, which are relatively weak.
Spectroscopy at mid-infrared (MIR) frequencies (4,000 cm-1 to 400 cm-1) captures the
fundamental vibrational modes of

biological samples, which are stronger and more

information rich [38], thereby offering stronger signals than NIR, which reflects secondary
modes. Advances in data analysis and machine learning techniques now make the large
spectral datasets amenable to processing.
The distinctive features of the MIR spectra are likely related to the biochemical changes
in red blood cells following malaria infection [41,42]. These differences may also result
from Plasmodium-specific proteins present in infected human blood [59], or simply due
to pathological manifestations of malaria such as anemia, iron deficiency or other
inflammatory responses. Based on previous analyses of body fluids [53,54,60,61], and
earlier work by Roy et al., [42], Kozicki et al., [55], Khoshmanesh et al., [41], the spectral
bands putatively responsible for the differences between Plasmodium-infected and

Plasmodium-free specimens were examined (Table 1). Further analysis of the dominant
spectral wavelengths showed that they were mostly in the fingerprint region associated
with amino acids, carbohydrates, lipids and proteins (Table 1 and Fig.6). More detailed
analysis beyond this initial proof of principle is still required to examine how variations in
these specific bands influence the diagnostic capacity of this technology.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Bands in the C−H stretching regions are usually attributed to lipids synthesized during
development of P. falciparum and can change the make-up of infected erythrocytes and
become detectable in the spectra. On the other hand, the region between 1,250 and 800
cm−1 is sensitive to nucleic acid vibrations associated with proliferation of Plasmodiumspecific ribosomes during parasite development and cell invasion [42]. We observed
several peaks in this region characteristic of sugars and peptides, consistent with parasite
DNA (Table 1 & Fig. 6). In previous assessments, it was also shown that reduced
absorbance in the carbohydrate regions at 1,144 cm−1, 1,101 cm−1 and 1,085 cm−1 are
likely associated with lower glucose content in infected red blood cells, since these
parasites metabolize glucose faster than normal cells [41,42]. Perhaps the most obvious
are the different heme vibration regions (Table 1), which show higher hemoglobin levels
in non-infected than infected samples because Plasmodium catabolizes the complex
hemoglobin protein into constituent lipids and bilirubin. By tracking these key
characteristics, it is possible to predict the infection status of the dried whole blood
specimen.
This study should be considered purely as an initial proof-of-principle study, and more
studies are required before the technology is field-deployable or effective. Filter papers
containing dried human blood spots were scanned and the resulting spectra used to train
algorithms to predict outcomes of nested PCR [40]. Comparison was made with results
of tests considering only P. falciparum and also with results of tests considering any
species of Plasmodium. In both cases, the technique achieved high accuracy in
distinguishing between infected and uninfected specimen. While this finding indicates
that the technique could be applicable for diagnosis of different malaria parasites, it also
highlights the need to improve the approach so as to distinguish between different
parasite species.
The field survey from which the DBS specimens were collected also had mRDT data.
Relative to PCR as reference, the mRDT results achieved slightly higher sensitivity (97.6%
vs 92.8%) but lower specificity (84.4% vs. 91.7%) than the mid infrared spectroscopy
approach (Table 2). In previous studies, the same mRDTs achieved sensitivity of 99.7%

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

for P. falciparum, and 95.5% for non P. falciparum and a specificity of 99.5% for both
[45,62].
Significant improvements are still necessary before this technique can be deployed for
actual screening and diagnosis. One avenue of improvement is the availability of more
field data to validate this approach as a complementary tool for screening malaria, and
potentially other blood-borne infections. Also, this current study did not include any
quantification of infection intensities, which will be necessary to examine validity in areas
of different transmission intensities, as well as potential role of this technology in malaria
elimination settings. Such future studies should also include: a) greater analysis on
biological basis of the observed signals and how this may be influenced by the natural
history of malaria infections in humans, or its manifestations such as anemia, b)
determination of whether the method can distinguish between the different parasite
stages, such as the asexual stages versus the sexual stages (i.e. gametocytes), c) detailed
examination and characterization of cases incorrectly identified by this new approach,
and d) assessment of parasite detection thresholds, and factors that may influence it if
mid-Infrared spectroscopy and machine learning are used.
It takes 30 seconds to scan a single blood spot under MIR spectrometer, and the approach
is considerably lower cost than PCR platforms. The MIR equipment presently costs
~29,000 USD as an initial outlay, but there are no extended costs for reagents except for
occasional replacement of the desiccants. It takes less than a minute to clean the crystal
and anvil, position DBS on the crystal and collect the MIR spectra, thus any experienced
staff member can scan more than 250 specimens per day. Comparatively, average PCR
systems cost between 3000USD and 10,000 USD, require reagents repeatedly. The cost
of processing a DBS sample can be 2-4 USD per unit and regularly takes up to two days
get back full results in batches typically not exceeding 100 specimens. Assuming a modest
analysis of just 5000 samples per year, it would take ~2 years to recover full costs of
switching from PCR to MIR-ML based systems and break even. The onward costs of
servicing are also low as the MIR equipment is robust and requires no reagents other
than desiccants. Compared to PCR, use of MIR-ML could therefore potentially be

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

developed into a cost-effective, quick and scalable approach. Besides, the same spectra,
once collected, can be analyzed for multiple characteristics, potentially making this
approach a one-stop system for assessing multiple disease indicators with different
specimen types such as DBS papers, blood slides, mosquitoes and fluids. It is however
not expected that the technology, in its current form, can replace current best practices
for malaria surveillance or diagnostics, without further field validation.
One limitation of this current study is that the number of samples used was low, totaling
only 296 (123 Plasmodium positive and 173 Plasmodium negative). It is expected that
the quality of the predictions will improve as more data are available to train the models,
especially if there is variation in localities from where the specimen originates, parasite
densities, geographical locations and demographics of infected individuals. A related
limitation was that it was not possible to balance the Plasmodium-positive and

Plasmodium-negative specimens by other variables such as anemia, sex, age, period of
storage or parasitaemia prevalence in the different villages, all of which may influence
malaria risk and the predictive values of test methods. Future studies should therefore
test whether these factors can significantly influence outcomes of the prediction models.

Conclusions
These results demonstrate that mid-infrared spectroscopy coupled with supervised
machine learning could be used to screen for malaria parasites in dried human blood
spots. This approach has the potential for rapid and high-throughput screening of

Plasmodium infections in non-clinical field surveys, and possibly for diagnosis in clinical
settings. However, the full utility will require further advances in the algorithms and field
validation in other study sites. Training the models on larger datasets is expected to
improve specificity and sensitivity of the technique. The MIR spectroscopy system is
robust, lower-cost compared to PCRs, requires minimum maintenance, and is reagentfree except for occasional replacement of desiccants.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Ethics approval
Ethical approval for the study was obtained from Ifakara Health Institute’s Institutional
Review Board (Ref. IHI/IRB/No: 007 - 2018), and from the Medical Research Coordinating
Committee (MRCC) at the National Institutes of Medical Research (NIMR), Ref:
NIMR/HQ/R.8a/Vol.IX/2895.

Consent for publication
Permission to publish this work was also obtained from the National Institutes of Medical
Research (NIMR), REF: NIMR/HQ/P.12 VOL XXVIII/14.

Availability of data and material
All data for this study will be available upon request. The analysis script was adapted
from https://github.com/SimonAB/Gonzalez-Jimenez_MIRS; and has been changed to
accommodate this specific analysis and deposited in a public repository. It is available at
MwangaEP/Manuu-ML-Projects.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contribution
EPM, EM, EGM, HSN, SAM, DJS, JKS and FOO designed the study. EPM, EM, JKS and EGM
performed and supervised experiments and collection of dried blood spots samples. EPM
and MGJ analyzed the data. EPM and CS designed the schematics. SA and EM supported
with PCR analysis. EPM, EM, EGM and FOO wrote and revised the manuscript. HMF, MFM,
FB, SAB, KW, AO, MTS, and PS reviewed and revised the manuscript. SAB trained EPM
the Machine learning analysis. The manuscript has been approved by all authors prior to
submission. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgment
The authors wish to thank all field technicians and senior health personnel who supported
malaria diagnosis and DBS collection. The authors thank Ifakara laboratory team for
performing PCR analysis.

Funding
This research was supported by Wellcome Trust Intermediate Fellowship in Public Health
& Tropical Medicine awarded to FOO (Grant No. WT102350/Z/13/Z), a Howard Hughes
Medical Institute (HHMI)-Gates International Research Scholarship awarded to FOO
(Grant No. OPP1099295) and an MRC grant awarded to University of Glasgow (Grant No.
MR/P025501/1). EPM, DJS, SAM and JKS were also supported by Wellcome Trust
International Masters Fellowships in Tropical Medicine & Hygiene, (Grant Nos.
WT214643/Z/18/Z, WT 214644/Z/18/Z, WT212633/Z/18/Z and WT200086/Z/15/Z
respectively).

References
1. World Health Organization, World Health Organization. Global Malaria Programme.
Global technical strategy for malaria, 2016-2030. WHO Geneva. 2015.
2. malERA: An updated research agenda for diagnostics, drugs, vaccines, and vector
control in malaria elimination and eradication. PLoS Med. 2017.
3. malERA: An updated research agenda for characterising the reservoir and measuring
transmission in malaria elimination and eradication. PLoS Med. 2017.
4. Renggli S, Mandike R, Kramer K, Patrick F, Brown NJ, McElroy PD, et al. Design,
implementation and evaluation of a national campaign to deliver 18 million free longlasting insecticidal nets to uncovered sleeping spaces in Tanzania. Malar J. 2013;12:85.
5. Bonner K, Mwita A, McElroy PD, Omari S, Mzava A, Lengeler C, et al. Design,
implementation and evaluation of a national campaign to distribute nine million free LLINs

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

to children under five years of age in Tanzania. Malar J. 2011;
6. Khatib RA, Killeen GF, Abdulla SMK, Kahigwa E, McElroy PD, Gerrets RPM, et al.
Markets, voucher subsidies and free nets combine to achieve high bed net coverage in
rural Tanzania. Malar J. 2008;
7. Mashauri FM, Kinung’Hi SM, Kaatano GM, Magesa SM, Kishamawe C, Mwanga JR, et
al. Impact of indoor residual spraying of lambda-cyhalothrin on malaria prevalence and
anemia in an epidemic-prone District of Muleba, North-western Tanzania. Am J Trop Med
Hyg. 2013;
8. GeissbÃ¼hler Y, Kannady K, Chaki PP, Emidi B, Govella NJ, Mayagaya V, et al. Microbial
larvicide application by a large-scale, community-based program reduces malaria
infection prevalence in urban Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. PLoS One. 2009;4:e5107.
9. WHO. Guidelines for the treatment of malaria - 3rd edition. www.who.int/malaria.
2015;
10. Payne D. Use and limitations of light microscopy for diagnosing malaria at the primary
health care level. Bull World Health Organ. 1988;
11. Snounou G, Viriyakosol S, Jarra W, Thaithong S, Brown KN. Identification of the four
human malaria parasite species in field samples by the polymerase chain reaction and
detection of a high prevalence of mixed infections. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 1993;
12. Snounou G, Viriyakosol S, Xin Ping Zhu, Jarra W, Pinheiro L, do Rosario VE, et al.
High sensitivity of detection of human malaria parasites by the use of nested polymerase
chain reaction. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 1993;
13. Perandin F, Manca N, Calderaro A, Piccolo G, Galati L, Ricci L, et al. Development of
a Real-Time PCR Assay for Detection of Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium vivax, and

Plasmodium ovale for Routine Clinical Diagnosis. J Clin Microbiol. 2004;
14. Beadle C, Long GW, McElroy PD, Hoffman SL, Long GW, Weiss WR, et al. Diagnosis
of malaria by detection of Plasmodium falciparum HRP-2 antigen with a rapid dipstick

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

antigen-capture assay. Lancet. 1994;
15. Britton S, Cheng Q, McCarthy JS. Novel molecular diagnostic tools for malaria
elimination: A review of options from the point of view of high-throughput and
applicability in resource limited settings. Malar. J. 2016.
16. Okell LC, Ghani AC, Lyons E, Drakeley CJ. Submicroscopic Infection in Plasmodium

falciparum –Endemic Populations: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis . J Infect Dis.
2009;
17. Singh B, Bobogare A, Cox-Singh J, Snounou G, Abdullah MS, Rahman HA. A genusand species-specific nested polymerase chain reaction malaria detection assay for
epidemiologic studies. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1999;
18. WHO. WHO Malaria Policy Advisory Committee Meeting: Meeting Report, October
2017 [Internet]. 2017. Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/255044
19. Lloyd YM, Esemu LF, Antallan J, Thomas B, Tassi Yunga S, Obase B, et al. PCR-based
detection of Plasmodium falciparum in saliva using mitochondrial cox3 and varATS
primers. Trop Med Health. 2018;
20. Buppan P, Putaporntip C, Pattanawong U, Seethamchai S, Jongwutiwes S.
Comparative detection of Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum DNA in saliva
and urine samples from symptomatic malaria patients in a low endemic area. Malar J.
2010;
21. Al-Shehri H, Power BJ, Archer J, Cousins A, Atuhaire A, Adriko M, et al. Non-invasive
surveillance of Plasmodium infection by real-time PCR analysis of ethanol preserved
faeces from Ugandan school children with intestinal schistosomiasis. Malar J. 2019;
22. Oriero EC, Jacobs J, van Geertruyden JP, Nwakanma D, D’alessandro U. Molecularbased isothermal tests for field diagnosis of malaria and their potential contribution to
malaria elimination. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 2015.
23. Moody A. Rapid diagnostic tests for malaria parasites. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 2002.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

24. Wilson ML. Malaria rapid diagnostic tests. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;
25. Fagbamigbe AF. On the discriminatory and predictive accuracy of the RDT against
the microscopy in the diagnosis of malaria among under-five children in Nigeria. Malar J.
2019;18:46.
26. Cook J, Xu W, Msellem M, Vonk M, Bergström B, Gosling R, et al. Mass screening and
treatment on the basis of results of a Plasmodium falciparum-specific rapid diagnostic
test did not reduce malaria incidence in zanzibar. J Infect Dis. 2015;
27. Tao D, McGill B, Hamerly T, Kobayashi T, Khare P, Dziedzic A, et al. A saliva-based
rapid test to quantify the infectious subclinical malaria parasite reservoir. Sci Transl Med.
2019;
28. Sikulu-Lord MT, Maia MF, Milali MP, Henry M, Mkandawile G, Kho EA, et al. Rapid and
Non-destructive Detection and Identification of Two Strains of Wolbachia in Aedes aegypti
by Near-Infrared Spectroscopy. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016;10.
29. Fernandes JN, dos Santos LMB, Chouin-Carneiro T, Pavan MG, Garcia GA, David MR,
et al. Rapid, noninvasive detection of Zika virus in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes by nearinfrared spectroscop. American Association for the Advancement of Science; 2018.
30. Esperança PM, Blagborough AM, Da DF, Dowell FE, Churcher TS. Detection of

Plasmodium berghei infected Anopheles stephensi using near-infrared spectroscopy.
Parasites and Vectors. 2018;
31. Ferreira Maia M, Kapulu M, Muthui M, Wagah M, Ferguson H, Dowell F, et al. Detection
of malaria in insectary-reared Anopheles gambiae using near-infrared spectroscopy. Malar
J. 2019;18:85.
32. Mayagaya VS, Michel K, Benedict MQ, Killeen GF, Wirtz RA, Ferguson HM, et al. Nondestructive determination of age and species of Anopheles gambiae s.l using nearinfrared spectroscopy. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2009;81:622.
33. Lambert B, Sikulu-Lord MT, Mayagaya VS, Devine G, Dowell F, Churcher TS.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Monitoring the Age of Mosquito Populations Using Near-Infrared Spectroscopy. Sci Rep.
2018;8.
34. Sikulu-Lord MT, Devine GJ, Hugo LE, Dowell FE. First report on the application of
near-infrared spectroscopy to predict the age of Aedes albopictus Skuse. Sci Rep. 2018;8.
35. Krajacich BJ, Meyers JI, Alout H, Dabiré RK, Dowell FE, Foy BD. Analysis of near
infrared spectra for age-grading of wild populations of Anopheles gambiae. Parasit
Vectors. 2017;10:552.
36. Ntamatungiro AJ, Mayagaya VS, Rieben S, Moore SJ, Dowell FE, Maia MF. The
influence of physiological status on age prediction of Anopheles arabiensis using near
infra-red spectroscopy. Parasites and Vectors. 2013;
37. Milali MP, Sikulu-Lord MT, Kiware SS, Dowell FE, Corliss GF, Povinelli RJ. Age Grading
An. Gambiae and An. Arabiensis Using Near Infrared Spectra and Artificial Neural
Networks. bioRxiv [Internet]. 2018;490326.
38. Gonzalez-Jimenez M, Babayan SA, Khazaeli P, Doyle M, Walton F, Reedy E, et al.
Prediction of malaria mosquito species and population age structure using mid-infrared
spectroscopy and supervised machine learning. Wellcome Open Res. 2019;4:76.
39. Sikulu M, Killeen GF, Hugo LE, Ryan PA, Dowell KM, Wirtz RA, et al. Near-infrared
spectroscopy as a complementary age grading and species identification tool for African
malaria vectors. Parasit Vectors. 2010;3:49.
40. Mwanga EP, Mapua SA, Siria DJ, Ngowo HS, Nangacha F, Mgando J, et al. Using midinfrared spectroscopy and supervised machine-learning to identify vertebrate blood meals
in the malaria vector, Anopheles arabiensis. Malar J. 2019;18:187.
41. Khoshmanesh A, Dixon MWA, Kenny S, Tilley L, McNaughton D, Wood BR. Detection
and quantification of early-stage malaria parasites in laboratory infected erythrocytes by
attenuated total reflectance infrared spectroscopy and multivariate analysis. Anal Chem.
2014;

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

42. Roy S, Perez-Guaita D, Andrew DW, Richards JS, McNaughton D, Heraud P, et al.
Simultaneous ATR-FTIR Based Determination of Malaria Parasitemia, Glucose and Urea
in Whole Blood Dried onto a Glass Slide. Anal Chem. 2017;
43. Kaindoa EW, Matowo NS, Ngowo HS, Mkandawile G, Mmbando A, Finda M, et al.
Interventions that effectively target Anopheles funestus mosquitoes could significantly
improve control of persistent malaria transmission in south–eastern Tanzania. PLoS One.
Public Library of Science; 2017;12:e0177807.
44. Finda MF, Limwagu AJ, Ngowo HS, Matowo NS, Swai JK, Kaindoa E, et al. Dramatic
decreases of malaria transmission intensities in Ifakara, south-eastern Tanzania since
early 2000s. Malar J. 2018;
45. Abbot. SD BIOLINE Malaria Ag P.f/Pan [Internet]. 2019. Available from:
https://www.alere.com/en/home/product-details/sd-bioline-malaria-ag-p-f-pan.html
46. Ministry of Health Tanzania, NMCP. National Guidelines for Malaria Diagnosis and
Treatment. Malar Control Ser No 11. 2006;
47. GE Healthcare Life Sciences. 903 Proteinsaver Card [Internet]. 2019. Available from:
https://www.gelifesciences.com/en/fj/shop/forensics/cards-kits-and-collectors/903proteinsaver-card-p-01011
48. Bruker Optics. ALPHA II - The Compact FTIR Spectrometer for any Industry
[Internet]. 2019. Available from: https://www.bruker.com/products/infrared-nearinfrared-and-raman-spectroscopy/ft-ir-routine-spectrometers/alpha/overview.html
49. Snounou G, Singh B. Nested PCR Analysis of Plasmodium Parasites. In: Doolan DL,
editor. Malar Methods Protoc Methods Protoc. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 2002. p. 189–
203.
50. Bruker Optics. OPUS Spectroscopy Software [Internet]. 2019. Available from:
https://www.bruker.com/products/infrared-near-infrared-and-ramanspectroscopy/opus-spectroscopy-software.html

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

51. Pedregosa F, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, Blondel M, et al. Scikit-learn :
Machine Learning in Python. J Mach Learn Res. 2011;
52. Bell D, Peeling RW. Evaluation of rapid diagnostic tests: Malaria. Nat Rev Microbiol.
2006;
53. Orphanou CM. The detection and discrimination of human body fluids using ATR FTIR spectroscopy. Forensic Sci Int. 2015;
54. Zou Y, Xia P, Yang F, Cao F, Ma K, Mi Z, et al. Whole blood and semen identification
using mid-infrared and Raman spectrum analysis for forensic applications. Anal Methods.
2016;
55. Kozicki M, Creek DJ, Sexton A, Morahan BJ, Wesełucha-Birczyńska A, Wood BR. An
attenuated total reflection (ATR) and Raman spectroscopic investigation into the effects
of chloroquine on Plasmodium falciparum-infected red blood cells. Analyst. 2015;
56. Frosch T, Koncarevic S, Becker K, Popp J. Morphology-sensitive Raman modes of the
malaria pigment hemozoin. Analyst. 2009;
57. Chen K, Yuen C, Aniweh Y, Preiser P, Liu Q. Towards ultrasensitive malaria diagnosis
using surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy. Sci Rep. 2016;
58. Newman DM, Heptinstall J, Matelon RJ, Savage L, Wears ML, Beddow J, et al. A
magneto-optic route toward the in vivo diagnosis of malaria: Preliminary results and
preclinical trial data. Biophys J. 2008;
59. Lasonder E, Ishihama Y, Andersen JS, Vermunt AMW, Pain A, Sauerwein RW, et al.
Analysis of the Plasmodium falciparum proteome by high-accuracy mass spectrometry.
Nature. 2002;
60. Laxmeshwar SS, Madhu Kumar DJ, Viveka S, Nagaraja GK. Preparation and Properties
of Biodegradable Film Composites Using Modified Cellulose Fibre-Reinforced with PVA.
ISRN Polym Sci. 2012;

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001206; this version posted July 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

61. Pretsch E, Bühlmann P, Badertscher M. Structure determination of organic
compounds: Tables of spectral data. Struct. Determ. Org. Compd. Tables Spectr. Data.
2009.
62. Tseroni M, Pervanidou D, Tserkezou P, Rachiotis G, Pinaka O, Baka A, et al. Field
Application of SD Bioline Malaria Ag Pf/Pan Rapid Diagnostic Test for Malaria in Greece.
Snounou G, editor. PLoS One. Public Library of Science; 2015;10:e0120367.

