medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Original Research Article

Impact of spectrograms on the classification of wheezes and crackles in an educational setting. An
interrater study.

Aviles-Solis JC.1, Storvoll I2, Vanbelle Sophie3, Melbye H.1

1) General Practice Research Unit, Department of Community Medicine, UiT The Arctic
University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
2) Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT, The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
3) Department of methodology and statistics, University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The
Netherlands.

Corresponding author: Juan Carlos Aviles Solis, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Post-box 6050
Langnes, 9037 Tromsø. E-mail: juan.c.solis@uit.no

Word count: 2182
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background: Chest auscultation is a widely used method in the diagnosis of lung diseases. However,
the interpretation of lung sounds is a subjective task and disagreements arise. New technological
developments like the use of visual representation of sounds through spectrograms could improve the
agreement when classifying lung sounds, but this is not yet known.
Aims: To test if the use of spectrograms improves the agreement when classifying wheezes and
crackles.
Methods: We used 30 lung sounds recordings. The sample contained 15 normal recordings and 15
with wheezes or crackles. We produced spectrograms of the recordings. Twenty-three third to fifthyear medical students at UiT the Arctic University of Norway classified the recordings using an online
questionnaire. We first showed the students examples of how wheezes and crackles looked in the
spectrogram. Then, we played the recordings in a random order two times, first without the
spectrogram, then with live spectrograms displayed. We asked them to classify the sounds for the
presence of wheezes and crackles. We calculated kappa values for the agreement between each
student and the expert classification with and without display of spectrograms and tested for
significant improvement. We also calculated Fleiss kappa for the 23 observers with and without the
spectrogram.
Results: When classifying wheezes 13/23 (1 with p<.05) students had a positive change in k, and 16/23
(2 with p<.05). All the statistically significant changes were in the direction of improved kappa values
(.52 - .75). Fleiss kappa values were k=.51 and k=.56 (p=.63) for wheezes without and with
spectrograms. For crackles, these values were k=.22 and k=.40 (p=<0.01) in the same order.
Conclusions: The use of spectrograms had a positive impact on the inter-rater agreement and the
agreement with experts. We observed a higher improvement in the classification of crackles compared
to wheezes.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Chest auscultation is a widely used method in the diagnosis and follow up of several diseases. Medical
doctors use it to guide clinical decisions and treatment strategies. (1) However, the identification and
interpretation of the sounds remains a subjective task. Generally, auscultation occurs in a “solitary”
fashion since normal stethoscopes are designed for individual listening. Often, disagreement between
health professionals arises when classifying lung sounds and the reliability in the classification of
wheezes and crackles has been found to be moderate at best. (2-6) This variation is caused by not only
diverse identification, but also due to different labeling of the sounds. (7, 8) These limitations of
auscultation make the training of new health professionals a challenging task. It has been suggested
that difficulties in teaching and learning auscultation also contribute to the demise of this technique.
(9)
However, new electronic stethoscopes can capture and store sounds in a digital form. Assisted by the
processing capacity of personal computers and/or mobile phones it is possible to generate visual
representations of sound in the form of spectrograms. In spectrograms, the common adventitious lung
sounds, wheezes and crackles, show recognizable patterns, (figure 1) which may be of help in the
identification of these sounds. (10) Some of the electronic stethoscopes available on the market offer
this solution. The use of spectrograms also gives the possibility for group analysis and discussion. In
addition, the use of recordings with spectrograms could avoid the objectification of patients used in
the teaching of auscultation. (11)
It would be natural to think that the use of a visual support could help to improve the classification of
lung sounds since there are two sensory inputs instead of one. The use of spectrograms could improve
the teaching of lung sounds by giving an aid to the listening abilities in training. Andrés et al (12) found
that the spectrograms do have a positive impact on how medical students assign a diagnosis with the
help of lung sounds. However, the design of this study did not isolate the effect of spectrograms and
therefore this affirmation is inconclusive. There are very few studies on this subject. Therefore, we do
not know whether the use of spectrograms would help to medical students to better classify lung
sounds. If spectrograms have a positive effect in the classification of lung sounds it would make it a
valuable tool to make auscultation training more simple and effective.
The aim of this study is to explore how the use of spectrograms affects the agreement between medical
students and a panel of experts and the agreement within a group of students in classifying lung
sounds.

Methods
Data for classification
We recorded lung sounds from 20 adults. They were 67.4 years old on average (44–84) and nine were
female. We registered the following information about the subjects: age, gender and self-reported
history of heart or lung disease. No personal information was registered that could link the sound
recordings to the individual subjects. The project was presented for the Regional Committee for
Medical and Health Research Ethics, and it was considered to be outside the remit of the Act on
Medical and Health Research.
To record the lung sounds, we used a microphone MKE 2-EW with a wireless system EW 112-P G3-G
(Sennheiser electronic, Wedemark, Germany) placed in the tube of a Littmann Master Classic

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

II stethoscope (3M, Maplewood, MN, USA) at a distance of 10 cm from the headpiece. The microphone
was connected to a digital sound Handy recorder H4n (Zoom, Tokyo, Japan).
We placed the membrane of the stethoscope against the naked thorax of the subjects. We asked the
subjects to breathe deeply while keeping their mouth open. We started the recording with an
inspiration and continued for approximately 20 seconds trying to capture three full respiratory cycles
with good quality sound. We performed this same procedure at six different locations (figure 2). The
researcher recording sounds used a headphone as an audio monitor to evaluate the quality. When too
much noise or cough was heard during the recording, a second attempt was performed.
We obtained 120 audio files in ‘.wav’ format and recorded at a sample rate of 44 100 Hz and 16 bit
depth in a single monophonic channel. We did not perform post-processing of the sound files or
implement filters. We chose 30 recordings for this study from 18 different subjects. This selection
contained 15 normal and 15 abnormal sounds, from which nine were classified as containing crackles
and six containing wheezes.
A panel of four experts in the field of lung sound research classified the recordings according to the
presence of wheezes and crackles by a majority criterion.
Observers
We invited medical students from third to fifth year at UiT, The Arctic University of Norway. The
students had received the standard curricular training in physical examination provided in the
medicine school. The training in lung auscultation included a lecture on lung sounds which included
the demonstration of some spectrograms. Beyond this, the students had no previous experience with
the use of spectrograms.
Presentation and classification of the lung sounds
First, we presented a couple of recordings with wheezes and crackles and showed the students how
these sounds looked in the spectrograms. Then we played the 30 recordings in a random order in two
sessions. In the first session, we presented sound only. In the second session, the sound and the
spectrograms were simultaneously displayed in the classroom screen. There was a pause of 20
minutes in between the two sessions. We presented no additional information beyond the sound and
the spectrograms. The observers were not aware that the same sounds were played in both sections.
In both sessions, each recording was played two times and the students had up to 30 seconds to classify
it before moving to the next recording. The observers used their personal computers and an online
classification scheme (Questback AS, Norway). In this scheme, the observers had to specify if the
recording contained only normal respiratory sounds. If this was not the case, the observers had to
further specify if the recording contained wheezes, crackles or other sounds and if they appeared
during inspiration or expiration. It was also possible to mark the recording as containing too much
noise to be classified. At the end of the classifications session we obtained a report in an excel
document. (Microsoft,Redmond,WA,USA)
Statistical analysis
We calculated Cohen kappa for the agreement between the observers and the experts, and Fleiss
kappa for all the observers as a group. We then compared the kappa values obtained in the sections
with and without the use of spectrograms and calculated p values to explore for statistically significant
differences using an adaption of Hotelling’s T2 test described by Vanbelle, S. (13) In this analysis, the
recordings were clustered by the individual they were recorded from. We used Holm’s correction
procedure to adjust p values for multiple hypothesis testing. We used R version 3.2.1 and the package
“magree” to perform all the calculations. Significance level was set at p <0.05. In addition, we

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

calculated sensitivity and specificity of each participant using the experts’ classification as the gold
standard. We tested for significant differences in sensitivity and specificity with and without the
intervention using paired Wilcoxon signed rank test with continuity correction.
The results of this study are reported according to the Guidelines for Reporting Reliability and
Agreement Studies (GRRAS). (14)

Results
Observers
We included 23 observers in the study. At the beginning, 30 students accepted to participate in the
study. From them, two withdrew before the start of the study, two did not show up and three did not
complete the classification session due to lack of time. Eight participants were third year students,
fourteen participants were from the fourth year and one was from the fifth year. There were 19
women and four men.
Agreement
The students observed a mean prevalence of wheezes of 9.7 (6 – 15) without spectrograms and 8.3 (5
– 12) with spectrograms. In the case of crackles the students observed a mean prevalence of 11.5 (4 –
22) and 10.9 (5 – 18) in the same order. The mean proportion of agreement (%) and Cohen kappa (k)
with the experts for all 23 participants classifying wheezes without spectrograms was 82 % and k=.56.
We observed 88 % and k=.68 with the use of spectrograms. In the case of crackles we observed a
proportion of agreement of 72 % and k=.38 without spectrograms. With the use of spectrograms 80 %
and k=.56. Fleiss kappa values for the multirater agreement were k=.51 and k=.56 (p=.63) for wheezes
without and with spectrogram, respectively. For crackles, we observed k=.22 and k=.40 (p=<0.01) in
the same order. (figure 3) Compared to the expert panel’s classification, 13/23 students had a positive
change in kappa when classifying wheezes (one with p<.05), and 16/23 (two with p<.05) when
classifying crackles. (figure 4 and figure 5) All the statistically significant changes were in the direction
of improved kappa values (.52 - .75).
When looking at the classification of normal vs abnormal sounds (wheezes or crackles) we observed a
mean prevalence of abnormal sounds of 18.7 and 18 with and without spectrogram (experts 15). The
mean absolute agreement was 72 % with a mean kappa of k= 0.44 without spectrograms and 80% and
k=0.60 with spectrograms. Only one participant had a significant improvement in this analysis.
The median sensitivity for wheezes did not present a significant change but the specificity was higher
in the classification with the use of spectrograms (p=0.002). In the case of crackles, there was a
significant increase in sensitivity (p=0.03) when using spectrograms but without significant change in
specificity. (figure 6)

Discussion
We found improved agreement with the experts in the classification of lung sounds with the use of
spectrograms. However, most of the improvements were not statistically significant. We did observe
a significant improvement in the agreement within the group (Fleiss kappa) when classifying for
crackles when the sounds were presented with spectrograms.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The levels of individual and group agreement observed in this study corresponds with that reported in
previous studies. (15) We generally observed a higher agreement for wheezes than for crackles, in
accordance with what is described in the literature. (3) It is interesting that the impact of spectrograms
was different for wheezes and crackles. It might be that wheezes are easier to recognize without
spectrograms due to its relatively long duration and its musical quality, which make them more familiar
to the human ear. On the contrary, crackles are short explosive sounds that could easily be missed by
ear appreciation or perceived as noise. (16) For this reason, having a visual aid could be an advantage
to identify them.
Andrés et al (12) found that the spectrograms do have a positive impact on how medical students
assign a diagnosis to a patient with the help of lung sounds. Even though the observer populations are
similar, the results are not comparable since the outcome in their test was a diagnosis and not the
classification of the sounds. Since the participants in Andrés’ study got clinical information together
with the sound this could have influenced how they classified lung sounds. Nguyen et al observed
that the addition of clinical information has an effect on the classification of lung sounds and this effect
is experience-dependent. In Nguyen’s study, the group classifying lung sounds without clinical
information achieved similar scores classifying lung sounds regardless of clinical experience. When
clinical information was provided, then the more experienced raters achieved higher scores. (17)
Our exploratory study suggests that the use of spectrograms might be helpful to improve the teaching
of auscultation, mostly in the cases of crackles. This by enhancing interrater agreement and facilitating
discussion of the sounds in a teaching arena.
Strengths and limitations
We think the methodology employed allowed us to analyze the isolated effect of the spectrograms in
the classifications.
The students had free seating. Even though absolute silence was required during the classification, we
cannot fully rule out the possibility that the students could have influenced each other. This could have
influenced the estimation of agreement in the group (multi-rater) agreement in a positive direction.
We have tested the same hypothesis 23 times. This increases the chance of making a type I error. We
have taken this situation into account by correcting the p-values with Holm’s procedure.
Some limitations in our study concern the sample size of sounds to classify. Due to the exploratory
nature of this study, we chose a number of sounds to be classified which could allow us to perform the
whole procedure in a time window of two hours. This, to avoid dropouts from the study. It is possible
that we could have had observed more significant changes if the sound sample would have been larger.
Future studies looking at the effect of spectrograms in agreement should take this into account in its
design.

Conclusion
The use of spectrograms had a positive impact on the inter-rater agreement and the agreement
compared to experts. We observed a higher improvement in the classification of crackles compared
to wheezes.
Akcnowledgements: We would like to thank Professor A. Marques, Professor P. Piirilä, Professor H.
Pasterkamp and Professor A. Sovijarvi for their help in classifying the lung sound recordings used in
this study. We would like to thank Dr. Cristina Jácome for its valuable insight. The authors also would

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

like to thank LHL rehabilitation centre at Skibotn, Norway, for its cooperation in performing the
recordings.

References
1.
Turnbull S, Lucas PJ, Redmond NM, Christensen H, Thornton H, Cabral C, et al. What gives rise
to clinician gut feeling, its influence on management decisions and its prognostic value for children
with RTI in primary care: a prospective cohort study. BMC Fam Pract. 2018;19(1):25.
2.
Badgett RG, Lucey CR, Mulrow CD. Can the clinical examination diagnose left-sided heart
failure in adults? JAMA. 1997;277(21):1712-9.
3.
Benbassat J, Baumal R. Narrative review: should teaching of the respiratory physical
examination be restricted only to signs with proven reliability and validity? J Gen Intern Med.
2010;25(8):865-72.
4.
Brooks D, Thomas J. Interrater reliability of auscultation of breath sounds among physical
therapists. Phys Ther. 1995;75(12):1082-8.
5.
Margolis P, Gadomski A. The rational clinical examination. Does this infant have pneumonia?
JAMA. 1998;279(4):308-13.
6.
Metlay JP, Kapoor WN, Fine MJ. Does this patient have community-acquired pneumonia?
Diagnosing pneumonia by history and physical examination. JAMA. 1997;278(17):1440-5.
7.
Spiteri MA, Cook DG, Clarke SW. Reliability of eliciting physical signs in examination of the
chest. Lancet. 1988;1(8590):873-5.
8.
Melbye H, Garcia-Marcos L, Brand P, Everard M, Priftis K, Pasterkamp H. Wheezes, crackles
and rhonchi: simplifying description of lung sounds increases the agreement on their classification: a
study of 12 physicians' classification of lung sounds from video recordings. BMJ Open Respir Res.
2016;3(1):e000136.
9.
Rice T. Learning to listen: auscultation and the transmission of auditory knowledge. J Roy
Anthropol Inst. 2010;16:S41-S61.
10.
Riella RJ, Nohama P, Maia JM. Method for automatic detection of wheezing in lung sounds.
Braz J Med Biol Res [Internet]. 2009;42(7):674-84.
11.
Rice T. “Beautiful Murmurs”: Stethoscopic Listening and Acoustic Objectification. The Senses
and Society. 2008;3(3):293-306.
12.
Andres E, Gass R. Stethoscope: A Still-Relevant Tool and Medical Companion. Am J Med.
2016;129(5):e37-8.
13.
Vanbelle S. Comparing dependent kappa coefficients obtained on multilevel data. Biom J.
2017;59(5):1016-34.
14.
Kottner J, Audige L, Brorson S, Donner A, Gajewski BJ, Hrobjartsson A, et al. Guidelines for
Reporting Reliability and Agreement Studies (GRRAS) were proposed. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64(1):96106.
15.
Aviles-Solis JC, Vanbelle S, Halvorsen PA, Francis N, Cals JWL, Andreeva EA, et al.
International perception of lung sounds: a comparison of classification across some European
borders. BMJ Open Respir Res. 2017;4(1):e000250.
16.
Kiyokawa H, Greenberg M, Shirota K, Pasterkamp H. Auditory detection of simulated crackles
in breath sounds. Chest. 2001;119(6):1886-92.
17.
Nguyen DQ, Patenaude JV, Gagnon R, Deligne B, Bouthillier I. Simulation-based multiplechoice test assessment of clinical competence for large groups of medical students: a comparison of
auscultation sound identification either with or without clinical context. Can Med Educ J.
2015;6(1):e4-e13.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1.- Examples of spectrograms of lung sound recordings showing the presence of wheezes
(stars) and crackles (arrowheads.

Figure 2.-Illustration showing the different places where lung sounds were recorded. (1_2) Between
the spine and the medial border of the scapula at the level of T4–T5; (3_4) at the middle point
between the spine and the mid-axillary line at the level of T9–T10; (5_6) at the intersection of the
mid-clavicular line and second intercostal space.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3.- Fleiss kappa for the group of 23 participants when classifying wheezes and crackles with
only sound and sound plus spectrogram.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4.- Cohen’s kappa of each participant when classifying wheezes with only sound (left) and with
sound and spectrograms (right) compared to the reference standard. The change in kappa between
the two classifications and its statistical significance is illustrated at the center. Proportion of
agreement (%) is presented on the lateral columns.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 5.- Cohen’s kappa of each participant when classifying crackles with only sound (left) and with
sound and spectrograms (right) compared to the reference standard. The change in kappa between
the two classifications and its statistical significance is illustrated at the center. Proportion of
agreement (%) is presented on the lateral columns.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19005504; this version posted August 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 6.- Box and whiskers diagrams showing the change in sensitivity and specificity of the students
classifying wheezes and crackles with and without spectrograms. The answers of the experts were
considered as the reference standard. P values shown were obtained from the test of difference
between means using paired Wilcoxon signed rank test with continuity correction. Md= Median.

