medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003236; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

1

Toward Automated Classification of Pathological
Transcranial Doppler Waveform Morphology via
Spectral Clustering
Samuel G. Thorpe, Corey M. Thibeault, Nicolas Canac, Kian Jalaleddini, Amber Dorn, Seth J. Wilk, Thomas
Devlin, Fabien Scalzo, Robert B. Hamilton


Abstract—Cerebral Blood Flow Velocity waveforms acquired
via Transcranial Doppler (TCD) can provide evidence for
cerebrovascular occlusion and stenosis. Thrombolysis in Brain
Ischemia (TIBI) flow grades are widely used for this purpose, but
require subjective assessment by expert evaluators to be reliable.
In this work we seek to determine whether TCD morphology can
be objectively assessed using an unsupervised machine learning
approach to waveform categorization. TCD beat waveforms were
recorded at multiple depths from the Middle Cerebral Arteries of
106 subjects; 33 with CTA-confirmed Large Vessel Occlusion
(LVO). From each waveform, three morphological variables
were
extracted,
quantifying
absolute
peak
onset,
number/prominence of auxiliary peaks, and systolic canopy
length. Spectral clustering identified groups implicit in the
resultant three-dimensional feature space, with gap-statistic
criteria establishing the optimal cluster number. We found that
gap-statistic disparity was maximized at four clusters, referred to
as flow types I, II, III, and IV. Types I and II were primarily
composed of control subject waveforms, whereas types III and IV
derived mainly from LVO patients. Cluster morphologies for
types I and IV aligned clearly with Normal and Blunted TIBI
flows, respectively. Types II and III represented commonly
observed flow-types not delineated by TIBI, which nonetheless
deviate quantifiably from normal and blunted flows. We
conclude that important morphological variability exists beyond
that currently quantified by TIBI in populations experiencing or
at-risk for acute ischemic stroke, and posit that the observed
flow-types provide the foundation for objective methods of realtime automated flow type classification.
Index Terms—Transcranial Doppler, Ultrasound, Ischemic
Stroke, Large Vessel Occlusion, Spectral Clustering, Clustering
Algorithms.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Transcranial Doppler ultrasound (TCD) is a noninvasive
methodology for measuring Cerebral Blood Flow Velocity
(CBFV) through the large arteries of the brain. The
morphology of the pulsatile CBFV waveform can provide
information concerning numerous cerebrovascular pathologies

Submitted to archive on July 24, 2019. Financial support for this work
was provided in full by Neural analytics, Inc., Los Angeles CA 90064 USA.
Samuel G. Thorpe, Corey M. Thibeault, Nicolas Canac, Kian Jalaleddini,
Amber Dorn, Seth J. Wilk, and Robert Hamilton are all currently with Neural
Analytics, Inc., Los Angeles CA 90064 USA. Samuel G Thorpe is the
corresponding author (email: samuel.thorpe@neuralanalytics.com)
Fabien Scalzo is with the University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095
USA, Department of Neurology (e-mail: fab@cs.ucla.edu).
Thomas Devlin is with Erlanger Medical Center, Department of
Neurology, Chattanooga, TN 37403 USA.

[1], including stroke [2–4], intracranial hypertension [5], and
mild Traumatic Brain injury [6]. TCD has proven effective for
detecting occluded and stenosed cerebral arteries in the
context of acute ischemic stroke [7–9]. In these studies, stroke
pathology is primarily quantified using Thrombolysis in Brain
Ischemia (TIBI) flow grades to evaluate waveform
morphology [10], with waveform features such as onset of
maximum velocity, and evidence of standard pulsatile and
peak structure evaluated for grade assignment. Numerous such
studies have shown TIBI assessment to be a valuable tool for
these purposes, possessing sensitivity and specificity often
exceeding 90%. [2,9,11] However, reliable determination of
TIBI grades requires subjective assessment by experts,
severely limiting their utility for prehospital stroke assessment
by less specialized personnel. Recent work by our group has
shown that a TCD-derived morphological biomarker termed
Velocity Curvature Index (VCI) may provide a robust,
objectively computable metric for detecting Large Vessel
Occlusion (LVO) [12,13]. Though VCI readily identifies
waveforms with pathologically deviant curvature, it does not
differentiate between pathological morphologies such as those
delineated by the TIBI scale. An objective means of waveform
categorization could thus provide additional information
concerning stroke etiology to better inform stroke triage and
transfer decisions.
The TIBI categories range from grades 0 - 5, with 5
indicating normal flow, and grades 0 and 1 designating absent
(0) or minimal (1) flow associated with complete or partial
vascular occlusion. The grades between are associated with
characteristic morphologies which are used to determine
blunting (grade 2), dampening (grade 3), or stenotic (grade 4)
flows. The complexity and subjectivity in assignment of these
categories, along with their evident utility for stroke
assessment, make them a natural candidate problem for
automation via machine learning. However, before attempting
this explicitly, we feel a more foundational problem must first
be addressed, in that it is currently unclear to what degree
these categories actually capture the natural variance inherent
in empirical data. That is, we know these categories are useful,
but we do not know that they are comprehensive. Additional
waveforms may be present which are also informative, or
perhaps a different subset may better explain variability across
subjects.
In this work we take a data-driven approach to waveform
categorization, retrospectively applying an unsupervised
learning algorithm to a dataset comprised of multiple subject

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003236; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

2

groups, including patients experiencing acute LVO, as well as
control subjects collected both in and out of hospital. For these
purposes we employ Spectral Clustering [14,15], which does
not make strong assumptions about inherent cluster density,
and thus performs well when clusters are connected but
potentially non-convex. We hypothesize that LVO subject
waveforms will fall into clusters which are mostly distinct
from non-LVO controls, for which we can subsequently
compare alignment with established TIBI categories.

II.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

A.
Subjects
We compared TCD waveform morphology across three
subject groups; one with CTA-confirmed LVO, a second nonLVO control group collected in-hospital, and a third group of
control subjects collected out of hospital. LVO and in-hospital
controls (IHC) were enrolled at Erlanger Southeast Regional
Stroke Center in Chattanooga, TN, between October 2016 and
October 2017. Clinical and imaging methodological details for
these subjects are given in [12,13]. Out of hospital controls
(OHC) were scanned at multiple locations in Los Angeles,
CA. Volunteers were eligible for enrollment if between 40 –
85 years of age, and no exclusion criteria applied (Table 1).
Experiment protocols for LVO and IHC subjects were
approved by University of Tennessee College of Medicine
Institutional Review Board (ID: 16-097), and for OHC
subjects by Western IRB (ID: 20151682).
TABLE I
SUBJECT EXCLUSION CRITERIA
LVO, IHC Subjects
1) Head CT findings consistent
with acute primary intracranial
hemorrhage (SAH, ICH, etc.).
2) Patients requiring
pharmacological support for
hypotension.
3) Subjects who underwent
partial or full craniotomy.
4) Additional intracranial
pathologies present (tumor,
hydrocephalus, etc.).
5) Anticipated insufficient time
to acquire a complete set of
scan as described by the
protocol.

OHC Subjects
1) Individuals taking any
psychoactive medication.
2) Systolic arterial blood pressure
greater than 140 mmHg
3) Individuals presenting with an
external wound in head.
4) Pregnant Women.
5) Individuals who have a known
history of: severe TBI, moderate
TBI (within 3 years), vascular
disease, stroke, sickle cell
anemia, brain tumor, epidural or
subdural hematoma, abnormal
MRI or CT scan, cardiovascular
disease.

6) Significant hemodynamic
pharmacological agent
(cocaine, amphetamine, etc.).
7) Subjects who are under arrest
for a felony.
Subject exclusion criteria. Note the following abbreviations: SAH – Subarachnoid Hemorrhage, ICH – Intracranial Hemorrhage, TBI – Traumatic
Brain Injury, MRI – Magnetic Resonance Imaging, CT – Computerized
Tomography.

B.

TCD Waveform Recording & Processing
CBFV signals were acquired by trained technicians using 2
MHz handheld probes to transtemporally insonate the
left/right MCA. The technician was instructed to obtain
recordings for as many depths as possible between 45 – 60
mm in both the left/right cerebral hemispheres. Once signal
was identified and optimized at a specific depth, waveform
recordings were made in 30-second intervals. Individual beat
waveforms from each recorded depth were extracted offline
(post-recording) using an automated beat identification
algorithm [16], with automated beat outlier rejection via
Iterated Interquartile Range exclusion with cross-correlation
and beat length as primary comparators [17]. To be included
in this analysis, exams were required to contain at least one
bilateral pair of left/right MCA scans at depths between 45 –
60 mm, each containing at least 15 accepted beats. Accepted
beats were aligned and averaged, resulting in a single
representative beat waveform for each recorded interval. OHC
waveforms, digitally sampled at 400 Hz, were resampled to
125 Hz to match the native sampling rate of LVO and IHC
waveforms. All waveforms were smoothed via convolution
with a 9 ms Hanning window to reduce high-frequency noise.
Since this analysis sought to evaluate morphological
commonality regardless of underlying heart rate or velocity
scale, each waveform was normalized with respect to both
time and velocity. The velocity normalization was
accomplished for each waveform by first subtracting the
minimum, then subsequently dividing by the resultant
maximum (thus rescaling to the interval [0, 1] along the
velocity axis). The temporal normalization was accomplished
by resampling each waveform to 100 total samples (via cubic
spline), effectively enforcing a common heart rate across
waveforms.
C.
Cluster Feature Extraction
From each waveform, denoted x(t) in equations 1 – 3, we
extracted three morphological features (figure 1). The first,
onset (equation 1), marked the temporal onset of maximal
velocity. Canopy (equation 2), was defined as the number of
samples comprising the beat “canopy”, i.e. the cardinality
(denoted card) of the set of samples with velocity greater than
25% of the diastolic-systolic range [see 12 for details]. The
final feature, peaks (equation 3), quantified the number and
“weight” of waveform peaks. First we identified the set of
true-peaks (TP, approximate zeros of the first derivative) as
points in the canopy corresponding to a sign-change in the
difference between successive samples. True peaks were each
assigned a weight of one. Next we identified the set of
“pseudo-peaks” (PP, points where the derivative is small but
non-vanishing) where the difference magnitude between
successive samples dropped below a critical threshold of 0.01
(choosing the point with smallest difference magnitude in any
group of adjacent sub-threshold samples). For pseudo-peaks
we assigned weights corresponding to one minus the ratio of
the associated difference magnitude and the threshold 0.01,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003236; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

3

such that those with the smallest derivative were weighted
most heavily. The peaks variable was then computed as the
sum over all corresponding weights.

(1)

onset=n : x ( t n )=max { x ( t i ) }

(2)

canopy=card ( C ) ,
C= {i : x ( t i ) >x ( t 0 ) +0.25 ( x ( t onset ) − x ( t 0 ) ) }

(3)

i∈ {1 ,... ,100 }

peaks=card ( TP ) +

∑

k ∈ PP

1−

|x ( t k ) − x ( t k −1 )|
0.01

E.

Cluster Archetypes
To visualize the characteristic morphology of the
resultant clusters, archetypal waveforms were derived for each
by computing the matrix of correlation distances between all
cluster member waveforms, and ranking by average distance
to other members. The five waveforms with smallest mean
intra-cluster distance were averaged to obtain the waveform
archetype for each cluster.

III.

RESULTS

A.

Subject Demographics
The current analyses included 33 LVO subjects (16 female),
33 IHC subjects (13 female), and 40 (25 female) OHC
subjects, with average ages of 66.9 (SD=15.7), 56.4
(SD=16.3), and 58.4 (SD=10.9) years, respectively. A total of
996 average beat waveforms were included in this analysis,
with 354, 445, and 196 contributed by LVO, IHC, and OHC
subjects, respectively.
B.

Fig. 1. Cluster variables are depicted for three example waveforms taken
from each of the subject groups; OHC (A), IHC (B), and LVO (C). All
waveforms were normalized in both time and velocity, so as to span 100 total
samples ranging from zero to one on the y-axis. The onset variable (vertical
line) marks the time sample where maximum velocity is attained. The
canopy variable (horizontal line) marks the length (in samples) of the systolic
canopy. The peaks variable is a weighted sum of waveform peaks, both true
(indicated by circles) and pseudo (triangles).

D.

Spectral Clustering and Gap Analysis
The extracted features were z-transformed, and the
resultant three-dimensional feature space was partitioned via
spectral clustering implemented in Scikit-learn [18],
specifically the SpectralClustering module with default
parameters and radial basis kernel. To determine the optimal
number of clusters, gap statistics (Gk) were computed for total
clusters (k) ranging from two to seven. In this procedure, gap
statistics are computed as the difference between observed log
intra-cluster dispersion pooled across k clusters (denoted Wk),
and the analogous expected dispersion bootstrapped from a
null distribution incorporating the covariance structure of the
observed data [19]. Each of the 1000 bootstrap iterations was
generated by sampling uniformly over the range of the
columns of the observed data transformed by its right-singular
vectors, and back-transforming the resultant sample to feature
space via the right-singular transpose (method b in [19]). The
optimal number of clusters were selected as the smallest k
such that Gk > Gk+1 – Sk+1, where Sk is the standard
deviation of the k-cluster bootstrap distribution corrected to
account for simulation error.

Gap Analysis and Cluster Archetypes
Figure 2A shows expected and observed log intracluster dispersion as a function of total clusters, with the gap
statistic determined by their difference. The elbow in observed
dispersion at four clusters corresponds to both the maximum
gap statistic (figure 2B) and optimal number of clusters
determined by the Tibshirani et al. (2001) criteria. The
associated feature space (figure 3A) is shown partitioned into
the four resultant clusters, with membership indicated by
color. The largest cluster (type I), containing 400 waveforms,
was characterized by early max velocity onset with wide
canopy and strong peaks (figure 3B). Of waveforms in this
cluster, 18% came from LVO subjects, with 82% from
controls (52% IHC, 30% OHC). The second largest cluster
(type II), containing 257 waveforms, was characterized by
later max velocity onset, with wide canopy and strong peaks
(figure 3C). Of waveforms in this cluster, 20% came from
LVO subjects versus 80% from controls (68% IHC, 12%
OHC). The smallest cluster (type III), containing 83
waveforms, was characterized by early max velocity onset,

Fig. 2. Pooled Intra-cluster dispersion (A), and associated Gap Statistics (B)
as a function of cluster number. Gap-statistic disparity was maximized at
four clusters which also corresponded to the optimal number given by the
selection criteria in Tibshirani et al. [19]

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003236; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

4

with narrow canopy and weak peaks (figure 3D). Of
waveforms in this cluster, 95% came from LVO subjects
versus 5% from controls (1% IHC, 4% OHC). The final
cluster (type IV), containing 256 waveforms, was
characterized by late max velocity onset, with wide canopy
but weak peaks (figure 3E). Of waveforms in this cluster, 60%
came from LVO subjects versus 40% from controls (28%
IHC, 12% OHC).

group compositions suggest type II is more commonly
observed in controls, and type III nearly always associated
with LVO. The type II cluster, characterized by late onset
maximal velocity but otherwise normal peaks, may reflect
differences in peripheral vascular resistance relative to type I,
which could conceivably impact either or both the initial
systolic upstroke and/or the timing of reflected waves
affecting the amplitude of the mid-systolic peak.
Interpretation of the pathological type III morphology
represents the most speculative aspect of this work. We infer
from its strong association with LVO subjects that it likely
results from occlusion or stenosis of the cerebral vessels,
though in a manner distinct from typically blunted waveforms,
leaving the initial systolic acceleration unaffected while
suppressing all subsequent morphological structure; features
which are especially clear in the unnormalized subject
waveforms (see figure 4 for examples). This pattern is
intriguingly similar to previously observed waveforms
associated with vascular stenosis (see [20] figure 4c),
suggesting that this flow type may rightly be thought of as the
analog of the TIBI stenotic grade 4. However, multiple
reasons compel us to be cautious with this claim. First, this
flow type was by far the smallest cluster, which manifest in
only a small number subjects. Case reports for most of these
subjects did indicate significant, but non flow-limiting
stenoses. However, such moderate stenoses are not uncommon
in the LVO subject population in general. Moreover, the TIBI
grade 4 categorical definition given by Demchuk et al. [10]
refers both to elevated velocity relative to the adjacent
(unaffected) hemisphere, which are not clearly born out in our
subjects, as well as evidence for flow turbulence, which
spectrograms are required to assess. For the time being we
reserve judgement as to whether future studies incorporating
richer spectral data might confirm this flow type to have
stenotic etiology.

Fig. 3. Three-dimensional feature space is shown in Z-scored coordinates
with the optimal four clusters indicated by color. Associated cluster
morphologies are shown for each beat type (B-E), with the most
representative exemplar for each cluster shown in color, and the range of the
next 50 most representative variants depicted in gray. Associated histograms
in the upper right (B-E) demonstrate that Type I and II clusters were
primarily composed of waveforms from control patient populations, whereas
Type III and IV clusters were primarily composed of LVO patient
waveforms.

IV.
A.

DISCUSSION

Comparison to TIBI Flow Grades
Of the clusters we observed, two have definitive
analogues on the TIBI scale. Specifically, our type I cluster
showed the early systolic maximum and recognizable peak
structure associated with TIBI grade 5 normal flow. Similarly,
our type IV cluster exhibited the delayed flow acceleration
with no discernable early peak, and maximum velocity in midto-late systole, characteristic of TIBI grade 2 blunted flow.
Accordingly, we observed type I flows more often in control
subjects, whereas type IV flows were more commonly
associated with LVO. The remaining clusters did not have
unambiguous TIBI analogues, though their contrasting subject

Fig. 4. Individual example waveforms from each cluster, shown in standard
units (unnormalized), with variability across individual beats depicted in
light gray. The type I and II examples (A and B) were sampled from the IHC
group, whereas the types III and IV examples (C and D) were selected from
the LVO subjects.

B.

Limitations and Future Work
Considering the remaining TIBI flow grades, the
lowest are not associated with sufficiently pulsatile CBFV
waveforms, and thus could not be represented in our data set.
Specifically, grade zero is defined as the absence of flow,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003236; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

5

whereas grade 1 (minimal flow) is so weakly pulsatile as to
give rise to nearly flat waveforms when averaged over
successive beats. In this study we required subjects to exhibit
bilateral pulsatile data to be included in analysis. This was
done to ensure that absence of temporal acoustic windows
would not be mistaken for absence of MCA flow. However,
future experimental protocols could be modified to require
TCD examination of all cerebral vessels in the anterior
circulation. Evidence of flow in any of these vessels in a given
hemisphere without corresponding evidence of adjacent MCA
flow would allow for confident assessment of absent or
minimal flow grades, likely bringing our current results further
into alignment with the TIBI scale.
The remaining TIBI grade 3 flow (Dampened), is not
solely morphologically defined, requiring comparison of
velocity magnitude relative to a control waveform for
assignment, and thus cannot clearly align with our clusters.
Future work could explore whether our clustering framework
might be extended for application to sets of waveforms,
including relative velocities as features, which might help
reconstruct these other TIBI categories.
From the 3-dimensional cluster space (figure 3A) it is
clear that adjacent cluster types II and IV share a fuzzy
boundary primarily determined by the peaks variable,
suggesting the two can be difficult to differentiate when
systolic peaks are not clear. Indeed, the type IV cluster had the
least homogenous group composition, with 40% of waveforms
originating from control subjects; a fact which would
negatively impact specificity were we to use these clusters
alone to classify LVO. Clearly, further work is needed to
determine whether additional or refined clustering features,
perhaps derived from waveform spectrograms and associated
Mmode, might help disambiguate these groups.

V.

CONCLUSIONS

To our knowledge, this study presents the first unsupervised
learning analysis of LVO pathology evident in the TCD
signal. We have shown that spectral clustering can readily
recover meaningful TCD flow types bearing clear relation to
known morphological categories. Moreover, the resultant
cluster archetypes provide definitive morphological templates,
enabling automated categorization of novel waveforms via
numerous potential comparative methods, the refinement of
which should provide fruitful avenues for future work.
Ultimately, we will explore whether such automated labels can
be combined with other established metrics, such as VCI and
velocity asymmetry, to improve LVO classification efficacy.

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]

REFEERENCES
[1]

[2]

Alexandrov AV, Sloan MA, Tegeler CH, Newell DN, Lumsden A,
Garami Z, et al. Views and Reviews Practice Standards for Transcranial
Doppler ( TCD ) Ultrasound . Part II . Clinical Indications and Expected
Outcomes. 2010; 215–224. doi:10.1111/j.1552-6569.2010.00523.x
Demchuk AM, Christou I, Wein TH, Felberg R a., Malkoff M, Grotta
JC, et al. Specific transcranial Doppler flow findings related to the

[18]
[19]
[20]

presence and site of arterial occlusion. Stroke. 2000;31: 140–146.
doi:10.1161/01.STR.31.1.140
Demchuk AM, Christou I, Wein TH, Felberg RA, Malkoff M, Grotta JC,
et al. Accuracy and Criteria for Localizing Arterial Occlusion With
Transcranial
Doppler.
J
Neuroimaging.
2000;10:
1–12.
doi:10.1111/jon20001011
Alexandrov AV, Demchuk AM, Burgin WS. Insonation method and
diagnostic flow signatures for transcranial power motion (M-mode)
Doppler. J Neuroimaging. 2002;12: 236–244. doi:10.1111/j.15526569.2002.tb00127.x
Sunghan Kim, Hamilton R, Pineles S, Bergsneider M, Xiao Hu.
Noninvasive
Intracranial
Hypertension
Detection
Utilizing
Semisupervised Learning. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering. 2013;60: 1126–1133. doi:10.1109/TBME.2012.2227477
Thibeault CM, Thorpe S, O’Brien MJ, Canac N, Ranjbaran M, Patanam
I, et al. A Cross-Sectional Study on Cerebral Hemodynamics After Mild
Traumatic Brain Injury in a Pediatric Population. Front Neurol.
frontiersin.org; 2018;9: 200. doi:10.3389/fneur.2018.00200
Saqqur M, Hill MD, Alexandrov AV, Roy J, Schebel M, Krol A, et al.
Derivation of power M-mode transcranial doppler criteria for
angiographic proven MCA occlusion. J Neuroimaging. 2006;16: 323–
328. doi:10.1111/j.1552-6569.2006.00055.x
Tsivgoulis G, Sharma VK, Lao AY, Malkoff MD, Alexandrov AV.
Validation of transcranial Doppler with computed tomography
angiography in acute cerebral ischemia. Stroke. 2007;38: 1245–1249.
doi:10.1161/01.STR.0000259712.64772.85
Brunser AM, Lavados PM, Hoppe A, Lopez J, Valenzuela M, Rivas R.
Accuracy of transcranial doppler compared with CT angiography in
diagnosing arterial obstructions in acute ischemic strokes. Stroke.
2009;40: 2037–2041. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.542704
Demchuk AM, Scott Burgin W, Christou I, Felberg RA, Barber PA, Hill
MD, et al. Thrombolysis in Brain Ischemia (TIBI) transcranial Doppler
flow grades predict clinical severity, early recovery, and mortality in
patients treated with intravenous tissue plasminogen activator. Stroke.
2001;32: 89–93.
Sloan MA, Alexandrov AV, Tegeler CH, Spencer MP, Caplan LR,
Feldmann E, et al. Assessment: transcranial Doppler ultrasonography:
report of the Therapeutics and Technology Assessment Subcommittee of
the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology. American Academy
of Neurology; 2004;62: 1468–1481. doi:10.1212/WNL.62.9.1468
Thorpe S, Thibeault C, Wilk S, O’Brien M, Canac N, Ranjbaran M, et
al. Velocity Curvature Index: A novel diagnostic biomarker for Large
Vessel Occlusion. Transl Stroke Res. Translational Stroke Research;
2018; doi:10.1007/s12975-018-0667-2
Thorpe S, Thibeault C, Canac N, Wilk S, Devlin T, Hamilton R.
Decision Criteria for Large Vessel Occlusion Using Transcranial
Doppler
Waveform
Morphology.
Front
Neurol.
2018;9.
doi:10.3389/fneur.2018.00847
Ng AY, Jordan MI, Weiss Y. On Spectral Clustering: Analysis and an
algorithm. In: Dietterich TG, Becker S, Ghahramani Z, editors.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 14. MIT Press;
2002. pp. 849–856. Available: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/2092-onspectral-clustering-analysis-and-an-algorithm.pdf
Bach FR, Jordan MI. Learning spectral clustering. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 16 (NIPS). 2004; 305–312.
doi:10.1057/palgrave.ivs.9500158
Canac N, Ranjbaran M, O’Brien M, Asgari S, Scalzo F, Thorpe S, et al.
Algorithm for Reliable Detection of Beat Onsets in Cerebral Blood Flow
Velocity Signals. bioRxiv. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory; 2018;
364356. doi:10.1101/364356
Jalaleddini K, Canac N, Thorpe SG, Delay B, Dorn AY, Scalzo F, et al.
Objective Assessment of Beat Quality in Transcranial Doppler
Measurement of Blood Flow Velocity in Cerebral Arteries [Internet].
bioRxiv. 2019. p. 554568. doi:10.1101/554568
Pedregosa F, Weiss R, Brucher M. Scikit-learn : Machine Learning in
Python. 2011;12: 2825–2830.
Tibshirani R, Walther G, Hastie T. Estimating the number of clusters in
a data set via the gap statistic. J R Stat Soc Series B Stat Methodol.
2001;63: 411–423. doi:10.1111/1467-9868.00293
Bathala L, Mehndiratta MM, Sharma VK. Transcranial doppler:
Technique and common findings (Part 1). Ann Indian Acad Neurol.
2013;16: 174–179. doi:10.4103/0972-2327.112460

