medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007955; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

PROBLEM BASED LEARNING APPLIED TO PRACTICE IN BRAZILIAN’S MEDICAL
SCHOOL: A MINI-SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
Frederico Alberto Bussolaro1 ; Claudine Thereza-Bussolaro2
1 Federal

University of Mato Grosso, Brazil
2 University of Alberta, Canada
ABSTRACT
Background
Active learning is a well-established educational methodology in medical school worldwide.
Although its implementation in Brazilian clinical settings is quite challenging. The objective of
this study is to review the literature in a systematic manner to find and conduct a reflective
analysis of how PBL has been applied in clinical teaching in Brazilian medicine schools.
Material & methods
A systematic literature search was conducted in three databases. A total of 250 papers related
to PBL in Brazilian medical school were identified thought the databases search. Four studies
were finally selected for the review.
Results
Four fields of medicine were explored on the four selected papers: gynecology/family medicine,
medical semiology, psychiatry, and pediatrics. Overall, all the papers reported some level of
strategic adaptability of the original PBL methodology to better applied in the Brazilian medical
school’s curricula and country peculiar characteristics.
Conclusion
PBL application in Brazilian medical school suffers some level of alteration from the original
format, to better adapted to the peculiarities of Brazilian students maturity, health system
priorities and medical labor market.

KEYWORDS:
Active learning, problem-based learning, medical education, student-centered

INTRODUCTION
Problem Based learning, a constructivist method, was introduced to the medical
curriculum in 1969 (1) to help students become effective solvers od biomedical problems and
to foster attitudes leading to behavior as responsible physicians and scientists in their relation
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

to patients.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007955; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

The constructivism view of learning has evolved since the primordia of its concept in
1960. The need for a more critical humanist, reflexive ethical health-related professionals,
urged the tendency to "active" methods. The concept of an active methodology is that the
student must be active during its learning process, meaning that books, slides, online
presentations, and lectures are considered passive and non-constructivist venues of teaching.
Whereas, interactive games, hands-on, and group discussion are classified as constructivist. I.e.
Active venues. A systematic review(2) analyzed the effects of PBL in the future physician and
conclude that PBL during medical school has a positive effect on physician competency.
Active learning, emphasize that knowledge cannot be transmitted but it need to be
constructed.(3) The active methodology is world well spread by discovery-based learning
methodology (DBL). The DBL is a keen methodology both in students and professors
opinions.(2) DBL is a constructivist based approach in education, a “learn by doing” method in
which student is provided with materials to find the answer.
Challenge in medicine is related to patient safety concern, operating room efficiency,
and duty hour restrictions (3). The traditional apprentice-ship-style “see one, do one, teach one”
is significant disadvantageous, in the nowadays pressure academic environment where research
productivity, and clinical and operating room efficiency are prioritized over teaching time.(4)
Similarly challenging, PBL has a rigorous and highly structured practical teachinglearning process in which the student learn while trying to understanding or solving a
problem.(5) PBL is structured in “problem, solution, practice, research, questioning, realism,
originality and integration”(6), therefore its implementation in clinical settings requires more
time, cost and training of teachers, and is affected not only by the educational aspects but for
the unique priorities of health care environments as well.(7, 8)
Brazilian programs curricula abide the 2001 national guidelines for medical courses of
the ministry of education. The guideline requires that 35% of the total workload of medical
curricula is dedicated to clerkship during the last 2 years. Additionally, the guidelines requires
that students be exposed to patients of different levels of clinical complexity, difficulty, and
assistance. Therefore, the guideline strongly encourages the use of PBL and suggests that
students see patients early on in the medical program.(9)
PBL methodology has been introduced to Brazilian medical school since 1997.(10) This
study aims to review the literature in a systematic manner to find and conduct a reflective
analysis about how PBL has been applied in clinical teaching in Brazilian medicine schools.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007955; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

This is a study based on the mini-systematic literature review on PBL methodology
adopted in Brazilian’s medical school.
Protocol and registration
This review followed as much as possible the preferred reporting items for systematic
review and meta-analyses(PRISMA). We did not register the protocol of this review.
Eligibility Criteria
The identification of the studies was based on the research question: what field of
medicine has been applying PBL methodology in medical schools located in Brazil?
Inclusion criteria
This review included retrospectives and prospective studies concerning active learning,
specifically PBL methodology adopted in medical schools in Brazil
Exclusion criteria
Review articles, and articles in which the methodology was applied to other field than
medicine. Articles that did not present information related to the clinical applicability of the
PBL methodology were excluded.
Search strategy
Electronic databases searched were bireme, Medline and psycINFO
The search approach was developed through consultation with medical professors and
reviewing articles related to the topic. Appropriated keyword, truncation and word
combinations were adapted.
Data search
Three databases were searched Lilacs, PsycInfo and Medline, plus a manual search were
conducted on the reference list of included articles. Literature search was conducted in July 2 nd
2019 on the words “PBL” OR “Problem based learning” AND “Brazil*” AND “medical
school” OR “medicine”. For the Lilacs search the words in Portuguese were added. A total of
250 papers were found as follow: LILACS: 113 papers; PSycInfo: 84 papers; Medline: 53
papers.
After duplicates removal a total of 238 were screened by title and abstract. Finally a
number of four met our eligibility criteria. A Flowchart of the selection can be seen in figure 1.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007955; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Figure 1 Flowchart of the review

Study selection and Eligibility
All abstracts identifies during the database search were screened through by two
independent reviewers (F.A.B. and C.T.B). Potentially relevant abstracts were then selected for
full article independent evaluation by the same two reviewers. Any selection discrepancy was
solved through discussion between the two reviewers.
Strategy for data extraction and selection

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007955; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

The main outcome was applicability of PBL as teaching methodology within the clinical
setting in medicine. The organization of the results was based on the medicine clinical field.

RESULTS
A total of 250 papers were found after applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria 4 papers (1013) were definitely selected for this review. A table 1 shows the summary of findings.
Table 1 Literature Review summary of Findings
Author

Year

State(Brazil)

Field of application

Paulin & Poças

2009

São Paulo

Psychiatric

Mello Prado et al

Students (n)
80

years

Integrated practice

5

yes

experience report

Objective

2011

Pernambuco

Paediatric

yes

compare educational effectiveness of ward rounds conducted wit two different methodologies

Bestetti et al

2014

São Paulo

ginecology,internal medicine,
family physitian

N/R

5th year (8-10 semester)

yes

experience report

Dias-Lima et al

2019

Bahia

medical Semiology

N/R

2and 3rd semester

yes

experience report

72

5

n, number; NR, Not reported;

Fields of application
4 fields of medicine were explored on the selected papers: gynecology/family medicine,
medical semiology, psychiatry and pediatrics.
Gynecology and family medicine: the authors believe PBL is a worthwhile approach
to teaching Brazilian medical students. (11) reported a coordinate mix (tutoring, medical skills
and primary care) in which students are submitted to clinical and lab after the tutorial part of
PBL at the end of the process, students are submitted to 124 patient’s health problems.
Aggression and Defense Mechanism(Medical Semiology): the author Dias-Lima et al.
(12), observed a positive impact in student training and interest in the subject taught.
Psychiatry: Paulin & Poças (10) an experience report about the implementation of PBL
methodology to a psychiatry internship. The authors noticed improvement on the students’
knowledge regarding psychiatry. Another observation was proper patient referral from former
students who had been taught under the same methodology.
Paediatric Clinical teaching- ward round. The traditional methodology the students
participate as mere onlookers, differently in the active methodology. As example we found
Prado et al. (13) in which the active methodology was compared to traditional methodology as
follow:

DISCUSSION
During our mini-systematic review, four studies reported the use of PBL methodology
in the Brazilian Medical schools (10-13), in hospital, internships, and simulation labs.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007955; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

It should be explained that PBL was introduced in Canada in an undergrad curriculum
of three years rather than the traditionally four years.(1) The traditional four-year program has
4 weeks of break in summer time, while the three years PBL curriculum has only one month,
therefore students have 112 weeks of academic activity plus 12 weeks of elective time as seen
in figure 2. PBL has four phases:
•

the first phase lasts 14 weeks and is dedicated to normal structure and function;

•

the second phase has six weeks and is dedicated to abnormal biological
mechanisms;

•

Phase three has 40 weeks and is dedicated to abnormal structure and function;

•

Phase IV is dedicated to the clerkships in four interchangeable blocks of: family
medicine practice, surgery and psychiatry, pediatrics, and obstetrics and
gynecology.

Through Phase I to Phase III students have also a horizontal program (one hour per day)
dedicated to problems related to professional attitudes and ethics, abnormal behavior,
biomedical statistics, epidemiology, and rehabilitation medicine. Furthermore, students have
two six-week periods of elective experiences arranged by faculty members, and before entering
the clerkship students have a week of clinical skills in history taking, examination, and planning
of further investigation and treatment.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007955; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Figure 2 Outline of the three years undergrad medical curriculum proposed by McMaster
University, including six weeks of elective time ( retrieved from Spaulding, 1969, page 660)
(1)

Additionally, It should be stressed that the requirements for a student to be admitted to
medical schools are different between Canada and Brazil. In Canada, the PBL program was
proposed for students who already had at least three years of a background in behavioral
science, biochemistry, and cell biology, students should have preferably completed a degree
program. In Brazil, the requirement is to pass in an exam which evaluates student knowledge
in four areas (languages, codes and related technologies) or various subjects as Portuguese,
History, Geography, Maths, Physics, Chemistry and Biology and a written essay. Therefore the
maturity and the academic background is different between students in the first year of medical
school factors that can compromise the success of PBL in Brazilian Medical School.
The student’s maturity issue among Brazilian students, has been observed. Accordingly
(11), Brazilian medical students lack maturity and confidence to excel in a PBL approach,
leading them to be anxious and insecure about their short-term learning in the context of a PBL
methodology.(11)
Nonetheless, Brazilian medical school curriculum has been linked wherever possible
the PBL methodology. Besteti et al. (11) relate the importance of cultural and structural context
in implementing PBL in Brazilian medical school. In Brazil, the implementation of PBL
methodology is said to be affected by the medical labor market, the health system, and not only
by the educational aspect.(11)
Factors as time constraints, clinical flow, diversity of clinical problem impact teaching
conditions.(8) Barrows, 1986 stated that PBL method requires more time, cost, and efforts for
teacher compared to the lecture-based method. Accordingly, an effective PBL method requires
a quality of tutorial skills, meaning that the teacher or tutor has to guide the students to consider
all the steps in the reasoning of the problem, if this fails, the objectives of the PBL are
compromised.(14) Another issue that can compromise the use of PBL in clinical teaching
setting is that clinical teachers are always engaged in a dual process: clinical reasoning to care
for patients, and educational reasoning to teach patients.(8)
Couto LB et al.(15), analyze Brazilian medical students perceptions of subject-matter
expertise among PBL facilitators, and they conclude that PBL facilitator experts in the topic
are essential to the learning process. Similarly, in Canada -the birth-place of PBL- studies (1618) have shown that for the success of the PBL methodology, professor should be able to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007955; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

facilitate groups and be knowledgeable about the content effectively, and at the same time
students need to be willing to participate in peer teaching and be supportive of the group leaning
process. The health problems professors would have expertise in the field.(16-18)
The medical school initial proposed PBL curriculum program at McMaster University
has also suffered adaptations since its first implementation over 30 years ago. They maintained
the philosophy but changed the curriculum in 2005, implementing the COMPASS (Conceptoriented, multidisciplinary, problem-based, practice for transfer, simulations in clerkship,
streaming). The major adaptations were in student evaluation, the role of the tutor, and the
number and purpose of educational sessions.(17) Figure 3 shows the outline of the three-year
COMPASS undergrad curriculum currently in place at McMaster University.

Figure 3 Outline of the three-year COMPAS undergraduate MD curriculum retrieved from
Neville & Norman, page 373(17)

In our review, we found that Bestetti (11) also related the importance of subject-matter
expertise tutor to minimize time preparation and maximize students confidence. Additionally,
they invest in courses and preparation of tutors, within the practice and theoretical content, in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007955; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

the PBL methodology to overcome the because most teachers in Brazil are more familiar with
the traditional lecture-based methodology instead of the student-center approach.
Dias-Lima, 2019,(12) reported a positive impact of in the student training part of their
program. Although, their program has adapted the PBL method with ludic materials to
integrating the apprenticeship of disciplines like microbiology, parasitology, immunology, and
pathology in a clinical context. The drawback of the study is the absence of inclusion of patients
in the discipline taught; they used video to simulate a clinical environment.
Similarly, Lucchetti et al. (2019)(19), describe the experience of active methodology,
including simulation, to teach geriatrics and observed improvement in medical students
knowledge, attitudes, and skills. Geriatrics is a very challenge area to teach in comparison to
other areas where the presence of technology and procedures turns them into more attractive
areas for students. Although the paper addressed the use of active methodology, it did not
specify the use of PBL; therefore, it was excluded from our analyses.
In the pediatric field (13), researchers selected six patients from the emergency room
three patients diagnosed with diarrhea and three with pneumonia. Seventy-two students were
submitted to a test prior to access the patients, after that students participate in the academic
round ward conducted by a staff member previously trained in both methodologies, TM
(traditional method) and AM (active methodology). Lastly, students were submitted to a second
cognitive test 48 hours after the ward wound. The authors concluded that AM showed better
results on students' knowledge acquisition perception.
In Brazil, learning in the internship phase is made with hospitalized patients in hospital
beds, basic units, specialized outpatient clinics, or emergency rooms. These situations usually
require immediate care to the patient in the hospital, which limit studies and tutorial discussions.
To eliminate or even clear some of the limitations, Paulin's studies(10) and Prado(13),
demonstrated adaptations/models of hospital and outpatient care focused on learning with PBL,
situations that need adaptations/modifications in the healthcare system that assists patients,
allow the creation of moments for studies and discussion of cases without impairing the care of
the patients, who needs immediate response. Both teachers and students need to adapt, either
with a greater sense of responsibility in preparing with studies prior to care, aiming to reduce
insecurities. Students increase the dedication to practices in laboratories/semiology activities;
teachers widen the search to bring tools that allow students motivation. Teachers need to
prepare and understand the new profile of these students, who are more questioning, due to the
broad access to information by the internet, and from varied sources, not always scientific.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007955; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

PBL in medical education has been presented, for the most part of studies as a prospect
of improving the skills of physicians trained by this active methodology, although these studies
have not shown a convincing improvement in the knowledge and performance gains of trained
medical professionals using this methodology, compared to the traditional methods used in
most Brazilian medical schools, until the end of the last century.

CONCLUSION
PBL application in Brazilian medical school suffers some level of alteration from the
original format, to better adapted to the peculiarities of Brazilian students maturity, health
system priorities, and medical labor market.
In Brazil, more studies in PBL methodology need to be conducted to evaluate the
student knowledge acquisition through active learning methodology.

Reference List
1.
Spaulding W. The undergraduate medical curriculum (1969 model): McMaster
university. Canadian Medical Association Journal. 1969;100(14):659.
2.
Koh GC-H, Khoo HE, Wong ML, Koh D. The effects of problem-based learning during
medical school on physician competency: a systematic review. Cmaj. 2008;178(1):34-41.
3.
Luc JG, Antonoff MB. Active learning in medical education: Application to the training
of surgeons. Journal of medical education and curricular development. 2016;3:JMECD.
S18929.
4.
Graffam B. Active learning in medical education: Strategies for beginning
implementation. [References]: Medical Teacher. Vol.29(1), 2007, pp. 38-42.; 2007.
5.
Barrows HS, Tamblyn RM. Problem-based learning: An approach to medical education:
Springer Publishing Company; 1980.
6.
Tandogan RO, Orhan A. The Effects of Problem-Based Active Learning in Science
Education on Students' Academic Achievement, Attitude and Concept Learning. Online
Submission. 2007;3(1):71-81.
7.
Schmidt HG, Rotgans JI, Yew EHJ. The process of problem-based learning: What
works and why. [References]: Medical Education. Vol.45(8), 2011, pp. 792-806.; 2011.
8.
Audetat M-C, Laurin S, Sanche G, Beique C, Fon NC, Blais J-G, et al. Clinical
reasoning difficulties: A taxonomy for clinical teachers. [References]: Medical Teacher.
Vol.35(3), 2013, pp. e984-e989.; 2013.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007955; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

9.
Bestetti RB, Couto LB, Restini CB, Faria M, Jr., Romao GS. Assessment test before the
reporting phase of tutorial session in problem-based learning. Advances in Medical Education
& Practice. 2017;8:181-7.
10.
Paulin LFRdS, Pocas RCG. The experience of Universidade Sao Francisco with the
medical internship in psychiatry using the problem-based learning method. [Portuguese].
[References]: Trends in Psychiatry and Psychotherapy. Vol.31(1), 2009, pp. 67-72.; 2009.
11.
Bestetti RB, Couto LB, Romão GS, Araújo GT, Restini CBA. Contextual considerations
in implementing problem-based learning approaches in a Brazilian medical curriculum: the
UNAERP experience. Med Educ Online. 2014;19:24366-.
12.
Dias-Lima A, Silva MdC, Ribeiro LCV, Bendicho MT, Guedes HTV, Lemaire DC.
Avaliação, Ensinagem e Metodologias Ativas: uma Experiência Vivenciada no Componente
Curricular Mecanismos de Agressão e de Defesa, no curso de Medicina da Universidade do
Estado da Bahia, Brasil. Rev bras educ méd. 2019;43(2):216-24.
13.
Melo Prado H, Hannois Falbo G, Falbo AR, Figueiroa JN. Active learning on the ward:
Outcomes from a comparative trial with traditional methods. [References]: Medical Education.
Vol.45(3), 2011, pp. 273-279.; 2011.
14.
Barrows HS. A taxonomy of problem‐based learning methods. Medical education.
1986;20(6):481-6.
15.
Couto LB, Bestetti RB, Restini CB, Faria M, Jr., Romao GS. Brazilian medical students'
perceptions of expert versus non-expert facilitators in a (non) problem-based learning
environment. Medical Education Online. 2015;20(26893).
16.
Cunningham CE, Deal K, Neville A, Rimas H, Lohfeld L. Modeling the problem-based
learning preferences of McMaster University undergraduate medical students using a discrete
choice conjoint experiment. Advances in Health Sciences Education. 2006;11(3):245-66.
17.
Neville AJ, Norman GR. PBL in the undergraduate MD program at McMaster
University: three iterations in three decades. Academic Medicine. 2007;82(4):370-4.
18.
Lohfeld L, Neville A, Norman G. PBL in undergraduate medical education: a qualitative
study of the views of Canadian residents. Advances in Health Sciences Education.
2005;10(3):189-214.
19.
Lucchetti AL, Duarte BS, de Assis TV, Laurindo BO, Lucchetti G. Is it possible to teach
Geriatric Medicine in a stimulating way? Measuring the effect of active learning activities in
Brazilian medical students. Australasian journal on ageing. 2019.

