medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Olanzapine for the Prevention and Treatment of
Nausea and Vomiting Induced by Chemotherapy for
Lung Cancer: protocol for a multicenter, double-blind
and randomized controlled trial

Running title: THE EFFICACY AND SAFETY OF
OLANZAPINE FOR CINV
#*

Jian-Guo Zhou , Pei-Jie Li#, Su-Han Jin, Da-Hai Liu, Ming-Ze Cao, Yu Zou, Hu Ma*
Authors:
1.Jian-Guo Zhou: Department of Oncology, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical
University, Zunyi, China; E-mail: jianguo.zhou@yahoo.com
2.Pei-Jie Li: Department of Oncology, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical
University, Zunyi, China; E-mail: 503186082@qq.com
3.Su-Han Jin: Department of Orthodontics, Affiliated Stemmatological Hospital of
Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, China; E-mail: doctorjin1991@163.com
4.Lang Huang: Department of Orthodontics, Affiliated Stemmatological Hospital of
Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, China; E-mail: Lang_huang10@163.com
5.Da-Hai Liu: Department of Oncology, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical
University, Zunyi, China; E-mail: liudahai418@163.com
6.Ming-Ze Cao: School of Medicine and Science, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi,
China; E-mail: 1329212297@qq.com
7.Yu Zou: School of Public Health, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University,
Zunyi, China; E-mail: 1911425499@qq.com
8.Hu Ma: Department of Oncology, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University,
Zunyi, China; E-mail: mahuab@163.com
Jian-Guo Zhou and Pei-Jie Li contributed equally to this work.

Correspondence to: Jian-Guo Zhou MD, Department of Oncology, Affiliated Hospital
of Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, China, NO.149, Dalian Road, Zunyi 563000,
China.
Tel:
+86-0851-28609038;
Fax:
+86-0851-28609095;
Email:
jianguo.zhou@yahoo.com. Hu Ma MD PhD, Department of Oncology, Affiliated
Hospital of Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, China, NO.149, Dalian Road, Zunyi
563000, China. Tel: +86-0851-28609038; Fax: +86-0851-28609095; Email: l:
mahuab@163.com.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Background: Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) is frequently
observed after the administration of chemotherapy and significantly influences the
quality of life (QoL) of patients. Olanzapine has a high control rate of CINV in
patients with cancer when combined with the NK-1 receptor antagonist
dexamethasone and 5- hydroxytryptamine (5-HT3) receptor antagonists. The efficacy
of a regimen without an NK-1 receptor antagonist remains unknown. Therefore, we
designed this randomized trial to provide evidence for the management of CINV.
Methods and ananlysis: This is a double-blind, multicenter and randomized controlled
trial. Patients with histologically confirmed lung cancer will be assessed by physicians
based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria, and 156 participants will be enrolled and
randomized to a placebo group or experiment group to receive treatment for CINV.
The primary endpoint is the incidence of delayed CINV. The secondary endpoints are
complete response (CR) of acute CINV, CR of delayed CINV, effective control rate
(ECR) of CINV and QoL. During the six days after administration, these endpoints
will be evaluated and recorded by physicians.
Ethic and dissemination: This study has received approval from the institutional
ethical review board of the Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University (ref
approval No. 58). Written informed consent will be signed by all participants prior to
enrolling. Participants will be randomly assigned to the experimental group or
comparator group by blocked randomization.
Trial Registration: This study has been registered on www.clinicaltrials.gov. ID:
NCT03571126.
Protocol version: 28 March 2019. Version 1.3
Keywords: chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting; olanzapine; lung cancer.

Article summary
Strengths and limitations
This study will provide evidence for physicians to find an affordable and effective
treatment regimen for CINV through this study.
Because of the variety of pharmaceutical companies, medical care and other
factors, problem of cost will be further explored in the following studies.
Although the study is designed as a double-blind randomized controlled trial,
QoL will be measured by a questionnaire that is filled out by patients themselves.
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

This may influence the conclusions.

Background
Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) is frequently observed in the
treatment of cancer, and influences the quality of life (QoL) of patients and their
adherence to treatment. CINV also leads to dehydration, malnutrition and other
adverse events[1,2]. Therefore, the prevention and relief of CINV are indispensable to
ensure the conduction of chemotherapy. The mechanism of CINV remains unknown,
and most studies have shown that CINV is mainly related to the following aspects.
First, chemotherapeutic agents stimulate the gastrointestinal tract, which induces the
release of neurotransmitters by chromaffin cells. The neurotransmitters bind to their
corresponding receptors, which then results in vomiting by stimulating the vomiting
center. Second, Chemotherapeutic agents and their metabolites directly activate
chemoreceptor. Third, mental factors directly irritate the cerebral cortex pathway[3].
The major neurotransmitters that lead to vomiting include dopamine (DA), histamine,
5- hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), and substance P[4-6]. Studies have demonstrated that
5-HT is related to acute CINV. Thus, 5-HT3 receptor antagonists, such as granisetron,
could be an effective medicine for CINV. Geling and colleagues declared that a
5-HT3 receptor antagonist was effective for acute CINV but had little efficacy in
preventing delayed emesis[7-8]. In addition, studies have indicated that the NK-1
receptor antagonist aprepitant is a potent agent in relieving CINV. Four phase 3 trials
indicated that aprepitant had a significantly higher control rate of CINV in patients
with cancer than standard antiemetic therapy, which made aprepitant indispensable in
the management of emetogenic chemotherapy[9-13]. Thus, correlative guidelines
recommend regimens with a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, NK-1 receptor antagonist and
glucocorticoid as the standard treatment for strongly emetic chemotherapy regimens[8].
However, the prevention of nausea and vomiting caused by moderately emetic
chemotherapy regimens remains a problem in clinical practice.
Olanzapine inhibits several neurotransmitters that cause CINV, which is why this
medicine is effective for both acute and delayed CINV[14]. Olanzapine is widely used
in the treatment of mental disorders. Thus, this drug can alleviate anxiety, improve
sleep quality and relieve pain from opioid therapy in patients with cancer[15]. The
usual adverse effects of olanzapine are lethargy, weight gain, fatigue, constipation,
hyperlipidemia and hyperglycemia. The most common adverse effect is lethargy,
which can oppose the insomnia and excitation caused by dexamethasone[16]. In
summary, olanzapine is a potent agent to control CINV with mild adverse effects, and
the use of olanzapine is worth generalizing. However, there are problems to need to
be solved in the application of olanzapine for CINV. Aprepitant, which is included in
the recommended treatment method of CINV, is expensive. This limits its application
in patients. Additionally, no clinical trial has been designed to prove the efficacy of
olanzapine in antiemetic therapy when it is not in combination with an NK-1 receptor
antagonist.
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Because of these reasons, we intend to compare the regimens with olanzapine (or a
placebo), dexamethasone and 5-HT3 receptor antagonists in terms of efficacy and
adverse events during the treatment of CINV. We aim to provide an available
therapeutic option for CINV in patients with cancer to improve their QoL.

Methods
Study design
This study is a multicenter, double-blind and randomized controlled trial. Olanzapine
will be compared with a placebo (both are combined with dexamethasone and 5-HT3
receptor antagonists) to determine if olanzapine is an effective and safe choice for
patients suffering from CINV. We plan to include patients with lung cancer regardless
of their histopathologic types and sex, and a subgroup analysis will be conducted later
to estimate whether these differences influence the efficacy of olanzapine. A total of
156 subjects will be randomized into two groups (experimental group or comparator
group). This study will be conducted in the Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical
University, Zunyi, China; Sichuan Cancer Hospital and Research Institute, Chengdu,
China; Affiliated Hospital of North Sichuan Medical College, Nanchong, China; First
People's Hospital of Zunyi, Zunyi, China; Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical
University, Luzhou, China; and Guizhou Provincial People’s Hospital, Guiyang,
China. The procedures of this study are shown in Fig. 1.

Inclusion criteria
(1) Patients aged 18 to 70 years, male or female.
(2) Patients with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance
status ≤ 2 or Karnofsky performance status (KPS) scores ≥ 60.
(3) Patients with cytologically or histologically confirmed lung cancer (including
adenocarcinoma, squamous carcinoma, small-cell lung cancer and other types of lung
cancers).
(4) Patients who agree to receive chemotherapy and who can tolerate at least 2 cycles
of chemotherapy (no matter how many cycles of chemotherapy the patient previously
received).
(5) Chemotherapy regimens recommended by the clinical practice guidelines
(National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines and Chinese Society of Clinical
Oncology guidelines of lung cancer). Specific treatments include cisplatin or
carboplatin (AUC≥4) plus pemetrexed, cisplatin or carboplatin (AUC≥4) plus
docetaxel, cisplatin or carboplatin (AUC≥4) plus paclitaxel and cisplatin or
carboplatin (AUC≥4) plus etoposide. Specific dosages will be calculated according to
the body surface area of the participants. The dosage of cisplatin can be divided over
three days for administration. The duration of highly emetic therapy should be less
than or equal to three days.
(6) Patients with adequate organ function including the following: Adequate bone
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

marrow reserve: white blood cell (WBC) count higher than or equal to 2.0 X109/L ,
absolute neutrophil count (ANC) superior or equal to 1.5 X109/L, platelets higher than
superior or equal to 80 X 109/L, and hemoglobin higher than or equal to 90g/L.
Hepatic parameters: bilirubin <1.5 times the upper limit of normal (ULN) and
aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) ≤2.5xULN (or
<5xULN with liver metastases); and Renal parameters: Serum creatinine≤1×ULN,
calculated creatinine clearance (CrCl) higher than or equal to 50mL/min based on the
standard Cockroft and Gault formula.
(7) There should be at least 3 weeks from the end of last chemotherapy.
(8) Women of reproductive years who are willing to avoid pregnancy with the
appropriate methods during the study and 8 weeks after the last administration. A
pregnancy test before beginning the administration will be conducted when necessary,
and the results need to be negative.
(9) Participants who are willing to join this study and sign the informed consent form.

Exclusion criteria
Patients with any one of these following criteria will be excluded:
(1) Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
(2) Patients who need to receive radiotherapy during this trial.
(3) Patients with an obstruction of the gastrointestinal tract.
(4) Patients with severe heart, renal or liver disease.
(5) Patients with metabolic abnormalities.
(6) Patients with epilepsy or who are using sedatives.
(7) Patients who have received an with antiemetic less than 24 hours before
chemotherapy or those who have suffered from vomiting before chemotherapy.
(8) Patients with brain metastases (intracranial hypertension may cause vomiting).
(9) Patients with contraindications to chemotherapy.
(10) Patients who have an allergic reaction to treatment in this study.
(11) Patients who are participating in another clinical trial or who have participated in
a study less than 2 weeks prior.
(12) Patients who are considered unsuitable to be included by the treating physicians.

Patient and public involvement
There will be two groups in this study (experimental group and comparator group).
All participants will received dexamethasone (10 mg/d, from the first day to the third
day) plus tropisetron (4 mg/d, from the first day to the third day).The patients in the
comparator group will receive a placebo. The patients in the experimental group will
receive olanzapine (10 mg/d). Placebo and olanzapine will be given from the first day
to the fourth day. Both of them have the same packaging, and their quality has been
tested by Jiangsu Hansoh Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd according to China’s State Food
and Drug Administration standards YBH05472018 (No.FC190082). The intervention
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

will provide for only one cycle. The time schedule of the enrollment, interventions
and assessments of this study is shown in Table 2. First of all, patients will be
informed by researchers or physicians about the research questions and the outcome
measurements. An informed consent will be signed by all participants prior to
enrolling. Participants will be randomly assigned (1:1) to the experimental group or
comparator group by blocked randomization, and this procedure will be stratified by
center. We will use the “Statistical Product and Service Solutions” (SPSS) software to
generate the random number table. Each center will designate a specific staff member
who is responsible for the storage, distribution, recording and recycling of the
medicine. All bags which contain Olanzapine or placebo will be numbered from 1 to
156 according to the random number table. And patients will then finished their own
questionnaires to evaluated the QoL. Patients and physicians will not be aware of
which strategy is selected. Researchers are not blinded to the randomization, so they
are responsible for measuring the outcomes and analyzing the data. The results of
study will disseminate to participants by researchers through phone or e-mail after
publishing.

Outcome measures
Primary endpoint
Incidence of delayed CINV (CINV that occurred from 24 hours to 120 hours after
chemotherapy).

Secondary endpoint
Complete response (CR) of acute CINV, CR of delayed CINV, effective control rate
(ECR) (CR plus partial response), and QoL.
Because of the difficulty to include enough participants who did not receive
chemotherapy before, all assessments are conducted after any cycle of chemotherapy.
In terms of the influence of cycles of chemotherapy on the frequency of events, we
will conduct subgroup to elucidate this problem.

QoL assessment
The QoL of the participants will be measured by the European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire-Lung Cancer 13
(EORTC QLQ-LC13) scale, the European Organization for Research and Treatment
of Cancer Quality of Life (EORTC QLQ-LC30) scale and the Functional Assessment
of Cancer Therapy-Lung cancer (FACT-L) scale [17-19]. The EROTC QLQ-LC13 and
EORTC QLQ-LC30 scales comprise several symptoms measured by scores ranging
from 1 to 7; the higher the symptoms are scored, the worse the QoL is. The FACT-L
scale is a combination of the 27-item FACT-General (FACT-G) scale and the 9-item
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lung Cancer Subscale (LCS) and measures multidimensional quality of life. The
higher the score obtained, the better the QoL is. The use of all scales has been
authorized.

Safety evaluation
The safety of olanzapine will be assessed by the following aspects: vital sign
measurements, routine blood examinations, liver and renal function tests,
electrocardiographs and the occurrence of relevant adverse events (AEs). AEs are
unintended situations that occur after the use of experimental therapy, and not all of
AEs result from treatment. AEs are divided into mild (treatment is usually not needed),
moderate (moderate damage to the body) and severe AEs (severe damage to the body
and is life-threatening) according to symptoms of the participants and degree of injury
to the organs caused by the drugs. Investigators will also evaluate the degree of
relevance between the AEs and the experimental therapy. The time of appearance,
severity level, duration, relevant treatment measurements and outcomes of the AEs
will be recorded by the researchers. A serious adverse event (SAE) is an adverse
reaction that meets one of the following criteria: 1) causes death; 2) causes a high risk
of death; 3) results in hospitalization or a longer hospital stay; 4) leads to permanent
or severe disability. When AEs are observed in the participants, investigators can
terminate the treatment according to the severity of the AEs and give corresponding
therapy.

Statistical methods
We will use SPSS software to conduct statistical analysis. The actual number of
participants, the number of participants lost, the number of excluded cases, basic
characteristics, patient compliance and efficacy rates and safety of olanzapine will be
analyzed. Mean± standard deviation will be used to describe quantitative data that are
normally distributed. The interquartile range (IQR) will be used to describe
quantitative data that are not normally distributed. We will use the t-test or Wilcoxon
rank-sum test to analyze quantitative data. The chi-square test will be used to analyze
the count data. A P value of less than 0.05 woll be regarded as statistically significant.
All the data in this study are based on the Electronic Data Capture (EDC) system, and
the system is developed and supported by Jiangsu famisheng medical Co. Ltd. The
data administrator will establish an electronic medical record report (eCRF) and is
responsible for the confirmation from the monitor, applicant and principal
investigators. The system administrators are responsible for the confirmation from the
data administrators.

Sample size
The determination of sample size refers to the schemes and results of studies
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

conducted by Navari

[20]

.

Studies have shown that the incidence of delayed CINV in

patients who receive olanzapine plus standard treatment is 68-83% and in patients
who only received standard treatment is 23-58%. Therefore, we chose 68% for the
experimental group and 40% for the comparator group. We chose 0.05 as the type I
error rate, and the type II rate was 0.0997 by calculation. With the use of PASS 11.0,
each group needs 62 participants. We estimate that 20% of the participants will
withdraw from the study or be lost to follow-up and thus, each group needs 78
participants.

Data monitoring
Investigators and physicians will strictly follow the study protocol, and all procedures
will be standard and professional. There is minimal risk of harm with olanzapine for
the treatment of CINV according to the reported study, and all the adverse events
caused by olanzapine will be evaluated as secondary outcomes. Therefore, a Data
Monitoring Committee (DMC) is not needed.

DISCUSSION
Patients with lung cancer have sufferd from CINV for decades, which influences their
QoL to a large extent. Clinical trials have demonstrated that aprepitant has a
significantly higher control rate of CINV in patients with cancer compared with
standard antiemetic therapy[9-13]. Regimens with a 5-HT3 receptor, NK-1 receptor
antagonist and glucocorticoid have been recommended for CINV in the clinical
guidelines. However, in China, the NK-1 receptor antagonist aprepitant is not covered
in medical care, and many patients cannot afford this medicine.
Olanzapine is efficient in the treatment of CINV according to several clinical studies,
although this drug mainly used in therapy for mental disorders[18-20]. A systematic
review elucidated that olanzapine regimens achieved a higher complete response in
the overall and delayed phases than traditional antiemetic drugs[21]. Since there are no
large clinical trials that explicitly investigate the efficacy and safety of olanzapine not
in combination with NK-1 receptor antagonists in CINV, guidelines in China do not
recommend olanzapine to alleviate nausea and vomiting. Furthermore, 5-HT3
receptor antagonists were administered by intravenous injection (iv), while in our
study, the drugs were administered by intravenously guttae (ivgtt). Dexamethasone
was used by orally in most studies, but in our study, the drug was administered
ivgtt[20-22]. Therefore, participants will stay in the hospital during this study, which
allows for the evaluation to be highly detailed and correct. We hope to find an
affordable and effective treatment regimen for CINV through this study.
Because of the variety of pharmaceutical companies, medical care and other factors,
we will not discuss the problem of cost in this study. Data will be collected, and this
problem will be further explored in the following studies. Although the study is
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

designed as a double-blind randomized controlled trial, QoL will be measured by a
questionnaire that is filled out by patients themselves. This may influence the
conclusions of this study.

Trial Status
This study has been registered on www.clinicaltrials.gov (ID: NCT03571126), and
recruitment is expected to begin in June, 2019.

Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
This study has received approval from the institutional ethical review board of the
Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University (ref approval No. 58) and we will not
begin recruiting at subcenters in the trial until local ethical approval has been obtained.
Subjects will obtain compensation if SAE occurs. The details are listed in the policy
schedule drafted by Asia-Pacific Property & Casualty Insurance Co., Ltd
(NO.06020400000912362019000024).
Written informed consent (see Additional file 1) will be signed by all participants
prior to enrolling, PI or clinical researchers will inform participants about the
procedures of this study, what regimen will be administrated and so on. Patients will
have enough time to considerate whether they are willing to join this trial. The
patients will receive a copy of this form. Withdrawal from the study is allowed at any
time if the patient is unwilling to continue the trial. After withdrawal of the study, data
from these patients will not be included in the data analysis.

Availability of data and material
All of these study data are available upon reasonable request and can be obtained by
contacting with the corresponding author.

Competing interests
Authors contributed to this protocol declare no competing interests.

Funding
This trial is conducted with no external funding and is instead funded from the Qian
Ke He (2019) 4440 and the Special Fund for Traditional Chinese Medicine and Ethnic
Medicine supported by the Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine of
Guizhou Province (grant QZYY2017–113). Project ZY-201751044 is supported by
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Zunyi Medical University Training Program of Innovation and Entrepreneurship for
Undergraduates. Project ZYKY-20173830 is supported by Zunyi Medical University
School of Medicine and Science Training Program of Innovation and
Entrepreneurship for Undergraduates, the Open Project Program of the Special Key
Laboratory of Oral Diseases Research, the Higher Education Institution in Guizhou
Province, and the Master Scientific Research Foundation of Zunyi Medical
University.

Authors’ contributions
JG Zhou MD is the first author who designed this study and also drafted, read, revised
and approved the final version of this manuscript. PJ Li MM is the co-first author who
contributed equally to this work. JG Zhou MD and Prof. Hu Ma are the corresponding
authors who conceived and designed the study, modified and read and approved the
final version. JG Zhou, PJ Li, DH Liu, SH Jin, MZ Cao and Y Zou are responsible for
patient recruitment, assign participants to interventions and follow up.

Authors’ Information
Protocol contributors
The main information of authors of this protocol is listed in Table 1.

Corresponding authors
Correspondence to: Jian-Guo Zhou MD, Department of Oncology, Affiliated Hospital
of Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, China, NO.149, Dalian Road, Zunyi 563000,
China.
Tel:
+86-0851-28609038;
Fax:
+86-0851-28609095;
Email:
jianguo.zhou@yahoo.com. Hu Ma MD PhD, Department of Oncology, Affiliated
Hospital of Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, China, NO.149, Dalian Road, Zunyi
563000, China. Tel: +86-0851-28609038; Fax: +86-0851-28609095; Email: l:
mahuab@163.com.

Acknowledgements
We thank Sichuan Cancer Hospital and Research Institute, Chengdu, China; Affiliated
Hospital of North Sichuan Medical College, Nanchong, China; The First People's
Hospital of Zunyi, Zunyi, China; The affiliated hospital of southwest medical
university, Luzhou, China; and Guizhou Provincial People’s Hospital, Guiyang, China
for their collaboration with us.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abbreviations
All the abbreviations used in this protocol has been listed in Table 3.

References
1. Hesketh PJ, Kris MG, Basch E, Bohlke K, Barbour SY, Clark-Snow RA, et al. Antiemetics:
American Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guideline Update. Journal of clinical
oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2017;35(28):3240-61.
2. Walsh D, Davis M, Ripamonti C, Bruera E, Davies A, Molassiotis A. 2016 Updated
MASCC/ESMO consensus recommendations: Management of nausea and vomiting in advanced
cancer. Supportive care in cancer : official journal of the Multinational Association of Supportive
Care in Cancer. 2017;25(1):333-40.
3. Adel N. Overview of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and evidence-based therapies.
The American journal of managed care. 2017;23(14 Suppl):S259-s65.
4. Leslie RA, Shah Y, Thejomayen M, Murphy KM, Robertson HA. The neuropharmacology of
emesis: the role of receptors in neuromodulation of nausea and vomiting. Canadian journal of
physiology and pharmacology. 1990;68(2):279-88.
5. Sanger GJ, Andrews PL. Treatment of nausea and vomiting: gaps in our knowledge. Autonomic
neuroscience : basic & clinical. 2006;129(1-2):3-16.
6. Endo T, Minami M, Hirafuji M, Ogawa T, Akita K, Nemoto M, et al. Neurochemistry and
neuropharmacology of emesis - the role of serotonin. Toxicology. 2000;153(1-3):189-201.
7. Navari RM. 5-HT3 receptors as important mediators of nausea and vomiting due to
chemotherapy. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2015;1848(10 Pt B):2738-46.
8. Geling O, Eichler HG. Should 5-hydroxytryptamine-3 receptor antagonists be administered
beyond 24 hours after chemotherapy to prevent delayed emesis? Systematic re-evaluation of
clinical evidence and drug cost implications. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2005;23(6):1289-94.
9. Hesketh PJ, Grunberg SM, Gralla RJ, Warr DG, Roila F, de Wit R, et al. The oral neurokinin-1
antagonist aprepitant for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: a
multinational, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in patients receiving high-dose
cisplatin--the Aprepitant Protocol 052 Study Group. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal
of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2003;21(22):4112-9.
10. Poli-Bigelli S, Rodrigues-Pereira J, Carides AD, Julie Ma G, Eldridge K, Hipple A, et al.
Addition of the neurokinin 1 receptor antagonist aprepitant to standard antiemetic therapy
improves control of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Results from a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in Latin America. Cancer. 2003;97(12):3090-8.
11. Schmoll HJ, Aapro MS, Poli-Bigelli S, Kim HK, Park K, Jordan K, et al. Comparison of an
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

aprepitant regimen with a multiple-day ondansetron regimen, both with dexamethasone, for
antiemetic efficacy in high-dose cisplatin treatment. Annals of oncology : official journal of the
European Society for Medical Oncology. 2006;17(6):1000-6.
12. Warr DG, Hesketh PJ, Gralla RJ, Muss HB, Herrstedt J, Eisenberg PD, et al. Efficacy and
tolerability of aprepitant for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in
patients with breast cancer after moderately emetogenic chemotherapy. Journal of clinical
oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2005;23(12):2822-30.
13. Navari RM, Gray SE, Kerr AC. Olanzapine versus aprepitant for the prevention of
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: a randomized phase III trial. The journal of
supportive oncology. 2011;9(5):188-95.
14. Bymaster FP, Calligaro DO, Falcone JF, Marsh RD, Moore NA, Tye NC, et al. Radioreceptor
binding profile of the atypical antipsychotic olanzapine. Neuropsychopharmacology : official
publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology. 1996;14(2):87-96.
15. Passik SD, Kirsh KL, Theobald DE, Dickerson P, Trowbridge R, Gray D, et al. A retrospective
chart review of the use of olanzapine for the prevention of delayed emesis in cancer patients.
Journal of pain and symptom management. 2003;25(5):485-8.
16. Zhang Z, Zhang Y, Chen G, Hong S, Yang Y, Fang W, et al. Olanzapine-Based Triple
Regimens Versus Neurokinin-1 Receptor Antagonist-Based Triple Regimens in Preventing
Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting Associated with Highly Emetogenic Chemotherapy:
A Network Meta-Analysis. The oncologist. 2018;23(5):603-16.
17. Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Bergman B, Bullinger M, Cull A, Duez NJ, et al. The European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer QLQ-C30: a quality-of-life instrument for use
in international clinical trials in oncology. Journal of the National Cancer Institute.
1993;85(5):365-76.
18. Bergman B, Aaronson NK, Ahmedzai S, Kaasa S, Sullivan M. The EORTC QLQ-LC13: a
modular supplement to the EORTC Core Quality of Life Questionnaire (QLQ-C30) for use in lung
cancer clinical trials. EORTC Study Group on Quality of Life. European journal of cancer (Oxford,
England : 1990). 1994;30a(5):635-42.
19. Cella DF, Bonomi AE, Lloyd SR, Tulsky DS, Kaplan E, Bonomi P. Reliability and validity of
the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Lung (FACT-L) quality of life instrument. Lung
cancer (Amsterdam, Netherlands). 1995;12(3):199-220.
20. Navari RM, Qin R, Ruddy KJ, Liu H, Powell SF, Bajaj M, et al. Olanzapine for the Prevention
of Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting. The New England journal of medicine.
2016;375(2):134-42.
21. Mizukami N, Yamauchi M, Koike K, Watanabe A, Ichihara K, Masumori N, et al. Olanzapine
for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in patients receiving highly or
moderately emetogenic chemotherapy: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Journal of pain and symptom management. 2014;47(3):542-50.
22. Tan L, Liu J, Liu X, Chen J, Yan Z, Yang H, et al. Clinical research of Olanzapine for
prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Journal of experimental & clinical
cancer research : CR. 2009;28:131.
23. Wang X, Wang L, Wang H, Zhang H. Effectiveness of Olanzapine Combined with
Ondansetron in Prevention of Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting of Non-small Cell
Lung Cancer. Cell biochemistry and biophysics. 2015;72(2):471-3.
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

24. Yoodee J, Permsuwan U, Nimworapan M. Efficacy and safety of olanzapine for the prevention
of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Critical
reviews in oncology/hematology. 2017;112:113-25.

Table titles
Table 1: The main information of the authors
Table 2: Time schedule of the enrollment, interventions, and assessments
Table 3: List of abbreviations

Tables
Table 1 The main information of the authors

Names

Affiliation

E-mail

Jian-Guo
Zhou

Department of Oncology, Affiliated
Hospital of Zunyi Medical University,
Zunyi, China

jianguo.zhou@yahoo.com

Pei-Jie Li

Department of Oncology, Affiliated
Hospital of Zunyi Medical University,
Zunyi, China

503186082@qq.com

Su-Han
Jin

Department of Orthodontics, Affiliated
Stemmatological Hospital of Zunyi
Medical University, Zunyi, China

doctorjin1991@163.com

Da-Hai
Liu

Department of Oncology, Affiliated
Hospital of Zunyi Medical University,
Zunyi, China

liudahai418@163.com

Ming-Ze
Cao

School of Medicine and Science, Zunyi
Medical University, Zunyi, China.

1329212297@qq.com

Yu Zou

School of Public Health, Affiliated
Hospital of Zunyi Medical University,
Zunyi, China.

1911425499@qq.com

Hu Ma

Department of Oncology, Affiliated
Hospital of Zunyi Medical University,
Zunyi, China

mahuab@163.com

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 2 Time schedule of the enrollment, interventions, and assessments
STUDY PERIOD

TIMEPOINT

Enrollment

Allocation

D-28~D-7

D-7~D0

Postallocation
D1

D2

D3

D4

Placebo

√

√

√

√

Experimental

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

ENROLLMENT:

√

Eligibility screen

√

Informed consent

√

Allocation

D5

D6

√

√

√

INTERVENTIONS:

ASSESSMENTS:
Baseline
characteristics
Vital signs
Blood routine
Urine routine
Stool routine

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

Electrocardiograp
h

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Renal and liver
function
Coagulation

√

√

√

Lipid and glucose
levels
Pregnancy test
Tumor marker

√

√

√

√

MASCC
√

evaluation

√

√

.√

√

EORTC QLQ-C30
questionnaire

√

√

√

√

√

√

score
EORTC-QLQ-LC13
questionnaire
score
FACT-L
questionnaire
score
FLIE
questionnaire

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

score
Safety evaluation

√

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 3 List of abbreviations

Full name
5- hydroxytryptamine
adverse events
alanine transaminase
aspartate transaminase
Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
complete response
creatinine clearance
dopamine
Data Monitoring Committee
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group
electronic medical record report

Abbreviation
5-HT3
AE
ALT
AST
CINV
CR
CrCl
DA
DMC
ECOG
eCRF

Electronic Data Capture
EDC
European Organization for Research and Treatment of EORTC QLQ-LC13
Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire-Lung Cancer 13
European Organization for Research and Treatment of EORTC QLQ-LC30
Cancer Quality of Life
effective control rate
ECR
FACT-General
FACT-G
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Lung cancer
FACT-L
interquartile range
IQR
intravenous injection
iv
intravenously guttae
ivgtt
Lung Cancer Subscale
LCS
Karnofsky performance status
KPS
quality of life
QoL
serious adverse event
SAE
Statistical Product and Service Solutions
SPSS
16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012583; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

upper limit of normal
white blood cell

ULN
WBC

17

