medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

1
Violin plot data: A concerto of crucial information on valve
thrombogenicity categorized in vitro by valve motion and inferred flow velocity
Lawrence N. SCOTTEN1, David BLUNDON2, Marcus-André DEUTSCH3, Rolland SIEGEL4
Affiliations:
1
Independent consultant, Victoria, BC, Canada
2
Instructor, Environmental Biology, Camosun College, Victoria BC, Canada
3
Surgeon – Cardiothoracic, Klinik fur Thorax- und Kardiovaskularchirurgie, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum
NRW, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany
4
Independent consultant, Portland, Oregon, USA
Correspondence to: Lawrence N. SCOTTEN. Dipl. T., Independent Consultant, 1560 Bonair Place,
Victoria, BC V8P 4V4, Canada. Email: larryscotten2@hotmail.com
Abstract:
Objectives
This in vitro study compares mechanical (MHV) and bioprosthetic (BHV) heart valves for high amplitude
short duration regional flow velocities (RFV) near valve closure.
Background
We previously tested several clinical and prototype valves and observed RFV at levels which may be
related to a dimensionless thrombogenic potential (TP).
Methods
A total of four valves were tested in aortic and mitral sites under pulsatile circulation in a pulse
duplicator. Valves included both clinical models and experimental prototypes. An optical approach
measuring projected dynamic valve area (PDVA) to gauge valve motion was implemented. Pulsatile
pressures and flow rates were measured by conventional techniques and a quasi-steady flow tester was
used to measure valve leakage. RFV was derived using time-dependent volumetric flow rate/PDVA.
Since flow velocity and fluid shear force are related through flow velocity gradient, TPs for valves that
achieve near closure during the forward flow deceleration phase were determined as RFVs relative to the
control mechanical valve RFV value of -126 m/s.
Results
TP is dimensionless and ranged between -0.45 and +1.0. Negative TPs arise when transient rebound of
valve occluders is accompanied by water-hammer phenomena. Positive TPs occur during the decelerating
forward flow. Bioprostheses had lowest TP transient of 0.15 with exception of a mock-transcatheter aortic
valve (mTAVI) that incorporated by design a trivial perivalvular leak (~1.35 ml/s). This device
demonstrated a remarkably high transient TP of 0.95. The control mechanical valves had the highest TP
of 1.0. The study implicates TP transients near mechanical valve closure, and not forward or non-flow
phases, as primary to shear induced activation of the coagulation cascade.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

2
Conclusions
Our data reveals distinct TP profile differences between valve models. If verifiable, the design of future
valves may utilize currently available experimental tools to determine TPs resulting in advanced devices
with significantly reduced TP.
I. Introduction and Background
Development of prosthetic heart valves is replete with innovative designs and materials intended to
provide adequate hemodynamic performance and long term durability. Although early ball-in-cage
valves from Starr, Harken and Smeloff partially met these requirements, an incidence of thrombotic and
thromboembolic events stimulated investigation into novel geometries and new materials. Carpentier,
Hancock, Ionescu and others devised bioprosthetic valves that mitigated the incidence of thromboembolic
complications albeit at the expense of extended durability. Progressive modifications in mechanical valve
geometry and enhancements of tissue preservation methodology have not yet resolved these longstanding
shortcomings that vex prosthetic valve technology nearly 60 years later.
The earliest published data from investigation into sources of thrombogenicity in mechanical valves was
the work of Davey [1] and Smeloff [2] in 1966, in which cyclic flow behavior was visualized by highspeed cinematography in a pulse duplicator with a transparent chamber and a sheet of light flow technique
using aluminum flow tracer particles in transparent test fluids. Flow patterns adjacent to an early model
Starr-Edwards valve ball occluder were identified and multiple retrograde impulses were observed at
valve closure. Although the investigators speculated that these events were associated with high shear,
equipment of that era was incapable of measuring the retrograde flow velocities associated with occluder
rebound phenomena. More recently, computational methods employed to examine flow patterns, flow
velocities, and pressures associated with contemporary mechanical and bioprosthetic valve function have
generated extensive information on flow but as yet have not proposed a development pathway to
eliminate thrombogenicity in the former and extend durability in the latter [e.g. 3-5].
In prior publications, [5-10] we hypothesized that mechanical valve occluder closing behavior was
implicated in the thrombogenic discrepancy between mechanical and bioprosthetic valves. This work
required innovative adaptations to our pulse duplicator to allow measurement of prosthetic valve dynamic
area (PDVA). These adaptations provided crucial insight into the contribution of occluder oscillation,
cavitation and occluder rebound that contribute in the complex genesis of valve thrombosis. Subsequent
pulse duplicator adaptations in 2011 included a unique electro-optical subsystem that we referred to as
Leonardo [6]. An unanticipated benefit of adding the Leonardo sub-system was that it facilitated
determination of spatially averaged flow velocity in immediate proximity to a test valve. We found that
transient RFVs occurred often near MHV closure and proposed it as a proxy for rapidly changing
(transient) shear forces. Blood shear forces initiate multiple biochemical and functional reactions known
to promote formation of micro-thrombi aggregates that may remain locally adherent or embolize [11-18].
Test results from this work provided stimulation to define geometry for a mechanical heart valve (MHV)
with blood damage reduced to tissue valve levels and we subsequently extended this experimental
methodology to study thrombogenic potential in transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) devices
[8].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

3
II. Methods
A) Test Apparatus
Since 2004, our valve testing has been conducted in an extensively cited commercial in vitro test flow
system [6-10]. Typical simulation conditions included: pulse rate 70 beats/min; pressures ca.120/80
mmHg; and cardiac output 5 litres/min. Basic test methodology is depicted in Figure 1. The current photo
sensor/amplifier in use was upgraded in 2011 yielding improved specifications in subsequent reports [710]. Valves were tested in pulsatile and quasi-steady pressure/flow systems and PDVA was obtained.
Time-dependent RFV was derived by dividing the volumetric flow rate by the PDVA (volumetric flow
rate/PDVA). A separate apparatus (model LT8991, ca. 2008) provided accurate measurement of small
closed valve leakage rates under quasi-steady pressure/flow conditions. Such measures were used to
estimate valve leakage area [8].
The Leonardo modified pulse duplicator originally adapted in 2011 has innovative features to measure
PDVA from backlit valves. This unique electro-optical prototype remains in current use with improved
spatial and temporal resolution capability (i.e., 0.001 cm2 and 1μs) compared with that originally reported
in 2004 [6]. Test results from this prototype system were recently used to compare numerical simulations
for contemporary porcine tissue and bovine pericardial bioprosthetic heart valves and with data from a
similar independent pulse duplicator in which excellent agreement was noted [4].
A Visco-elastic Impedance Adapter (VIA model 7991, sn 44) was designed by Scotten in 1997 to model
adjustable ventricle visco-elastic and isovolumetric functionality. Jennings et al. reported use of VIA in
the Leeds valve tester for studying stentless porcine valves [19]. This physiological trait coincides with
valve opening and closure, and influences ventricular pressure rates (dp/dt), the propensity for
microbubbles, high intensity transient signals (HITS), cavitation, acoustic emissions, and possible vortex
formation. The test fluid used was saline (viscosity 1 mPa·s; density 1.0 g/ml). Blood analog fluids such
as saline-glycerin are problematic requiring temperature control to maintain stable optical and viscous
properties. Other authors, testing a St. Jude Medical, (SJM) RegentTM valve, have shown that fluid
viscosities ranging from 1.1 - 3.1 mPa·s have a negligible effect on valve-closing PDVA, but reduce the
backflow rate by ca.14%.
Accurate measurement of closed valve leakage was obtained in a quasi-steady pressure/flow apparatus
calibrated with known small orifice areas described previously [7-9]. Valve leakage areas assigned for
pulsatile flow test data analysis were; 0.0178 cm2 (SJM); 0.003 cm2 (BV3D); and 0.012 cm2 (control
valve -Edwards pericardial).
B) Leonardo
Since only fleeting glimpses of prosthetic valve motion can be seen by the unaided eye, complex and
costly high-speed imaging techniques are required to visualize quantitative details. Leonardo mitigates
this problem through a simple solution that measures valve motion (see Figure 1). As an integral
component of our model heart, a photo detector continuously measures the amount of light that transits
the test valve (either aortic or mitral) during cyclic function. This approach provides important data about
valve motion. An inherent advantage of monitoring valve motion (PDVA) with Leonardo is that all

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

4
signals are analog in close synchronization prior to acquisition with an analog to digital (A-D) converter
[6].
C) Calibration
Two types of light sensors are useful for measuring high speed PDVA data from valve experiments. Data
collected here and previously [6-10] utilized an analog-type light sensor (photodiode) calibrated with
circular reference orifice areas placed temporarily in the aortic or mitral test site. Measured output
voltages had exceptional linearity vs. geometric orifice areas. Specification section lists typical
calibrations per linear regression equation fit. Alternate methods have employed either CMOS or CCD
digital image chips where area-to-chip pixel scaling estimates can be made to calibrate PDVA vs. time
data [4, 20].

Figure 1: Optical approach gauges aortic (or mitral) prosthetic heart valve function with
occluder motion quantified as projected dynamic valve area (PDVA).
D) Specifications [7]
• Temporal resolution (based on voltage step waveform response, rise time from 10% to 90%
amplitude) ≈1.04 μs;
• Bandwidth ≈ 0.35/risetime = 0.35/1.04μs = 337 KHz;
• Spatial area resolution (closed valve), 0.001 cm2 (n=10 cycle average);
• Telecentric lens maintains constant magnification ≈0.16 x;
• Working distance ≈18 cm (AORTIC); ≈19 cm (MITRAL);
• Perspective error <0.3% (depth 15 mm);
• Spatial sensitivity variation <6%;
• Typical site dependent linear regression calibrations are:
y=0.00128x, with R2 =0.99988 (AORTIC);

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

5
y=0.00132x, with R2 =0.99959 (MITRAL);
• LED back light source (diffuse red):
Wavelength 625±15 nm
Uniformity 99.24%
Luminance 5,780 cd/m2
E) Regional Flow Velocity and Shear Force
Regional flow velocity magnitude shown in Figure 3 can be considered a shear force surrogate associated
with valve TP. Since flow velocity and fluid shear are related through flow velocity gradient, a proxy for
valve thrombogenic potential may be inferred by flow velocity. Although TP cannot be assumed to
increase linearly with flow velocity it is considered proportional to the inferred regional flow velocity
(m/s) and independent of fabrication materials. The regional flow velocity determined by Leonardo must
be appreciated as an estimated spatial average quantity (m/s) and not a site specific quantity. Since flow
velocity gradients cannot be obtained with Leonardo, neither can shear force values (dyne/cm2) from
measured RBVs (m/s).
F) Derivations and PDVA Synchronization Adjustment
Valve regional flow velocity (RFV) is equal to volumetric flow rate, divided by the PDVA (flow
rate/PDVA) and is an estimate of the regional instantaneous spatial average.
Analog signal bandwidth differences between PDVA and transvalvular volumetric flow rate were 0-337
KHz vs. 0-100 Hz, respectively. As the PDVA signal preceded the other signals by -2.5 ms based on step
signal response, a phase adjustment between the PDVA and the other signals was required. Accordingly,
post experiment, we shifted the acquired PDVA signal 1 data acquisition interval of -3.4 ms [7].
G) Violin Plots with Relative Flow Velocity Scaling
Although “Violin” plots have not previously been utilized for presentation of in vitro valve test results,
they attracted our attention as a powerful graphic technique to present voluminous quantitative or
qualitative data. Sample Figure 2 depicts TP data density near valve closure and reveals different peaks,
their position, and relative amplitudes. Here, split-violin plots benefit from superior spatial efficiency
compared to full violin plots.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

6

Figure 2: Sample split-violin plot depiction of inferred dimensionless valve thrombogenic potential (TP).
Shaded margin ΔY represents probability of recurrence of an inferred TP (relative to an RFV of -126 m/s).
All data points can be reduced to a split-violin shape with each configuration representing an independent
data set and coverage of all data points. Single data points with minimum density depict baseline data
values.
The broader split-violin region(s) convey greater recurrence of TP data values whereas narrower
regions(s) contain fewer recurrences. TPs for valves during the forward flow deceleration phase on the
verge of closure were determined as RFVs relative to a control mechanical valve RFV value of -126 m/s.
RFV was derived using time-dependent volumetric flow rate/PDVA. Since flow velocity and fluid shear
force are related through flow velocity gradient, TP of valves may be a useful surrogate for transfer of
shear forces to blood cells and for coagulation activation potential.
I) Valve thrombogenic potential is consistent by multiple determinations
Since 2011, our investigations utilizing Leonardo have compared TP of test valves to controls. Over time,
alternate metrics for assessing TP evolved (Table I). For example, a widely used clinical MHV (SJM) has
consistently exhibited high TP compared with controls regardless of determination method [6-10]. Figure
3 shows that the inferred TP for the SJM aortic valve is high (1.0) for all the determination methods listed
in Table I. All determinations utilized valve motion as a component metric for obtaining TP [6-10].
Table I: Determination of TP for SJM aortic test valve -example.
Thrombogenic Potential (TP)
Peak Backflow Velocity, m/s
Thrombogenic Potential Index, TPI
Split violin, maximum TP

Quantity
-235
3.9
1.0

References
6
10
(Present study)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

7

Figure 3: Inferred dimensionless TP of valves (based on near closure RFVs relative to -126 m/s).
Illustrated valve BV3D shown in full open and closed positions. Negative data includes water hammer
phenomena and occluder rebound RFVs except for valve BV3D. This early prototype valve is currently
pending fabrication using refined prototype materials and geometry. Over the valve closing period (~495
ms, milliseconds), a total of 150 RFV data points for each of 10 consecutive cycles were acquired per
experiment. Vioplot R software analyzed 10,500 data values to create full-violin plots. Subsequently,
Visio software was used to trace, scale, and cut-in-half the full violin plots produced by Vioplot R to
create the split-violin plots shown here.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

8
Vioplot R* software package and Visio 2002 ** have been utilized to create the split-violin plots used in
this study. Observers will appreciate that wider violin shape regions demonstrate show more probable
flow velocities than those in the narrower zones.
*R Core Team (2019) R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/
** Microsoft, Redmond, WA USA
III. Results and Discussion
Flow dynamics near valve closure cause rapidly changing PDVA and interrelated flow profiles to
progressively constrain regurgitation (analogous to greater valve stenosis) before the complete motionless
closed valve condition. This may stimulate cellular responses before that condition occurs. Over time our
primary focus evolved into development of insights into thrombogenic factors specific to the valve
closing phase. During brief crucial moments of valve closure, localized prothrombotic microenvironments
may be relevant to generation of high velocity leakage jets, flow unsteadiness, valve flutter, cyclic
variability of PDVA, turbulence, and excessive shear forces that may induce blood element damage [2123]. The various influences mentioned previously may be relevant to multiple valve types for:








conduction abnormalities
reduced mobility of valve leaflets or occluders
silent cerebral micro-infarction
sub-clinical valve thrombosis
potential for pannus formation
acute and sub-acute embolic stroke and other adverse cerebrovascular events including TIA
cavitation and high intensity trans-cranial signals (HITS) [6]

Closure dynamics therefore raise provocative questions about valve thrombogenic impact including:
1. Dynamics of valve closure that may mimic well studied pro-thrombotic aspects of forward valve flow
(e.g., valve stenosis) and arterial flows (e.g., arterial sclerosis)
2. Valve closure dynamics may reflect combined biomechanical and biochemical responses sufficient to
exacerbate risk for pathologic thrombus formation and propagation
3. Valve rebound and water-hammer -the SJM valve in the mitral position consistently manifested
leaflet rebound observed as a momentary post closure partial re-opening driven by water-hammer
power (transvalvular pressure × volumetric flow rate). This has been previously reported with
magnified examples of high-resolution PDVA rebound data [7].
Figure 3 compares several contemporary and prototype cardiac valves near closure extending over the
~495 ms each cycle of 10 consecutive cycles gathered. One hundred fifty (150) RFV data points were
collected for every cycle and 10 consecutive cycles were collected for each valve. The time increment
was ~3.4 ms which was the interval used to collect data over the total cycle time of 867 ms (cycle rate
=70 per minute). Inferred dimensionless TP of the test valves (X axis) is referenced to an RFV of -126
m/s, the peak observed for the SJM aortic MHV.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

9
A) Study outcomes (previous and present reports) [7-9, 11]:
1. High amplitude RFVs and resultant supra-physiologic shear forces originating in small intra- and
para-valvular leakage (PVL) gaps are mechanistic initiators of the clotting cascade.
2. Platelet activation is induced by high shear even with short exposure time [23, 24]
3. The disparity in closing dynamics between MHV vs. bioprosthetic valves is chronically overlooked as
a primary indicator of valve TP.
4. Current MHVs have overt RFV transients at closure relating to occluder non-response to flow
deceleration and residual PDVA.
5. A mock TAVR valve with trivial PVL generated high magnitude short duration RFVs.
6. An unintended consequence of reducing significant PVL to trivial PVL produces high RFVs and
increased valve TP.
7. For a given volumetric backflow rate near valve closure, the smaller the total residual leakage area,
the greater the magnitude of RFVs.
8. The highest recorded RFVs were generated by the SJM valve compared to the tissue control valves
(Edwards pericardial).
9. Rapid prototype valve BV3D produced RFVs similar to the tissue control valves.
10. A spatial average of RFVs in immediate proximity to prototype valves may be a practical indicator in
qualitative screening for valve TP.
11. Test data from valve BV3D strongly suggest that specific MHV leaflet geometries generate a closure
force during forward flow deceleration and prior to flow reversal, a potentially beneficial “soft
closure” response.
12. Since the motion of heart valves is too fast to see and too important to ignore, Leonardo provides a
simple rapid means to pre-calibrate, record, and perform quantitative valve motion analysis.
13. Our technology enabled RFVs to be resolved and focused attention on overt RFVs previously
overlooked and hidden due to brevity, small PVL gaps, and limited instrumentation resolution
capability.
14. Our results infer shear damage to formed blood elements and a resultant continuous thrombogenic
response constitute a mechanistic explanation for observed thrombogenic disparity in prosthetic valve
types and designs now broadened to include observations of TAVI related thromboembolic events.
15. For MHVs, cyclic RFVs appear to be related to a prothrombotic state requiring chronic anticoagulation. This risk is much less recognized in bioprosthetic heart valves which appear not to
generate a pro-thrombotic closing phase but TAVI prostheses with trivial PVL may generate
pathologic RFVs similar to those observed in MHVs.
16. Promising prototype MHVs were designed and tested in vitro with dimensions optimized to provide
minimum TP relative to BHV controls thereby attenuating potential of hemodynamic biomechanical
forces and biochemical pathways known to initiate and amplify thrombus formation.
B) Caveats
While not a site specific quantity, we submit that RFVs are useful surrogates for flow induced blood cell
damage potential. To infer valve TP directly from derived maximum flow velocities is an over
simplification considering the complexity of blood coagulation factors recently reviewed by Rana and
associates [26]. For example, the difference between laminar and turbulent flow and their respective

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

10
impact on blood component damage awaits experimental evidence to validate numerical simulations [27].
In contrast to laminar, turbulent fluid flow is characterized by chaotic flow/pressure fluctuations with
sufficient shear forces to activate blood clotting mechanisms [28].
Development of advanced valves with clinical potential requires detailed and accurate prototypes with
improved geometric leakage flow path area (GAP) control for final optimization and definitive laboratory
testing prior to animal and durability testing.
IV. Conclusions
Importance – Promising MHVs have been designed and tested in vitro with dimensions optimized to
provide minimum TP relative to BHV controls and thereby attenuating in vivo hemodynamic
biomechanical forces and biochemical pathways known to initiate and amplify thrombus formation.
Current valve designs and manufacturing efforts focused on valve open phase performance largely
exclude consideration of dynamic flow conditions during the closing phase. Although events close to
valve closure involve multi-factorial influences, our prior work found that valve motion and flow velocity
constituted a primary contribution to valve TP and that closure-related functional deficit is a common
shortcoming of current MHVs [10].
In this study, dimensionless TP was used to rank valve thrombogenic potential based on in vitro
measurements that determine spatially averaged regional flow velocities relative to a maximum (-126
m/s) obtained for the SJM mechanical valve (TP=1.0). TP ranged from -0.45 to 0 +1.0 with the clinical
bioprosthetic control valve (Edwards PerimountTM) having the least (TP = 0.17). These results are
consistent with extensive qualitative clinical experience of thrombogenic disparity between these classes
of valves. SJM recipients require life-long anticoagulants whereas bioprosthetic devices typically impose
minimal increased thrombogenic risk.
Progress beyond the limitations of current prosthetic valves will require innovative MHV designs with
substantially reduced TP confirmed by in vitro dynamic testing results indistinguishable from control
tissue valves. This requires appreciation of valve closure as a crucial factor since very high flow short
duration RFVs near valve closure result in transient or continual blood cell damage and initiation of the
coagulation cascade [23].
Additionally, results suggest that designing a MHV with reduced TP comparable to clinically well
established tissue valves is achievable with current technology. The objective is to produce a MHV that
will not increase recipient thrombogenic risk. On a cautionary note, device manufacturers preoccupied
with modifications of catheter delivered valves to minimize residual leak assume that reducing a major
leak to a minor (trivial) one diminishes patient risk. However, we consistently observe smaller volumemetric paravalvular leaks (PVL) to associate with higher magnitude RFVs and counter-intuitively; that
larger PVLs result in lower RFVs and shear forces. This is consistent with recently reported clinical
experience where independent predictors of late leaflet thrombosis up to 3 years post implant were male
sex and PVL less than mild [18].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

11
In vitro, a tissue valve-like “soft” closing profile along with either complete sealing or optimized closed
leakage area are important for minimizing water-hammer driven rebound and subsequent RFVs and may
be an essential dynamic characteristic for low thrombogenic function. Bioprosthetic valves benefit from
minimal volumetric backflow rates (VBRs) and a propensity to be fully competent when closed resulting
in negligible RFVs.
Perhaps the most consequential outcome of our work is development of a practical method to screen
valves for inferred thrombotic potential by determination of RFVs. In the case of MHVs, blood flow is
disrupted predominantly by valve closure dynamics that produce elevated shear forces and stagnant low
flows which trigger pro-thrombotic response.
Footnotes
Contributions: (I) Conception and design: LN Scotten; (II) Administrative support: LN Scotten;
(III) Provision of study materials: LN Scotten; (IV) Collection and assembly of data: LN Scotten;
(V) Data analysis and interpretation: LN Scotten, D Blundon; (VI) Manuscript writing: All authors;
(VII) All authors have approved the final submitted version of the manuscript.
Acknowledgements: Jason Nicholls utilized SolidWorks software for modeling and Keyshot
software for rendering the valve prototype BV3D in Figure 3.
Competing Interests: None declared.
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed
Financial Disclosure: This research has been done on a pro bono basis by all authors with no
financial support of others.
Data sharing statement: All data relevant to the study are included in the article.
Open access: Anyone can share, reuse, remix, or adapt this material, providing this is not done
for commercial purposes and the original authors are credited and cited.
V. References
[1] Davey TB, Kaufman B, Smeloff, EA. Pulsatile flow studies of prosthetic heart valves. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 1966;51:264-7.
[2] Smeloff EA, Huntley AC, Davey TB, et al. Comparative study of prosthetic heart valves. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 1966;52:841-8.
[3] Bluestein D, Chandran KB, Manning KB. Towards non-thrombogenic performance of blood
recirculating devices. Ann Biomed Eng 2010;38:1236-56.
[4] Lee JH, Rygg AD, Kolahdouz EM, Rossi S, Retta SM, Duraiswamy N, Scotten LN, Craven BA,
Griffith BE. Fluid-Structure interaction models of an experimental pulse duplicator for simulating
bioprosthetic heart valve dynamics. Paper posted to pre-print server 2019 engrXiv. February 16
doi:10.31224/osf.io/8ys2k. https://engrxiv.org/8ys2k/

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

12
[5] Consolo F, Sheriff J, Gorla S, Magri N, Bluestein D, Pappalardo F, Slepian MJ, Fiore GB, Redaelli
A. High frequency components of hemodynamic shear stress profiles are a major determinant of
shear-mediated platelet activation in therapeutic blood recirculating devices. Sci Rep. 2017;7:49945008.
[6] Scotten LN, Walker DK. New laboratory technique measures projected dynamic area of prosthetic
heart valves. J Heart Valve Dis 2004;13:120-32; discussion 132-3.
[7] Scotten LN, Siegel R. Importance of shear in prosthetic valve closure dynamics. J Heart Valve Dis
2011;20:664-72.
[8] Scotten LN, Siegel R. Thrombogenic potential of transcatheter aortic valve implantation with trivial
paravalvular leakage. Ann Transl Med 2014;2:43.
[9] Scotten LN, Siegel R. Are anticoagulant independent mechanical valves within reach –fast prototype
fabrication and in vitro testing of innovative bi-leaflet valve models. Ann Transl Med 2015;3:197205.
[10] Chaux A, Grey RJ, Stuoka JC, Emkin MR, Scotten LN, Siegel R. Anticoagulant independent
mechanical heart valves –viable now or still a distant holy grail. Ann Transl Med 2016;4:525-601.
[11] Van Belle E, Rauch A, Vincent F, Robin E, Kibler M, Labreuche J, Jeanpierre E, Levade M, Hurt C,
Rousse N, Dally JB, Debry N, Dallongeville J, Vincentelli A, Delhaye C, Auffray JL, Juthier F,
Schurtz G, Lemesle G, Caspar T, Morel O, Dumonteil N, Duhamel A, Paris C, Dupont-Prado A,
Legendre P, Mouquet F, Marchant B, Hermoire S, Corseaux D, Moussa K, Manchuelle A, Bauchart
JJ, Loobuyck V, Caron C, Zawadzki C, Leroy F, Bodart JC, Staels B, Goudemand J, Lenting PJ,
Susen S. Von Willebrand Factor ultimers during transcatheter aortic-valve replacement. N Engl J
Med 2016;375:335-44.
[12] Armijo G, Nombela-Franco L, Tirado-Conte G. Cerebrovascular events after transcatheter aortic
valve implantation. Front Cardiovasc Med 2018;5:104-118. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2018.00104.
[13] Musa TA, Uddin A, Loveday C, Dobson LE, Igra M, Richards F, Swoboda PP, Singh A, Garg P,
Foley JRJ, Fent GJ, Goddard AJP, Malkin C, Plein S, Blackman DJ, McCann GP, Greenwood JP.
Silent cerebral infarction and cognitive function following TAVI: an observational two-centre UK
comparison of the first-generation CoreValve and second-generation Lotus valve. BMJ Open
2019;9:e022329 doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-022329
[14] Deutsch MA, Scotten LN, Siegel R, Lange R, Bleiziffer S. Leaflet thrombosis and clinical events
after TAVR: are paravalvular leaks a crucial trigger? EuroIntervention 2018;14:716-717.
[15] Rashid HN, Gooley RP, Nerlekar N, Ihdayhid AR, McCormick LM, Nasis A, Cameron JD, Brown
AJ. Bioprosthetic aortic valve leaflet thrombosis detected by multidetector computed tomography is
associated with adverse cerebrovascular events: a meta-analysis of observational studies.
EuroIntervention. 2018; 13:e1748-55.
[16] Rashid HN. Cameron JD, Brown AJ. Activation of the coagulation cascade and the role of
paravalvular leak in the development of leaflet thrombosis following transcatheter aortic valve
replacement. EuroIntervention 2018;14:718-719.
[17] Khodaee F, Barakat M, Abbasi M, Dvir D, Azadani AN. Incomplete expansion of transcatheter
aortic valves is associated with propensity for valve thrombosis. Interact CardioVasc Thorac Surg
2019; doi:10.1093/icvts/ivz213.
[18] Yanagisawa R, Tanaka M, Yashima F, Arai T, Jinzaki M, Shimizu H, Fukuda K, Watanabe Y,
Naganuma T, Higashimori A, Mizutani K, Araki M, Tada N, Yamanaka F, Otsuka T, Yamamoto
M, Hayashida K. Early and late leaflet thrombosis after transcatheter aortic valve replacements a

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009407; this version posted December 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

13

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]

multicenter initiative from the OCEAN-TAVI registry. Circ Cardiovasc Interv 2019;12:e007349.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCINTERVENTIONS. 118.007349
Jennings L, Butterfield M, Walker PG, Watterson KG, Fisher J. The influence of ventricular
impedance on the hydrodynamic performance of bioprosthetic aortic roots in vitro. J Heart Valve
Dis 2001;10:269-275
Alizadeh M, Cote M, Albu AB. Leaflet free edge detection for the automatic analysis of prosthetic
heart valve opening and closing motion patterns from high speed video recordings. Image Analysis
2017 20th Scandinavian Conference, SCIA 2017; Part II, LNCS 10270:15-27. doi: 10.1007/978-3319-59129-2
Quinlan HJ, Dooley PN. Models of flow-induced loading on blood cells in laminar and turbulent
flow, with application to cardiovascular device flow. Ann Biomed Eng 2007;35:1347-1356.
doi:10.1007/s10439-007-9308-8
Hatoum H, Yousefi A, Lilly S, Maureira P, Crestanello J, Dasi LP. An in vitro evaluation of
turbulence after transcatheter aortic valve implantation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2018;156:18371848.
Rosseel L, De Backer O, Søndergaard L. Clinical valve thrombosis and subclinical leaflet
thrombosis following transcatheter aortic valve replacement: Is there a need for a patient-tailored
antithrombotic therapy? Front Cardiovasc Med 2019; 6:44-54. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2019.00044
Ding J, Chen Z, Niu S. Quantification of shear-induced platelet activation: High shear stresses for
short exposure time. Artificial Organs 2015;39:576-83.
Soares JS, Sheriff J, Bluestein D. A novel mathematical model of activation and sensitization of
platelets subjected to dynamic stress histories. Biomech Model Mechanobiol 2013;12:1127-41. doi:
10.3389/fcvm.2019.00141
Rana A, Westein E, Niego B, Hagemeyer CE. Shear-dependent platelet aggregation: mechanisms
and therapeutic opportunities. Front Cardiovasc Med 2019;6:141-162. doi:
10.3389/fcvm.2019.00141
Faghih MM, Sharp MK. Modeling and prediction of flow-induced hemolysis: a review.
Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiol 2019;18:845–881. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2019.00141
Aimo A, Giugliano RP, De Caterina R. Non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulants for mechanical
heart valves, is the door still open? Circulation 2018;138:1356-1365.

