medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A machine learning approach for precision diagnosis of
juvenile-onset SLE
George A Robinson*1,2, Junjie Peng*1,2, Pierre Dönnes1,3, Leda Coelewij1, Anna Radziszewska2,
Chris Wincup1, Hannah Peckham2, David A Isenberg1,2, Yiannis Ioannou2, Coziana Ciurtin1,2†, Ines
Pineda-Torra4†, Elizabeth C Jury1†
1

Centre for Rheumatology Research, Department of Medicine, University College London, Rayne
Building, London W1CE 6JF, U.K.
2
Centre for Adolescent Rheumatology Versus Arthritis, Department of Medicine, University College
London, Rayne Building, London W1CE 6JF, U.K.
3
Scicross AB, Skövde, Sweden.
4
Centre for Cardiometabolic and Vascular Science, Department of Medicine, University College
London, London W1CE 6JF, U.K.
* Share first authorship
† Share senior authorship

Corresponding authors: Liz Jury (e.jury@ucl.ac.uk), Coziana Ciurtin (c.ciurtin@ucl.ac.uk), Ines
Pineda-Torra (i.torra@ucl.ac.uk), George Robinson (george.robinson.15@ucl.ac.uk)

Key words:
Juvenile-onset systemic lupus erythematosus, immunophenotyping, machine learning, T-cells, Bcells, monocytes

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Juvenile-Onset systemic lupus erythematosus (JSLE) is an autoimmune rheumatic disease
characterised by systemic inflammation and organ damage, with disease onset often coinciding
with puberty. JSLE is associated with more severe disease manifestations and a higher motility
rate compared to adult SLE. Due to the heterogeneous clinical and immunological manifestations
of JSLE, delayed diagnosis and poor treatment efficacy are major barriers for improving patient
outcome. In order to define a unique immunophenotyping profile distinguishing JSLE patients from
age matched healthy controls, immune-based machine learning (ML) approaches were applied.
Balanced random forest analysis discriminated JSLE patients from healthy controls with an overall
91% prediction accuracy. The top-ranked immunological features were selected from the optimal
ML model and were validated by partial least squares discriminant analysis and logistic regression
analysis. Patients could be clustered into four distinct groups based on the top hits from the ML
model, providing an opportunity for tailored therapy. Moreover, complex correlations between the
JSLE immune profile and clinical features of disease were identified. Further immunological
association studies are essential for developing data-driven personalised medicine approaches to
aid diagnosis of JSLE for targeted therapy and improved patient outcomes.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic, multi-system autoimmune rheumatic disease
with a complex aetiology [1]. Juvenile-onset SLE (JSLE) accounts for approximately 15% to 20% of
all cases and is defined as the development of SLE in childhood or adolescence [2]. JSLE has a
more aggressive disease presentation characterised by increased prevalence of malar rash,
nephropathy, central nervous system (CNS) disease and haematological manifestations [3-6]
compared to adults with SLE. Severe disease complications, including multiple-organ impairment
and a notable increase in risk of cardiovascular disease, are also described in JSLE [7]. To date,
no medications have been approved for the treatment of JSLE due to the significant paucity of
adolescent-specific trial data [8, 9]. Primarily, the same pharmaceutical drugs are used in JSLE as
in adult SLE; however, JSLE patients commonly require increased corticosteroids and
immunosuppressive therapies because of their more severe disease presentation [2, 5, 10, 11].
The heterogeneous nature of the clinical manifestations are matched by the broad variety of
genetic and immunological abnormalities in JSLE patients [2], making precision diagnosis
particularly difficult in these patients. The predicament with imprecise diagnosis and poor treatment
efficacy leading to unsatisfactory outcomes for JSLE patients emphasises the urgent need for a
widely accepted universal diagnostic criteria and valid patient stratification for personalised
treatment.
Recently, in depth computational analysis of large multi-omic datasets has accelerated
understanding of complex heterogeneous diseases such as SLE/JSLE [12-15]. Machine learning
(ML) is a subdivision of artificial intelligence that builds analytical models by learning by example
and has been used in a wide range of clinical areas, including medical image classification and
prediction [16], drug discovery by predicting the optimal pharmaceutical target [17], and building
predictive models for disease diagnosis and prognosis [18]. It relies upon data collection, data
preparation, model training, model evaluation and improved performance cycles for selfimprovement, giving it enormous predictive power. A random forest is an ensemble ML algorithm
for classification consisting of multitudinous decisions trees, as in a real forest. Compared to a
single decision tree, the random forest method can increase the accuracy of the model without
suffering from overfitting data [19]. Each decision tree is able to generate independent predictions
and vote for the decisive classification outcome, which is more accurate than performing any
individual decision tree model alone.
The most recent SLE study applied three different machine learning approaches, including knearest neighbours (KNN), generalized logistic models (GLM) and random forest models to predict
disease activity using gene expression profiles. The random forest classifier outmatched other

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

approaches by achieving an 83% accuracy under 10-fold cross-validation [20]. Another study used
random forest models to predict lupus nephritis outcomes [21].
Here, ML approaches were applied to immunophenotyping profiles of JSLE patients and agematched healthy controls. An immunological signature was identified and validated using a
predictive ML model. This signature could be translated into potential diagnostic and therapeutic
biomarkers, including CD4+, CD8+, CD8+ effector memory and CD8+ Naïve T-cells, naïve and
unswitched memory B-cells and total CD14+ monocytes. This work could contribute to the
evolution of more precise diagnostic immunological signatures for heterogeneous autoimmune
rheumatic diseases such as JSLE and could facilitate better stratification of patients for optimal
treatment choices and improve quality of life for patients.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results
JSLE patients have a different immunological architecture to healthy controls
To investigate the potential immunological processes driving JSLE pathogenesis, in-depth
immunophenotyping was performed on PBMCs from 67 patients with JSLE and 39 age-matched
healthy controls (HCs) (demographic and clinical characteristics of the study cohort are given in
Supplementary Table 1). Gating strategies and description of immune phenotyping panel are
shown in Supplementary Figure 1 and Supplementary Table 2.
Initial analysis by t-test revealed that JSLE patients had a vastly different immune cell profile
compared to HCs following 1% false discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple testing (Figure
1A-C). This included increased total and naïve CD8+ T-cells and CD14+ monocytes as well as
decreased total CD4+ T-cells, CD8+ central memory (CM) T-cells, invariant natural killer T (iNKT)cells, naïve (Bm1) and unswitched memory B-cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDC’s).
The immunological architecture of JSLE patients compared to HCs was further explored using
correlation comparison analysis of the 28 immunological parameters described above. In the HC
population significant correlations were observed between many different types of immune cells,
most notably, significant negative correlations were identified between naïve and memory B-cell
sub-populations and separately between naïve and memory T-cell populations (Figure 1D-upper
triangle, and Supplementary Table 3). In JSLE, a clear global change in immunological architecture
was evident compared to HCs: many of the immune cell relationships identified in HCs were
inverted or exacerbated in JSLE. Most notably, an increased negative correlation between naïve
and memory (Early-Bm5) B-cells, an increased positive correlation between switched and
unswitched memory B-cells and an increased negative correlation between classical and nonclassical monocytes. (Figure 1D-lower triangle, and Supplementary Table 3). These results
suggest a comprehensive alteration of the immune system in JSLE with substantial memory
lymphocyte involvement indicating dysregulation of the adaptive immune system.
Machine learning identifies a unique immune signature associated with JSLE
To further assess the importance of the immunological composition in JSLE pathology, a balanced
random forest (BRF) ML approach utilising immunophenotyping data was employed to discriminate
between patients with JSLE and HCs (Figure 2A for BRF schematic and methods section for
description of the approach). Each decision tree was constructed with a randomly generated
subset of the original sample data, where only a random subset of the immunological parameters
is considered in each split. In order to maximise the performance of the predictive model, a
parameter-tuning test was performed by comparing model accuracy using different numbers of
randomly selected immunological parameters in each split. BRF models with 10 immunological
parameters (Nvariables=10) selected in each split gave the best overall model accuracy, and thus
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

were employed in the following analysis. To ensure the reliable predictive performance of the
model, a total of 10,000 decision trees were used for model construction.
After optimisation, the BRF model identified JSLE patients from HCs with a classification accuracy
of 86.8% (Figure 2B). The classification error rate in the out-of-bag validation set was 10.4% and
17.9% for predicting JSLE samples and HC samples respectively. Receiver operating curve (ROC)
analysis of the BRF model showed an AUC of 0.909 (Figure 2C), indicating the outstanding
efficiency of the model in discriminating JSLE samples from HC samples. From this analysis the
diagnostic sensitivity and specificity was 89.6% and 82.1% respectively. In addition, the
classification accuracy held a steady measure of 87.8% in the 10-fold cross-validation analysis.
Thus, JSLE patients can be discriminated from HCs with high confidence using these
immunological parameters and this BRF ML model.
Important immunological parameters selected from the balanced random forest model
The top contributing feature identified by the random forest algorithm to segregate JSLE from the
HC was the altered frequency of CD19+ unswitched memory cells, followed by Bm1 (naïve) B-cells
and CD14+ monocytes (Figure 2D). To further evaluate the influence of individual immunological
parameters, individual random forest models using each of the most important variables were
performed. The AUC of these univariate random forest models ranged from 72.18% to 84.08%,
with the best performance given by the Bm1-only model (AUC=0.8408), followed by the CD19+
unswitched memory B-cell-only model (AUC=0.8297) (Figure 2E). These results confirm the
important role of each primary immunological parameter selected in the original random forest
model.
Removing individual parameters from the random forest model was investigated; the distribution of
important variables generated from the model that excluded CD19+ unswitched memory B-cells
was similar to that of the original model (Figure 2F). Therefore, the individual frequency alteration
of CD19+ unswitched memory B-cells and other select immunological parameters might not be the
critical explanation for JSLE pathogenesis. Instead, the systemic alteration of the immune system
involving multiple immune cell dysregulations might better explain the complexity and
heterogeneity of the disease phenotype.
Validation of the top immunological parameters associated with JSLE from the balanced
random forest model
To further evaluate and validate the relationship between the individual immunological parameters
and JSLE, logistic regression analysis was applied by modelling the probability of JSLE using the
immune profiles of the HC and JSLE cohorts. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals
produced by the logistic regression model were used to evaluate the strength of the association
between individual immunological parameters and JSLE (Figure 3A, Supplementary Table 4). In
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

agreement with the results of the autoregulation analysis (Figure 1D), logistic regression analysis
identified 12 out of 28 immune cell types as significantly associated with JSLE, substantiating the
global immunological difference between JSLE and HCs. The correlation between having JSLE
and the reduced frequency of CD19+ unswitched memory cells was relatively high (OR=0.71,
95%CI = (0.60, 0.82)), in accordance with previous BRF classification analysis (Figure 2D).
Variables that were selected by the optimal BRF model were all confirmed to be significantly
associated with JSLE by logistic regression, thus strengthening the evidence of their potential
application as diagnostic biomarkers. Of note, vastly significant negative associations were
observed in iNKT-cells (OR = 4.59e-06, 95%CI = 1.52e-10, 0.14) and PDCs (OR=2.03e-02, 95%CI
= 6.11e-04, 0.67); for this reason, they were removed from the forest plot.
As a secondary validation, sparse partial least squares discriminant analysis (sPLS-DA) was
performed to rank and validate the immunological variables by their distribution in JSLE and HCs.
sPLS-DA is a supervised clustering machine learning approach that combines parameter selection
and classification into one operation. By assessing the overall estimation error rate and balanced
error rate in 10-fold cross-validation, models with four components were chosen for optimal model
performance (Figure 3B). After applying the optimal immunophenotyping-aid sPLS-DA, a
significant separation between JSLE and HCs was observed by plotting principal component (PC)
2 against PC 1 (Figure 3C), indicating a good prediction ability for the model. Similar to the BRF
analysis, a subset of discriminating immune cell types were selected and ranked by discriminating
capability (Figure 3D-E). Unsurprisingly, the highest weighted immunological parameter was
CD19+ unswitched memory cell (weight = -0.69), followed by Bm1 at approximately half of the
weight (-0.34). The top 10 discriminating parameters selected from sPLS-DA were all reported as
significantly associated with JSLE and matched the most important parameters from the BRF
model, with the exception of CD8+ CM cells and PDCs. Thus, a distinct immune signature was
identified and validated that could be applied diagnostically to identify JSLE patients for faster
targeted immunotherapy (Table 1).
Patients can be stratified based on the top hits from the ML model
To assess whether the immunological signature identified could be used to further stratify JSLE
patients, K-mean clustering, an unsupervised ML algorithm was used. For this analysis,
immunological parameters fulfilling the following criteria were selected: 1) selected as top 10
important variables in balanced random forest model; 2) selected as top 10 weighting variables in
sPLS-DA analysis; 3) significantly associated with JSLE in logistic regression analysis. After
screening, eight immune cell types stood out from the 28 immunological parameters: CD4+, CD8+,
CD8 EM and CD8+ Naïve T-cells, Bm1 and unswitched memory B-cells and total CD14+
monocytes (Table 1). K-mean clustering was performed to partition the original JSLE patients into

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

four groups (Group(G)1, n=10; G2, n=21; G3, n=21; G4, n=15) based on the top-weighted
immunophenotyping variables, with distinct immune profiles (Figure 4A and B).
Clear patterns among T cell subsets were observed from the patient grouping, with significant
differences in CD4+, CD8+, CD8+ naïve, and CD8+ EM T cell subset frequencies (Figure 4B).
JSLE samples in group (G)1 and G3 share relatively high CD8+ T-cells and relatively low CD4+ Tcells, whereas the opposite phenotype was observed in G2 and G4. G1 also had relatively high EM
but low naïve CD8+ T-cells. Interestingly, no significant differences were identified between the
groups for unswitched memory and Bm1 B-cells, CD14+ monocytes or iNKT cells. In addition,
relative comparison revealed no demographic or clinical differences between any groups with the
exception of complement component 3 (C3) which was significantly reduced in G1 and G3
(Supplementary Table 5). Thus, despite the identification of a strong predictive immune signature
associated with JSLE, patient heterogeneity in JSLE could still be important for considering
targeted and tailored treatment.
Immune cell subsets associated with JSLE are driven by different clinical features
Finally, in order to explore the systemic association between immunological parameters and
serologic clinical features a network analysis was performed. Clinical features including the
measurement of disease activity (SLE disease activity index, SLEDAI), anti-double stranded
(ds)DNA antibodies, complement levels, serum lipids, and other JSLE-associated biomarkers,
were selected to examine the relationship between immune cell frequencies and JSLE disease
features. From the overall correlation network, extensive immune correlations across clinical
features were observed (Figure 5, Supplementary Table 6). Consistent with the previous topweighted immunological parameters (Table 1), frequent connections involved total CD4+ and
CD8+ T-cells, naïve CD8 T-cells and Bm1 and unswitched memory B-cells, whereas iNKT-cells
only correlated positively with body mass index (BMI) and C3.
Disease activity, (SLEDAI) correlated negatively with CD4+ T-cells, naïve B-cells and intermediate
and non-classical monocytes and positively with CD8+ T-cells, transitional and mature B-cell
subsets. Anti-dsDNA antibody measures correlated with early Bm5 and switched memory B-cells
with no correlation with T-cell subsets. C3 also had many significant correlations, including a
negative correlation with total and EM CD8+ T-cells, supporting patterns associated with the kmean clustered groups (Figure 4 and Supplementary Table 5).
These results suggest the potential interaction between clinical features and disease-related
immune dysregulation, which could help explain the multifactorial, heterogeneous and systemic
nature of the disease.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Discussion
While the immunological differences between HCs and patients with adult SLE have been well
established in previous studies [3, 22], the immune phenotype of patients with JSLE is less well
described. Defects in immune cell subtypes in JSLE may contribute to an increased disease
severity and pathogenesis via different immunological pathways. Due to the complexity of the
pathogenesis and the heterogeneous nature of JSLE clinical manifestations, imprecise diagnosis
and poor treatment efficacy remain two major obstacles that drastically affect the outcome of
patient with JSLE [2]. Here the immune profiles of 28 immune cell subsets in JSLE patients were
compared to HCs to explore the immunological signature of the disease and assess potential
drivers of JSLE immunopathogenesis. This analysis identified i) a global shift of the immunological
architecture away from HCs in JSLE patients confirmed by correlation comparison analysis; ii)
JSLE patients were distinguished from HCs using an optimal BRF model, indicating the potential
immunologically-directed diagnostic power of ML; iii) Patients were clustered into four distinct
groups based on the top hits from the ML model and iv) specific clinical features were differentially
associated with immune cell subsets in JSLE. Together, these findings contribute to JSLE
diagnostic research, help identify meaningful therapeutic targets for JSLE treatment and uncover
the underlying pathogenic mechanisms of JSLE.
Precise and early diagnosis of JSLE is particularly important because morbidity and mortality can
be significantly controlled with suitable treatment [23]. A recent study showed that in the UK, JSLE
diagnosis based on the onset of symptoms is accomplished in a median time of two months, but
there was a significant variation in diagnosis time (interquartile range 1–6 months) due to the highly
heterogeneous clinical manifestation of the disease [24, 25]. In clinical practice, 38% of SLE
patients are diagnosed with at least one other co-occurring autoimmune disease [26]. Therefore,
symptoms common in typical SLE patients such as fatigue, hair loss and lymphadenopathy are
normally indeterminate for JSLE diagnosis as they also present in multiple other diseases. To
accurately diagnose JSLE, a variety of clinical features and laboratory markers are necessary in
order to distinguish JSLE from other systemic autoimmune conditions, such as juvenile idiopathic
arthritis and juvenile dermatomyositis, and requires expertise across multiple fields.
An initial SLE diagnosis is highly dependent on disease presentation without comprehensive
laboratory testing [27], which makes the diagnosis of patients with inconspicuous symptoms
particularly challenging. Considering the importance of immunophenotyping assessments and
autoantibody tests, it is becoming crucial to include comprehensive peripheral blood tests in firstand second-line diagnostics [28]. The limited number of selected immune parameters makes the
immune-based JSLE diagnostic assay economically feasible [29, 30]. ML models with substantial
predictive accuracy can assist clinicians with complicated diagnostic decision making, though
extensive study is necessary to construct accurate models for specific population groups. The
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

autonomy of ML is attributable to their exceptional learning ability, which allows for continuous selfimprovement without having step-by-step instructions.
Using ML approaches here, 8 out of 28 of the immune subtypes were confirmed as significantly
associated with JSLE, and they contribute substantially to the classification models. In principle,
these select immunological features can be further assessed as valuable biomarkers and designed
as a potential diagnostic tool. In addition, the high percentage (steady measure of 87.8%) obtained
from the 10-fold cross validation suggests a consistently reliable model performance without
overfitting issues when applied in practice. This tool could enhance current diagnostic routines by
providing a more in-depth view of the patient’s immunological state.
The development and use of biologic therapies have been increasingly promising because they
can target specific immunopathological agents and diminish SLE disease progression [31].
However, the efficacy of each biologic drug is unsatisfactory due to the heterogeneous
immunopathogenesis [23]. For instance, the complete response (CR) rate of rituximab assessed
by the British Isles Lupus Assessment Group (BILAG) was only 46.7% for SLE [32]. The
importance of the treat-to-target approach for SLE patients is addressed by van Vollenhoven and
colleagues [33], as the appropriate target can be identified and resolved with specific therapy for
each patient. In addition, biological drugs have become increasingly popular in routine
management of patients with severe JSLE, but none have been approved for use in paediatric
patients [23]. Despite the strong predictive immune signature developed from our ML method,
JSLE patients could still be clustered into four distinct groups based on the expression of the top
immune cell subsets from the ML model. Significant differences between the groups were only
observed for T-cell subsets which may be associated with C3 levels; less heterogeneity was
observed in the frequency of unswitched memory and Bm1 B-cells and CD14+ monocytes, which
may explain the increased predictive power of these subsets in the BRF model. Therefore, using
immunological biomarkers to unravel the underlying disease mechanism may allow for a more
personalised approach, improving clinical trial design, approval rate and treatment efficacy of JSLE
patients.
This project has a number of potential limitations. While ML approaches are well-known for their
robustness and their capability to self-learn, many ML algorithms function like an incomprehensible
“black box” that produces reasonable prediction results without giving complementary justification
[34]. Since this work was designed to be heavily based on ML, the lack of a rational biological
explanation from the results is an inevitable problem. Therefore, to uncover the immunopathogenic
significance from selected immune features, a longitudinal study of JSLE cohorts is critically
important for validating the association between immune cell subsets and disease.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Patients with JSLE often have overlapping clinical manifestations with other autoimmune diseases,
including Sjögren’s syndrome and Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) [35]. Due to the limited cohort
recruited for this study, patients with other autoimmune diseases were not included in the analysis.
Therefore, the immunological differences between JSLE and other immune diseases were not
assessed. Additionally, ML models were only trained with JSLE and HC samples. As a result, the
performance of classification models is limited when applied to the overall population where other
confounding diseases are present. Separating patients with autoimmune diseases that show
extensive overlapping of symptoms will be particularly meaningful in precision diagnosis.
In conclusion, this study investigated the ability of immunophenotyping to stratify patients with
JSLE and demonstrated the potential of immune-based ML to develop precision diagnosis and
personalised treatment. By applying immune-based ML approaches, a BRF algorithm
discriminated JSLE patients from HCs with an accuracy of ~91%. Future multi-omics association
studies have the potential to investigate the correlation between the essential immunological
parameters and clinical manifestations, extracting the full value of the immune signatures in clinical
practice.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Materials and Methods
Patients and control samples
Patient blood was collected from JSLE patients (n=67) attending a young adult or adolescent
rheumatology clinic at University College London Hospital (UCLH) or Great Ormond Street
Hospital (GOSH) respectively. Teenage and young adult healthy control (HC) blood (n=39) was
collected at the Rayne building, UCL, from volunteers taking part in educational events such as
young scientist days. Informed consent was acquired from both patients and healthy controls under
the ethical approval reference: REC11/LO/0330. All information was stored as anonymised data.
Detailed clinical characteristics and disease features were recorded from patient files and
questionnaires (Supplementary Table 1). Disease activity was calculated via the SLE Disease
Activity Index (SLEDAI). A score of 4 or more was used to indicate active disease [36].
Flow cytometry
Surface staining
Multiparameter flow cytometry was used to immunophenotype JSLE and HC PBMCs stained with
fixable blue dead cell stain (ThermoFisher) and a T-cell and antigen presenting cell (APC) antibody
panel to measure cell marker expression (28 immune cell subsets, Supplementary Figure 1 for
gating strategy, Supplementary Methods Table 1 for list of antibodies used). PBMCs were stained
at a density of 1x10^6 cells per well (96 well round bottom plate). This was followed by subsequent
washes and fixation in 2% PFA before running on a flow cytometer.
Data acquirement and analysis
Data was acquired using a BD LSRFORTESSA X-20 flow cytometer (1x10^6-2x10^6 cells per
sample) and analysis was carried out using FlowJo Single Cell Analysis Software (TreeStar).
Application settings were created to begin with and Cytometer Setup and Tracking (CS&T) (BD)
beads were run on the flow cytometer before each session to assess cytometer performance.
Application settings were applied to panel templates each time prior to compensation to ensure
that all immunophenotyping data was comparable over time. Gating strategies were kept
consistent throughout and are shown in Supplementary Figure 1.
Statistical analysis
The clinical features and immune profile data of 67 JSLE patients and 39 HCs were collated and
stored in Microsoft Excel. Individual identifications were replaced with randomly assigned numbers
to ensure confidentiality. General immunophenotype data compared between HCs and JSLE
patients or across JSLE stratified groups was performed by unpaired t-test using GraphPad Prism
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

8 software and plotted as violin plots, scatter dot plots or as a volcano plot where data was
corrected for multiple testing by two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini, Krieger and
Yekutieli (false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%). All other statistical analyses were performed in R
version 3.5.2 [37] and demographic variables including gender, age and ethnicity were adjusted for
in all ML analyses. The software/packages used for processing any analysis are listed in
Supplementary Methods Table 2 and are detailed below.
Correlation Comparison analysis
Correlation comparison analysis was performed to investigate the difference in immunological
architecture between the HC and the JSLE patients. Spearman correlation tests between pairs of
immune cell types in both the HC and the JSLE patients were performed using R version 3.5.2
[37]. The significance for the difference in corresponding correlation between the HC and the JSLE
patients was calculated using the cocor package in R (cocor.indep.groups function) [38].
Spearman correlation coefficients for pairs of immune cell types were plotted in a heat map using
the heatmap.2 function from gplots package in R (Supplementary Methods Table 2).
Balanced random forest (BRF)
To stratify JSLE patients from the HC using immunophenotyping data, the balanced random forest
(BRF) approach was used with the randomForest package in R (Supplementary Methods Table 2).
Decision trees were built using a bootstrap dataset consisting of randomly selected samples from
the original dataset (n = 106), allowing the same sample to be selected more than once. As the
original sample set had an unbalanced HC:JSLE (39:67) ratio, the balanced method was applied in
the bootstrap dataset construction. The bootstrap dataset was first selected from the minority class
(HC, n = 39) whilst randomly drawing the exact number (n = 39) from the majority class (JSLE).
The balanced bootstrap dataset (n = 78) was then used for model training. After creating the
bootstrap dataset, only a random subset of immunological variables was considered at each split
of the decision tree. Every decision tree was built by constructing a new bootstrap dataset and
considering a newly selected subset of variables at each step. A total 10,000 decision trees were
used for the BRF model construction, allowing the output to be stabilised. The classification output
of the model was provided by aggregating the predictions of every decision tree and making the
final prediction. Samples that were not included in the bootstrap dataset were termed the Out-ofBag (OOB) dataset and were used to validate the model performance.
In addition, model optimisation testing was performed to determine the exact number of
immunological variables (Nvariable) included in each subset for building the decision tree. By
comparing the accuracy of the BRF model with different Nvariable settings (Nvariable ranging from 1
to 28), the model with the overall lowest classification error rate was selected as the optimal model
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and applied in further analysis. For model performance evaluation, the ROC plot and the AUC of
each model was computed with the pROC package in R (Supplementary Methods Table 2). To
assess the BRF model performance in practice, 10-fold cross validation was applied with the caret
package in R (Supplementary Methods Table 2).
Sparse partial least squares discriminant analysis (sPLS-DA)
This supervised machine learning approach sPLS-DA was operated using the mixOmics package
(Supplementary Methods Table 2) in R. Ten-fold cross-validation with 50 repetitions was applied to
prevent model overfitting. Model optimisation was applied to select the number of components
included in the sPLS-DA model. By comparing the overall estimation error rate and the balanced
error rate (BER) from 10-fold cross-validation, the model with the best discriminatory performance
was selected as the optimal model and was used for further analysis. The separation of JSLE and
HC samples was presented by projecting the samples into the subspace constructed of component
1 and component 2. The prediction interval of the model was calculated from the 95% confidence
ellipses for the HC group and the JSLE group. The top 10 weighted immunological parameters
were selected and presented by variable loading plots.
Logistic regression for association analysis
The association between the immunophenotypes of 28 parameters and JSLE was assessed by
logistic regression analysis adjusted for age, sex and ethnicity. For each measurement, the odds
ratio (OR) and the 95% confidence interval (CI) were determined. The p-value for each association
was calculated in the logistic regression analysis. Forest plots produced with the ggplot2 package
(Supplementary Methods Table 2) in R were used to present the logistic regression analysis
results, with significant associations highlighted in blue (p < 0.05).
K-means clustering analysis
To apply the identified biomarkers in JSLE patient stratification, k-means clustering analysis was
performed with the stats package in r. The k-means clustering algorithm repositions the specific
amount of cluster centroids around the JSLE samples (n=67) until the most convergent grouping
appears. The number of groupings in k-means clustering is determined by the elbow method
(Supplementary Methods Figure 1). The immunophenotypes of the selected top hits parameter
were standardised and laid out as a heatmap, with columns representing selected immune cell
types and rows representing individual JSLE samples.
Network analysis
To visualise the systemic connection between immune cell type and clinical features, network
analysis was performed with Force Atlas layout in Gephi (Supplementary Methods Table 2). 16
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

clinical features, namely SLEDAI score, cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL), C:HDL, lowdensity lipoprotein (LDL), triglycerides, lymphocyte count, complement component 3 (C3), Creactive protein (CRP), double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR),
haemoglobin, platelet count, urine protein:creatinine ratio, neutrophil count and body mass index
(BMI) were applied in the network analysis, covering essential measurement of disease activity,
lipid levels, inflammation and autoantibody levels. Pearson correlation coefficients for each
association were calculated in R. Only correlations with an absolute value of ≥0.2 are shown in the
graph.

Contributors: Design of research study; ECJ, CC, ITP, PD. Acquiring data; GAR, AR, HP, CW.
Recruiting patients; HP, CC, YI, CW, DAI. Analyzing data; GAR, JP, PD, LC. Writing the
manuscript; GAR, JP, ECJ. Review of the manuscript; DAI, CC, ITP, PD. All authors approved the
final version.
Funding: GAR was supported by a PhD studentship from Lupus UK and The Rosetrees Trust
(M409). This work was supported by the Adolescent Centre at UCL UCLH and GOS funded by
Arthritis Research UK (20164 and 21953), Great Ormond Street Children’s Charity and the NIHR
Biomedical Research Centres at GOSH and UCLH. The views expressed are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.

Competing interests: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.

Ethics

approval: This

study was

approved

by the

London-Harrow research

Ethics

Committee,11/LO/0330

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1. Selection of important immunological features from ML analysis

CD4+
CD4+ CM
CD4+ EM
CD4+ EMRA
CD4+ Naive
CD8+
CD8+ CM
CD8+ EM
CD8+ EMRA
CD8+ Naive
iNKT
Treg
Tresp
CD19+
Bm1
Bm2
Bm2 (Transitional)
Bm3-Bm4
Early Bm5
Late Bm5
CD19+ Naive
CD19+ Switched memory
CD19+ Unswitched memory
CD14+
Classical
Intermediate
non-classical
PDC's

BRF
✓

sPLS-DA
✓

✓

Logistic regression
✓
✓

✓

✓
✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓

✓
✓

✓

✓

Table 1: Selection of important immunological features from ML analysis
28 immune cell subsets involved in the immunopenotyping of HCs and JSLE patients assessed by flow
cytometry. There are listed and ticked where: left) selected as top 10 most important variables in the
balanced random forest (BRF) model; middle) selected as top 10 weighted variables in sparse partial least
squares discriminant analysis (sPLS-DA) analysis; right) significantly associated with JSLE in logistic
regression analysis. Abbreviations: Regulatory T-cells (Tregs), invariant natural killer T-cells (iNKT-cells),
central memory (CM), effector memory (EM), plasmacytoid dendritic cell (PDC), Bm1 (naïve), Bm2 (mature),
Bm2’ (transitional), Bm3-4 (Plasmablasts), early/late Bm5 (memory).

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1: The immunological architecture is altered in JSLE: PBMC’s from HCs (n=39) and JSLE
patients (n=67) were stained ex-vivo as described in Supplementary Figure 1 (gating strategy) and
Supplementary Methods Table-1, to evaluate expression of 28 immune cell subsets by flow cytometry. (A)
Volcano plot displaying data points from all 28 immune cell subsets between JSLE patients and HCs. Fold
10
change and Log p values are displayed from unpaired t tests. Red line=adjusted p value following 1% false
discovery rate adjustment for multiple comparisons. B-C) Violin plots displaying B) antigen presenting cells
and C) T-cell subsets that were significantly different between HCs and JSLE patients by unpaired t test.
Mean+SE, *=p<0.05, **=p<0.01, ***=p<0.001, ****=p<0.0001. D) Correlation comparison analysis was
performed on immune phenotyping data described in (A). Upper left of the heat map: correlation between
pairs of immune cell types (28 immunological variables) in HCs. Spearman correlation coefficients for each
pair of cell types are represented by colour (red indicates a positive correlation coefficient; blue indicates a
negative correlation coefficient). Colour concentration is proportional to the strength of the correlation
(corresponding value shown on the right of the figure). Bottom right of the heat map: Correlation between
pairs of immune cell types in JSLE patients, where a dark grey colour indicates the Spearman correlation
coefficient is not signficantly different to HCs. Correlations between pairs of immune cell types which were
significantly altered in JSLE patients are coloured (p<0.05) (red colour indicates a positive correlation
coefficient; blue indicates a negative correlationcoefficient) and boxed (p<0.01).

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2: Balanced random forest machine learning using immunophenotyping data can predict
accurately JSLE patients from healthy controls. (A) Building a predictive model using a Balanced
Random Forest approach. A large number of decision trees are used (in this case n=10,000) (see methods
section). Demographic variables including gender, age and ethnicity were adjusted for in the model. (B)
Comparison of 28 different immune cell subsets in healthy donors (n=39) vs JSLE patients (n=67) using the
Balanced Random Forest Model.The out of bag (OOB) error rate was 13.2%. (C) Reciever operator
characteristic (ROC) curve analysis and 10-fold cross validation was used to validate the model providing an
area under the curve (AUC) of 0.908 and an accuracy of 87.80%, meaning that the model was able to
confidently predict differentiation between HCs and JSLE. (D) The top 10 variables contributing to the
random forest model are shown. The mean decrease in Gini is a measure of each variable to the importance
of the model, a higher score indicates a higher importance of the variable. (E) ROC showing the sensitivity
and specificty of the top 9 markers identified by the model. This shows that all variables are important for the
prediction. (F) The top 10 contributing variables in the random forest model trained on a total of 27
immunological parameters (excluding CD19+ unswitched memory cells).

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3: Top hits from BRF approach were validated using logistic regression analysis and sparse
Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (sPLS-DA). (A) Odds ratios (95% confidence intervals, CIs)
of 28 immunological parameters were computed with logistic regression analysis. The dotted line represents
the line of no effect (OR=1). 95% CIs that do not cross the dotted line (OR=1) indicate a statistically
significant association between the immune cell type and JSLE (in red). Gender, ethnicity and age were
adjusted in the logistic regression analysis to avoid confounding effects. For better visualization of the result,
iNKT and PDC were omitted from the figure. (B-E) sPLS-DA analysis was perfomed. (B) Model optimisation.
Models with different component numbers were assessed by 10-fold cross-validation x10, using the overall
error rate (blue line) and balanced error rate (BER, yellow line) to evaluate model performance. The models
with four components gave the lowest overall estimation error rate (16.7%) and BER (17.5%) and were
selected as optimal for sPLS-DA models. (C) sPLS-DA plot to validate the top hits from the predictive model.
sPLS-DA is a supervised clustering method, which applies weighting to measurements which separate HCs
and un-stratified JSLE patients. Ovals indicate the 80% prediction interval. Using this analysis, the weighting
of each cell type in component 1 is displayed (D) as well as their factor loading value (E). Demographic
variables including gender, age and ethnicity were adjusted for in all analysis.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4: Patient clustering by top-weighted immunological parameters in JSLE compared to HCs.
(A) JSLE Patients were stratified using k-means clustering including the using immunophenotypes of the
selected top-weighted immunological parameters. The immunophenotypes are plotted as a heatmap, each
row representing an individual JSLE sample, which are clustered by groups. The immunophenotype is
standardised within each column by z-score. The colour key shows the corresponding colour for z-score
(from -5 to 5) for each column, representing the relationship to the mean of the group; red colour indicates a
relatively high frequency of the immune cell type, and blue colour indicates a relatively low frequency of the
immune cell type. Four groups of patients were recognised with distinct immune cell profiles. Group 1 (n=10,
red); Group 2 (n=21, orange); Group 3 (n=21,blue); Group 4 (n=15, green). B) Scatter dot plots displaying
top-weighted immunological parameters between the k-means clustered groups (coloured appropriately).
Mean+SE, one-way ANOVA, Tukey's multiple comparisons test, *=p<0.05, **=p<0.01, ***=p<0.001,
****=p<0.0001.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5: Network analysis identifies associations between immunological and clinical features
JSLE. Correlations between immune cell frequency measures and JSLE clinical characteristics. Pearson
correlation coefficients based on univariate logistic regression are represented as connecting lines between
the clinical characteristic nodes and immune cell frequency nodes. Only correlations with an absolute r value
of 0.2 and above are shown. Immune cell subsets with no correlation (r) values above 0.2 are not shown. P
values and r values are displayed in Supplementary Table 4. Size of the circles (nodes) are proportional to
the total number of connections with other nodes. Red line colour indicates a positive correlation and blue
lines indicate a negative correlation. Node colour was grouped according to immune cell type (T-cells: green,
B-cells: orange, monocytes: pink, PDC’s: purple) and clinical characteristic (grey). The graph was generated
using the Force Atlas layout in Gephi 0.9.2.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

Nightingale, A.L., R.D.T. Farmer, and C.S. de Vries, Incidence of clinically diagnosed systemic lupus
erythematosus
1992-1998
using
the
UK
General
Practice
Research
Database.
Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 2006. 15(9): p. 656-661.
Mina, R. and H.I. Brunner, Pediatric Lupus-Are There Differences in Presentation, Genetics,
Response to Therapy, and Damage Accrual Compared with Adult Lupus? Rheumatic Disease
Clinics of North America, 2010. 36(1): p. 53-+.
Cervera, R., et al., SYSTEMIC LUPUS-ERYTHEMATOSUS - CLINICAL AND IMMUNOLOGICAL
PATTERNS OF DISEASE EXPRESSION IN A COHORT OF 1,000 PATIENTS. Medicine, 1993.
72(2): p. 113-124.
Ambrose, N., et al., Differences in disease phenotype and severity in SLE across age groups. Lupus,
2016.
Tucker, L.B., et al., Adolescent onset of lupus results in moire aggressive disease and worse
outcomes: results of a nested matched case-control study within LUMINA, a multiethnic US cohort
(LUMINA LVII). Lupus, 2008. 17(4): p. 314-322.
Brunner, H.I., et al., Difference in disease features between childhood-onset and adult-onset
systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 2008. 58(2): p. 556-562.
Murphy, G., L. Lisnevskaia, and D. Isenberg, Autoimmune Rheumatic Diseases 2 Systemic lupus
erythematosus and other autoimmune rheumatic diseases: challenges to treatment. Lancet, 2013.
382(9894): p. 809-818.
Morgan, T., et al., Children and adolescents with SLE: not just little adults. Lupus, 2013. 22(12): p.
1309-1319.
Hedrich, C.M., E.M.D. Smith, and M.W. Beresford, Juvenile-onset systemic lupus erythematosus
(jSLE) - Pathophysiological concepts and treatment options. Best Practice & Research in Clinical
Rheumatology, 2017. 31(4): p. 488-504.
Hersh, A.O., et al., Differences in Long-Term Disease Activity and Treatment of Adult Patients With
Childhood- and Adult-Onset Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Arthritis & Rheumatism-Arthritis Care &
Research, 2009. 61(1): p. 13-20.
Font, J., et al., Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in childhood: analysis of clinical and
immunological findings in 34 patients and comparison with SLE characteristics in adults. Annals of
the Rheumatic Diseases, 1998. 57(8): p. 456-459.
Banchereau, R., et al., Personalized Immunomonitoring Uncovers Molecular Networks that Stratify
Lupus Patients. Cell, 2016. 165(3): p. 551-565.
Van Nieuwenhove, E., et al., Machine learning identifies an immunological pattern associated with
multiple juvenile idiopathic arthritis subtypes. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 2019. 78(5): p.
617-628.
Panousis, N.I., et al., Combined genetic and transcriptome analysis of patients with SLE: distinct,
targetable signatures for susceptibility and severity. Annals of the rheumatic diseases, 2019. 78(8):
p. 1079-1089.
Toro-Dominguez, D., et al., Stratification of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Patients Into Three
Groups of Disease Activity Progression According to Longitudinal Gene Expression. Arthritis &
Rheumatology, 2018. 70(12): p. 2025-2035.
Esteva, A., B. Kuprel, and R.A. Novoa, Dermatologist-Level Classification of Skin Cancer with Deep
Neural Networks. Oncologie, 2017. 19(11-12): p. 407-408.
Gawehn, E., J.A. Hiss, and G. Schneider, Deep Learning in Drug Discovery. Molecular Informatics,
2016. 35(1): p. 3-14.
Alipanahi, B., et al., Predicting the sequence specificities of DNA- and RNA-binding proteins by deep
learning. Nature Biotechnology, 2015. 33(8): p. 831-+.
Ho, T.K., Random decision forests, in Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Document Analysis and Recognition (Volume 1) - Volume 1. 1995, IEEE Computer Society. p. 278.
Kegerreis, B., et al., Machine learning approaches to predict lupus disease activity from gene
expression data. Scientific Reports, 2019. 9: p. 12.
Wolf, B.J., et al., Development of Biomarker Models to Predict Outcomes in Lupus Nephritis. Arthritis
& Rheumatology, 2016. 68(8): p. 1955-1963.
Font, J., et al., Clusters of clinical and immunologic features in systemic lupus erythematosus:
Analysis of 600 patients from a single center. Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism, 2004. 33(4): p.
217-230.
Peterknecht, E., M.P. Keasey, and M.W. Beresford, The effectiveness and safety of biological
therapeutics in juvenile-onset systemic lupus erythematosus (JSLE): a systematic review. Lupus,
2018. 27(13): p. 2135-2145.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007765; this version posted October 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

37.
38.

Lythgoe, H., et al., DIAGNOSIS AND INITIAL MANAGEMENT OF JUVENILE-ONSET SYSTEMIC
LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS IN THE UK AND IRELAND. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 2019.
78: p. 1329-1329.
Watson, L., F. Gohar, and M.W. Beresford, Diagnosis and management of juvenile-onset SLE.
Paediatrics and Child Health, 2011. 21(12): p. 539-545.
Lockshin, M.D., A.B. Levine, and D. Erkan, Patients with overlap autoimmune disease differ from
those with 'pure' disease. Lupus Science & Medicine, 2015. 2(1): p. 6.
Gatto, M., et al., Preclinical and early systemic lupus erythematosus. Best Practice & Research
Clinical Rheumatology, 2019: p. 101422.
Thong, B. and N.J. Olsen, Systemic lupus erythematosus diagnosis and management.
Rheumatology, 2016. 56(suppl_1): p. i3-i13.
Virgo, P.F. and G.J. Gibbs, Flow cytometry in clinical pathology. Annals of Clinical Biochemistry,
2012. 49: p. 17-28.
Castro, C. and M. Gourley, Diagnostic testing and interpretation of tests for autoimmunity. Journal of
Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 2010. 125(2): p. S238-S247.
Bernal, C.B., L.D. Zamora, and S.V. Navarra, Biologic therapies in systemic lupus erythematosus.
International Journal of Rheumatic Diseases, 2015. 18(2): p. 146-153.
Duxbury, B., C. Combescure, and C. Chizzolini, Rituximab in systemic lupus erythematosus: an
updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Lupus, 2013. 22(14): p. 1489-1503.
van Vollenhoven, R.F., et al., Remission in SLE: closing in on the target. Annals of the Rheumatic
Diseases, 2015. 74(12): p. 2103-2106.
Watson, D.S., et al., Clinical applications of machine learning algorithms: beyond the black box. BmjBritish Medical Journal, 2019. 364: p. 4.
Maazoun, F., et al., Systemic lupus erythematosusmyositis overlap syndrome: report of 6 cases.
Clinics and practice, 2011. 1(4): p. e89.
Griffiths, B., M. Mosca, and C. Gordon, Assessment of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
and the use of lupus disease activity indices. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol, 2005. 19(5): p. 685708.
R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing.
Available online
at https://www.R-project.org/. 2018.
Diedenhofen, B. and J. Musch, cocor: A Comprehensive Solution for the Statistical Comparison of
Correlations. 2015, Figshare.

23

