medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Influence of electromagnetic radiation emitted by daily-use
electronic devices on the Eyemate​®​ system
Azzurra Invernizzi​1,2,*​, Shereif Haykal​1,2,*​, Valeria Lo Faro​1,*​, Vincenzo Pennisi​3​, Lars Choritz​3

1. Laboratory for Experimental Ophthalmology, University of Groningen, University
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands
2. Cognitive Neuroscience Center, Department of Biomedical Sciences of Cells &
Systems, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands
3. Department of Ophthalmology, Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg,
Magdeburg, Germany
* these authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence​:
Azzurra Invernizzi, Laboratory for Experimental Ophthalmology, University Medical Center
Groningen, P.O.Box 30.001, 9700 RB Groningen, Netherlands. Phone: +31 50 3612510; Fax:
+31 50 3611709; e-mail: ​a.invernizzi@umcg.nl

Lars Choritz, Department of Ophthalmology, Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg,
Magdeburg, Germany. Email: ​lars.choritz@med.ovgu.de
Running title​: Influence of electromagnetic radiation on the Eyemate® system
Authors’ contributions​: ​AI, SH, VLF, VP and LC conceptualized, designed the experimental
setup and collected the data. AI performed data analysis and visualization. AI, SH and VFL
wrote and finalised the manuscript. LC ​supervised the study and revised the final draft of
the manuscript.​ All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgements​:
We want to thank Jacqueline van den Bosch for her useful feedback on the experiment
design and Frans W. Cornelissen for his feedback on data analysis and support during the
writing process.

Funding​: This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grants agreement
No. 661883 (EGRET cofund) and No.675033 (EGRET plus). The funding organizations had no
role in the design, conduct, analysis, or publication of this research.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Purpose​: Eyemate® is a system for the continual monitoring of intraocular pressure (IOP),
comprised of an intraocular sensor, and a hand-held reader device. The eyemate®-IO
sensor is surgically implanted in the eye during cataract surgery. Once implanted, the
sensor communicates telemetrically with the hand-held device to activate and record IOP
measurements. The aim of this study was to assess the possible influence of
electromagnetic radiation emitted by daily-use electronic devices on the eyemate® IOP
measurements.
Methods: The eyemate®-IO sensor was placed in a plastic bag, immersed in a sterile sodium
chloride solution at 0.9% and placed in a water bath at 37°C. The antenna, connected to a
laptop for recording the data, was positioned at a fixed distance of 1 cm from the sensor.
Approximately two hours of “quasi-continuous” measurements was recorded for the
baseline and for cordless phone, smart-phone and laptop. Repeated measures ANOVA was
used to compare any possible differences between the baseline and the tested devices.
Results​: For baseline measurements, the sensor maintained a steady-state. The same
behavior was observed with the devices measurements during active and inactive states.
Conclusion: ​We found no evidence of signal drifts or fluctuations associated with the tested
devices, thus showing a lack of electromagnetic interference with data transmission.
Patients who already have the eyemate®-IO sensor implanted, or those considering it, can
be informed that the electromagnetic radiation emitted by their daily-use electronic
devices does not interfere with IOP measurements made by the eyemate®-IO sensor.
Keywords: ​Glaucoma, Intraocular pressure, eyemate® system, telemetry, electromagnetic

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

radiation.

Background
Glaucoma is one of the leading causes of irreversible blindness worldwide, with a predicted
increase in prevalence as the world’s population continues to age.​1​ While the underlying
causes of glaucoma vary, the main controllable risk factor for all subtypes of glaucoma is
increased intraocular pressure (IOP).​2​ IOP is usually measured by a trained specialist in a
clinical setting during working hours. However, IOP exhibits both short and long-term
fluctuations throughout the day,​3,4​ which can easily be missed by acquiring static IOP
measurements at the clinic in the traditional manner. Although still controversial, some
studies have suggested that such fluctuations are an independent risk factor for the
development and progression of glaucoma.​5,6​ Therefore, monitoring IOP fluctuations could
potentially improve our understanding of glaucoma and how to best control it, and in turn
improve patient care.
Several approaches and devices have been proposed for the continuous monitoring of IOP
throughout the day.​7​ Currently, the only CE-certified device for continuously monitoring IOP
intraocularly is the eyemate® (Implandata Ophthalmic Products GmbH, Hannover,
Germany). The eyemate® system comprises a wireless pressure sensor and handheld device
(Mesograph). The sensor communicates with the Mesograph device telemetrically, both to
provide it with an energy source and to transfer IOP recordings made by the sensor.
Implantation of the sensor is usually performed during cataract surgery, where the sensor is
placed in the ciliary sulcus after capsular implantation of the intraocular lens. Once
implanted, the sensor is meant to remain in the patient’s eye indefinitely.​11

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The eyemate® system enables glaucoma patients to measure their own IOP at any time
during the day without the need for a doctor’s visit. It also allows ophthalmologists to
produce IOP profiles for their patients throughout the day, enabling the detection of any
possible fluctuations. Given the novelty of the device, clinical studies of its long-term
outcome are still scarce. A study of the long-term safety of the implanted first-generation
sensor in 5 open-angle glaucoma patients over an average period of 37.5 months has
reported “good functionality and tolerability”.​8​ A more recent study of patients who
received the implant following Boston Keratoprosthesis surgery reported that the sensor
successfully detected postoperative IOP peaks and that measurements made by the sensor
showed satisfactory agreement with finger palpation.​9
As the eyemate®-IO sensor communicates with the hand-held reader telemetrically, some
patients might fear that the electronic devices that they use on a daily basis might
somehow interfere with this communication, leading to unreliable measurements of IOP. In
this study, we address these concerns by investigating the effect of electromagnetic
radiation produced by everyday electronic devices on the measurements made by an
eyemate®-IO sensor.

Methods
Data acquisition
The latest generation of eyemate® wireless intraocular transducer sensor was used for
studying the influence of electromagnetic radiation on the IOP measurements. The sensor
was placed in a plastic bag, immersed in a sterile sodium chloride solution at 0.9% and

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

placed inside a tissue bath reservoir (RES-01, Experimetria Ltd., Hungary) containing Milli
Q-water. A circulating water bath (CWB-02, Experimetria Ltd., Hungary) connected to the
tissue bath was used to maintain the temperature constant around 37°C in the system
(Figure 1, panel a).
An antenna, connected to the Mesograph device, which in turn was connected to a laptop
for recording the data, was positioned at a fixed distance of 1 cm from the sensor (Figure 1,
panel b). Approximately two hours (116 minutes) of “quasi-continuous” measurements
were recorded for the baseline and for each device at a sample rate of approximately 10
Hz.​ ​To obtain the baseline measurements, any disturbing electromagnetic impulses were
eliminated. All plugs were removed from the sockets in the test room, no lights were
switched on, no telephones (fixed line, cordless, or smart- phone). Only the data acquisition
computer and the water pump, placed at 2 m from the experimental setup, were left in the
room. The duration of the data acquisition was based on the maximal storing capacity of
the readout file (64 KB limit).

Figure 1 - Experimental setup. Panel ​a shows an overview of the setup, including the tissue-bath reservoir,

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

and the Mesograph reader for recording measurements. Panel ​b shows a closer look at the eyemate®-IO
sensor and the fixed antenna.

In order to have comparable measurements for testing the influence of each electronic
device, the same environment was recreated: the plugs were removed from the socket, no
lights were switched on and only the data acquisition computer and the water pump were
left in the room.
For each device, the experiment was divided into four different measurement intervals: the
initial twenty-five minutes were used as “baseline” (named no device to avoid confusion);
after this time, each single device - smartphone (​Huawei P10 Lite​), cordless phone (Philips
CD180) and laptop (ASUS ZenBook UX410) - was positioned next to the sensor in
inactive-mode. For the smartphone and laptop the inactive mode meant to set the device
in flight mode while for the cordless phone it meant putting it in stand-by (no call). The
measurements in inactive mode were made for twenty-five minutes, after which the device
was switched to active mode for the following twenty-five minutes. This consisted of an
active call for the smartphone and the cordless phone and active Wi-Fi and video streaming
for the laptop. The final measurement period consisted of a no device recording for the
remaining forty-one minutes.

Data analysis
In order to compare the baseline data with data acquired with different devices, the
baseline timeline was divided into four sub-phases corresponding to the four measurement
intervals (no device, device inactive, device active and no device) acquired for the devices.
Absolute pressure values, which represent the raw output data from the sensor used to
obtain the final IOP measurement, were used to evaluate possible IOP fluctuation. A

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

polynomial fitting of degree 9th, that takes into account environment pressure and
temperature, was applied to the acquired raw data (Figure 2, panel:a). Fitted data was
binned by averaging of ten samples per second (Figure 2, panel: b). Using the binned data,
we computed the mean, the maximum and minimum values for each measurement
period/interval of baseline and devices data. The range of fluctuations for each of the four
time-events was then determined by calculating the difference between the maximum and
the minimum values per data-bin, then by averaging the max and min values for each
event. Repeated measures ANOVA with Greenhouse-Geisser correction using SPSS version
25.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicag, Illinois, USA) was used to statistically compare any possible
differences between the baseline and the tested devices to investigate the influence of
daily use devices on the sensor recording.

Results
For baseline measurements, the sensor maintained a steady level for the duration of the
experiment, resulting in a flat profile with no apparent drift. The same behaviour was
observed with the device measurements during active and inactive states.
Small drops in signal measurements were observed corresponding to the time points where
each device was handled in the experimental setup (Figure 2, panel: b, drops in different
time-events are indicated with arrows).
Similar pattern of distributions and range of fluctuations were observed for both baseline
and devices in all four time-events (Figure 3 and Table 1). No statistically significant
difference (p-value = 0.332) was found between the average fluctuation for each
time-events of the baseline and the tested devices.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2 - “Quasi-continuous ” data recorded for a device. ​We show an example of the data recorded for one
of the three tested devices, namely the smartphone. Panel a: fitted data over time; panel b: fitted and
downsampled absolute pressure data over time. Arrows indicate drop in the signal measurements.

Figure 3 - Absolute pressure distributions during the four time-events. ​A kernel density function was applied
to the data for plotting purpose. Mean and median of each distribution are indicated with black solid line and
red dotted line, respectively.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1 - Illustration of absolute pressure range fluctuations during the four time-events. ​For each
time-events, for each device we show the averaged absolute pressure fluctuations calculated based on the
range definition.

Discussion
The eyemate® ​is a system capable of continuously monitoring IOP intraocularly. ​The
eyemate®-IO sensor is designed to be implanted in the patient’s eye during cataract surgery
in order to transmit IOP measurements telemetrically.​10-11 Because this sensor is constantly
sending and receiving ​electromagnetic ​signals, patients might fear that their daily use
electronic devices may be a source of interference in the IOP measurements. To date, the
number of studies investigating this promising new technology and its potential limitations,
such as electromagnetic interference, is still lacking.​12-13-14
Here, we investigated the interference of electromagnetic radiation emitted by three
daily-use electronic devices (a cordless phone, a smartphone and a laptop) on the
measurements made by the eyemate® system. ​We found no evidence of signal drifts or
fluctuations associated with the tested devices, indicating a lack of interference of the
electromagnetic radiation emitted by the devices on the telemetric transmission of data
between the sensor and the antenna of the ​eyemate® system.
However, abrupt signal drops were revealed in the measurement profiles of the three
devices, which corresponded with the time points when each device was handled in the

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

experimental setup. ​These signal drops are most likely unrelated to electromagnetic
interference with the readings, but probably due to an abrupt change to the surrounding
magnetic field following the repositioning of the tested device close to the sensor. No
reduction in the number of samples recorded was present.
A similar study has been previously conducted using the Triggerfish® contact lens sensor
(SENSIMED AG, Lausanne, Switzerland) with the same purpose of identifying the influence
of electromagnetic radiation on the continuous measurement of the eye pressure by the
sensor.​12-13 ​The study assessed possible signal drift, noise and fluctuations in IOP
measurements recorded by the contact lens sensor due to possible electromagnetic
interference from similar ​daily-use devices. No drift or signal fluctuation was reported.
The Triggerfish® device measures small changes in ocular circumference at the
corneal-scleral junction corresponding to changes in intraocular pressure, volume and
ocular biomechanical properties as well. ​Although the Triggerfish® contact lens sensor is
placed superficially on the cornea and the eyemate®-IO sensor is placed intraocularly, both
sensors share a similar method of telemetric communication with an external antenna for
IOP monitoring. Therefore, our current results are in line with those reported for the
Triggerfish®.​13

Limitations
An intrinsic limitation of the study is the limited data storage capacity of the reading out
system. This restricted our ability to test signal drift and fluctuation over a longer period of
time, as was done with similar IOP recording system.​13 Another possible limitation is the
restricted number of devices tested. Future studies may consider including other devices

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

which are becoming more commonly used, e.g. bluetooth headphones, WiFi connected
camera.

Conclusions
Measurements made by the eyemate​®​ system showed no apparent signal drift or evidence
of being influenced by external electromagnetic radiation produced by the devices that we
tested. Patients who already have the eyemate​®-IO​ sensor implanted, and those who are
considering to have one, should be informed that the electromagnetic radiation emitted by
their daily-use electronic devices does not interfere with IOP measurements made by the
eyemate​®​ system.

References
1.

Tham YC, Li X, Wong TY, Quigley HA, Aung T, Cheng CY. Global prevalence of glaucoma and
projections of glaucoma burden through 2040: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ophthalmology.​ 2014;121(11):2081-2090.

2.

Coleman AL, Miglior S. Risk Factors for Glaucoma Onset and Progression. ​Surv Ophthalmol​.
2008;53(6 SUPPL.):3-10.

3.

DRANCE SM. The significance of the diurnal tension variations in normal and glaucomatous
eyes. A
​ rch Ophthalmol (Chicago, Ill 1960).​ 1960;64(4):494-501.

4.

Kitazawa Y, Horie T. Diurnal variation of intraocular pressure in primary open-angle
glaucoma. A
​ m J Ophthalmol​. 1975;79(4):557-566.

5.

Leidl MC, Choi CJ, Syed ZA, Melki SA. Intraocular pressure fluctuation and glaucoma
progression: What do we know? ​Br J Ophthalmol​. 2014;98(10):1315-1319.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6.

Guo Z, Chang K, Wei X. Intraocular pressure fluctuation and the risk of glaucomatous damage
deterioration: a Meta-analysis. ​Int J Ophthalmol.​ 2019;12(1):123-128.

7.

Dick HB, Schultz T, Gerste RD. Miniaturization in Glaucoma Monitoring and Treatment: A
Review of New Technologies That Require a Minimal Surgical Approach. ​Ophthalmol Ther.​
2019;8(1):19-30.

8.

Koutsonas A, Walter P, Roessler G, Plange N. Long-term follow-up after implantation of a
telemetric intraocular pressure sensor in patients with glaucoma: a safety report. ​Clin Exp
Ophthalmol.​ 2018;46(5):473-479.

9.

Enders P, Hall J, Bornhauser M, et al. Telemetric Intraocular Pressure Monitoring after
Boston Keratoprosthesis surgery with the Eyemate-IO Sensor: Dynamics in the first year. ​Am
J Ophthalmol.​ 2019.

10.

Dick HB, Schultz T, Gerste RD. Miniaturization in Glaucoma Monitoring and Treatment: A
Review of New Technologies That Require a Minimal Surgical Approach. Ophthalmol Ther
[Internet]. 2019;8(1):19–30.

11.

Choritz L, Mansouri K, van den Bosch J, Weigel M, Dick HB, Wagner M, et al. Telemetric
measurement of intraocular pressure via an implantable pressure sensor – twelve-month
results from the ARGOS-02 trial. Am J Ophthalmol; 2019, Sep 20.

12.

Ittoop SM, SooHoo JR, Seibold LK, Mansouri K, Kahook MY. Systematic Review of Current
Devices for 24-h Intraocular Pressure Monitoring. Adv Ther [Internet]. 2016 Oct 16 [cited
2019 Jul 26];33(10):1679–90.

13.

​Rabensteiner DF, Rabensteiner J, Faschinger C. The influence of electromagnetic

radiation on the measurement behaviour of the triggerfish® contact lens sensor.
BMC Ophthalmol. 2018;18(1):1–5.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011692; this version posted November 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

14.

Todani A, Behlau I, Fava MA, Cade F, Cherfan DG, Zakka FR, et al. Intraocular Pressure
Measurement by Radio Wave Telemetry. Investig Ophthalmology Vis Sci [Internet]. 2011 Dec
20 [cited 2019 Jul 26];52(13):9573.

13

