medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The Project for Objective Measures Using Computational Psychiatry Technology (PROMPT):
Rationale, Design, and Methodology
Taishiro Kishimoto1, Akihiro Takamiya1, Kuo-ching Liang1, Kei Funaki1, Takanori Fujita2, Momoko
Kitazawa1, Michitaka Yoshimura1, Yuki Tazawa1, Toshiro Horigome1, Yoko Eguchi1, Toshiaki
Kikuchi1, Masayuki Tomita3, Shogyoku Bun4, Junichi Murakami5, Brian Sumali6, Tifani Warnita7,
Aiko Kishi6, Mizuki Yotsui8, Hiroyoshi Toyoshiba9,10, Yasue Mitsukura6, Koichi Shinoda7, Yasubumi
Sakakibara8, Masaru Mimura1, on behalf of the PROMPT collaborators
Affiliations
1 Department of Neuropsychiatry, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
2 Department of Health Policy and Management, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan
3 Oizumi Hospital, Tokyo, Japan
4 Sato Hospital, Yamagata, Japan
5 Biwako Hospital, Shiga, Japan
6 Department of System Design Engineering, Keio University, Kanagawa, Japan
7 Department of Computer Science, School of Computing, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo,
Japan
8 Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Keio University, Kanagawa, Japan
9 Center for Systems Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo Japan
10 FRONTEO, Inc., Tokyo, Japan
Corresponding Author
Taishiro Kishimoto, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Psychiatry, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
Tel: +81-3-5363-3829

Fax: +81-3-5379-0187

Email: taishiro-k@mti.biglobe.ne.jp

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background: Depressive and neurocognitive disorders are debilitating conditions that account for the
leading causes of years lived with disability worldwide. Overcoming these disorders is an extremely
important public health problem today. However, there are no biomarkers that are objective or easyto-obtain in daily clinical practice, which leads to difficulties in assessing treatment response and
developing new drugs. Due to advances in technology, it has become possible to quantify important
features that clinicians perceive as reflective of disorder severity. Such features include facial
expressions, phonic/speech information, body motion, daily activity, and sleep. The overall goal of
this proposed study, the Project for Objective Measures Using Computational Psychiatry Technology
(PROMPT), is to develop objective, noninvasive, and easy-to-use biomarkers for assessing the severity
of depressive and neurocognitive disorders.
Methods: This is a multi-center prospective study. DSM-5 criteria for major depressive disorder,
bipolar disorder, and major and minor neurocognitive disorders are inclusion criteria for the depressive
and neurocognitive disorder samples. Healthy samples are confirmed to have no history of psychiatric
disorders by Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview, and have no current cognitive decline
based on the Mini Mental State Examination. Participants go through approximately 10-minute
interviews with a psychiatrist/psychologist, where participants talk about non-specific topics such as
everyday living, symptoms of disease, hobbies, etc. Interviews are recorded using RGB and infrared
cameras, and an array microphone. As an option, participants are asked to wear wrist-band type devices
during the observational period. The interviews take place ≤10 times within up to five years of followup. Various software is used to process the raw video, voice, infrared, and wearable device data. A
machine learning approach is used to predict the presence of symptoms, severity, and the
improvement/deterioration of symptoms.
Discussion: The PROMPT goal is to develop objective digital biomarkers for assessing the severity
of depressive and neurocognitive disorders in the hopes of guiding decision-making in clinical settings
as well as reducing the risk of clinical trial failure. Challenges may include the large variability of
samples, which makes it difficult to extract the features that commonly reflect disorder severity.
Trial Registration: UMIN000021396, University Hospital Medical Information Network (UMIN)
Keywords: Depression, neurocognitive disorder, machine learning, severity, treatment response,
screening, facial expression, body motion, speech, natural language processing
Issue date: 2018-Jun-25, Protocol amendment number: 1.8

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Background
Depressive disorders and neurocognitive disorders are common, disabling, and debilitating psychiatric
conditions. Major depressive disorder (MDD) affects approximately 6% of the adult population
worldwide each year [1], and the prevalence in 2017 is estimated to have been 264.5 million people
[95% uncertainty interval (UI) 246.3 to 286.3]. Moreover, depressive disorder is the third leading cause
of years lived with disability (YLDs) that contributes to 43.1 million YLDs (95%UI 30.5 to 58.9) [2].
Pharmacotherapy is one of the mainstays of depression treatment, and many efforts to develop new
antidepressant treatments have been made. However, clinical trials for antidepressant medications face
tremendous difficulties. Failures in such clinical trials have even led to the unfortunate consequence
of several pharmacological companies moving out of the psychiatric field [3, 4]. The reasons for these
clinical trial failures may include multiple factors, such as: 1) the mechanisms of an illness are not
fully understood; 2) the heterogeneity of the targeted population; 3) difficulty in recruiting patients
with severe symptoms; 4) too many placebo responders; and so on. Poor reliability of measurement,
poor interview quality, and rater bias are also important factors that contribute to a number of these
reasons for trial failure [5, 6]. The most popular severity measurement tools for depression include the
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D) [7] and Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale
(MADRS) [8]. Although HAM-D and MADRS are clinician-rated assessment tools, these measures
mainly depend on subjective reports by the patients. Such rating scales that rely on patients’ subjective
feelings can be influenced by the patient’s personality and/or the interviewer’s ability/skill. It is also
common for the anchor point to be ambiguous, among other issues. On the other hand, there are
evaluation items in these rating scales that do not rely on the patient’s subjective opinion, such as
psychomotor disturbances (i.e., retardation and agitation) in HAM-D, and apparent sadness in MADRS.
But even these items still depend on subjective assessments by the clinicians, and are therefore not
truly objective. Several other biological, objective methods have been investigated with the aim of
ensuring a more objective measurement of depression severity, such as monoamine levels in
cerebrospinal fluids [9], cytokines [10], positron emission tomography (PET) [11], neuroendocrine
tests [12], and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [13]. However, no objective biomarkers that are
reliable and easy-to-use in clinical settings have been discovered.
Dementia, another disease targeted by this research, is increasingly affecting people as the global
population ages. The number of individuals who live with neurocognitive disorders world-wide is
estimated to be 45 million (95%UI 39.7 to 50.4) [2], and these disorders contribute to 6.5 million YLDs
(95%UI 4.7 to 8.6). Furthermore, neurocognitive disorders are the fifth leading cause of death globally,
accounting for 2.4 million (95% UI 2.1 to 2.8) deaths [14]. It is believed that in the future, this number
may increase to up to 82 million by 2030, and 152 million by 2050 [15]. Additionally, mild cognitive
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

impairment (MCI), which is an intermediate stage between the expected cognitive decline of normal
aging and the decline caused by a neurocognitive disorder, has an estimated prevalence of 10%-20%
in individuals aged ≥65 years [16]. The biological mechanisms of dementia may be better understood
than those of depression. Based on the current understanding of those mechanisms, several early
diagnosis methods have already been introduced in clinical settings, or have become possible at the
research stage; for example, PET imaging, cerebrospinal fluid, and plasma for amyloid-β and/or tau
protein detection [17–20]. However, unfortunately, the possibility of using these methods in screenings
or illness evaluations is still far off, as these biomarkers do not necessarily reflect real-time cognitive
decline, and the examinations required are costly or invasive such that they cannot be repeated well.
Moreover, a biomarker may no longer play its role as a clinical marker that reflects symptom severity
when the marker itself is the target of the medication, such as amyloid-β or tau protein. Over 100
clinical drug trials targeting dementia have ended in failure, and currently, as treatment practices shift
focus to target the very early stage of the illness [21], it is beneficial to develop repeatable tests for
discovering preclinical conditions or MCI. There are several rating scales being used in clinical settings
to test cognitive function; for example, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) [22] and Montreal
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) [23] are ones widely used around the world. However, these
evaluations require testing the subject’s calculation and memorization abilities, which may place an
extra mental burden on the subject. Additionally, the subject’s education history can greatly influence
the results of these rating scales, and scores can be affected by the tester’s ability/skill. The ceiling
effect and floor effect are also issues, and the learning effect is most likely a large problem as well.
This is because, as previously stated, as treatment practices shift focus to early detection, patients with
slight cognitive impairment may end up memorizing the testing procedures, which would defeat the
purpose of the exams.
So far, it has been explained that there are limits to the “gold standard” rating scales used in clinical
settings and trials, and that there are no ideal biomarkers. But at the same time, psychiatrists are able
to infer a certain amount about a patient’s severity by the way they act in clinical settings; for example,
how the patient enters the room, sits in a chair, or speaks to the interviewer. In this way, psychiatrists
can observe the patient’s condition and determine if their treatment is effective. In terms of depression,
the various domains of human expression, such as facial movements, speech, and motor movements,
have been identified as observable features in depressed patients since Hippocrates’s era [24]. Several
studies linked depression with less eye contact, overall sluggishness, slumping back posture, etc. [25–
28]. These observable psychomotor abnormalities continue to be regarded by experts as essential and
critical features of depression, especially melancholic depression or melancholia [29–31]. In regard to
neurocognitive disorders, clinicians can gain information from instances when patients hesitate in their
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

speech trying to recall a word, or when they try to gloss over the fact they cannot remember something.
As dementia symptoms progress, patients lose their motivation, as well as interest in things around
them, and these effects are reflected in the patients’ speech and facial expressions. But those
observations are difficult to quantify.
With recent developments in many technological fields, the collection and analysis of a variety of data
sets has become easier and less expensive. For example, a subject’s pause time and speech rate during
phone conversations [32], the intensity of a subject’s smile [33], and sensor-detected body motion [34]
were used to diagnose and/or assess the severity of subjects’ depression. Observations are not limited
only to clinical settings; research using actigraphy to observe subjects’ daily activities has been
ongoing for some time, and has been able to find certain differences between depressed patients and
healthy volunteers [35].
Methods for automatically detecting and evaluating the severity of neurocognitive disorders include
one based on acoustic characteristics [19, 36–40], one using linguistic information [41–43], and
some fusing both those approaches [44, 45]. Wearable devices that gather information about activity,
sleep, and conversation time were also used to diagnose/assess severity [46].
In many cases, studies that collect large amounts of data from electronic devices also use machine
learning to estimate the presence and/or severity of illnesses. When applied to this goal, machine
learning approaches are valuable, as data from such applications often contain complex cross-sectional
and longitudinal patterns. These complex patterns are exhibited in the joint distribution, and in the
linear and nonlinear relationships between all, or subsets of, the aforementioned factors. These
relationships are further complicated when utilizing multimodal data. By collecting such data with
diagnoses and/or severity information as labels, we can develop novel machine learning techniques to
discover these complex patterns, which can in turn provide objective indices and predictive models for
diagnosis (categorical classification) and severity assessment (continuous variable prediction), as well
as for judging whether there has been an improvement/deterioration in a patient’s condition since their
previous visit (categorical classification). Through these machine learning tasks, it is also possible to
gain additional insights into which clinical characteristics are helpful in diagnosing and evaluating
severity, how to identify characteristics that parallel symptom improvement, and more.
The Project for Objective Measures Using Computational Psychiatry Technology (PROMPT), which
is funded by the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED), is an industryacademia collaborative research project that aims to develop new techniques for diagnosing and
evaluating illness severity utilizing the technology described above; such technology is already readily
available or developed by companies in this partnership. In concrete terms, we will record subjects’
facial expressions, speech (acoustic analysis, speech speed analysis, natural language processing), and
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

body motion in an examination room within a simulated clinical visit setting. With subject consent, we
will ask them to put on a wearable device to also record daily activity and sleep. The collected data
will be combined, machine learning will be applied, and we will develop learning models based on a
variety of objectives, with the hope that this research will prove useful in every-day clinical settings
and clinical trials. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Keio University
School of Medicine and the participating medical facilities. Any adverse events that occur during the
study will be reported to and managed by this same review board.
Methods
Participants
This study is a multi-site prospective observational study. Participants are recruited at seven hospitals
and three outpatient clinics that specialize in treating either mood disorders or dementia, or both, in
five different prefectures in Japan. Patient recruitment is conducted in the following locations and
hospitals: Tokyo (Keio University Hospital, Tsurugaoka Garden Hospital, Oizumi Hospital, Komagino
Hospital); Shiga (Biwako Hospital); Yamagata (Sato Hospital); Fukushima (Asaka Hospital).
Outpatient clinics were used for additional patient recruitment in Tokyo (Oizumi Mental Clinic,
Asakadai Mental Clinic) and Kanagawa (Nagatsuda Ikoinomori Clinic). Healthy controls were
recruited from the same areas as patients. Participants are inpatients or outpatients aged ≥20 years,
who met the DSM-5 criteria for major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, major neurocognitive
disorder, and mild neurocognitive disorder. Patients with subjective cognitive impairment (i.e., patients
who feel they are cognitively impaired, but when tested, are not shown to have abnormalities) are also
included in this study. Exclusion criteria include: (1) paralysis or involuntary movement in the face or
body; and (2) inability to speak (e.g., removal of vocal cords). Healthy controls are screened by using
the Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.) and MMSE, and are excluded if they
have a history of psychiatric disorders or show cognitive impairment. Researchers obtain written
informed consent from all participants. In cases where patients were judged to be decisionally impaired,
the patients’ guardians will give consent. Participants are able to leave the study at any time.
Assessments
All assessments are undertaken by trained research psychiatrists and/or psychologists. Clinical
characteristics (e.g., age, sex, duration of illness), past medical history, and currently prescribed
medications are collected using patients’ medical charts. RGB and infrared video recordings
[RealSense R200 (Intel Corporation)/ Microsoft Kinect for Windows v2 (Microsoft Corporation)], and
voice recordings using an array microphone [Classis RM30W (Beyerdynamic GmbH & Co. KG)/
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

PRO8HEx Hypercardioid Dynamic Headworn Microphone (Audio-Technica Corporation)], are
captured during a 10-minute interview with a psychiatrist and/or psychologist. During the interview,
conversations between the interviewer and patient cover topics that arise in normal clinical practice,
such as mood, daily living, sleep, events in the past week, concerns, etc. After the 10-minute clinical
interview, a semi-structured interview using the clinical assessment tools is conducted (Table 1). In
addition to participating in the above-mentioned interview recordings, participants are asked to wear
wearable devices [Silmee W20 (TDK Corporation)] until their next assessment. Silmee is a wristbandtype wearable monitor equipped with an accelerometer, gyrometer, pulse sensor, thermometer, and UV
meter. We make the use of wearable devices optional, as it is possible that some participants will see
it as a burden. In order to collect various data from the same patients in different states, assessments
are done up to 10 times for each patient during the study period. Visit intervals are not fixed, but we
attempt to time them for when patients’ clinical symptoms have changed from the last visit (e.g., if we
learn from the treating psychiatrist that a patient has recovered, we attempt to see the patient at that
time), so that we can input datasets reflecting various illness severities into the machine learning
program. The minimum interval sets are one week for patients with depression and one month for
healthy volunteers. The Structural Clinical Interview for DSM-5 (SCID) is performed to the greatest
degree feasible to confirm the diagnoses during the follow up period. Normal treatment is continued
during the study period. The documents pertaining to this research are only stored in cabinets that lock
within a research room of the Keio University School of Medicine's Department of Neuropsychiatry.
We assign research numbers to data that will be used in the study, and from there on, the data are
managed using those numbers. Once numbers are assigned, all data are completely separated from any
personal identifiers. Additionally, case report forms are managed using electronic data capture.
All these data are stored securely in Microsoft Azure. Microsoft Azure is a highly reliable cloud-based
system, and it has wide compliance with industry-specific and global regulations, such as: adherence
to ISO 27001, an international regulation for information security management systems; adherence to
FedRAMP, a cloud-computing security standard in the United States; and adherence to ISO/IEC 27018,
the international performance standard for regulating how personal information is handled by cloud
service providers.
Analysis
The machine learning models for PROMPT are trained to perform the following tasks: 1) predict
whether a subject has or does not have depression/neurocognitive disorders for screening purposes; 2)
predict the severity of a subject’s depression/cognitive decline based on results from severity rating
scales such as HAM-D (including the 21, 17, and 6 item versions’ scores), MADRS, Beck Depression
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Inventory, Second Edition (BDI-II), and MMSE with a known margin of error for the predicted rating;
3) predict the improvement or deterioration of a subject’s depressive state/cognitive function with
respect to a previously recorded state if the subject has had a prior assessment by the system; and 4)
predict the scores of individual items in a depression/cognitive rating scale that are indicators of
different aspects of a subject’s depression/cognitive states, such as depressed mood, anhedonia,
insomnia, anxiety, and psychomotor retardation/agitation for depression, or orientation to time and
place, memory, attention and calculation, language, and visuospatial perception for neurocognitive
disorders.
The data used to train these machine learning models are multimodal in nature, including facial
expression and eye blinking features extracted from RGB video recordings, body motion features
extracted from infrared recordings, and voice features extracted from audio recordings. We first
perform data cleaning and feature engineering to construct feature vectors in which the machine
learning algorithms can more easily find patterns that can correctly identify healthy and depressed
subjects or predict a fine gradient of depression severity from a subject’s physical symptoms.
Extracted Data
In audio engineering, phonic data are often used to describe the sound generation from the vocal cord
and sound modulation from the shape of the mouth and the position of the tongue. To use these physical
properties in our machine learning models, we extract phonic data from audio recordings with software
such as Praat [47] and openSMILE [48] at 10-ms intervals. These phonic data include: fundamental
frequency (F0); first, second, and third formant frequencies (F1, F2, F3); cepstral peak prominence
(CPP); and mel-frequency cepstrum coefficients (MFCC).
To discover patterns at a higher level, prosodic speech data are extracted from audio recordings,
including: rate of speech, which measures the number of syllables spoken per minute; delay of reply,
which measures the length of delay between the end of the physician’s sentence and the beginning of
the subject’s subsequent sentence; and pause time, which measures the length of delay between two
consecutive sentences spoken by the subject.
Facial features are extracted from video recordings with software such as OKAO Vision and Openface
[49, 50]. The data extracted include predicted facial expressions of the subject in each frame of the
video recording, and the inverse distance between the upper and lower eye lids.
Regarding body motion, the speed statistics and angles formed by four joints in XYZ dimension,
namely Spine Shoulder, Head, Shoulder Right, and Shoulder Left, are utilized as features. These joints
are extracted either by Kinect V2 joint map, or from Intel RealSense.
We collect daily activity data for the subjects using wearable devices as described above. Daily activity
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

data targeted for collection include number of steps taken, energy expended, body motion, sleep state,
skin temperature, heart rate, and UV exposure index.
Feature Engineering
For some machine learning models, we need to perform feature engineering to summarize the timecourse data extracted from the raw audio and video recordings, and to capture the relationship between
pairs of time-course data. The following feature engineering approaches are used to construct features
from the multi-modal data as input to the machine learning models for predicting a subject’s
depression/cognitive status and/or severity using the following methods: 1) space-delay matrix [51]
that computes all pair-wise similarities between the extracted data (space) at each delay from a set of
different delay scales (delay); 2) distribution statistics (5-, 25-, 50-, 75-, 95-quantile and mean and
standard deviation); 3) Markov transition probabilities for the state change between two adjacent timeseries samples; 4) similarity measures between different data; and 5) decision-tree-based quantization
of data.
Machine Learning Architecture
We take two approaches to the machine learning architecture: one based on non-deep-learning machine
learning algorithms, utilizing feature selection of the engineered features and meta-models; and one
based on deep-learning algorithms.
For the non-deep-learning-based machine learning architecture, we first perform feature selection to
choose a subset of the engineered features to build our models. The parameters obtained through
feature engineering are passed to an elastic-net model [52] for feature selection. The labels of the
dependent variables are regressed on the feature vector and an elastic-net model is fitted. The fitted
model has a sparse set of coefficients; i.e., many of the features’ coefficients will be forced to zero
during fitting and contribute nothing to the prediction of the labels. The features in the feature vector
that have non-zero coefficients are retained as selected features and used to build the next layer of the
machine learning algorithm.
Next, the selected features from the elastic-net feature selection layer are used to train the first layer
models of the meta-model. Models used in the second layer include algorithms such as Support Vector
Regression (SVR) [53], Support Vector Machine (SVM) [54], XGBoost [55], Random Forest (RF)
[56], Adaptive Boosting (Adaboost) [57], and Adaptive Bagging (Adabag) [58]. The same selected
features (features with non-zero coefficients) are used in each of the machine learning models and the
labels predicted by each model are passed as features to the second layer of the meta-model.
For the second layer, we can use an algorithm with logistic regression or SVM for classification, or
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

one with a linear model or SVR for regression. The features for this layer are the predicted labels from
the previous machine learning layer, and the true labels are regressed against these predicted labels to
train the machine learning model.
For deep-learning-based models, we use deep-learning architectures such as Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) [59, 60], Gated Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNN) [61], Bayesian Neural
Networks (BNN) [62], and Long Short-Term Memory Networks (LSTM) [63]. For these models, the
time-course features extracted from the raw video and audio data are used directly as input, instead of
the engineered features. It should be noted that for either deep-learning or non-deep-learning-based
architectures, the models are not limited to those listed above.
For the improvement/deterioration model we use the non-deep-learning machine learning models,
where each input feature vector is constructed from the data of two separate interviews with the same
subject. For each of the interviews with the same subject, the feature vector is constructed as described
above. To construct the feature vector for the improvement/deterioration model, the feature vector of
the prior interview is divided elementwise by the feature vector of the latter interview. This new vector
of element-wise ratios of the feature vectors of the two interviews is used as the feature vector for the
improvement/deterioration

model.

The

machine

learning

architecture

for

the

improvement/deterioration model is the same as the model presented above.
Sample Size
To predict the sample size required for the supervised learning performances, we use learning curves
to estimate the number of samples required to reach 90% accuracy for classification tasks. An inverse
exponential model is fitted to pairs of sample size and cross-validation accuracy to predict the number
of samples necessary. For depression, based on the preliminary data that we collected, we estimated a
need for approximately 200 patients and 100 healthy volunteers; for dementia, we estimated a need
for 100 patients and 100 healthy volunteers. Assuming an average of three assessments per individual
participant, we therefore set a target of 1,500 datasets from 500 participants.
Discussion
The PROMPT study is unique in its purpose and integrative approach. The main purpose of PROMPT
is to develop objective digital biomarkers for the assessment of depression/neurocognitive disorders
in the hopes of guiding clinical decision-making in clinical settings. There will be tremendous value
in noninvasive and easy-to-use methods that do not put additional burdens on clinical practice, and
which can be repeatedly conducted not only in daily clinical settings, but also in clinical trials. In this
project, we collect systematically observable features of patients (including facial, speech, and
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

movement expressions) during clinical interviews, as well as daily activity measurements for the time
between clinical interviews. We follow and assess each participant up to 10 times longitudinally, so
that the machine can learn different severities of the diseases. This approach is also helpful to avoid
overfitting in machine learning. Based on the collected datasets, we aim to develop a machine learning
model to screen these disorders, assess severity, and reveal whether or not the symptoms improved
since the last visit.
Specifically, observable signs of patients, such as facial expression and speech rate, are important
characteristics of depressive disorders, but psychomotor disturbances in particular have been
considered one of the most fundamental features of depression, especially melancholic depression [30].
They are also one of the diagnostic symptoms of major depressive episodes and manic episodes [64].
Psychomotor disturbances may have predictive value for antidepressant treatments, especially for
electroconvulsive therapy [27]. Some rating scales have been developed for psychomotor disturbances,
including the CORE measurement [65] and the Motor Agitation and Retardation Scale (MARS) [66].
However, these measurements rely on the subjective judgment of the clinicians, and no reliable and/or
validated objective measurement methods for psychomotor disturbances have been developed.
Therefore, PROMPT strives to overcome these historical issues. In addition, our model could be used
as an assessment tool for psychomotor disturbances, and for distinguishing melancholic depression
from heterogeneous DSM-defined major depression. It could also be used for investigating the
underlying

neurobiology

of

psychomotor

disturbances

in

collaboration

with

neuroimaging/neurophysiological measurements in future studies.
For neurocognitive disorders, the importance of early intervention and prevention of disease through
the modification of therapy methods is being emphasized more and more. However, examinations such
as amyloid PET or cerebrospinal fluid tests are not practical in terms of the invasiveness and cost, as
well as the facility equipment requirements. In addition, when performing cognitive assessments at the
preclinical stage, it is difficult to distinguish between disease-related changes and changes caused by
normal aging, since cognitive impairment is still comparatively minor at that stage. As mentioned
previously, learning effects can also be a significant problem when a patient is assessed repeatedly,
especially in the early phase of a disorder. It would be highly beneficial if a new approach is developed
that can identify high risk patients without these issues.
Challenges of the study are as follows. First, the large variability of the subjects makes it difficult to
extract the features that commonly reflect disorder severity. For example, if we learn that one’s
conversational response time is slower than a healthy control’s, we still do not know if he/she has
psychomotor retardation, because we do not know his/her original speed of speech. But at the same
time, psychiatrists can judge if someone has psychomotor retardation even if they do not know what
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

he/she was like before the onset of illness. Psychiatrists most likely gather multimodal information
from patients for a comprehensive judgement, and a machine may be able to do the same, as long as it
is given the same modalities. Nevertheless, the variability of the samples is the most concerning matter
for this study, and though this could be resolved to a certain degree by gathering a larger number of
datasets, we may still see the machine learning models’ accuracy hit a ceiling at some point. Second,
recruiting severe patients is difficult. As this study does not focus on intervention, recruitment may not
be as large a problem in this case, but recruiting severe patients is an inherent difficulty in clinical
studies. Imbalanced samples for different severities caused by recruitment difficulties may prohibit the
machine learning algorithms from achieving a high prediction accuracy. Third, it is very important to
keep inter-rater reliability high when diagnosing and/or assessing patients, as assessment scale scores
will be the labels for machine learning. Anticipating this issue, the study team developed educational
modules to maintain a high quality of ratings, and the inter-rater reliability will be tested using random
sampling during the study period. Finally, since data will be collected from typical clinical settings,
the recordings may contain a significant amount of optical and acoustic noise from the background, or
due to inconsistent instrument setup. Well-designed preprocessing and data cleaning steps will be
important to provide high quality features for the machine learning algorithms.
Abbreviations
UMIN: University Hospital Medical Information Network; UI: uncertainty interval; YLDs: years lived
with disability; HAM-D: Hamilton Depression Rating Scale; MADRS: Montgomery-Asberg
Depression Rating Scale; PET: positron emission tomography; MRI: magnetic resonance imaging;
MCI: mild cognitive impairment; MMSE: Mini-Mental State Examination; MoCA: Montreal
Cognitive Assessment; PROMPT: Project for Objective Measures Using Computational Psychiatry
Technology; AMED: Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development; DSM-5: Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition; SCID: Structural Clinical Interview for DSM5; M.I.N.I.: Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview; RGB: red, green, blue; UV: ultraviolet;
ISO: International Organization for Standardization; FedRAMP: Federal Risk and Authorization
Management Program; IEC: International Electrotechnical Commission; BDI-II: Beck Depression
Inventory, Second Edition; F0: fundamental frequency; F1, F2, F3: first, second, and third formant
frequencies; CPP: cepstral peak prominence; MFCC: mel-frequency cepstrum coefficients; SVR:
Support Vector Regression; SVM: Support Vector Machine; RF: Random Forest; Adaboost: Adaptive
Boosting; Adabag: Adaptive Bagging; CNN: Convolutional Neural Networks; GCN: Gated
Convolutional Neural Networks; BNN: Bayesian Neural Networks; LSTM: Long Short-Term
Memory Networks; MARS: Motor Agitation and Retardation Scale; MDD: Major depressive disorder;
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

BD: Bipolar disorder; YMRS: Young Mania Rating Scale; PSQI: Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index;
CDR: Clinical Dementia Rating; LM: Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised Logical Memory; CDT: Clock
Drawing Test; NPI: Neuropsychiatric Inventory; GDS: Geriatric Depression Scale
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Keio University School of Medicine
and the participating medical facilities. Researchers obtain written informed consent from all
participants. In cases where patients were judged to be decisionally impaired, the patients’ guardians
will give consent. Participants are able to leave the study at any time.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Availability of data and material
Not applicable.
Competing interests
All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf
and declare: no support from any organization for the submitted work; T. Kishimoto reports personal
fees from Otsuka, Pfizer, and Dainippon Sumitomo, Banyu, Eli Lilly, Dainippon Sumitomo, Janssen,
Novartis, Otsuka, and Pfizer; KF reports personal fees from Novartis and Mochida, non-financial
support from Otsuka; HT is an employee of FRONTEO; TH reports personal fees from Yoishitomi; T.
Kikuchi has reports personal fees from Astellas, Dainippon Sumitomo, Eli Lilly, Janssen, MSD,
Otsuka, Yoshitomi Yakuhin, Pfizer, and Takeda; JM reports personal fees from Eli Lilly, Janssen,
Otsuka, MSD, Shionogi, and Pfizer; MM reports personal fees from Daiichi Sankyo, DainipponSumitomo Pharma, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Fuji Film RI Pharma, Janssen Pharmaceutical, Mochida
Pharmaceutical, MSD, Nippon Chemipher, Novartis Pharma, Ono Yakuhin, Otsuka Pharmaceutical,
Pfizer, Takeda Yakuhin, Tsumura, and Yoshitomi Yakuhin, and he received grants from Daiichi Sankyo,
Eisai, Pfizer, Shionogi, Takeda, Tanabe Mitsubishi, and Tsumura. Other authors have no conflict of
interest; no other relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Funding
This research is supported by the Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development
(AMED) under Grant Number JP18he1102004. The Grant was awarded on Oct. 29, 2015 and ends on
Mar. 31, 2019. The funding source did not participate in the design of this study and will not have any
hand in the study’s execution, analyses, or submission of results.
Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED)
20F Yomiuri Shimbun Bldg. 1-7-1 Otemachi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100-0004 Japan
Tel: +81-3-6870-2200, Fax: +81-3-6870-2241, Email: jimu-ask@amed.go.jp
Authors’ Contributions
T. Kishimoto, AT, KL, KF, TF, MK, M. Yoshimura, YT, TH, YE, T. Kikuchi, MT, SB, JM, BS, TW,
AK, M. Yotsui, HT, YM, KS, YS, MM contributed to the design of the study and writing of the
manuscript. All authors have read and approved the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the PROMPT collaborators: Minoru Ko, Hiroaki Miyata, Ruriko Otsuka,
Koki Kudo, Kyosuke Sawada, Bun Yamagata, Kanako Ichikura, Yuki Ito, Yuriko Kaise, Satsuki
Sakiyama, Ayako Sento, Sayaka Hanashiro, Yuki Momota, Yoshitaka Yamaoka, Fumiya Tsurushima,
Mao Yamamoto, Daiki Tsuburai, Kelley Cortright (Keio University), Akiko Goto (Tsurugaoka Garden
Hospital), Nobuya Ishida (Biwako Hospital), Yukari Shimanuki, Yuka Oba (Sato Hospital), Inoue
Nakamasa (Tokyo Institute of Technology), Kuniko Nishikawa, Akihito Tamiya, Hidefumi Uchiyama,
(FRONTEO Healthcare, Inc.), Hiromatsu_Aoki, Haruka Taniguchi (OMRON Corporation), Satoshi
Maemoto, Kai Zaremba (SYSTEM FRIEND, INC.), Yasuhiko Fujita, Makoto Hashizume, Koichi
Iwase, Kenichiro Shii (Advanced Media, Inc.), Hiroaki Kobayashi (SoftBank Corp.), Nobuki Fujinaka
(Microsoft Japan Co., Ltd.), Hideyoshi Murashige (Semco Co.), Fumihiro Kanda (INDUSTRIAL
MECHATRONICS CO., LTD).

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1. Bromet E, Andrade LH, Hwang I, Sampson NA, Alonso J, de Girolamo G, et al. Cross-national
epidemiology of DSM-IV major depressive episode. BMC Med. 2011;9:90.
2. GBD 2017 Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collaborators. Global, regional, and national
incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 354 Diseases and Injuries for 195 countries and
territories, 1990-2017: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Lancet.
2018;392:1789–1858.
3. Miller G. Is Pharma Running Out of Brainy Ideas? Science. 2010;329:502 LP – 504.
4. Abbott A. Novartis to shut brain research facility: Drug giant redirects psychiatric efforts to genetics.
Nature. 2011;480:161–162.
5. Demitrack M, Faries D, Herrera J, DeBrota D, Potter W. The problem of measurement error in multisite
clinical trials. Psychopharmacol Bull. 1998;34:19–24.
6. Kobak KA, Kane JM, Thase ME, Nierenberg AA. Why Do Clinical Trials Fail ? The Problem of
Measurement Error in Clinical Trials : Time to Test New Paradigms ? J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2007;27:1–5.
7. Hamilton M. A rating scale for depression. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1960;23:56–62.
8. Montgomery S, Asberg M. A new depression scale designed to be sensitive to change. Br J Psychiatry.
1979;134:382–389.
9. Redmond DJ, Katz M, Maas J, Swann A, Casper R, Davis J. Cerebrospinal fluid amine metabolites.
Relationships with behavioral measurements in depressed, manic, and healthy control subjects. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 1986;43:938–47.
10. Alesci S, Martinez PE, Kelkar S, Ilias I, Ronsaville DS, Listwak SJ, et al. Major depression is associated
with significant diurnal elevations in plasma interleukin-6 levels, a shift of its circadian rhythm, and loss of
physiological complexity in its secretion: Clinical implications. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90:2522–2530.
11. Milak M, Parsey R, Keilp J, Oquendo M, Malone K, Mann J. Neuroanatomic correlates of
psychopathologic components of major depressive disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005;62:397–408.
12. Kunugi H, Ida I, Owashi T, Kimura M, Inoue Y, Nakagawa S, et al. Assessment of the
dexamethasone/CRH test as a state-dependent marker for hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis
abnormalities in major depressive episode: A multicenter study. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2006;31:212–
220.
13. Mwangi B, Matthews K, Steele JD. Prediction of illness severity in patients with major depression using
structural MR brain scans. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2012;35:64–71.
14. GBD 2016 Dementia Collaborators. Global, regional, and national burden of Alzheimer’s disease and
other dementias, 1990-2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet
Neurol. 2019;18:88–106.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

15. Patterson C. The state of the art of dementia research: New frontiers. London: Alzheimer’s Disease
International; 2018.
16. Langa K, Levine D. The diagnosis and management of mild cognitive impairment: a clinical review.
JAMA. 2014;312:2551–2561.
17. Ruan Q, Onofrio GD, Sancarlo D, Bao Z, Greco A, Yu Z. Potential neuroimaging biomarkers of
pathologic brain changes in Mild Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer ’ s disease : a systematic review. BMC
Geriatr. 2016;16:1–9.
18. Tapiola T, Alafuzoff I, Herukka S, Parkkinen L, Hartikainen P, Soininen H, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid βamyloid 42 and tau proteins as biomarkers of Alzheimer-type pathologic changes in the brain. Arch Neurol.
2009;66:382–389.
19. Nakamura M, Shinohara S. Feasibility Study for Estimation of Depression Severity using Voice Analysis.
In: IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). 2018. p. 2792–2794.
20. Pase M, Beiser A, Himali J, Satizabal C, Aparicio H, DeCarli C, et al. Assessment of Plasma Total Tau
Level as a Predictive Biomarker for Dementia and Related Endophenotypes. JAMA Neurol. 2019;76:598–
606.
21. Cummings J, Lee G, Ritter A, Zhong K. Alzheimer’s disease drug development pipeline : 2018.
Alzheimer’s Dement Transl Res Clin Interv. 2018;4:195–214.
22. Folstein M, Folstein S, McHugh P. “Mini-mental state”. A practical method for grading the cognitive state
of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res. 1975;12:189–198.
23. Nasreddine Z, Phillips N, Bédirian V, Charbonneau, S Whitehead V, Collin I, Cummings J, et al. The
Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr
Soc. 2005;53:695–989.
24. Sobin C, Sackeim H. Psychomotor symptoms of depression. Am J Psychiatry. 1997;154:4–17.
25. Waxer P. Nonverbal interaction of patients and therapists during psychiatric interviews. J Abnorm
Psychol. 1974;93:319–322.
26. Fairbanks L, McGuire M, Harris C. Nonverbal interaction of patients and therapists during psychiatric
interviews. J Abnorm Psychol. 1982;91.
27. Buyukdura J, McClintock S, Croarkin P. Psychomotor retardation in depression: Biological
underpinnings, measurement, and treatment. Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacology Biol Psychiatry. 2011;35:395–
409.
28. Parker G, Hadzi-Pavlovic D, Brodaty H, Boyce P, Mitchell P, Wilhelm K, et al. Psychomotor disturbance
in depression: defining the constructs. J Affect Disord. 1993;27:255–265.
29. Parker G, Hadzi-Pavlovic D, Wilhelm K, Hickie I, Brodaty H, Boyce P, et al. Defining melancholia:
Properties of a refined sign-based measure. Br J Psychiatry. 1994;164 MAR.:316–326.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

30. Parker G, Fink M, Shorter E, Taylor M, Akiskal H, Berrios G, et al. Issues for DSM-5: Whither
Melancholia? The Case for Its Classification as a Distinct Mood Disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2010;167:745–
747.
31. Snowdon J. Should psychomotor disturbance be an essential criterion for a DSM-5 diagnosis of
melancholia? BMC Psychiatry. 2013;13:1–6.
32. Mundt J, Vogel A, Feltner D, Lenderking W. Vocal acoustic biomarkers of depression severity and
treatment response. Biol Psychiatry. 2012;72:580–587.
33. Scherer S, Stratou G, Mahmoud M, Boberg J, Gratch J, Rizzo A, et al. Automatic behavior descriptors for
psychological disorder analysis. In: Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture
Recognition 2013. IEEE; 2013. p. 1–8.
34. Joshi J, Dhall A, Goecke R, Cohn J. Relative Body Parts Movement for Automatic Depression Analysis.
In: 2013 Humaine Association Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction. 2013. p. 492–
497.
35. Tazawa Y, Wada M, Mitsukura Y, Takamiya A, Kitazawa M, Yoshimura M, et al. Actigraphy for
evaluation of mood disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Affect Disord. 2019;22:257–269.
36. Khodabakhsh A, Yesil F, Guner E, Demiroglu C. Evaluation of linguistic and prosodic features for
detection of Alzheimer’s disease in Turkish conversational speech. EURASIP J Audio, Speech, Music
Process. 2015.
37. Tóth L, Gosztolya G, Vincze V, Hoffmann I, Szatlóczki G, Biró E. Automatic detection of Mild cognitive
impairment from spontaneous speech using ASR. In: Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the
International Speech Communication Association, INTERSPEECH. International Speech and Communication
Association; 2015. p. 2694–2698.
38. Gosztolya G, Tóth L, Grósz T, Vincze V, Hoffmann I, Szatlóczki G, et al. Detecting mild cognitive
impairment from spontaneous speech by correlation-based phonetic feature selection. In: Proceedings of the
Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, INTERSPEECH. 2016. p. 107–
111.
39. Kiss G, Vicsi K. Mono- and multi-lingual depression prediction based on speech processing. Int J Speech
Technol. 2017;20:919–935.
40. Linz N, Tröger J, Alexandersson J, Wolters M, König A, Robert P. Predicting Dementia Screening and
Staging Scores From Semantic Verbal Fluency Performance. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining Workshops. 2017. p. 719–728.
41. Zimmerer V, Wibrow M, Varley R. Formulaic Language in People with Probable Alzheimer’s Disease: A
Frequency-Based Approach. J Alzheimer’s Dis. 2016;53:1145–1160.
42. Orimaye SO, Wong JS, Golden KJ, Wong CP, Soyiri IN. Predicting probable Alzheimer ’ s disease using

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

linguistic deficits and biomarkers. BMC Bioinformatics. 2017;18:34.
43. Wankerl S, Nöth E, Evert S. An N-Gram Based Approach to the Automatic Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s
Disease from Spoken Language. In: Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association, INTERSPEECH. Stockholm; 2017. p. 3162–3166.
44. Fraser K, Meltzer J, Rudzicz F. Linguistic features identify Alzheimer’s disease in narrative speech. J
Alzheimer’s Dis. 2016;49:407–422.
45. Sadeghian R, Schaffer J., Zahorian S. Speech Processing Approach for Diagnosing Dementia in an Early
Stage. In: Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association,
INTERSPEECH. 2017. p. 2705–2709.
46. Kimura N, Aso Y, Yabuuchi K, Ishibashi M, Hori D. Modifiable Lifestyle Factors and Cognitive Function
in Older People : A Cross-Sectional Observational Study. Front Neurol. 2019;10 April:1–12.
47. Boersma P, Weenink D. Praat: doing phonetics by computer. 2018. http://www.praat.org/.
48. Eyben F, Wöllmer M, Schuller B. openSMILE - The Munich Versatile and Fast Open-Source Audio
Feature Extractor. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM international conference on Multimedia. 2010. p. 1459–
1462.
49. Lao S, Kawade M. Vision-Based Face Understanding Technologies and Their Applications. In:
SINOBIOMETRICS’04 Proceedings of the 5th Chinese conference on Advances in Biometric Person
Authentication. Berlin: Springer; 2004. p. 339–348.
50. Amos B, Ludwiczuk B, Satyanarayanan M. OpenFace: A general-purpose face recognition library with
mobile applications. 2016.
51. Williamson JR, Bliss DW, Browne DW, Narayanan JT. Epilepsy & Behavior Seizure prediction using
EEG spatiotemporal correlation structure. Epilepsy Behav. 2012;25:230–238.
52. Zou H, Hastie T. Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. J R Stat Soc Ser B (Statistical
Methodol. 2005;67:301–320.
53. Drucker H, Burges CJ., Kaufman L, Smola A, Vapnik V. Support vector regression machines. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 9 (NIPS 1996). 1996. p. 155–161.
54. Boser BE, Guyon IM VV. A training algorithm for optimal margin classifiers. In: COLT ’92 Proceedings
of the fifth annual workshop on Computational learning theory. New York; 1992. p. 144–152.
55. Chen T, Guestrin C. XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system. In: KDD ’16 The 22nd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. San Francisco; 2016. p. 785–794.
56. Breiman LEO. Random Forests. Mach Learn. 2001;45:5–32.
57. Freund Y, Schapire RE. A Decision-Theoretic Generalization of On-Line Learning and an Application to
Boosting. J Comput Syst Sci. 1997;55:119–139.
58. Breiman LEO. Bagging Predictors. Mach Learn. 1996;140:123–140.

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

59. LeCun Y, Boser B, Denker J, Henderson D, Howard R., Hubbard W, et al. Backpropagation applied to
handwritten zip code recognition. Neural Comput. 1989;1:541–551.
60. Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton G. ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural networks.
In: NIPS’12 Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Neural Information Processing SystemsVolume 1. Lake Tahoe; 2012. p. 1097–1105.
61. Yann N D, Angela F, Michael A, David G. Language Modeling with Gated Convolutional Networks. In:
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR 70. 2017. p. 933–941.
62. Neal RM. Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks. Springer-Verlag New York; 1996.
63. Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Comput. 1997;9:1735–1780.
64. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition.
Books Wagon; 2014.
65. Parker G, Hadzi-Pavlovic D. Development and Structure of the CORE System. In: A Phenomenological
and Neurobiological Review. 1996. p. 82–129.
66. Sobin C, Mayer L, Endicott J. The Motor Agitation and Retardation Scale : A Scale for the Assessment of
Motor Abnormalities in Depressed Patients. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1998;10:85–92.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013011; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1. A semi-structured interview using clinical assessment tools
Time

Healthy

administered

controls

HAM-D

Every visit

MADRS

Type of assessment

MDD

BD

✓

✓

✓

Every visit

✓

✓

✓

YMRS

Every visit

✓

✓

✓

BDI-II

Every visit

✓

✓

✓

PSQI

Every visit

✓

✓

✓

MMSE

Screening,
every visit

Neurocognitive
disorder

✓

✓

CDR

Every visit

✓

✓

LM (Immediate/Delayed)

Every visit

✓

✓

CDT (copying/free-drawing)

Every visit

✓

✓

NPI

Every visit

✓

✓

GDS

Every visit

✓

✓

M.I.N.I.

Screening

✓

✓

SCID

Once during the
follow up

✓

✓

✓

✓

MDD: Major depressive disorder, BD: Bipolar disorder, HAM-D: Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, MADRS:
Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale, YMRS: Young Mania Rating Scale, BDI-II: Beck Depression
Inventory Second Edition, PSQI: Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, MMSE: Mini-Mental State Examination,
CDR: Clinical Dementia Rating, LM: Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised Logical Memory, CDT: Clock Drawing
Test, NPI: Neuropsychiatric Inventory, GDS: Geriatric Depression Scale, M.I.N.I.: Mini-International
Neuropsychiatric Interview, SCID: Structural Clinical Interview for DSM-5

20

