medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Computational Modeling of Ovarian Cancer: Implications for Therapy
and Screening
Shengqing Gu1,2,7,*, Stephanie Lheureux1,3, Azin Sayad1, Paulina Cybulska1,4,8, Liat BenDavid Hogen1,4, Iryna Vyarvelska1,4, Dongsheng Tu5, Wendy Parulekar5, Douglas A.
Levine6, Marcus Q. Bernardini1,4, Barry Rosen1,4,9, Amit Oza1,3, and Benjamin G. Neel1,2,10,*

1

Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G2M9, Canada

2

Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G1L7, Canada

3

Division of Medical Oncology and Hematology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G2M9,

Canada
4

Division of Gynecologic Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G2M9, Canada

5

NCIC Clinical Trials Group, Queens University, Kingston, ON K7L3N6, Canada

6

Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU-Langone Medical Center, NY 10016, USA

7

Present address: Department of Data Sciences, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215,

USA
8

Present address: Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, NY 10065, USA

9

Present address: Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, MI 48073, USA

10

Present address: Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU-Langone Medical Center, NY

10016, USA
*Correspondence: Shengqing_gu@dfci.harvard.edu (S.G.), Benjamin.neel@nyumc.org (B.G.N.)

1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract

High-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HG-SOC) is a major cause of cancer-related death.
Whether treatment order—primary debulking surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy
(PDS) or neo-adjuvant chemotherapy with interval surgery (NACT)—affects outcome is
controversial. We developed a mathematical framework that holds for hierarchical or
stochastic models of tumor initiation and reproduces HG-SOC clinical course. After
estimating parameter values, we infer that most patients harbor chemo-resistant HG-SOC
cells at diagnosis, PDS is inherently superior to NACT due to better depletion of resistant
cells, and earlier diagnosis could improve survival of primary, but not relapsed, patients.
Our predictions are supported by primary clinical data from multiple cohorts. Our results
have clear implications for these key issues in HG-SOC management.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Significance Statement

The optimal order and timing of surgery and chemotherapy, and the potential benefits of
earlier diagnosis of HG-SOC, remain controversial. We developed a mathematical
framework of tumor dynamics to address such issues, populated the model with primary
clinical data and reliably recapitulated clinical observations. Our model prospectively
predicts that: (1) PDS is inherently superior to NACT; (2) timely adjuvant chemotherapy
is critical for the outcome of PDS with <1mm, but not >1mm, residual tumors; (3) earlier
detection of relapse is unlikely to be beneficial with current therapies; (4) earlier detection
of primary HG-SOC could have substantial benefit. Our model provides insights into the
evolutionary dynamics of HG-SOC, argues for new clinical trials to optimize HG-SOC
therapy, and is potentially applicable to other tumor types.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction

Ovarian cancer is the 8th most common cancer in women and the 8th most common cause
of cancer death in women worldwide1. High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HG-SOC)
constitutes ~70% of all ovarian malignancies and has the worst prognosis2. Current
treatment of HG-SOC consists of cytoreductive surgery and combination chemotherapy
with platinum-containing DNA-crosslinking drugs and taxane-based microtubulestabilizing agents2. Although treatment significantly improves survival, most women with
HG-SOC relapse with chemotherapy-refractory disease and eventually succumb3. Multiple
mechanisms of chemo-resistance have been documented4,5, including reduced intracellular
drug accumulation6, detoxification by increased levels of glutathione7, altered DNA
damage repair8,9, dysfunctional apoptotic pathways10,11, and hyper-activation of various cell
signaling pathways12–14. These mechanistic studies are consistent with recent genomic
analyses that reveal marked clonal evolution of HG-SOC during therapy15. Other evidence,
however, supports a hierarchical organization of HG-SOC, featuring intrinsically chemoresistant “cancer stem cells” (CSC) that can escape initial treatment and seed recurrence16–
18

.
Although there is uniform agreement that HG-SOC patients should receive surgery

and chemotherapy, there is disagreement over the optimal order and timing of these
modalities. Two main options exist: primary debulking surgery with adjuvant
chemotherapy (PDS), or neo-adjuvant chemotherapy, followed by interval debulking
surgery (NACT)19–24. In either case, the surgical standard of care is to seek maximal
cytoreduction, with the objective being to leave no visible residual disease. However, the

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

precise definition of such “optimal debulking” varies among different centers, surgeons,
and reports19,21,24,25.
Several studies have reported similar outcomes after PDS or NACT, including two
highly influential randomized trials (EORTC and CHORUS) carried out across multiple
countries22,23,26–28. In both trials, however, there was a bias in patient recruitment, favoring
those with more extensive disease, who are less likely benefit from “upfront” surgery23,28.
Consistent with this interpretation, overall survival in these trials was significantly shorter
than that seen in other HG-SOC cohorts19,24,29,30. Closer examination of these studies
revealed additional factors that might have influenced their conclusions. The EORTC study
had inconsistencies in optimal debulking rates between participating centers, with the PDSassociated complete debulking data highly influenced by the results from a single
institute23. The CHORUS study involved 76 clinical sites, and there were substantial
differences in surgery execution and chemotherapy drug selection/dosage between those
institutions28.
A review of cases at our center (Princess Margaret Cancer Center) revealed that
PDS patients with no visible disease post-resection survived substantially longer (7-year
survival >60%) than those receiving NACT (7-year survival ~10%). Furthermore, although
residual tumor post-resection is a critical determinant of survival, its influence on the PDS
group was far more dramatic than on NACT group24. Of course, this report suffers from
deficiencies common to all retrospective analyses, including lack of randomization to
account for tumor burden at diagnosis and other factors; indeed, the NACT group in this
study did have more extensive disease.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Another controversy in HG-SOC management focuses on the potential benefit of
earlier diagnosis. Earlier diagnosis of primary HG-SOC is generally believed to enhance
patient survival and quality of life; certainly, detecting disease confined to the ovary offers
the best chance of cure3. Intuitively, one might predict that the same reasoning would apply
to recurrent disease; however, survival reportedly is similar in relapsed patients treated
earlier, based on increasing serum CA125 levels, versus those treated only when physical
symptoms of recurrence appear31. Conceivably, the lead time between CA125 rise and
clinical recurrence is too short for earlier chemotherapy to be beneficial; if so, then patient
survival might be extended by more sensitive methods, such as testing for circulating tumor
DNA (ctDNA)32,33.
To address these issues, we developed a mathematical framework that models the
dynamics of HG-SOC progression, response to surgery and chemotherapy, and recurrence.
Our results, generated over a wide range of parameters and accounting for hierarchical and
stochastic models of tumor initiation, argue that PDS is inherently superior to NACT and
suggest that with currently available therapies, the benefits of earlier detection are
intrinsically restricted to primary HG-SOC.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

RESULTS

Clinical Cohorts
To train and evaluate our model, we used two independent cohorts, comprising a
total of 285 FIGO Stage IIIC-IV HG-SOC patients (Table 1 and Figure S1). The first
dataset contains information on 148 patients who were treated by PDS or NACT at
University Health Network (UHN) between March 2003 and November 201124. In this
cohort, “complete (microscopic) debulking” (<1mm residual tumor) was achieved in 97
patients, whereas 51 patients had 1-10mm of residual tumor. Among the 97 patients with
complete debulking, 40 received upfront surgery, followed by 6 cycles of platinum and
taxane-based chemotherapy (hereafter, “PDS <1mm”), whereas the other 57 patients were
treated with upfront chemotherapy, followed by interval surgery after the first 3-4 cycles
(hereafter, “NACT <1mm”). For each patient, descriptions of tumor size post-surgery and
serum CA125 levels over the course of treatment were recorded (Figure 1a). As reported
previously24, overall survival was much better for patients in the PDS <1mm group (Figure
1b). However, patients in the NACT <1mm group tended to have greater tumor burden at
diagnosis24, confounding direct comparison of the survival curves. Data from these patients
(termed “Training Set” below) were used to train the parameters in our computational
model.
The other 51 patients in the UHN dataset underwent debulking, but were left with
residual tumor of 1-10mm in diameter. Incomplete debulking usually was due to tumor
location. As reported previously24, there was a significant negative association between
residual tumor size and patient survival in patients who had undergone PDS (Figure 1c),

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

but no association was found in the NACT group (Figure 1d). Similar trends have been
observed in several other studies investigating the association between patient survival and
residual tumor size19,20,34. Independent of the <1mm cohort, we used this 1-10mm cohort
(“Validation Set 1”, below) in initial tests of the validity of our computational model
(Figure S1).
The second dataset, which is independent of the UHN cohort, contains information
on 137 patients diagnosed from October 2001 to June 2005 and enrolled in the CAN-NCICOV16 trial (hereafter, “NCIC cohort”). These patients all received upfront surgery,
followed by 8 cycles of carboplatin/paclitaxel chemotherapy. The median delay for
chemotherapy after surgery was 0.8 month (compared with 1 month at UHN). In 20
patients, debulking to <1mm residual tumor was achieved, 36 patients had 1-10mm
residual tumor, and 81 patients had residual tumor diameter >10mm. Data from the NCIC
cohort was used to further evaluate the validity of our computational model (Figure S1).

Model Overview
We developed a mathematical model of cancer initiation and evolution to
investigate the dynamics of HG-SOC growth, the onset of chemo-resistance, and the effects
of various treatment strategies on patient survival (Figure 1e). Our initial framework was
based on work by the Michor laboratory35,36, and considers exponential expansion of HGSOC cells starting from a single cancer cell that has all of the genetic alterations needed
for proliferation and metastasis, but has not developed chemo-resistance. This framework
assumes that during tumor development/progression, any chemo-sensitive HG-SOC cell
can acquire mutations and/or epigenetic alterations that enable chemo-resistance; i.e., we

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

assume a stochastic model of tumor initiation. However, the model can be modified easily
to accommodate a hierarchical organization of HG-SOC, in which a relatively chemoresistant

CSC

gives

rise

to

chemo-sensitive

progeny.

Importantly,

the

predictions/implications of the hierarchical and stochastic models are essentially the same
(see below and Supplemental Information).
In the absence of chemotherapy, chemo-sensitive cells divide at rate r and die at
rate d, genetic or epigenetic changes that cause chemo-resistance occur with probability u
per cell division, and chemo-resistant cells divide at rate a and die at rate b (which can be
the same or different as the rates of division and death of chemo-sensitive HG-SOC cells).
The total number of HG-SOC cells at diagnosis is denoted by M1, with a proportion eM1
metastasized outside the peritoneal cavity and not accessible at debulking surgery. Once
cancer has been diagnosed, the (virtual) patient receives PDS or NACT. Post-surgery, the
number of HG-SOC cells in the peritoneal cavity is reduced to M; cancer cells at
inaccessible locations persist. During chemotherapy, chemo-sensitive cells divide at rate r’
and die at rate d’, with r’ < d’; the probability of conversion from chemo-sensitive to
chemo-resistant is u’ per division; and chemo-resistant cells divide at rate a’ and die at rate
b’. After first line treatment, persisting sensitive and resistant cells continue to proliferate
and reach number M1, at which time relapse is diagnosed, and the patient is again treated
with chemotherapy. Note that although tumor recurrence is usually diagnosed before it
reaches M1 in the clinic, our analyses (see below and Figure 6), along with clinical
evidence31, suggest that the timing of diagnosis of recurrence does not affect treatment
outcome. This regression-relapse cycle is repeated until chemotherapy fails to reduce
disease burden, at which point tumor growth continues until the patient’s death, with a total

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

number of cancer cells denoted by M2, which is larger than M1.
This framework enables us to estimate the probability that chemo-resistance is
present at diagnosis, the dynamics of sensitive and resistant cell numbers along the
treatment course, and the length of survival of HG-SOC patients. Analytic approximations
for these quantities are shown in the Experimental Procedures section. With these
quantities, we estimated the conversion rate (u) and inaccessible proportion (e) by
minimizing the deviations between patient survival data and the corresponding predictions
obtained using our model. Using these estimates, we then predicted the survival of patients
in test datasets to assess the validity of our model, compared the survival of PDS- or
NACT- treated patients when controlled for starting tumor burden, and probed the potential
benefits of earlier diagnosis of HG-SOC.

Estimation of Parameter Values
For most model parameters, a clinically relevant range of values could be deduced
from clinical data or previous publications (see Extended Experimental Procedures for
detailed description of parameter value estimations). We then varied u and e over a wide
range, and computed the expected distribution of survival of patients by Monte-Carlo
simulation. We compared the deviation between the Training Set data and the predictions
of our model for each combination of u and e, and from the region of best fit for these
parameters, we inferred that 10-9 < u < 10-7 and 10-9 < e < 10-5 (Figure 2a). Finer
investigation of the fit between data and theory in this parameter region showed that u =
10-7.6 and e = 10-7.4 is the best combination of these parameters, as it minimizes the deviation
between data and theory (Figure 2b). Importantly, the trained value for u is consistent with

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

chemo-resistant conversion rates estimated for multiple other cancers37–40. The trained
value for e predicts that inaccessible cancer cells outside the peritoneum are less numerous
than cancer cells inside the peritoneum after first-line therapy, which comports with clinical
observations that recurrent HG-SOC occurs predominantly inside the abdominal cavity.
Using the trained parameter values, we compared the observed (Figure 1b) and predicted
(Figure 2c) distributions of patient survival in the Training Set. Reassuringly, the model
predictions closely recapitulated the clinical observations (Figures 2d-e).
Using our mathematical framework and these estimated rates, we then calculated
the probability (as a function of tumor burden) that chemo-resistant cells are present at
diagnosis (Figure S2a). Consistent with clinical and theoretical studies of other
malignancies37–39,41–45, our model predicted that at least some chemo-resistant cells are
always present at the start of therapy for HG-SOC. We varied the values for each model
parameter over a large range to test their influence on the calculated number of resistant
cells at diagnosis: within the ranges tested, this number almost always exceeds 103 (Figures
S2b-g).

Model Validation
To assess the accuracy of our mathematical framework and the validity of the
estimated parameter values, we analyzed the model-predicted distribution of overall
survival using data from several test sets (Figure 3). First, we predicted the survival of
patients in Validation Set 1 (Figures 3a-b, red curves), by adjusting the value of M. Notably,
our model recapitulated the clinical observation that residual tumor size is significantly
associated with survival in patients undergoing PDS, but not NACT (Figures 3a-b).

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Comparison of the observed (Figures 1c-d, red curves) and predicted (Figures 3a-b, red
curves) distributions of patient survival revealed no significant differences (Figures 3c-d).
The data for the above validation exercise derived from different patients than those
used for the Training Set, but all of these patients were treated over the same time period
at the same institution (UHN). To more rigorously test the validity of our model, we
analyzed independent patient data, derived from the NCIC cohort. As noted above, the
treatment course of these patients also differed somewhat from that of the UHN patients,
enabling an even better test of the general applicability of our framework. We incorporated
these differences into the model and predicted the survival of patients in the NCIC trial.
Again, the model predictions fit very well with clinical observations, and recapitulated the
theme that PDS with minimal residual tumor results in the best outcome (Figures 3e-i).

Predicted Outcome of PDS and NACT in Patients with Identical Tumor Burden
Confident in the predictive ability of our mathematical framework, we modeled the
expected clinical outcome of PDS and NACT in patients with the same initial tumor burden
by imposing the same distribution of M1 on both groups. Our model predicts that PDS
patients should survive longer than NACT patients when controlled for residual postsurgery tumor mass. As residual tumor increases, however, the predicted survival
advantage of PDS shrinks (Figures 4a-b). To investigate the underlying reason(s) for these
predictions, we explored the predicted dynamics of chemo-sensitive (green) and chemoresistant (blue) HG-SOC cells in patients undergoing treatment by PDS or NACT (Figures
4c-d). Our model predicts that, at diagnosis, a typical HG-SOC patient has low numbers of
chemo-resistant cells. In women who undergo PDS, debulking surgery (S in Figure 4c)

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

dramatically reduces the number of chemo-sensitive and chemo-resistant cancer cells,
because these cells appear identical to the surgeon and therefore have an equal likelihood
of removal. Depending on the (stochastic) distribution of chemo-resistant cells within the
abdominal cavity of the HG-SOC patient, all chemo-resistant cells might have been
eliminated if, post-surgery, there is <1mm residual tumor. Follow-up chemotherapy (C in
Figure 4c) can then reduce the remaining chemo-sensitive cells to very low numbers or
even eradicate them.
By contrast, with NACT, neo-adjuvant chemotherapy (C) dramatically enriches for
chemo-resistant cells, while killing the sensitive cells; consequently, chemo-resistant cells
comprise a large proportion of total tumor cells at surgery (S). Because chemo-sensitive
cells are largely depleted by the neo-adjuvant chemotherapy, the amount of residual tumor
visible to the surgeon is reduced substantially. Consequently, it is virtually impossible for
interval debulking surgery to fully deplete the chemo-resistant cells (Figure 4d). We
propose that the relative inability of NACT to deplete chemo-resistant cells underlies the
difference in outcome between patients treated with PDS and NACT. Importantly, this
conclusion is based on intrinsic properties of the dynamics of cancer proliferation, survival,
and death.
We then explored why the predicted superiority of PDS over NACT depends on
residual tumor burden post-surgery. By examining the expected distribution of chemosensitive and -resistant cell numbers after first-line therapy, we found that PDS with <1mm
residual tumor has the potential to deplete all cancer cells in a significant proportion of
HG-SOC patients (Figure 4e). This finding can account for the considerable survival
difference between PDS and NACT with <1mm residual tumor. By contrast, with >1mm

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

residual tumor, neither PDS nor NACT depletes all malignant cells, even though fewer
tumor cells are predicted to remain after PDS (Figure 4f). Consequently, almost all patients
with >1mm residual tumor are predicted to relapse and eventually die because of the
inability of current agents to kill chemo-resistant cells. This analysis explains why the
survival advantage conferred by PDS over NACT shrinks as residual tumor increases and
why residual tumor mass is a key determinant of survival after PDS but not NACT (Figures
3a-b).

Predicted Outcome of PDS and NACT in Patients with Identical Tumor Burden
To test the robustness of our predictions and quantitatively examine the influence
of each factor on survival, we varied the values of every parameter in our model over a
large range. Our conclusions on the relative efficacy of PDS and NACT treatment hold true
throughout, although the magnitude of the predicted difference can vary (Figure S3).
Systematic modulation of the model parameters also enabled us to assess the contribution
of each factor to patient survival, and revealed several interesting features. For example,
we found that faster growth of cancer cells does not necessarily lead to worse survival. In
particular, although elevated growth rate of chemo-resistant cells in the absence of
chemotherapy leads to worse survival, faster-growing, chemo-sensitive cells can
sometimes lead to better survival (Figures S3a-d). This result can be attributed to a lower
percentage of chemo-resistant cells at diagnosis when chemo-sensitive cells proliferate
faster. However, if the proliferation rate of chemo-sensitive cells is too high (e.g., when r
= 3), new chemo-resistant cells might be generated between the time of surgery and
adjuvant chemotherapy, resulting in worse survival (Figure S3c). We also inferred that the

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

relative importance of chemo-sensitive and chemo-resistant cells in influencing survival
might differ at different stages along the clinical course. During treatment-free periods, the
growth rate of chemo-resistant cells could play a more dominant role in influencing patient
survival (Figures S3a-d), because they underlie ultimate treatment failure. However, during
periods of chemotherapy, the growth rate (or depletion rate) of chemo-sensitive cells might
play a more dominant role (Figures S3e-h), because the depletion rate of chemo-sensitive
cells at this stage determines whether they can be completely eradicated by chemotherapy.
By contrast, chemo-resistant cells likely will endure. As a result, drug choice and dose,
which likely influences the efficiency of elimination of chemo-sensitive cells, is predicted
to be a critical factor in treatment outcome. Consistent with this analysis, residual cancer
cell abundance after tumor resection can dramatically influence patient survival, especially
in the PDS group (Figure S3i), suggesting that primary cytoreductive surgery should aim
for complete removal of cancer cells even though chemotherapy will usually follow. Tumor
size at diagnosis can be a critical factor determining whether a patient can be cured (Figure
S3j), and will be further addressed below. By contrast, varying the parameter value of
tumor size at patient death did not influence the length of survival (Figure S3k).
We also considered two alternative scenarios: (1) that heterogeneous populations
of (variably) chemo-resistant cells exist in the same patient (Figures S4a-c); or (2) that HGSOC initiates from an intrinsically chemo-resistant “cancer stem cell”, which differentiates
into chemo-sensitive “tumor progenitor cells” (Figures S4d-f). Either of these scenarios
results in the same conclusions about the relative efficacy of PDS and NACT and its
dependence on residual tumor post-surgery.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Modeling Alternative Treatment Regimens
We next utilized our model to predict the effects of altering current treatment
regimens. For both PDS and NACT, adjuvant chemotherapy typically begins 4-5 weeks
post-surgery, an interval chosen to allow patients to recover from their typically aggressive
surgical treatment. The length of the post-surgical chemotherapy delay varies between
centers and among physicians, but its influence on treatment outcome has not been studied
carefully. We varied the length of treatment delay in our model, and tested the predicted
effects on patient survival. For PDS with <1mm residual tumor, earlier initiation of
chemotherapy should prolong survival, whereas longer treatment delay worsens outcome
(Figure 5a, p<0.0001). For PDS with >1mm residual tumor or for NACT with any amount
of residual tumor, the length of treatment delay (within the same range) is predicted to have
little effect on outcome (Figures 5b-d). These differences arise primarily because PDS that
results in <1mm residual tumor potentially can deplete all tumor cells when treatment delay
is minimized (Figure 4e), and the probability of depletion decreases with longer delay,
largely because chemo-resistant cells can arise during this period (Figure S6a). By contrast,
PDS with >1mm residual tumor or NACT is unlikely to deplete all cancer cells (Figures
4e-f and S6b-d), irrespective of treatment delay.
For the NACT regimen, our model predicts that neo-adjuvant chemotherapy
enriches for chemo-resistant cells and thus increases the percentage of chemo-resistant
tumor cells remaining post-surgery. Conceivably, reducing the number of cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy could attenuate the enrichment for chemo-resistant cells, thereby
prolonging patient survival. Indeed, our model predicts that patients undergoing NACT
with <1mm or >1mm residual tumor could benefit slightly from reducing the number of

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

pre-surgery chemotherapy cycles (Figures 5e-f). This small predicted improvement arises
primarily because of more efficient reduction of the number of chemo-resistant cells at
surgery. The benefit is limited, however, because for most patients, chemo-resistant cells
are still unlikely to be eradicated after their enrichment during the neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy period (Figures S5e-f).

Predicted Effects of Earlier Diagnosis on Survival
We also utilized our model to evaluate the potential benefits of earlier diagnosis.
We first modeled the effects of diagnosing relapsed HG-SOC at the earliest possible time
enabled by the currently used clinical test, CA-125 detection46. Contrary to the intuitive
notion that earlier diagnosis of recurrence should be advantageous, we find that CA-125based earlier diagnosis is not expected to improve survival (Figures 6a-d, red curves). We
also asked if detecting recurrence earlier than is possible with CA-125 monitoring would
be advantageous. Yet even with a lead time ~104 greater than that required for physical
symptoms to appear, the current upper limit of sensitivity for ctDNA-based diagnosis of
ovarian cancer33, our model predicts no advantage in patient survival with earlier detection
of recurrence (Figures 6a-d, green curves).
We explored the reason for this lack of survival advantage by modeling the
theoretical numbers of chemo-sensitive and –resistant cells in a virtual patient whose
recurrence is diagnosed with increasing levels of sensitivity (Figure 6e). Although earlier
diagnosis, followed by prompt re-institution of chemotherapy, can better deplete chemosensitive cells, it barely affects chemo-resistant cells, which ultimately expand and cause
patient death. Therefore, earlier diagnosis is unlikely to improve survival when applied to

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

relapsed cancers treated with standard cytotoxic chemotherapy. We further interrogated the
quantitative relationship between the length of lead time and the potential advantage in
survival, and found that to achieve an advantage of 1 month in overall survival, a lead time
of over 9 months is probably necessary, and even then, is not sufficient (Methods).
Finally, we used our model to explore the potential benefit of earlier diagnosis of
treatment-naïve tumors. Because earlier upfront diagnosis would identify smaller, probably
less disseminated tumors, it likely would increase the chance for complete debulking
during first-line therapy. We therefore focused our comparison on the predicted effects in
patients with <1mm residual tumor. Our analysis argues that earlier diagnosis of treatmentnaïve cancer, with concomitant prompt intervention, can improve patient survival whether
they undergo PDS or NACT (Figure 7). For PDS, the predicted survival benefit can be
dramatic (Figures 7a, 7c, and 7e), primarily because lower volume and less diffuse tumor
at presentation can increase the likelihood of disease eradication (Figures S5a, S5c, and
S5e). Earlier detection can also provide some benefit for patients undergoing NACT if lead
time is sufficient (Figures 7b, 7d, and 7f). In that case, chemo-resistant cells might not yet
have arisen, and chemotherapy alone might be sufficient to eradicate disease (Figures S5b,
S5d, and S5f).

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DISCUSSION

Mathematical modeling has demonstrated potential in the systematic and
quantitative assessment of various treatments44,47,48. If the outcomes of different strategies
could be modeled accurately a priori, clinical trials could focus on therapeutic
combinations that are most likely to succeed, and improvements in patient outcomes could
be accelerated. Predictive models also can suggest when specific clinical controversies
merit re-examination in the controlled trial setting. Our mathematical model of HG-SOC
defines factors that affect the evolution of chemotherapy resistance and can predict patient
survival based on the growth dynamics of chemo-sensitive and –resistant cells, whether
stochastic or hierarchical models of tumor initiation are assumed. Furthermore, the results
of our analyses have important implications for HG-SOC therapy and screening.
We populated our model with clinical data from ~300 patients receiving PDS or
NACT. After estimating the rates of tumor cell proliferation and conversion to chemoresistance, we concluded that most HG-SOC patients probably harbor chemo-resistant
cancer cells at diagnosis. Our outcome predictions closely match patient data from multiple
sources and support clinical observations that: (1) PDS that leaves minimal residual tumor
is the optimal treatment strategy; (2) residual tumor size is a critical determinant of survival
in patients undergoing PDS, but not NACT; (3) earlier diagnosis of relapsed cancer does
not – and cannot – lead to better survival with current therapies; and (4) earlier diagnosis
of primary (treatment-naïve) HG-SOC could dramatically improve outcomes from this
devastating disease, especially if much more sensitive detection methods can be developed.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Our model shows clearly that, when controlled for residual cancer size after
surgery, PDS should always lead to a better outcome than NACT. If debulking leaves
minimal (<1mm) residual tumor, the elemental properties of tumor dynamics predict that
PDS should result in dramatically longer overall survival than NACT. We infer that the
reason for the superior predicted outcome of PDS is that upfront surgery can deplete
minority chemo-resistant cells more effectively, leaving adjuvant chemotherapy to
eradicate residual chemo-sensitive cells. If debulking surgery removes all chemo-resistant
cells, the PDS regimen can be curative. By contrast, cure is unlikely after NACT for at
least two reasons. First, neo-adjuvant chemotherapy enriches for, and allows the continued
expansion of, chemo-resistant cells. Second, by depleting bulk chemo-sensitive cells,
chemotherapy removes tumor mass that can mark the location of chemo-resistant cells
interspersed in metastatic deposits throughout the peritoneum. We suggest that removing
these “sentinel” chemo-sensitive cells renders interval surgery less effective than upfront
surgery in depleting chemo-resistant cells, which are the cells that eventually cause death.
Put another way, with existing agents, the only way to achieve cure, and the best way to
promote long-term survival, is to remove all, or the vast majority of, chemo-resistant cells.
At present, the only way to achieve this goal is by surgically removing such cells, which is
much more likely with the PDS regime. Of course, the development of drugs that can target
these resistant cells might alter these conclusions17,22,49.
Previous clinical studies differed over whether PDS or NACT is superior. A
retrospective analysis of patients treated between 1980 and 1997 found no difference in
outcome between PDS and NACT26. By contrast, several meta-analyses indicated that
NACT is associated with worse prognosis21,50. This controversy occasioned two large,

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

controlled clinical trials to compare PDS and NACT23,28, which found no significant
difference in patient survival between PDS and NACT. Three major weaknesses limit the
strength of these trials’ conclusions: (1) They only recruited patients with “extensive” HGSOC, which might explain the notably worse outcome of patients in this study, especially
in PDS <1mm group, compared with multiple other reports19,20,24,51. Our computational
model predicts that elevated upfront tumor burden can lead to worse overall survival and
obscure the difference in outcome between PDS and NACT, even when complete
debulking is performed (Figure S3j). This factor alone might contribute to the lack of
difference between PDS and NACT in these trials. (2) In the EORTC trial, there was
marked inconsistency between the participating institutions in percentage of optimal
debulking in the PDS group, with 63% for one center in a single country and <12% for the
other 6 countries involved23,52. Our model predicts that residual tumor size is a critical factor
for patient survival, especially in the PDS group, and increased abundance of residual
cancer cells can decrease the advantage of PDS (Figure S3i). (3) In the CHORUS trial,
many patients (30-40%) received carboplatin monotherapy, instead of combination
carboplatin and paclitaxel28. Previous studies demonstrated that platinum-based
combination therapy in ovarian cancer leads to better survival than platinum therapy
alone53, likely by more effectively depleting chemo-sensitive cells or by killing some
platinum-resistant cells. Our model predicts that the efficiency of depletion of chemosensitive cells during chemotherapy is a critical factor for patient survival (Figure S3e-f).
Therefore, the model’s predictions might explain the different findings from existing
clinical studies.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A previous mathematical modeling study, based on a Gompertzian growth model,
argued that NACT should be superior to PDS54. However, that study did not account for
the different dynamics of chemo-sensitive and –resistant cells, and assumed equal
efficiency of surgical depletion of large and small tumors, which ignores the intrinsic
limitations of surgery. Such assumptions can lead to serious errors in modeling HG-SOC.
For example, although aggressive surgery might reduce a tumor containing >1011 cells to
a mass of <107 cells, a tumor containing <106 cells is unlikely to be visible during surgery,
making it highly unlikely that such a tumor can be surgically reduced to <102 cells. Notably,
the conclusions of our study still hold if our model is implemented with Gompertzian
growth assumptions (data not shown).
Similarly, a study of the optimal order of surgery and chemotherapy in pancreatic
cancer concluded that neo-adjuvant chemotherapy should be superior to upfront surgery36.
However, the biology and chemo-responsiveness of pancreatic cancer and HG-SOC differ
substantially: whereas HG-SOC is usually quite chemo-responsive, pancreatic cancer is
notoriously chemo-resistant. The differential influence on tumor visibility following
chemotherapy likely underlies the different predictions in the two diseases. Nevertheless,
the difference between our conclusions and those of Haeno et al. argue for caution in
extrapolating their conclusions to other types of cancer.
Our model enables quantitative analysis of the dependence of treatment outcome
on various factors under different scenarios, providing a powerful tool to assist clinical
decision-making. For example, we found that the advantage of PDS over NACT diminishes
with larger residual tumor post-surgery, more extensive metastases at unresectable
locations, and/or a higher percentage of chemo-resistant cells at diagnosis (Figures 3a-b,

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and S3a-c). These features might help explain the similar overall survival between PDS
and NACT groups in studies involving patients with more extensive upfront disease or less
complete surgical removal23,26. Our analysis also argues that for PDS patients with <1mm
residual tumor, adjuvant chemotherapy should start as early as possible to provide the best
chance of curative outcome; indeed, we predict that differences of even a few weeks might
dramatically alter the chance for curative outcome. Conversely, if complete debulking is
not achieved at primary surgery, delaying chemotherapy is less likely to affect survival.
These predictions are consistent with the results of a meta-analysis of clinical studies55,
which found that each extra week of delay was associated with a significantly decreased
overall survival in patients with PDS <1mm residual tumor, but not in patients with visible
residual disease. We also predict that reducing the number of cycles of neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy should result in slightly improved overall survival for NACT patients, a
prediction that also is consistent with a meta-analysis of clinical data50. Taken together,
these findings argue that even in patients too infirm to undergo immediate surgical
debulking, the number of neo-adjuvant cycles before surgery should be minimized.
A final prediction of our model is that the effects of earlier diagnosis of HG-SOC
should be quite different in relapsed versus treatment-naïve patients. For the former, earlier
diagnosis is unlikely to improve overall survival, primarily because earlier treatment of
recurrent tumors with existing agents cannot deplete chemo-resistant cells that have been
enriched over the clinical course. This prediction matches very well with earlier clinical
observations31. Two scenarios might alter this conclusion: (1) if effective chemotherapy
with a resistance profile orthogonal to platinum/taxane-based therapy were to become
available at relapse; or (2) if effective debulking could be achieved at relapse. Effective

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

drugs against HG-SOC remain a major clinical limitation56,57. Our findings argue strongly
for employing alternative agents as early as possible upon tumor relapse. Surgery is no
longer typically performed on recurrent HG-SOC, and its efficacy could be limited by the
proportion of cancer cells at unresectable locations at disease relapse. Nevertheless, our
model calls for re-evaluation of feasibility and potential efficacy of secondary surgery for
the benefit of earlier diagnosis. Consistent with our analysis, several retrospective studies
report that secondary surgery achieving complete debulking can be beneficial for HG-SOC
patients with platinum-sensitive tumors58,59.
By contrast, our model predicts that earlier diagnosis of treatment-naïve cancer
could improve overall survival for at least two reasons: (1) chemo-resistant cells are usually
not enriched prior to treatment and earlier intervention can reduce the likelihood that
significant numbers will arise; and (2) earlier upfront surgery has a better chance of
removing all chemo-resistant cells, assuming that tumor cells have not diffused throughout
the peritoneal cavity or seeded unresectable locations. There also are at least two additional
benefits of earlier diagnosis and treatment of naïve HG-SOC: (1) patients receiving
incomplete debulking with regular diagnosis might achieve complete debulking with
earlier diagnosis; and (2) patients considered treatable only by NACT with regular
diagnosis might be eligible for PDS with earlier diagnosis.
In summary, our analyses suggest that future randomized clinical trials might
consider: (1) the influence of the interval between primary debulking surgery and adjuvant
chemotherapy on treatment outcome; (2) the association between the number of neoadjuvant chemotherapy cycles and treatment outcome; and (3) the effects of alternative
chemotherapy and/or complete secondary surgery on relapsed tumor, especially when

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

coupled to earlier diagnosis. Although political and logistical reasons might prevent a new
controlled trial of PDS versus NACT, we would argue strongly for such a trial if significant
numbers of gynecologic oncologists persist in arguing for the equivalence of these two
modalities. Finally, the mathematical abstraction makes our framework potentially
applicable to treatment of other malignancies with alternative parameter values.

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

METHODS

Patient Information
Clinical data from 285 HG-SOC patients were obtained from patient records at
University Health Network (148 patients) and from the National Cancer Institute Canada
OV16 trial (137 patients). Medical record information, including date of diagnosis, age of
patient, timing of treatment, extent of residual disease in diameter (<1mm, 1-10mm, or
>10mm), CA125 levels along the treatment course, and survival data (updated in 2014 for
UHN data and 2010 for NCIC data) were recorded. Institutional REB approval was
obtained through University Health Network and a Data Sharing Agreement was concluded
with National Cancer Institute Canada.

Variables Used in Mathematical Model
We denote the following variables for the development of mathematical modeling:
r, division rate of chemo-sensitive cells in the absence of chemotherapy; d, death rate of
chemo-sensitive cells in the absence of chemotherapy; a, division rate of chemo-resistant
cells in the absence of chemotherapy; b, death rate of chemo-resistant cells in the absence
of chemotherapy; r’, division rate of chemo-sensitive cells in the presence of
chemotherapy; d’, death rate of chemo-sensitive cells in the presence of chemotherapy; a’,
division rate of chemo-resistant cells in the presence of chemotherapy; b’, death rate of
chemo-resistant cells in the presence of chemotherapy; M, the number of residual cancer
cells in the peritoneal cavity after surgery; M1, the total number of cancer cells at diagnosis;
M2, the total number of cancer cells at death.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Estimation of Parameter Values
Unless otherwise specified, clinically relevant parameter values were estimated
and set as follows:
In the absence of chemotherapy, the proliferation rate of chemo-sensitive cells (r)
was obtained from the normal distribution with mean 2 and standard deviation 0.8, based
on a clinical study interrogating the doubling time of ovarian cancer cells by BrdU
labeling60. Another study compared cancer cell proliferation rates in platinum responders
and non-responders by thymidine labeling, and found that responders had significantly
higher labeling index than patients with stable or progressive disease61. Accordingly, we
set the proliferation rate of chemo-resistant cells (a) to a normal distribution with mean
0.84 and standard deviation 0.42. Death rates (d and b) were set as 10% of proliferation
rates (r and a) respectively, which is within physiologically relevant range; in any case,
varying this ratio over a large range does not affect the main conclusions of this paper.
During chemotherapy, the proliferation rate of chemo-sensitive cells (r’) was set
to 10% of that of randomly growing cells (r); the death rate of chemo-sensitive cells (d’)
was set to a normal distribution with mean 4.9 and standard deviation 1. These values
were set to match the clinical observation that chemo-responsive relapse occurs on
average ~11 months after 6 cycles of chemotherapy, indicating that cytotoxic reduction
of chemo-sensitive cells by 6 cycles of chemotherapy corresponds to ~11 months of
proliferation. Our inference is consistent with published efficacy of chemotherapy in HGSOC25,62. The proliferation rate of chemo-resistant cells during chemotherapy (a’) was set
to the same as that during random growth (a); the death rate of chemo-resistant cells

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

during chemotherapy (b’) was set to twice as that during randomly growing (b), or 20%
of a’, to reflect a modest effect of chemotherapy on chemo-resistant cells. Conversion
rate during chemotherapy (u’) was set as 10 times of that during randomly growing (u), to
reflect the DNA-damaging effect of platinum-based chemotherapy.
The parameters reflecting cancer cell numbers (M, M1, M2) were obtained from
normal distributions in base 10 logarithmic scale. The number of residual cancer cells
immediately post-surgery (M) was set to mean 6 and standard deviation 0.4 on the log
scale for <1mm residual tumor, mean of 8 on the log scale for 1-10mm residual cancer,
and mean of 10 on the log scale for >10mm residual cancer. The number of cancer cells
at diagnosis (M1) was initially set at different values in patients receiving PDS and
NACT, to reflect the clinical observation that patients with NACT tend to have more
extensive disease at diagnosis24. M1 for PDS was set at mean 11.5 and standard deviation
0.4 on the log scale, and M1 for NACT was set at mean 12 and standard deviation 0.4;
these values result in NACT patients starting with >3x the cancer burden in the model
than those receiving PDS. Moreover, we varied the ratio of tumor burden at diagnosis in
NACT vs PDS patients from 1 to 101.5, and the main conclusions hold over the entire
range. M2 was set to mean 13 and standard deviation 0.4 on the log scale.
We varied the values for all of the above parameters to test the robustness of our
conclusions. We found that the main conclusions hold true, though the magnitude of the
differences between PDS and NACT treatment outcomes may vary.

Mathematical Deduction of the Expected Number of Chemo-resistant Cells at
Diagnosis

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We deduced the expected the number of chemo-resistant cells at diagnosis based
on previous studies35,36. We first calculated the probability that chemo-resistant cells exist
at diagnosis (Pd), and then calculated the expected number of chemo-resistant cells at
diagnosis (Yd).
To calculate Pd, we summed the probabilities that the first successful lineage of
chemo-resistant cells arises when there are 1, 2, 3, … M1-1 chemo-sensitive cells. P(x)
denotes the probability that the first lineage arises when there are x chemo-sensitive cells.
P(x) can be expressed as the joint probability that no successful chemo-resistant lineage
arises at 1, 2, 3, … x-1 chemo-sensitive cells, and that a successful lineage arises at
exactly x chemo-sensitive cells. An expected 1/(1 − 𝑑/𝑟) divisions are needed for an
effective increase of 1 chemo-sensitive cell, and during these divisions an expected
𝑢/(1 − 𝑑/𝑟) chemo-resistant cells are generated, among which a proportion (1 − 𝑏/𝑎)
will successfully persist. Assuming that the number of surviving chemo-resistant cells
generated by each division follows a Poisson distribution with mean (1 − 𝑏/𝑎)𝑢/(1 −
𝑑/𝑟)45, we derive P(x):
3

7

3

7

𝑃(𝑥) = 𝑒 /(0/1)21/456/(1/ 8 ) (1 − 𝑒 /21/456/(1/ 8 ) )
Thus the probability that chemo-resistant cells exist at diagnosis, Pd, can be
written as the sum of P(x):
;< /1

3

7

3

7

𝑃7 = 9 𝑒 /21/45(0/1)6:(1/ 8 ) >1 − 𝑒 /21/456:(1/ 8 ) ?
0=1

If we denote the time between the emergence of a successful chemo-resistant cell
and diagnosis as tx, then the expected number of chemo-resistant cells at diagnosis in the
patients who have them can be expressed as:

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

;< /1

3
7
3
7
1
𝑌7 =
9 𝑒 /21/45(0/1)6:(1/ 8 ) >1 − 𝑒 /21/456:(1/ 8 ) ? 𝑒 (4/3)AB
𝑃7
0=1

The amount of time tx satisfies:
𝑥𝑒 (8/7)AB + 𝑒 (4/3)AB = 𝑀1

Computational Estimation of Patient Survival
We applied the following workflow to simulate clinical treatment of HG-SOC.
Overall survival is monitored and recorded along the workflow:

Assessment of Prediction Robustness Regarding PDS vs. NACT Regimen

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

To assess the robustness of the model predictions of outcome following PDS vs.
NACT, we varied u, e, and each of other parameters, and simulated disease progression
of mock PDS and NACT patients (N=50 each). Survival curves for PDS and NACT
regimens within each combination of parameter values were compared based on the
hazard ratio of the two groups, which was calculated by fitting a Cox proportional
hazards regression model63 to the simulated survival data using the R survival package.

Alternative Scenario 1 – Heterogeneous Chemo-resistant Cells in a Patient
We initially designed a two-component model where a single type of chemoresistant cell exists in a patient. We then extended our mathematical framework to
include a scenario in which heterogeneous chemo-resistant cells co-exist in a patient.
Within this framework (Figure S3d), ovarian cancer starts from a chemo-sensitive cell
with division rate r and death rate d. At each division, a chemo-sensitive cell has
probability u1 to convert into a Type-1 chemo-resistant cell, which divides at rate a1 and
dies at rate b1, and probability u2 to convert into a Type-2 chemo-resistant cell, which
divides at rate a2 and dies at rate b2. During chemotherapy, chemo-sensitive cells divide
at rate r’ and die at rate d’, Type-1 chemo-resistant cells divide at rate a1’ and die at rate
b1’, Type-2 chemo-resistant cells divide at rate a2’ and die at rate b2’, and conversion rates
are u1’ and u2’, respectively. We assume that u1 and u2 are small enough so that
conversions into Type-1 and Type-2 cells do not take place in the same division, and that
the majority of cancer cells at diagnosis are chemo-sensitive.
We could then approximate the expected the numbers of Type-1 (Y1d) and Type-2
(Y2d) chemo-resistant cells at diagnosis:

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

;< /1

𝑌17

3
7
3
7
1
/21/ < 5(0/1)6< :(1/ )
/21/ < 56< :(1/ )
4<
8 E1 − 𝑒
4<
8 F 𝑒 (4< /3< )A<B
=
9 𝑒
𝑃17
0=1

;< /1

𝑌G7

3
7
3
7
1
/21/ H 5(0/1)6H :(1/ )
/21/ H 56H :(1/ )
4H
8 E1 − 𝑒
4H
8 F 𝑒 (4H /3H )AHB
=
9 𝑒
𝑃G7
0=1

In the above equations, t1x and t2x represent the time from the emergence of a
successful Type-1 or Type-2 chemo-resistant cell to diagnosis of disease, respectively,
and approximately satisfy:
𝑥𝑒 (8/7)A<B + 𝑒 (4< /3< )A<B = 𝑀1
𝑥𝑒 (8/7)AHB + 𝑒 (4H /3H )AHB = 𝑀1
P1d and P2d represent the probabilities that Type-1 or Type-2 chemo-resistant cells
exist at diagnosis, respectively, and can be expressed as:
;< /1

𝑃17 = 9 𝑒

3
7
/21/ < 5(0/1)6< :(1/ )
4<
8

E1 − 𝑒

3
7
/21/ < 56< :(1/ )
4<
8 F

0=1
;< /1

𝑃G7 = 9 𝑒

3
7
/21/ H 5(0/1)6H :(1/ )
4H
8 E1

−𝑒

3
7
/21/ H 56H :(1/ )
4H
8 F

0=1

We then approximated the dynamics of chemo-sensitive (X), Type-1 chemoresistant (Y1), and Type-2 chemo-resistant (Y2) cells as below:
7M

Random growth:

⎧ 7N = (𝑟(1 − 𝑢1 − 𝑢G ) − 𝑑)𝑋
⎪ 7P<
= 𝑟𝑢1 𝑋 + (𝑎1 − 𝑏1 )𝑌1
7N
⎨ 7P
⎪ H = 𝑟𝑢G 𝑋 + (𝑎G − 𝑏G )𝑌G
⎩ 7N
7M

Chemotherapy:

⎧ 7N = (𝑟′(1 − 𝑢1 ′ − 𝑢G ′) − 𝑑′)𝑋
⎪ 7P<
= 𝑟′𝑢1 ′𝑋 + (𝑎1 ′ − 𝑏1 ′)𝑌1
7N
⎨ 7P
⎪ H = 𝑟′𝑢G ′𝑋 + (𝑎G ′ − 𝑏G ′)𝑌G
⎩ 7N

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MTUVWXU

Surgery:

⎧ 𝑋4RNS8 = MTUVWXU YP<TUVWXU YPHTUVWXU 𝑀 + 𝜀𝑋3SR[8S
⎪
P<TUVWXU
𝑌14RNS8 = M
𝑀 + 𝜀𝑌13SR[8S
YP
TUVWXU
<TUVWXU YPHTUVWXU
⎨
PHTUVWXU
⎪𝑌
=
𝑀 + 𝜀𝑌G3SR[8S
⎩ G4RNS8 MTUVWXU YP<TUVWXU YPHTUVWXU

Alternative Scenario 2 – Cancer Stem Cell Model
We also considered the alternative scenario in which HG-SOC originates from an
intrinsically chemo-resistant cancer stem cell, which can differentiate into chemosensitive cancer progenitor cells16,17,64. Within this framework (Figure S3g), HG-SOC
starts from a chemo-resistant stem cell with division rate a and death rate b per time unit.
Each stem cell division has a probability of u to produce a chemo-sensitive differentiated
cell, with division rate r and death rate d per time unit. During chemotherapy, chemoresistant stem cells have division rate a’ and death rate b’, and chemo-sensitive
differentiated cells have division rate r’ and death rate d’. Definitions of e, M, M1, and M2
are the same as in the initial model. The dynamics of chemo-resistant stem cells (Y) and
chemo-sensitive differentiated cells can be written as:
7P

Random growth:

\ 7N
7M
7N

= (𝑎(1 − 𝑢) − 𝑏)𝑌
= (𝑟 − 𝑑 )𝑋 + 𝑎𝑢𝑌
7P

Chemotherapy:

7N
\7M
7N

= (𝑎′(1 − 𝑢) − 𝑏′)𝑌
= (𝑟′ − 𝑑′)𝑋 + 𝑎′𝑢𝑌
M

Surgery:

TUVWXU
𝑋4RNS8 = M
𝑀 + 𝜀𝑋3SR[8S
TUVWXU YPTUVWXU
\
PTUVWXU
𝑌4RNS8 = M
𝑀 + 𝜀𝑌3SR[8S
YP
TUVWXU

33

TUVWXU

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Potential Benefit of Earlier Diagnosis of Relapsed Cancer
In order to assess the potential benefit of earlier diagnosis of relapsed cancer more
stringently, we mathematically deduced and compared the expected the number of
chemo-sensitive and chemo-resistant cells after early or standard diagnosis. For early
diagnosis, we assumed that a patient receives chemotherapy from time 0 to TC, and the
cancer randomly grows from time TC to TC+TR. For standard diagnosis, we considered
that the cancer randomly grows from time 0 to TR, and chemotherapy takes place from TR
to TR+TC. TR here represents the “lead time” for early diagnosis. The initial numbers of
chemo-sensitive and chemo-resistant cells at the time of early diagnosis are denoted as X0
and Y0, respectively.
We first modeled the effects of early diagnosis. From time 0 to TC, during
chemotherapy, the dynamics of chemo-sensitive and –resistant cells can be written as:
𝑑𝑋
= (𝑟 _ (1 − 𝑢_ ) − 𝑑 _ )𝑋
𝑑𝑡
]
𝑑𝑌
= (𝑎_ − 𝑏 _ )𝑌 + 𝑟′𝑢′𝑋
𝑑𝑡
Solving these differential equations, we have:
\

𝑋(𝑡) = 𝑋` 𝑒 a8
𝑌(𝑡) = >d 𝑟 _ 𝑢_ 𝑋` 𝑒 2a8

b a1/6 b c/7 b cN

b a1/6 b c/7 b c/a4 b /3 b c5N

𝑑𝑡 + 𝐶? ∙ 𝑒 a4

b /3 b cN

At time TC, the numbers of chemo-sensitive and –resistant cells are:
b

b

b

𝑋gh = 𝑋` 𝑒 a8 a1/6 c/7 cN
𝑟 _ 𝑢_ 𝑋`
b
b
b
𝑌gh = _
𝑒 a8 a1/6 c/7 cgh
_
_
_
_
(𝑟 (1 − 𝑢 ) − 𝑑 ) − (𝑎 − 𝑏 )
⎨
𝑟 _ 𝑢_ 𝑋`
b
b
⎪ + E𝑌` −
F 𝑒 (4 /3 )gh
_
_
_
_
_
(𝑟 (1 − 𝑢 ) − 𝑑 ) − (𝑎 − 𝑏 )
⎩
⎧
⎪

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Then, from time TC to TC+TR, the dynamics of chemo-sensitive and –resistant cells
can be written as:
𝑑𝑋
= (𝑟(1 − 𝑢) − 𝑑 )𝑋
𝑑𝑡
]
𝑑𝑌
= (𝑎 − 𝑏)𝑌 + 𝑟𝑢𝑋
𝑑𝑡
Integrating over time, we derived the numbers of chemo-sensitive and –resistant
cells at time TC+TR:
𝑋Si7(S48jk) = 𝑋` 𝑒 a8

b a1/6 b c/7 b cg

h Y(8(1/6)/7)gl

⎧
b
b
b
⎪
𝑟𝑢𝑋` 𝑒 (8 a1/6 c/7 )gh
a4 b /3 b cgh Y(4/3)gl
𝑌Si7(S48jk) = 𝑌` 𝑒
+
a𝑒 (8(1/6)/7)gl − 𝑒 (4/3)gl c
(𝑟(1 − 𝑢) − 𝑑) − (𝑎 − 𝑏)
⎨
𝑟′𝑢′𝑋` 𝑒 (4/3)gl
b
b
b
b
b
⎪
+ _
a𝑒 (8 a1/6 c/7 )gh − 𝑒 (4 /3 )gh c
_
_
_
_
(𝑟 (1 − 𝑢 ) − 𝑑 ) − (𝑎 − 𝑏 )
⎩
In the equation for the number of chemo-resistant cells, the term
𝑌` 𝑒 a4

b /3 b cg

h Y(4/3)gl

represents the number of chemo-resistant cells derived from

exponential expansion of those already present at time 0, whereas the other terms
represent the number of chemo-resistant cells generated from chemo-sensitive cells
during the period of TC+TR.
Using similar methodology, we could deduce the numbers of chemo-sensitive and
–resistant cells at TR+TC for standard diagnosis:
b

b

b

𝑋Si7(mN4i7487) = 𝑋` 𝑒 (8(1/6)/7)gl Ya8 a1/6 c/7 cgh
⎧
b
b
⎪
𝑟𝑢𝑋` 𝑒 a4 /3 cgh
(4/3)gl Ya4 b /3 b cgh
a𝑒 (8(1/6)/7)gl − 𝑒 (4/3)gl c
𝑌Si7(mN4i7487) = 𝑌` 𝑒
+
(𝑟(1 − 𝑢) − 𝑑) − (𝑎 − 𝑏)
⎨
𝑟′𝑢′𝑋` 𝑒 (8(1/6)/7)gl
b
b
b
b
b
⎪
a𝑒 (8 a1/6 c/7 )gh − 𝑒 (4 /3 )gh c
+ _
_
_
_
_
(𝑟
(1
)
)
−
𝑢
−
𝑑
−
(𝑎
−
𝑏
)
⎩
We found that 𝑋Si7(S48jk) = 𝑋Si7(mN4i7487) , indicating that one round of early
diagnosis is unlikely to affect the number of chemo-sensitive cells. The effect on chemo-

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sensitive cells in Figure 6e is caused by the shorter time lapse between different lines of
therapy, which is facilitated by early diagnosis.
We then calculated the difference between Yend(early) and Yend(standard):
8 b 6b

86

𝑌Si7(mN4i7487) − 𝑌Si7(S48jk) = 𝑋` ∙ 2(8(1/6)/7)/(4/3) − (8 b (1/6b )/7b)/(4b /3b )5
∙ a𝑒 (8(1/6)/7)gl − 𝑒 (4/3)gl c ∙ a𝑒 a4

b /3 b cg

h

− 𝑒 (8

b a1/6 b c/7 b )g

h

c

We imputed the clinically relevant values for these parameters (same as the mean
values shown in Figure 2), and interrogated the influence of TR on the relative difference
in chemo-resistant cell numbers between early and late diagnosis:
𝑌Si7(mN4i7487) − 𝑌Si7(S48jk)
𝑌Si7(mN4i7487)
=

=

9.66 × 10/s 𝑋` (𝑒 1.tgl − 𝑒 `.suvgl )
16.8𝑌` 𝑒 `.suvgl + 9.66 × 10/s 𝑋` 𝑒 1.tgl − 8.09 × 10/s 𝑋` 𝑒 `.suvgl

5.75 × 10/t (𝑒 1.`zzgl − 1)
𝑌` /𝑋` + 5.75 × 10/t 𝑒 1.`zzgl − 4.82 × 10/t

(1)

Equation (1) demonstrates that the relative difference in chemo-resistant cells is associated
with two factors: (1) the initial ratio of chemo-resistant/-sensitive cells at early diagnosis
(Y0/ X0), and (2) the length of lead time for early diagnosis (TR). If we impute Y0/X0=0.01,
meaning ~1% cancer cells at early diagnosis of relapsed cancer are chemo-resistant, then
TR needs to be longer than 11.6 months in order for the ratio in equation (1) to be less than
0.5, corresponding to an advantage of ~1 month in overall survival for early diagnosis. If
0.1% cancer cells at early diagnosis of relapsed cancer are chemo-resistant, then TR needs
to be longer than 9.4 months for an advantage of ~1 month in overall survival.

Estimation of Conversion Rate u and Unresectable Proportion e

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

For each combination of candidate values for u and e, we calculated the deviation
of model prediction from clinical observations as:
G

𝐷𝑒𝑣 = €9a𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ‚/Nƒ kS48 [3mS8„S7 − 𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ‚/Nƒ kS48 …8S7‚†NS7 c
‚

The combination that led to lowest deviation was used for model testing and further
predictions.

Statistical Analyses
Comparisons of overall survival between 2 groups were performed by log-rank test.
Comparisons of predicted survival between >3 groups were performed by log-rank test for
trend when the order of groups is logical. Comparisons of distribution of overall survival
between model predictions and clinical observations were performed by Chi-square test.

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

S.G. and B.G.N. designed the study; S.G. constructed the computational model and
performed the analyses; S.L., L.H.B., I.V., P.C., M.B., B.R., and A.O. provided clinical
expertise and helpful discussions; A.S. provided computational and statistical expertise and
helpful discussions; L.H.B. and I.V. extracted raw clinical data from UHN dataset; D.T.
and W.P. extracted raw clinical data from NCIC dataset; and B.G.N. supervised the
research. S.G. and B.G.N. wrote the manuscript.

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Dr. Hiroshi Haeno from Kyushu University and Drs. Siv Sivaloganthan
and Mohammad Kohandel from Waterloo University for helpful discussions. This work
was supported by grants from the Terry Fox Foundation (TFPPG 020003), National Cancer
Institute (R37 49152), and Department of Defense (60167542 104703 A) (to B.G.N.), and
a DCA Award from University of Toronto (to S.G.). B.G.N. was a Canadian Research
Chair, Tier 1, and work in his laboratory was supported in part by a grant from the Ontario
Ministry of Health and Long Term Care and the Princess Margaret Cancer Foundation.

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

REFERENCES

1.

Bray, F. et al. Global cancer statistics 2018: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence
and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA. Cancer J. Clin. 68,
394–424 (2018).

2.

Hennessy, B. T., Coleman, R. L. & Markman, M. Ovarian cancer. Lancet 374,
1371–1382 (2009).

3.

Jayson, G. C., Kohn, E. C., Kitchener, H. C. & Ledermann, J. a. Ovarian cancer.
Lancet 6736, (2014).

4.

Stewart, D. J. Mechanisms of resistance to cisplatin and carboplatin. Crit. Rev.
Oncol. Hematol. 63, 12–31 (2007).

5.

Orr, G. A., Verdier-Pinard, P., McDaid, H. & Horwitz, S. B. Mechanisms of Taxol
resistance related to microtubules. Oncogene 22, 7280–95 (2003).

6.

Mann, S. C., Andrews, P. A. & Howell, S. B. Short-term cisdiamminedichloroplatinum(II) accumulation in sensitive and resistant human
ovarian carcinoma cells. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 25, 236–40 (1990).

7.

Perego, P. et al. Ovarian cancer cisplatin-resistant cell lines: multiple changes
including collateral sensitivity to Taxol. Ann. Oncol. 9, 423–30 (1998).

8.

Zhen, W. et al. Increased gene-specific repair of cisplatin interstrand cross-links in
cisplatin-resistant human ovarian cancer cell lines. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12, 3689–98
(1992).

9.

Lin, X. & Howell, S. B. Effect of loss of DNA mismatch repair on development of
topotecan-, gemcitabine-, and paclitaxel-resistant variants after exposure to
cisplatin. Mol. Pharmacol. 56, 390–5 (1999).

10.

Beale, P. J., Rogers, P., Boxall, F., Sharp, S. Y. & Kelland, L. R. BCL-2 family
protein expression and platinum drug resistance in ovarian carcinoma. Br. J.
Cancer 82, 436–40 (2000).

11.

Perego, P. et al. Association between cisplatin resistance and mutation of p53 gene
and reduced bax expression in ovarian carcinoma cell systems. Cancer Res. 56,
556–62 (1996).

12.

Chekhun, V. F., Lukyanova, N. Y., Urchenko, O. V & Kulik, G. I. The role of
expression of the components of proteome in the formation of molecular profile of
human ovarian carcinoma A2780 cells sensitive and resistant to cisplatin. Exp.
Oncol. 27, 191–5 (2005).

13.

Lee, S., Choi, E.-J., Jin, C. & Kim, D.-H. Activation of PI3K/Akt pathway by
PTEN reduction and PIK3CA mRNA amplification contributes to cisplatin
resistance in an ovarian cancer cell line. Gynecol. Oncol. 97, 26–34 (2005).

14.

Pan, B. et al. Reversal of cisplatin resistance in human ovarian cancer cell lines by
a c-jun antisense oligodeoxynucleotide (ISIS 10582): evidence for the role of

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

transcription factor overexpression in determining resistant phenotype. Biochem.
Pharmacol. 63, 1699–707 (2002).
15.

Patch, A.-M. et al. Whole–genome characterization of chemoresistant ovarian
cancer. Nature 521, 489–494 (2015).

16.

Stewart, J. M. et al. Phenotypic heterogeneity and instability of human ovarian
tumor-initiating cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 6468–73 (2011).

17.

Janzen, D. M. et al. An apoptosis-enhancing drug overcomes platinum resistance
in a tumour-initiating subpopulation of ovarian cancer. Nat. Commun. 6, 7956
(2015).

18.

Ffrench, B., Gasch, C., O’Leary, J. J. & Gallagher, M. F. Developing ovarian
cancer stem cell models: laying the pipeline from discovery to clinical
intervention. Mol. Cancer 13, 262 (2014).

19.

Chi, D. S. et al. An analysis of patients with bulky advanced stage ovarian, tubal,
and peritoneal carcinoma treated with primary debulking surgery (PDS) during an
identical time period as the randomized EORTC-NCIC trial of PDS vs
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT). Gynecol. Oncol. 124, 10–14 (2012).

20.

Rauh-Hain, J. A. et al. Primary Debulking Surgery Versus Neoadjuvant
Chemotherapy in Stage IV Ovarian Cancer. Ann. Surg. Oncol. 19, 959–965
(2012).

21.

Bristow, R. E., Eisenhauer, E. L., Santillan, A. & Chi, D. S. Delaying the primary
surgical effort for advanced ovarian cancer: A systematic review of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy and interval cytoreduction. Gynecol. Oncol. 104, 480–490 (2007).

22.

Coleman, R. L., Monk, B. J., Sood, A. K. & Herzog, T. J. Latest research and
treatment of advanced-stage epithelial ovarian cancer. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 10,
211–24 (2013).

23.

Vergote, I. et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or primary surgery in stage IIIC or IV
ovarian cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 363, 943–53 (2010).

24.

Rosen, B. et al. The impacts of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and of debulking
surgery on survival from advanced ovarian cancer. Gynecol. Oncol. (2014).
doi:10.1016/j.ygyno.2014.07.004

25.

Schorge, J. O., McCann, C. & Del Carmen, M. G. Surgical debulking of ovarian
cancer: what difference does it make? Rev. Obstet. Gynecol. 3, 111–117 (2010).

26.

Vergote, I. et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or primary debulking surgery in
advanced ovarian carcinoma: a retrospective analysis of 285 patients. Gynecol.
Oncol. 71, 431–6 (1998).

27.

Inciura, A. et al. Comparison of adjuvant and neoadjuvant chemotherapy in the
management of advanced ovarian cancer: a retrospective study of 574 patients.
BMC Cancer 6, 153 (2006).

28.

Kehoe, S. et al. Primary chemotherapy versus primary surgery for newly
diagnosed advanced ovarian cancer (CHORUS): an open-label, randomised,
controlled, non-inferiority trial. Lancet (London, England) 386, 249–57 (2015).

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

29.

May, T. et al. The prognostic value of perioperative, pre-systemic therapy CA125
levels in patients with high-grade serous ovarian cancer. Int. J. Gynecol. Obstet.
140, 247–252 (2018).

30.

Sioulas, V. D. et al. Optimal primary management of bulky stage IIIC ovarian,
fallopian tube and peritoneal carcinoma: Are the only options complete gross
resection at primary debulking surgery or neoadjuvant chemotherapy? Gynecol.
Oncol. 145, 15–20 (2017).

31.

Rustin, G. J. S. et al. Early versus delayed treatment of relapsed ovarian cancer
(MRC OV05/EORTC 55955): a randomised trial. Lancet 376, 1155–1163 (2010).

32.

Forshew, T. et al. Noninvasive identification and monitoring of cancer mutations
by targeted deep sequencing of plasma DNA. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 136ra68 (2012).

33.

Bettegowda, C. et al. Detection of circulating tumor DNA in early- and late-stage
human malignancies. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 224ra24 (2014).

34.

Cervantes-Ruiperez, A. et al. Final results of OV16, a phase III randomized study
of sequential cisplatin-topotecan and carboplatin-paclitaxel (CP) versus CP in firstline chemotherapy for advanced epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC): A GCIG study of
NCIC CTG, EORTC-GCG, and GEICO. ASCO Meet. Abstr. 31, 5502 (2013).

35.

Haeno, H. & Michor, F. The evolution of tumor metastases during clonal
expansion. J. Theor. Biol. 263, 30–44 (2010).

36.

Haeno, H. et al. Computational modeling of pancreatic cancer reveals kinetics of
metastasis suggesting optimum treatment strategies. Cell 148, 362–75 (2012).

37.

Bozic, I. et al. Evolutionary dynamics of cancer in response to targeted
combination therapy. Elife 2013, 1–15 (2013).

38.

Bozic, I., Allen, B., Nowak, M. a & Martin, a. Dynamics of targeted cancer
therapy. Trends Mol. Med. 18, 311–6 (2012).

39.

Diaz, L. a et al. The molecular evolution of acquired resistance to targeted EGFR
blockade in colorectal cancers. Nature 486, 537–40 (2012).

40.

Komarova, N. L. & Wodarz, D. Drug resistance in cancer: principles of emergence
and prevention. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 9714–9 (2005).

41.

Landau, D. a. et al. Evolution and impact of subclonal mutations in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Cell 152, 714–726 (2013).

42.

Ellis, M. J. et al. Whole-genome analysis informs breast cancer response to
aromatase inhibition. Nature 486, 353–60 (2012).

43.

Ma, X. et al. Rise and fall of subclones from diagnosis to relapse in pediatric Bacute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Nat. Commun. 6, 6604 (2015).

44.

Leder, K. et al. Mathematical modeling of pdgf-driven glioblastoma reveals
optimized radiation dosing schedules. Cell 156, 603–616 (2014).

45.

Iwasa, Y., Nowak, M. a. & Michor, F. Evolution of resistance during clonal
expansion. Genetics 172, 2557–2566 (2006).

46.

Duffy, M. J. et al. CA125 in ovarian cancer: European Group on Tumor Markers

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

guidelines for clinical use. Int. J. Gynecol. Cancer 15, 679–91 (2005).
47.

Chmielecki, J. et al. Optimization of dosing for EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung
cancer with evolutionary cancer modeling. Sci. Transl. Med. 3, 90ra59 (2011).

48.

De Pillis, L. G., Radunskaya, A. E. & Wiseman, C. L. A validated mathematical
model of cell-mediated immune response to tumor growth. Cancer Res. 65, 7950–
7958 (2005).

49.

Yu, Y. et al. Inhibition of Spleen Tyrosine Kinase Potentiates Paclitaxel-Induced
Cytotoxicity in Ovarian Cancer Cells by Stabilizing Microtubules. Cancer Cell
82–96 (2015). doi:10.1016/j.ccell.2015.05.009

50.

Bristow, R. E. & Chi, D. S. Platinum-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy and
interval surgical cytoreduction for advanced ovarian cancer: A meta-analysis.
Gynecol. Oncol. 103, 1070–1076 (2006).

51.

Hofstetter, G. et al. The time interval from surgery to start of chemotherapy
significantly impacts prognosis in patients with advanced serous ovarian
carcinoma - Analysis of patient data in the prospective OVCAD study. Gynecol.
Oncol. 131, 15–20 (2013).

52.

Naik, R., Barton, D. & Naito, Y. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or primary surgery in
advanced ovarian cancer. … Engl. J. … 363, 2371; author reply 2372 (2010).

53.

Raja, F. A. et al. Platinum versus platinum-combination chemotherapy in
platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer: a meta-analysis using individual
patient data. Ann. Oncol. 24, 3028–3034 (2013).

54.

Kohandel, M., Sivaloganathan, S. & Oza, a. Mathematical modeling of ovarian
cancer treatments: Sequencing of surgery and chemotherapy. J. Theor. Biol. 242,
62–68 (2006).

55.

Mahner, S. et al. Prognostic impact of the time interval between surgery and
chemotherapy in advanced ovarian cancer: analysis of prospective randomised
phase III trials. Eur. J. Cancer 49, 142–9 (2013).

56.

Chester, C., Dorigo, O., Berek, J. S. & Kohrt, H. Immunotherapeutic approaches to
ovarian cancer treatment. J. Immunother. cancer 3, 7 (2015).

57.

Lopez, J., Banerjee, S. & Kaye, S. B. New developments in the treatment of
ovarian cancer--future perspectives. Ann. Oncol. 24 Suppl 1, x69–x76 (2013).

58.

Harter, P. et al. Surgery in recurrent ovarian cancer: the Arbeitsgemeinschaft
Gynaekologische Onkologie (AGO) DESKTOP OVAR trial. Ann. Surg. Oncol.
13, 1702–1710 (2006).

59.

Eisenkop, S. M., Friedman, R. L. & Spirtos, N. M. The role of secondary
cytoreductive surgery in the treatment of patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian
carcinoma. Cancer 88, 144–53 (2000).

60.

Erba, E. et al. Cell kinetics of human ovarian cancer with in vivo administration of
bromodeoxyuridine. Ann. Oncol. 5, 627–634 (1994).

61.

Alama, a et al. Tumour kinetics, response to chemotherapy and survival in
primary ovarian cancer. Eur. J. Cancer 30A, 449–452 (1994).
43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

62.

Covens, A. L. A critique of surgical cytoreduction in advanced ovarian cancer.
Gynecol. Oncol. 78, 269–274 (2000).

63.

Andersen, P. K. & Gill, R. D. Cox’s Regression Model for Counting Processes: A
Large Sample Study. Ann. Stat. 10, 1100–1120 (1982).

64.

Reya, T., Morrison, S. J., Clarke, M. F. & Weissman, I. L. Stem cells, cancer, and
cancer stem cells. Nature 414, 105–11 (2001).

44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure 1. Mathematical Framework of HG-SOC Clinical Course
(a) Representative CA125 levels during clinical course of a typical HG-SOC patient.
Chemotherapy responsiveness decreases along the treatment course, indicating the
accumulation of chemo-resistant cells.
(b-d) Kaplan-Meier survival curves for patients in the UHN dataset. Panel (b) compares
the survival of patients with <1mm residual tumor after treatment by PDS or NACT. Note
that patients with PDS <1mm lived significantly longer than those with NACT <1mm
(p<0.0001). Panel (c) compares the survival of patients treated by PDS with <1mm versus
1-10mm residual tumor. Note that patients with PDS <1mm lived significantly longer than
those with PDS 1-10mm (p<0.0001). Panel (d) compares the survival of patients treated by
NACT with <1mm versus 1-10mm residual tumor. Note that survival of these two groups
was not significantly different (p=0.46).
(e) Mathematical framework for modeling HG-SOC progression. The model assumes the
existence of chemo-sensitive and chemo-resistant HG-SOC cells. During random growth,
chemo-sensitive cells divide at rate r, die at rate d, and convert into chemo-resistant cells
with probability u per cell division; chemo-resistant cells divide at rate a and die at rate b.
During chemotherapy, chemo-sensitive cells divide at rate r’, die at rate d’, and convert
into chemo-resistant cells with probability u’ per cell division; chemo-resistant cells divide
at rate a’ and die at rate b’. See text and Supplementary Experimental Procedures for
details.
See also Figure S1.

45

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. Estimation of Parameter Values and Evaluation of Model Predictions
(a-b) Estimation of conversion rate (u) and inaccessible proportion (e) in patients treated
by PDS or NACT with <1mm residual tumor, using data from the UHN cohort (Training
Set). Colors represent the degree of deviation between clinical data and the predictions of
the mathematical model. Lighter colors represent region of best fit between theory and
observation. Panel (b) provides a finer scale analysis of the red dashed region in panel (a).
(c) Model prediction of survival of patients treated by PDS or NACT with <1mm residual
tumor. Parameter values are: u = 10-7.6, e = 10-7.4, d = r/10, b = a/10, a’ = a, b’ = a/5, u’ =
10u. Values for r, a, r’, and d’ were obtained from normal distributions. r was set with
mean 2 and s.d. 0.8. a was set with mean 0.84 and s.d. 0.42. r’ was set with mean 0.2 and
s.d. 0.08. d’ was set with mean 4.9 and s.d. 1. M1, M2, and M were obtained from normal
distributions in the log-10 scale. log10M1 was set with mean 11.5 and s.d. 0.4 for PDS group,
and mean 12 and s.d. 0.4 for NACT group. log10M2 was set with mean 13 and s.d. 0.4.
log10M was set with mean 6 and s.d. 0.4 for <1mm residual cancer.
(d-e) Comparisons of predicted and observed overall survival for PDS <1mm (d) and
NACT <1mm (e) groups. There was no significant difference between the prediction and
clinical data for (d) (p=0.20) or (e) (p=0.69).
See also Figure S2.

Figure 3. Evaluation of Model Predictions with Data from Validation Sets
(a-b) Predicted survival of patients from the UHN dataset treated with PDS (a) or NACT
(b). Black curves represent the predicted overall survival curves for patients with <1mm

46

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

residual tumor. Red curves represent the predicted overall survival curves for patients with
1-10mm residual tumor post-surgery. Note that the model predicts that post-surgery cancer
size is critical for the outcome of PDS, but not NACT.
(c-d) Comparison of predicted and observed survival for the PDS (c) and NACT (d) 110mm residual tumor groups. There was no significant difference between the predictions
and clinical data for either (c) (p=0.59) or (d) (p=0.21).
(e-f) Observed (e) and predicted (f) overall survival of patients in the NCIC cohort. Patients
received PDS and had <1mm, 1-10mm, or >10mm residual tumor.
(g-i) Predicted and observed survival of PDS-treated patients from the NCIC study with
<1mm (g), 1-10mm (h), or >10mm (i) residual tumor. There was no significant difference
between predictions and clinical data for (g) (p=0.73), (h) (p=0.40), or (i) (p=0.42).
Parameter values were the same as in Figure 2c, except that log10M was set with mean 8
and s.d. 0.4 for the 1-10mm residual group, and mean 10 and s.d. 0.4 for the >10mm
residual groups. Also, the gap between surgery and the start of chemotherapy was 1 month
for the UHN patients and 0.8 month for the NCIC patients; UHN patients received 6 cycles
of chemotherapy for first line PDS treatment, whereas NCIC patients received 8 cycles.

Figure 4. Predicted Outcome of PDS and NACT Patients with Same Initial Tumor
Burden
(a-b) Predicted survival of patients undergoing PDS (black curves) or NACT (red curves).
All patients received 6 cycles of chemotherapy. Panel (a) shows the results for <1mm
residual tumor group, and panel (b) shows the result for 1-10mm residual tumor group.

47

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Parameter values were as in Figure 2c, except that log10M1 was set at the same value for
the PDS and NACT groups, with mean 11.5 and s.d. 0.4.
(c-d) Simulation of representative progression dynamics for chemo-sensitive (green
curves) and chemo-resistant (blue curves) cancer cells in a patient undergoing PDS (c) or
NACT (d) treatment with optimal debulking. Treatment order is shown at the top of each
plot; “S” indicates “surgery”, and “C” indicates “chemotherapy”.
(e-f) Distribution of number of chemo-sensitive and chemo-resistant cells for the PDS
(black curves) and NACT (red curves) groups, with <1mm (e) or 1-10mm (f) residual
tumor.
See also Figure S3.

Figure 5. Predicted Outcomes of Alternative Treatment Strategies
(a-d) Predicted survival of patients receiving PDS (a-b) or NACT (c-d) with different
lengths of delay between debulking surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy. Panels (a) and (c)
show expected results with <1mm residual tumor after surgery; panels (b) and (d) show
predicted results with 1-10mm residual tumor.
(e-f) Predicted overall survival of patients receiving NACT with different cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy before and after surgery, with options of: 3 neo-adjuvant and 3
adjuvant cycles (black curves), 2 neo-adjuvant and 4 adjuvant cycles (red curves), or 1 neoadjuvant and 5 adjuvant cycles (green curves). Panel (e) shows the expected results with
<1mm residual tumor; panel (f) shows expected results with 1-10mm residual tumor.
Parameter values are the same as in Figure 2c.
See also Figure S4.

48

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6. Predicted Effects of Earlier Diagnosis and Treatment of Relapsed Cancer
(a-d) Predicted survival of patients with relapsed cancer detected at different degrees of
sensitivity. Predictions were stratified based on the first-line therapy performed, including
PDS with <1mm (a) or 1-10mm (b) residual tumor or NACT with <1mm (c) or 1-10mm
(d) residual tumor. “Standard” (black curves) represents diagnosis based on physical
symptoms, when the number of cancer cells is comparable to M1; “100x lead time” (red
curves) and “10,000x lead time” (green curves) represent earlier treatment of recurrent
disease with the number of cancer cells at diagnosis 1% or 0.01% that of M1, respectively.
(e) Simulation of representative growth dynamics for chemo-sensitive (green curves) and
chemo-resistant (blue curves) cancer cells in a patient treated by PDS with optimal
debulking, with relapsed cancer diagnosed at different degrees of sensitivity. Earlier
treatment of relapsed cancer can more effectively deplete chemo-sensitive cells, but does
not effectively change the trajectory of chemo-resistant cells, which are the ultimate cause
of patient death. Parameter values are the same as in Figure 2c.

Figure 7. Predicted Advantage of Earlier Diagnosis and Treatment of Naïve Cancer
Predicted survival of patients diagnosed with treatment-naive cancer at different degrees
of sensitivity. Predictions were stratified based on the eventual first-line therapy received,
including PDS (a, c, e) and NACT (b, d, f) with <1mm residual tumor. “Standard” (black
curves) indicates diagnosis based on physical symptoms, when the number of cancer cells
is equal to M1; “100x lead time” (red curves) and “10,000x lead time” (green curves)
represent earlier treatment of naïve cancer, with the number of cancer cells at diagnosis 1%

49

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

or 0.01% that of M1, respectively. Because earlier detection is likely to be associated with
less cancer dissemination, the numbers of residual cancer cells post-surgery might be
smaller. We tested scenarios wherein 100x earlier detection is associated with 100% (a-b),
50% (c-d), or 20% (e-f) the disease diffusion of Standard detection, by adjusting the
number of residual tumor cells for the “100x lead time” group to 1, 1/2, or 1/5 of M for
“Standard” group, respectively. Other parameter values are the same as in Figure 2c.
See also Figure S5.

50

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009712; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

TABLES

Table 1. Patient Characteristics in UHN and NCIC Cohorts
UHN Cohort

NCIC Cohort

148

137

2008 JAN
(2005 OCT – 2009 MAR)

2003 NOV
(2003 JAN – 2004 AUG)

58 (50 – 66)

58 (52 – 64)

PDS

61 (41%)

137 (100%)

NACT

87 (59%)

0 (0%)

IIIC

124 (84%)

102 (74%)

IV

24 (16%)

35 (26%)

<1mm

97 (66%)

20 (15%)

1-10mm

51 (34%)

34 (25%)

>10mm

0 (0%)

83 (60%)

CA125
before
treatment*

686 (220 – 1680)

Unknown

Overall survival*

41 (22 – not reached)

40 (26 – not reached)

Total number of
patients
Time
of
diagnosis*
Age*
Treatment
regimen

FIGO Stage

Residual disease

* values indicate median (range of first and third quartiles).

51

a

b
p<0.0001

600

200

0

Chemo

400

Percent survival

Chemo

800

0

PDS
NACT

100

6000
1000

Surgery
Chemo

Serum CA125 level

7000

12

24

36

48

80
60
40
20
0

60

0

12

Months after diagnosis

24

36

48

60

72

84

Months after diagnosis

c

d
Percent Survival

<1mm
1-10mm

80
60
40
20
0

0

12

24

36

48

60

Months after diagnosis

72

84

p=0.46

100

Percent survival

p<0.0001

100

<1mm
1-10mm

80
60
40
20
0

0

12

24

36

48

60

Months after diagnosis

e

Cancer
Randomly
Growing:

During
Chemotherapy:

Figure 1. Mathematical Framework of HG-SOC Clinical Course

72

84

b

a

Inaccessible
proportion, e

Inaccessible
proportion, e

10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7
10-8
15

10-9
10

-11

10

-10

5

10

-9

10

-8

10

10

-7

-6

10

10-6
10-7
10-8
10-9

-

15
10-9

10-8.6

Conversion rate, u

d

80

1.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

% Death each year

PDS
NACT

0.8

10-8.2

10-7.8

10-7.4

10-7

Conversion rate, u

c
Percent Survival

70

10-5

70

p=0.20

Observed
Predicted

60
40
20
0

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

>84

Months after diagnosis

Months after diagnosis

e
% Death each year

80

p=0.69

Observed
Predicted

60
40
20
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

>84

Months after diagnosis

Figure 2. Estimation of Parameter Values and Evaluation of Model Predictions

1.0
0.6

0.8

<1mm
1-10mm

0.4

Percent Survival

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

<1mm
1-10mm

0.2

1.0

b

0.0

Percent Survival

a

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

Months after diagnosis

d

80

p=0.59

Observed
Predicted

60

% Death each year

% Death each year

c

40
20

80

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

24

24

36

60

72

84

>84

1.0
0.8
0

12

24

36

48

Months after diagnosis

h

g
Observed

p=0.73

Predicted

80
60
40
20
0

80

% Death each year

100

% Death each year

48

0.6
0.4

48

Months after diagnosis

24

36

48

>48

Predicted

40
20

12

24

36

48

>48

Months after diagnosis

Months after diagnosis
80

Observed

p=0.40

60

0

12

i
% Death each year

36

<1mm
1-10mm
>10mm

0.2

<1mm
1-10mm
>10mm
12

Observed
Predicted

0.0

Percent Survival

Percent Survival

80

0

84

Months after diagnosis

f

0

72

20

12

100

20

60

40

>84

e

40

48

p=0.21

Months after diagnosis

60

36

60

0
12

24

Months after diagnosis

Observed

p=0.42

Predicted

60
40
20
0

12

24

36

48

>48

Months after diagnosis

Figure 3. Evaluation of Model Predictions with Data from Validation Sets

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Percent Survival

PDS
NACT

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

PDS
NACT

0.0

Percent Survival

1.0

b
1.0

a

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

Months after diagnosis
S C

d

C

sensitive
resistant

C

CSC

84

C

sensitive
resistant

Resistant

0.3

Sensitive

PDS
NACT

0

0.1

Frequency

0.1
0

Frequency

72

Months after diagnosis

PDS
NACT

0

1

104

107

1010

0

Number of cells after first-line therapy

f

1

104

107

1010

Number of cells after first-line therapy

Sensitive

0.3

PDS
NACT

0

0.1

Frequency

PDS
NACT

0.1

0.3

Resistant

0

Frequency

60

Months after diagnosis

0.3

e

48

Months after diagnosis

log10(Cell Number)

C

36

log10(Cell Number)

c

24

0

1

104

107

1010

Number of cells after first-line therapy

0

1

104

107

1010

Number of cells after first-line therapy

Figure 4. Predicted Outcome of PDS and NACT Patients with Same Initial Tumor
Burden

b

p<0.0001

1.0
0.6

0.8

1 month
1.5
months
2 months
3 months

0.4

Percent Survival

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1 month
1.5
months
2 months
3 months

0.0

0.0

Percent Survival

1.0

p=0.07

0.2

a

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

Months after diagnosis

d

60

72

84

1.0

p=0.40
0.8
0.6

Percent Survival

1 month
1.5
months
2 months
3 months

0.4

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1 month
1.5
months
2 months
3 months

0.0

Percent Survival

48

Months after diagnosis

p=0.82

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0

84

12

Months after diagnosis

f

24

36

48

60

Months after diagnosis

48

60

72

84

72

84

1.0

p=0.02

0.4

0.6

0.8

3 cycles
2 cycles
1 cycle

0.2

Percent Survival

1.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

3 cycles
2 cycles
1 cycle

12

36

Months after diagnosis

p=0.003

0

24

0.0

e
Percent Survival

36

0.2

c

24

0

12

24

36

48

60

Months after diagnosis

Figure 5. Predicted Outcomes of Alternative Treatment Strategies

72

84

b
1.0

p=0.88

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Standard
100x
lead time
10,000x
lead time

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Standard
100x
lead time
10,000x
lead time

0.0

Percent Survival

1.0

p=0.86

Percent Survival

a

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

Months after diagnosis

d

36

48

60

72

84

1.0
0.4

0.6

0.8

Standard
100x
lead time
10,000x
lead time

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Standard
100x
lead time
10,000x
lead time

p=0.24

0.2

1.0

p=0.66

Percent Survival

24

Months after diagnosis

Percent Survival

c

12

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

Months after diagnosis

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

Months after diagnosis

e

log10(Cell Number)

Standard

Sensitive
Resistant

100x lead time

Months after diagnosis

10,000x lead time

Figure 6. Predicted Effects of Earlier Diagnosis and Treatment of Relapsed
Cancer

b
1.0

p=0.04

0.6

0.8

Standard
100x
lead time
10,000x
lead time

0.4

Percent Survival

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Standard
100x
lead time
10,000x
lead time

0.0

0.0

Percent Survival

1.0

p=0.16

0.2

a

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

Months after diagnosis

d

48

60

72

84

1.0

p=0.04
0.8
0.6

Percent Survival

Standard
100x
lead time
10,000x
lead time

0.4

1.0
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Standard
100x
lead time
10,000x
lead time

0.0

0.0

Percent Survival

36

Months after diagnosis

p<0.0001

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

Months after diagnosis

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

Months after diagnosis

f
1.0
0.4

0.6

0.8

Standard
100x
lead time
10,000x
lead time

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Standard
100x
lead time
10,000x
lead time

p=0.03

0.2

1.0

p<0.0001

Percent Survival

e
Percent Survival

24

0.2

c

12

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

Months after diagnosis

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

Months after diagnosis

Figure 7. Predicted Advantage of Earlier Diagnosis and Treatment of Naïve
Cancer

148 HG-SOC
patients from
UHN

40 PDS
with
<1mm
residual
tumor

57 NACT
with
<1mm
residual
tumor

Model training

21 PDS
with 110mm
residual
tumor

137 HG-SOC
patients from
NCIC-OV16

30 NACT
with 110mm
residual
tumor

20 PDS
with
<1mm
residual
tumor

36 PDS
with 110mm
residual
tumor

Model testing

Figure S1. Data Organization for Model Training and Testing.

81 PDS
with
>10mm
residual
tumor

4e+04

8e+04

0.4

−9.0

0.6
0.8

−8.5

1.0
2.5

d

1.2

−8.0

log10u
1.4

f

−7.5

−7.0
8e+04

2.0

4e+04

4e+04

8e+04

0e+00

4e+04

8e+04

Expected Number

0e+00

Expected Number

b

0e+00

1.5

4

8e+04

8e+04
1.0

2

4e+04

4e+04

Expected Number

0e+00

Expected Number

0

0e+00

Expected Number

0e+00

Expected Number

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Probability of chemoeresistant cells at diagnosis

a

6
8

3.0
0.2

1.6
0.1

11.0

10

Diameter of Tumor (cm)

c

0.4
0.6

r

0.2

a

11.5

0.8

0.3

12.0

1.0

d

e

0.4

b

g

12.5

log10M1

Figure S2. Dependence of Number of Resistant Cells at Diagnosis on Parameter
Values.

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

Timefollow

72

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

Timefollow

72

72

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

24

36

36

36

48

48

48

60

60

60

72

72

72

Timefollow

Timefollow

84

84

84

0

0

0

0

12

12

12

12

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36
48

48

48

48

48
60

60

60

60

60
72

72

72

72

72
84

Timefollow
84

Timefollow

84

Timefollow

84

Timefollow

84

84
0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0.8

1.0

1.0

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

72

b
d = 0.1*r

36
48
60
72

Timefollow

36
48
60
72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow
72

Timefollow
72

u

d = 0.5*r
36
48
60
72

Timefollow
36
48
60
72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

72

84

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.4

0.6

72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

60

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

48

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

48

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.2

36

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.2

0.4

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

72

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

60

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.4

0.8

36

48

1.0

12

24

48

0.6

0.8

0.8

0

12

24

36

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

0

12

24

36

1.0

0.0

0.2

1.0

0.4

1.0

0.6

1.0

0

12

24

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

24

1.0

0.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.2

12

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

1.0

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.4

0.8

1.0

0

1.0

0.6

0.2

1.0

0.4

1.0

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

24

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

e

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

84

0.0

0.2

84

1.0

72
84

0.8

0.0

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

r = 3.0

12

48

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.0

u
0

36

48

60

0.4

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

CurvePDS

60
72

84

0.2

0.2

60
72

84

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.2

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

36
48
60
72

84

0.8

1.0

0.0

1.0

0.4

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

0.6

24
36
48
60

72

84

Timefollow

0.4

12
24
36
48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.2

0.8

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

0.6

1.0

0.8

0.2

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

1.0

84
0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

0.6

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

1.0

84

0.8

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

60

72

0

12

0.4

72
84

Timefollow

0.6

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

60
84

CurvePDS

d = 0.3*r
72
84

0.2

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

60

72

84

0.2

48
60
72

84

0.0

1.0

0.0

1.0

0.6

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

60

72

0.0

36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

1.0

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

12

24

36

48

60

84

0.8

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

0
12
24
36
48
60

84

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

0.8

0.6

0.2

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

d = 0.05*r
72

0

12

24

36

48

72

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.4

0.0

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.4

0.2

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36

48

1.0

0.2

0.2

1.0

0.8

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.6

84

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.8

0
12
24

36

60

72

84

0.2

84

Timefollow

0.6

84

Timefollow

0.4

1.0

84

CurvePDS

0.8

84

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.6

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.2

r = 2.5

0

12

36

0.4

Timefollow
0
12

24

48

60

72

84

0.0

Timefollow
0

12

36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.2

60

72
84

0.0

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

1.0

60
72
84

0.8

60
72

84

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

12

0.0

48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0

1.0

36

48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

24

36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.4

0.0

0.4

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.6

12

24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

0.4

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.2

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

0.6

0.0

1.0

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

1.0

0.8

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.8

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

CurvePDS

84

CurvePDS

0.8
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.0

84

0.2

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

60

72
84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

1.0

60
72
84

0.8

60
72
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.6

0.6

0.6

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0

12

0.6

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

0.4

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

24

36
48
60
72
84

CurvePDS

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.2

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

84

0.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.0

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

1.0

0.2

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

1.0

0.8

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.8

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

0.6

0.4

0.6
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.4

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0

24

36

72

1.0

84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

84

0.0

0.2

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

84

0.8

0.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

12

24

60

0.8

72
84

0.6

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

60

72

0

12

48

0.6

60

72
84

0.4

1.0

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

36

0.4

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

Timefollow

CurvePDS

36

48
60
72
0

12

24

36

60

72

84

24

0.2

24

36

48
60
72
84

0.2

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.4

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

60

72

12

0.0

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

1.0

0

12

24
36
48
60
72
84

0.0

0.2

1.0

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

1.0

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

1.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.6

0.0

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

60

84

0.8

84

0.8

0.6
0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.4

84
Timefollow

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

12

24

36

48

72

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

0.4

84

CurvePDS

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.4

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

CurvePDS

60

72
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.0

60

72
84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

60

72

0

12

36

0.2

48

60
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.0

1.0

Timefollow
0

12

24

48

60

84

Timefollow

0.0

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

1.0

24

36

48
60
72
84

0.8

Timefollow
1.0

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

72

84

12

0.8

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0

24

36

60

72

0

0.6

0

12

24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0.6

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

r = 1.2

0.4

84

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

84

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

12

24

48

60

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

1.0

84

0.8

84
Timefollow

0

12

36

48

72

0.2

72
84
Timefollow

0

24

36

60

0.0

60

72
0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48

60

84

12

24

48

1.0

48

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.8

36

48

60
72
0
12
24
36

48

72

0.4

0.2

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.6

24

36

48
60
84

CurvePDS

0.0

d = 0.2*r
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.4

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

0.2

Timefollow
1.0

0.0

0.0

1.0

Timefollow
0
12

24

48

60

72

84

12

CurvePDS

0

12

24
36
48
60
72
84

0.0

0.8

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

Timefollow
0

12

36

48

1.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.8

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

Timefollow
0

24

36

60

0.6

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

0.2

84

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0.4

0.2

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.2

d = 0.01*r
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

84

0.8

0.0

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60

84

12

24

48

72

84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
72

0.6

84
Timefollow

0

12

36

60

72

1.0

72
84
Timefollow

0

24

48

60

0.8

60

72
84
Timefollow

0.4

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.0

r = 2.0

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
60
72

84

0.2

60

72
84

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12
24
48
60

72

84

12

36

48

0.6

48

60
72
84

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
36
48

60

72

0

24

36

0.4

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

Timefollow

0.2

24

36

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.6

Timefollow
0
24
36
48

60

72

84

12

24

0.0

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

12

1.0

0

12

24
36
48
60
72
84
12
24
36

60

72

84

0.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
0
12
24

48

60

72

0

0.8

84

Timefollow
0
12

36

48

1.0

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

84

0.0

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

84

Timefollow
0

24

36

48

60

84

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

12

24

36

48

72

0.4

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

CurvePDS

60

72

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

60

72

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

60
72

84
Timefollow

0

12

36

0.2

48
60

72
84

0.8

0.4

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

36

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

1.0

24

36

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

12

0.8

12

24

36
48

60
72
84

CurvePDS

Timefollow

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

0

0.6

0

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

0.2

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0
12

24

36

48

60

84

0.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
84

0.0

0.6

0.8

0.0

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

0
12

24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0.4

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

0.2

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0

12

24

36

72

0.4

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

60

0.4

84

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

84

Timefollow

0

12

48

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

84

Timefollow

0

36

0.2

72

84

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

60

72

84

0.6

60
72

84

0.4

0.2

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

24

1.0

48
60

72
84

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

12

0.8

36

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

0.6

24

36

48

60
72
84

0.0

Timefollow

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.2

0.4

e

r = 0.8

0.4

12

24

36
48

60
72
0
12
24

36

48

1.0

0.8

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0.6

0.0

0.2

1.0

0.0

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

60

84

CurvePDS

0

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

0.8

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
84

0.6

0
12

24
36
48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

72

0.2

84

0.2

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.4

84

0.0

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

84

0.8

84

Timefollow

0.6

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0

12

24

36

60

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

48

1.0

72

84
Timefollow

0

12

36

0.8

60

72

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.0

60

72

84
Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.6

48

60
72

84

Timefollow

0

24

0.4

36

48
60

72
84

CurvePDS

0.2

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

12

CurvePDS

24

36

48

60
72
84

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

0

0.2

12

24

36
48

60
72
84

0.0

Timefollow

1.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24

36
48

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.4

Timefollow
0
12

24
36

48

60

84

0.0

0

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

0.8

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

0
12

24
36
48
60
72

0.6

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

Timefollow
0

12
24

36

48

72

1.0

84

Timefollow

0
12

24

36

60

0.4

84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

CurvePDS

84

0.2

84

0.0

0.0
0
12
24
36
48

1.0

1.0

84

0.8

0.8

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0

12

36

0.6

72

84
Timefollow

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72
84

Timefollow

0.4

60

72

84
Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60
72

84

0.0

60

72

84

CurvePDS

60
72

84

Timefollow

0

24

0.2

48
60

72

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48
60

72

84

12

0.0

36

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

1.0

24

36

48

60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24

36
48
60

72

84

0.8

12

24

36
48

60
72
84

0.2

0.2

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48

60

72

0.6

0

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.8

Timefollow
0

12
24
36

48

1.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0
12

24
36
48

1.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

0
12
24

36

60

0.6

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0
12

24

48

0.4

84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.4

84

Timefollow

0.4

0.2

0.4

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

84

CurvePDS

84

0.2

84

0.0

0.0

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

1.0

0.0

84
Timefollow

0

24

0.2

72

84
Timefollow

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72
84

0.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

12

0.0

60

72

84

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48
60
72

0

1.0

60

72

84
Timefollow

0.6

60
72

84

Timefollow

0.4

60

72
84

CurvePDS

0.8

60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
24

36
48
60
72

84

0.8

48

60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48
60

72

0.6

36

48

60
72
84

0.2

0.2

0.6

Timefollow
0

12
24
36
48

60

0.4

24

36

48

60
72
84

0.0

0.0

0.4

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48

CurvePDS

12

24

36
48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.2

0

12

24
36

48

1.0

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24

36

1.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72

84

0.8

0
12

24
36
48
60
72

0
12

24

0.6

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

0.4

0.2

0.6
0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0.8

0.0

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.6

Timefollow
0

1.0

0.0

0.4

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2
0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.8

0.8

0.0
0
12
24
36

48
60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8
0
12
24

36
48
60
72

0.6

0.2

0.6
0
12

24
36
48
60

0.4

0.0

0.4
0

12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0
12
24
36
48

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0
12
24
36

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

0.8

0
12
24

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0
12

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0.0

0.0

0.0

a
r = 1.6
84
0

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84

0

84

0

84

0

0

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

24
Timefollow

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

48

Timefollow

48

Timefollow

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

48

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

48

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow
36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60

72

84

60

72

84

60

72

84

60

72

84

48

48

48

48

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

Timefollow

—— PDS
—— NACT

Timefollow

Timefollow

—— PDS
—— NACT

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

Timefollow

72

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

24

36

36

36

48

48

48

60

60

60

72

72

72

Timefollow

Timefollow

84

84

84

0

0

0

0

12

12

12

12

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36

48

48

48

48
60

60

60

60

60
72

72

72

72

72
84

Timefollow
84

Timefollow

84

Timefollow

84

Timefollow

84

84
0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0.8

1.0

1.0

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

72

d
b = 0.1*a

36
48
60
72

Timefollow

36
48
60
72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow
72

Timefollow
72

u

b = 0.5*a
36
48
60
72

Timefollow
36
48
60
72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

72

84

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.4

0.6

72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

60

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.4

48

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

48

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

36

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.6

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

72

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

60

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

36

48

1.0

12

24

48

0.6

0.8

0.8

0

12

24

36

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.2

0.8

0

12

24

36

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0

12

24

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.8

0.2

1.0

0.4

1.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.4

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.4

24

1.0

0.0

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

12

60

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.2

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0

1.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.8

24

60

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

e

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

1.0

0.4

1.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.6

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

84

0.0

0.2

84

1.0

72
84

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.2

a = 1.5

12

48

60

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

1.0

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.4

0.8

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.0

u
0

36

48

60

0.4

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

Timefollow

CurvePDS

60
72

84

0.2

0.2

60
72

84

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

48
60
72

84

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

0.6

36
48
60

72

84

Timefollow

0.4

24
36
48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.2

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.0

0.8

0.0

1.0

0.4

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.2

1.0

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0.6

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.8

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

1.0

84
0.2

0.8
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

84
0.0

0.6

0.6

0
12
24

36

48

1.0

84

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

0.6

72
0
12

24

36

48

60

72

0

12

0.4

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.2

48
60
84

Timefollow

0.4

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.0

36
48
72
84

CurvePDS

b = 0.3*a
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

1.0

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

84

0.8

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.0

1.0

0.2

0.0

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.8

0.8

0.0

1.0

0.6

0.0

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

72

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.8

1.0

0.6

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.4

0.2

0.8
0
12
24
36

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.6

0.8

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

b = 0.05*a

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.6

84

0.8

0.2

0.2

0
12
24

48

60

72

84

0.2

84

Timefollow

0.6

0.0

0.0

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12

36

48

60

72

0.4

84

CurvePDS

1.0

84

0.2

0.8

84

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.8

84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.4

Timefollow
0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.2

a = 1.3

84

0.0

Timefollow
0

24

36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.2

60

72
84

12

24

36

48

1.0

60
72

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

12

0.0

48
60
72

84

0.8

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0

1.0

36

48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.6

0.0

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

24

36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow
1.0

0.2

0.2

0.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.6

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.0

1.0

0.0

0.2

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

0.4

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

1.0

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

CurvePDS

84

0.2

0.8
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.0

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

60

72

84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

1.0

60
72

84

0.8

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.6

0.6

0.8

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.4

0.4

0.6

0.6

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0

12

0.6

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

0.4

36

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

24

36
48

60
72
84

CurvePDS

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.2

12

24
36

48
60
72

84

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72

84

0.0

0
12

24
36
48

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.0

0.4

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

0.8

0

12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.8

0.6

1.0

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.6

0.4

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.4

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.2

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

84

1.0

84

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

84

0.8

84

0.6

84

0.4

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.2

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

0

12

36

72

0.8

72

84

Timefollow

0

24

60

0.6

60

72

0
12

24

36

48

60

72

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

84

0.0

60

72

84

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

72

84

12

48

0.4

48

60
72

84

Timefollow

0

36

CurvePDS

36

48
60

72
84

Timefollow

Timefollow

0.2

24

36

48

60
72
84

0.0

Timefollow
1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

72

84

24

0.0

12

24

36
48

60
72

0

12

24

48

1.0

0.8

1.0

0.6

Timefollow

0.6

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.2

1.0

0.8

0.0

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

36

60

72

12

1.0

0

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

0.8

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
84

0.6

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.8

0.6

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.2

0.2

Timefollow

0.4

0
12

24
36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

0.8

84

0.0

0

12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

84

0.8

0.0

1.0

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

84

Timefollow

0.4

84

Timefollow

0

24

48

60

84

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

12

36

48

72

0.4

72

84

Timefollow

0

24

36

60

CurvePDS

60

72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

12

24

48

0.2

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.0

36

48

60
72

0
12

24

36

60

72

84

Timefollow

1.0

24

36

48
60

72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.8

12

24

36
48

60
72
84

0.2

Timefollow
1.0

0.8

Timefollow
0
12

24

48

60

72

84

12

0.6

0

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.6

Timefollow

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

Timefollow
0

12

36

48

1.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0
12

24
36
48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.2

1.0

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

60

72

0.6

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

a = 0.6

0.4

84

0.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

12

24

36

48

60

84

0.2

72

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

72

0.0

60

72

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.2

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

1.0

48

60
72

0
12
24
36

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
48

60

72

84

0.0

48
60

84

0.8

b = 0.2*a
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

1.0

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
36

48

60

72

0.4

48

60
72
84

CurvePDS

48

60
72
84

0.2

0.8

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0.6

0.6

0.8

0.2

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.0

1.0

0.6

1.0

Timefollow
0
24
36

48

1.0

0.0

0.2

48

1.0

0.0

0.4

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.8

36

48
60
84
12
24

36

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.6

24

36

48
72
0
12

24

48

60

72

0

24

0.4

12

24

36

60
0

12

36

48

60

84

12

CurvePDS

0

12

24
36

48
72
84

0.8

0

12
24

36
60
84

Timefollow

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

1.0

0.8

0.4

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
0

24

36

48

72

0.4

0
12

24
36
48
72

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0

12
24
36
60
72

Timefollow

0

0.2

84

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

b = 0.01*a
60

84

CurvePDS

84

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

84

0.8

84

Timefollow

0.6

0.2

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

72

12

24

36

60

84

0.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
60

0

12

24

48

72

1.0

72

84
Timefollow

0.4

0.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.2

a = 1.1
84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

72

0

12

36

60

0.8

60

72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24

60

84

0.0

60

72

84

Timefollow

0

24

48

0.6

48

60
72

84

0.2

Timefollow
1.0

0.4

Timefollow
0
12
36

48

72

84

12

36

0.4

36

48
60

72
84

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.2

Timefollow
0
24
36

60

72

Timefollow

0.2

24

36

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.0

12

24

36
48

60
72
84
12
24
36

60

84

12

1.0

0

12

24
36

48
60
72

0.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.0

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24

48

1.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0
12

24
36
48
60
72
0
12

36

48

72

0

0.8

84

0.2

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

84

Timefollow
0

24

36

60

84

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

12

24

36

48

72

0.4

72

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

CurvePDS

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.2

48

60
72
84

0.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

1.0

24

36

48
60
72

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.8

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

12

0.8

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

60

72

0.6

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
24

48

60

0

0.6

0

12

24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

Timefollow

0.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60

72
84

0.2

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.0

0.0

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0
12

36

48

1.0

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

72

84

0.4

84

0.6

0.8
0
12
24
36

48
60
72
84

0.8

84

0.4

0.6

1.0

1.0

0
12
24

36
48
60
72
84

12

24

36

60

72

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48
60

0

12

24

48

60

0.2

72

84

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

0.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

24

36

0.6

Timefollow
0

12
24
36
48
72

84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
60

72

84

CurvePDS

60

72
84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
48

60

72

84

12

24

1.0

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

12

0.8

36

48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
36

48

60

72

84

0.2

36

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0
24

36

1.0

36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.2

0.4

e

Timefollow

0.6

36
48

1.0

36
48
60
72
84

0.4

0.8

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

Timefollow

0

0.6

24
36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.0

24
36
48
60

72
84

0.2

24
36
48

60

0.6

0.0

0.2

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

24
36

48
72
84

0.0

0.2

1.0

0.0

0.8

1.0

a = 0.4

0.4

12
24

36
60
84
12
24

48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0

12

24
48
72
0
12

36

48

60

72

0.2

84

Timefollow
0

24

36

48

1.0

0

12
24

36
60
72

0.8

84

Timefollow

0.6

0
12

24
48
60
84

0.4

84

0.0

0
12
24

36

1.0

84

0.8

0.8
0
12

24
48
72

0.6

0.6
0
24

36
60
84

12

24

36

60

0.0

Timefollow
0.4

CurvePDS
84

Timefollow
0

12

24

48

1.0

72
84
12

24
48
72

0

12

36

0.8

60

72
0
12
24

36
60

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24
48

72

0.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow
0

12
36
60

84

Timefollow

0.6

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.4

36

48
60
72
84

CurvePDS

0.2

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
48

72

84

12

CurvePDS

24

36

48
60
72

84

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
36

60

72

0

0.2

12

24

36
48
60
72

84

0.0

Timefollow
1.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24

48

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0
12

36

60

84

0.0

0

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

0.8

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

60
72

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24

48

72

1.0

84

Timefollow
0
12

36

60

0.4

84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

CurvePDS

84

0.2

84

0.0

0.0

0
12
24
36

48

1.0

1.0

84

0.8

0.8

84

Timefollow
0

12

24

48

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24

36
48
60
72
84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48
60
72

0

12

36

0.6

72
84

Timefollow

0.6

Timefollow
0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.0

60

72
84

CurvePDS

60
72

84
Timefollow

0

24

0.2

48
60
72

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

12

0.0

36

48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

1.0

24

36

48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.8

12

24

36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0.2

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

0.6

0

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48

1.0

0

12
24
36
48
60

72
84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
0
12
24

36

60

0.6

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
0
12

24

48

0.4

84

Timefollow
0

12

36

0.4

84

Timefollow

0.4

0.2

0.4

0
12
24
36

48
60
72
84

CurvePDS

84

CurvePDS

84

0.2

84

0.0

0.0

0.2

0
12
24

36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48

1.0

1.0

0.0

84

Timefollow
0

24

0.2

72
84

Timefollow

0.2

Timefollow
0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

12

0.0

60

72
84

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0

1.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.6

60
72

84
Timefollow

0.4

60
72

84

CurvePDS

0.8

60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.8

48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

36

48
60
72

84

0.2

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60

0.4

24

36

48
60
72

84

0.0

0.0

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48

CurvePDS

12

24

36
48
60

72
84
Timefollow

0.2

0

12

24
36
48

1.0

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

1.0

0

12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
0
12

24

0.6

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow
0

12

0.4

0.2

0.6
0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4
0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2
0
12
24
36

48
60
72
84

0.2

0.8

0.0
0
12
24

36
48
60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8
0
12

24
36
48
60
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.6

Timefollow
0

1.0

0.0

0.4
0

12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0.8

0.0

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0.6

0.2

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60

0.4

0.0

0.4

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2
0
12
24
36
48

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0
0
12
24
36

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

0.8
0
12
24

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4
0
12

0.2

0.2

0.2
0

0.0

0.0

0.0

c
a = 0.84
84
0

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84

0

84

0

84

0

0

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

24
Timefollow

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow
36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60

72

84

60

72

84

60

72

84

60

72

84

36

48

Timefollow

48

Timefollow

48

Timefollow

48

48

48

48

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

Timefollow

—— PDS
—— NACT

Timefollow

—— PDS
—— NACT

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

Timefollow

72

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

24

36

36

36

48

48

48

60

60

60

72

72

72

Timefollow

Timefollow

84

84

84

0

0

0

0

12

12

12

12

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36
48

48

48

48

48
60

60

60

60

60
72

72

72

72

72
84

Timefollow
84

Timefollow

84

Timefollow

84

Timefollow

84

84
0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

d’ = 4.4

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

24

12
24

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

24

24

24

u

d’ = 5.9
12
24

12
24

24

24

24

24

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

72

36
48
60
72

Timefollow

36
48
60
72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow
72

Timefollow
72

36
48
60
72

Timefollow
36
48
60
72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

72

84

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.4

0.6

72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

60

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.8

1.0

48

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

48

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

36

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.4

72

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

60

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

36

48

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

f
12

48

0.6

0.8

0.8

0

24

36

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.8

0

12

24

36

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0

12

24

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.8

0.0

1.0

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.8

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

1.0

24

1.0

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

12

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

1.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0

1.0

0.6

0.2

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

24

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

e

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

1.0

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

84

0.0

0.2

84

1.0

72
84

0.8

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

r’ = 1.6

12

48

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.4

0.8

0.8

u
0

36

48

60

0.4

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

Timefollow

CurvePDS

60
72

84

0.2

0.2

60
72

84

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.8

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

36
48
60
72

84

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

0.6

24
36
48
60

72

84

Timefollow

0.4

12
24
36
48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.2

0.8

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

0.6

1.0

1.0

0.4

1.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

1.0

84
0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

0.6

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

1.0

84

0.8

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

60

72

0

12

0.4

72
84

Timefollow

0.6

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

d’ = 5.4
84

CurvePDS

60
72
84

0.2

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

60

72

84

0.2

48
60
72

84

0.0

1.0

0.2

0.0

0.6

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

60

72

0.0

36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

1.0

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

12

24

36

48

60

84

0.8

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

0.8

0.0

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0.6

1.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.2

0.6

1.0

d’ = 3.9
84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0

12

24

36

48

72

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.6

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.4

0.2

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6
0
12
24
36

48

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.4

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.6

84

0.8

0.2

0.2

0.8

0
12
24

36

60

72

84

0.2

84

Timefollow

0.6

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.2

0.8

0
12

24

48

60

72

0.4

84

CurvePDS

1.0

84

0.2

0.8

1.0

84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.4

Timefollow
0.6

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

r’ = 0.8

84

0.0

Timefollow
0

12

36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.2

60

72
84

0.0

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

1.0

60
72
84

0.8

60
72

84

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

12

0.0

48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0

1.0

36

48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.2

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

24

36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.4

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.6

12

24
36
48

1.0

0.0

1.0

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

0.4

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.2

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

0.6

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

0.8

0.6

0.2

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

CurvePDS

84

CurvePDS

0.6
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.0

84

0.2

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

60

72
84

0.0

Timefollow

0
12

24

36

48

1.0

60
72
84

0.8

60
72

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.6

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0

12

0.6

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

0.4

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

24

36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.0

1.0

0.6

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.2

12

24
36
48

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

0.0

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.2

1.0

0.2

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

1.0

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.8

0.4

0.6
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.6

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

84

1.0

84

Timefollow

0

24

36

72

0.4

84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

84

0.0

0.2

0.2

1.0

0
12
24
36

48

1.0

84

0.8

0.0

84

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.8

0.6

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

60

72

84

12

24

60

0.8

72
84

0.4

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0

12

48

0.6

60

72
84

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

36

0.4

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

Timefollow

CurvePDS

36

48
60
72

0

12

24

36

60

72

84

24

0.2

24

36

48
60
72

0.6

1.0

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

60

72

12

0.0

12

24

36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

1.0

0

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.2

1.0

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

60

84

0.8

84

Timefollow

0.8

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.4

84

0.8

0.2
0
12
24
36
48

60
72

84

12

24

36

48

72

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48
60

72

0.6

84

Timefollow

0.4

84

CurvePDS

0.0

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.4

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

CurvePDS

60

72
0
12
24

36
48

60

72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24
36

48

60

72

84

0.0

60

72
84

0.2

Timefollow
0

12
24

36

48

60

72

0

12

36

0.2

48
1.0

Timefollow

0
12

24

36

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

36

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

1.0

24

48
60
72

0
12

24

48

60

72

84

12

0.8

12

36

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.8

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

60

0

0.6

0

24

36
48
60
72

84

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.2

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

r’ = 0.1

0.4

84

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.6

0

12
24
36
48

1.0

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.4

84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

12

24

36

48

72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60
72

0.6

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

72

0.2

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

60

0.0

60

72
0
12
24
36

48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12
24

36
48
60

72

84

0.2

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48

60

72

0

12

36

48

1.0

48

60
72
84

CurvePDS

0.0

d’ = 4.9
84

Timefollow

0

24

36

0.8

36

48
60
72
84

0.2

Timefollow
1.0

0.0

Timefollow
0

12
24
36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.6

24

36

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.8

1.0

1.0

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

12

24

0.4

12

24

36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

12

CurvePDS

0

12

24
36
48
60
72

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

Timefollow

0
12

24

36

48

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.2

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.2

d’ = 3.4
84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48
60

72
0

12

24

36

60

0.6

0.0

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2
0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

0.2

84

0.8

0.0

0.2

0
12
24
36

48
60
84

Timefollow

0.4

84

Timefollow

0.6

84

Timefollow
0

12

24

48

72

84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24

36
48
72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
60
72

0

12

36

60

72

1.0

72
84

Timefollow

0

24

48

60

0.8

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow
0

12
24
48
60

72

84

0.2

60

72
84

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.0

r’ = 0.4
84

12

36

48

0.6

48

60
72
84

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
36
48

60

72

0

24

36

0.4

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

Timefollow

0.2

24

36

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.6

Timefollow

0
24
36
48

60

72

84

12

24

0.0

12

24

36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

12

1.0

0

12

24
36
48
60
72

84
12
24
36

60

72

84

0.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

0
12
24

48

60

72

0

0.8

84
Timefollow

0
12

36

48

1.0

0
12
24
36
48
60

72
84

0.8

84

0.0

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

84
Timefollow
0

24

36

48

60

84

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

12

24

36

48

72

0.4

72
84
Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

CurvePDS

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.4

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

60

72
0
12
24

36
48
60
72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48

1.0

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.2

48
60
72
84

0.8

0.4

0.6

Timefollow
0

12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

1.0

24

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

12

0.8

12

24

36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow
1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

0

0.6

0

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.8

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

60

84

0.0

0

12
24
36
48
60

72
84

0.0

0.6

0.8

0.0

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

1.0

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.8

0.4

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

0.2

0.6
0
12
24
36
48

60
72

0

12

24

36

72

0.4

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

60

0.4

84

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0
12
24
36

48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

84
Timefollow

0

12

48

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12
24

36
48
60

72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48

1.0

84

Timefollow

0

36

0.2

72
84

0.8

Timefollow
0

12
24
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.0

60

72
84

0.6

60
72
84

0.4

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

24

1.0

48
60
72
84

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

12

0.8

36

48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

0.6

24

36

48
60
72

84

0.0

Timefollow
1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.2

0.4

e

r’ = 0.05

0.4

12

24

36
48
60
72

0
12
24

36

48

1.0

0.8

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0.6

0.0

0.2

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0
12

24

36

48

60

84

CurvePDS

0

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

0.8

0

12
24
36
48
60

72
84

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

72

0.2

84

0.2

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.4

84

0.0

0.8
0
12
24
36
48

1.0

84

0.8

84
Timefollow

0.6

0.6
0
12
24
36

48
60
72

0

12

24

36

60

0.0

Timefollow
0.4

CurvePDS
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

1.0

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.8

60

72
0
12
24

36
48
60
72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48
60

72

84

0.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow
0

12
24
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.6

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.4

36

48
60
72
84

CurvePDS

0.2

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

12

CurvePDS

24

36

48
60
72

84

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

0

0.2

12

24

36
48
60
72

84

0.0

Timefollow
1.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24

36

48

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0
12

24
36

48

60

84

0.0

0

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

0.8

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

60
72

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

Timefollow
0

12
24

36

48

72

1.0

84
Timefollow

0
12

24

36

60

0.4

84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

CurvePDS

84

0.2

84

0.0

0.0
0
12
24
36

48

1.0

1.0

84

0.8

0.8

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24

36
48
60
72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48
60
72

0

12

36

0.6

72
84

Timefollow

0.6

Timefollow
0

12
24
36
48
60

72
84

Timefollow

0.4

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60
72

84

0.0

60

72
84

CurvePDS

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.2

48
60
72

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48
60

72

84

12

0.0

36

48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

1.0

24

36

48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0
12
24

36
48
60

72

84

0.8

12

24

36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0.2

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0
12

24
36
48

60

72

0.6

0

12

24
36
48
60
72

84

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0

12
24
36

48

1.0

0

12
24
36
48
60

72
84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0
12
24
36
48

60
72

0
12
24

36

60

0.6

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

60
72

0
12

24

48

0.4

84
Timefollow

0

12

36

0.4

84
Timefollow

0.4

0.2

0.4

0
12
24
36

48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

84

CurvePDS

84

0.2

84

0.0

0.0

0.2

0
12
24

36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48

1.0

1.0

0.0

84

Timefollow

0

24

0.2

72
84

Timefollow

0.2

Timefollow
0

12
24
36
48
60

72
84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60
72

84

12

0.0

60

72
84

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48
60
72

0

1.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.6

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

60
72

84

CurvePDS

0.8

60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
24

36
48
60
72

84

0.8

48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0
12

24
36
48
60

72

0.6

36

48
60
72

84

0.2

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0

12
24
36
48

60

0.4

24

36

48
60
72

84

0.0

0.0

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48

CurvePDS

12

24

36
48
60

72
84

Timefollow

0.2

0

12

24
36
48

1.0

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24

36

1.0

0

12
24
36
48

60
72

84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

60
72

0
12

24

0.6

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

0.4

0.2

0.6
0
12
24
36
48

60
72

84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4
0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2
0
12
24
36

48
60
72

84

0.2

0.8

0.0
0
12
24

36
48
60

72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8
0
12

24
36
48

60
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.6

Timefollow
0

1.0

0.0

0.4
0

12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2
0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.8

0.8

0.0
0
12
24
36

48
60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8
0
12
24

36
48
60
72

0.6

0.2

0.6
0
12

24
36
48
60

0.4

0.0

0.4
0

12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2
0
12
24
36
48

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0
0
12
24
36

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

0.8
0
12
24

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4
0
12

0.2

0.2

0.2
0

0.0

0.0

0.0

e
r’ = 0.2
84
0

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84

0

84

0

84

0

0

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

24
Timefollow

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

48

Timefollow

48

Timefollow

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

48

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

48

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow
36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60

72

84

60

72

84

60

72

84

60

72

84

48

48

48

48

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

Timefollow

—— PDS
—— NACT

Timefollow

Timefollow

—— PDS
—— NACT

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

Timefollow

72

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

Timefollow

72

72

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

36

48

48

48

60

60

60

72

72

72

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

84

84

84

0

0

0

0

12

12

12

12

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36
48

48

48

48

48
60

60

60

60

60
72

72

72

72

72

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

84

84

84

84

84

84
0.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0
0.8

1.0

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

24
Timefollow

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

1.0

12
0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

72

72

72

h
b’ = 0.2*a’

36
48
60
72

36
48
60
72

72

Timefollow
72

Timefollow
72

u

b’ = 0.8*a’
36
48
60
72

Timefollow
36
48
60
72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

72

84

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.4

0.6

72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.2

60

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

48

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

36

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

72

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

60

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.2

a’ = 1.04

48

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

u
36

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

24

48

60

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.8

0.6

0.0

0.4

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0

12

24

36

48

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

1.0

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.6

1.0

0

12

24

36

1.0

0.6

1.0

0.6

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.8

0

12

24

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

e

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.6

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

84

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

0

12

24

48

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.2

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.0

0

12

24

36

48

60

0.4

1.0

84

0.8

72
84

CurvePDS

60
72

84

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

60
72

84

0.0

0.2

0.2

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

36
48
60
72

84

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

0.6

1.0

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.0

0.0

0.4

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

Timefollow

0.4

24
36
48
60

72

84

CurvePDS

12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.2

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.0

0.8

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

0

12

24

36

1.0

84

Timefollow

0.6

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

0.6

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

0.4

60
72
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

48
60
0
12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.0

48
72

Timefollow

0.4

60
84

CurvePDS

48
72
84

0.2

60
84

0.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

48
72
84

0.8

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

60

0

12

24

36

60

72

0.6

0.2

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

60

0.4

0.0

48

1.0

0.0

1.0

48
72

84

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

60

0.6

0.8

0.6

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.4

0.0

0.6

48

72

0.2

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

60

84

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.0

0.2

1.0

48

72

0

12

36

48

1.0

1.0

0.0

1.0

0.6

0.0

1.0

0.0

0.8

1.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

Timefollow

0

1.0

24

36

60

84

Timefollow

0.8

12

24
36

48

72

84

0.8

0.8

b’ = 0.6*a’
60

0.6

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.8

1.0

0.6

0.8

0.2

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

72

84

0.6

0

12
24
36

48

72

84

12

24

36

60

72

0.6

0
12
24
36

60

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.6

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

60

0.4

84

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

0.4

0
12
24
36

48

72

84

CurvePDS

84
0.2

0
12
24
36

60

84

0.2

84
0.0

0.6
0
12
24
36

48

1.0

84

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

a’ = 0.94

72

0.6

0.2

0.2

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.2

0.8

1.0

b’ = 0.15*a’

60

0.4

0.0

84

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.8

0
12
24

36

48

72

0

24

36

CurvePDS

72
84

Timefollow

Timefollow

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

60

84

0.0

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

72

12

24

0.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

1.0

48

60
72
84

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

84

0.8

36

48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

0.6

24

36
48
60
72

0

12

24

36

48

72

84

0.4

12

24
36
48
60

84

0.0

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

72

CurvePDS

0

12
24
36
48
72

0.6

0.8

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

0
12
24
36
60
72

84

0.8

0
12
24
48
60

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

0.4

0.0

0.2

Timefollow
36

1.0

0
12
24
48
72

84

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.0

1.0

Timefollow
36
60

72

0.6

1.0

1.0

0.8

1.0

0.0

1.0

0.0

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.8

0
12
24
48

60

72

84

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
36

60

72

84

0.0

0.0

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24

48

1.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

0.2

84

0.8

84

Timefollow

0.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.6

Timefollow
36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

60

72

0.4

Timefollow

Timefollow

0

12

24

1.0

72
84

CurvePDS

1.0

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

60

72

84

0.2

60
72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0

12

0.6

48
60

72
84

Timefollow

0

0.4

36

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

24

36
48

60
72
84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.2

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72

84

0.0

0.8

1.0

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

0
12

24
36
48
60
72

84

0.8

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.6

0.4

0

12
24
36
48
60

72

84

Timefollow

0.4

0.2

0.6

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

84

1.0

84

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

84

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.8

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

0

12

36

72

0.8

72

84

Timefollow

0

24

60

0.6

60

72
84

0.6

Timefollow

0
12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.0

60

72

84

0.4

1.0

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

12

48

0.4

48

60
72

84

Timefollow

0

36

CurvePDS

36

48
60

72
84

Timefollow

Timefollow

0.2

24

36

48

60
72
84

0.2

0.8

0.0

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

24

0.0

12

24

36
48

60
72

0.6

1.0

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

12

1.0

0

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.8

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

1.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0
12

24
36
48
60
72
84

0.6

0.0

0

12
24
36
48

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

0.8

84

0.8

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60

84

0.4

84
Timefollow

0.6

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

48

60

84

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

72

84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

60

72

0.4

84

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

72

0.4

72

84

Timefollow

0

24

36

60

CurvePDS

60

72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24

48

60

72

84

0.0

60

72

84

0.2

0.0

Timefollow
0
12

36

48

60

72

84

12

24

48

0.2

48

60
72

84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.0

36

48
60

72
84

0.0

Timefollow
1.0

0.0

0.6

Timefollow
0
24

36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

1.0

24

36

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.8

12

24

36
48

60
72
84
12

24

36

1.0

0.8

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow
0

12

24

48

60

72

84

12

0.6

0

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

0.8

0

12
24

36
48
60
72

0.6

0.8

0.2

0.4

0.0

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

60

72

0.6

0
12

24
36
48
60
72

0.4

0.6

0.0

0.2

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

a’ = 0.34

0.4

84

CurvePDS

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0

CurvePDS

72

84
Timefollow

0

24

36

48

60

84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

12

24

36

48

72

0.4

Timefollow
Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.0

60

72

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

48

1.0

48

60

72
84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.2

48

60
72

84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.0

48
60

84

0.0

48

72
0
12
24
36

1.0

60
84

0.8

48
72

0.4

CurvePDS

60
0
12
24
48

60

72

0.6

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
36

48

60

0.4

0.0

48
72

CurvePDS

1.0

1.0

60
84

0.2

0.8

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

0.6

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

48
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.2

1.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

Timefollow
0
24
36

48

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.8

0.6

60
84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.8

36

48
72
84
12
24

36

48

72

84

Timefollow

0.6

24

36

60
72
0
12

24

36

60

72

0

24

0.4

12

24

36

48

1.0

b’ = 0.4*a’
60
0

12

24

48

60

84

12

CurvePDS

0

12

24
36
48
72
84

0.8

0

12
24

36
60
84

Timefollow

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.2

Timefollow
0

12

36

48

72

0.4

0
12

24
36
48
72

0.6

0.8

0.4

0.2

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0

12
24
36
60
72

Timefollow

0

0.2

84

0.2

0.6

0
12
24
36
60

84

CurvePDS

84

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

84

0.8

84
Timefollow

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.6

1.0

b’ = 0.1*a’
48

72

0

24

36

60

84

0.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
60

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

84

12

24

48

72

1.0

72

84
Timefollow

0.4

0.0

0.0

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

a’ = 0.84
72

0

12

36

60

0.8

60

72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24

60

84

0.0

60

72

84

Timefollow

0

24

48

0.6

48

60
72

84

0.2

Timefollow
1.0

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
36

48

72

84

12

36

0.4

36

48
60

72
84

0.0

0.8

0.8

0.8

Timefollow
0
24
36

60

72

Timefollow

0.2

24

36

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.0

12

24

36
48

60
72
84
12
24
36

60

84

12

1.0

0

12

24
36

48
60
72

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24

48

1.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0
12

24
36
48
60
72
0
12

36

48

72

0

0.8

84

0.2

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

84
Timefollow
0

24

36

60

84

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

12

24

36

48

72

0.4

72

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

CurvePDS

60

72
84
Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.4

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.2

48

60
72
84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60

84

Timefollow

0.0

36

48
60
72

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

72

0

24

1.0

24

36

48
60
72
84

0.8

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

60

72

84

12

0.8

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.8

Timefollow

0
12
24

48

60

72

0

0.6

0

12

24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

0.8

1.0

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

Timefollow

Timefollow

0.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.0

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

Timefollow

0
12

36

1.0

0.4

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0

24

48

60

72

84

0.4

84
0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

12

36

48

60

72

CurvePDS

72

84
Timefollow

0

24

36

48

60

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60

84

12

24

36

48

0.0

60

72

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

36

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
72

84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
60

72

0

12

24

1.0

48

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

0.8

36

48

60
72
84

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

36

48
60
72
0
12
36

48

60

72

84

0.2

36
48
60
84

0.6

36
48
72

0.4

0.0

Timefollow

0.2

36
60
84

0.0

24
48
72
0
24

36

1.0

1.0

36
60
84

0.8

0.8

0.2

Timefollow

0.6

0.0

0.0

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

24
48
72
84

0.6

0.2

1.0

36
60
72

0.4

0.0

0.8

1.0

24
48

1.0

0.6

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

Timefollow

0

0.6

24
36
60
84

0.2

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.2

0.6

24
48
72
84

Timefollow

0.0

24
36
60

0.6

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

e
0.2

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.2

1.0

0.0

24
48
72
84

0.0

0.2

1.0

0.0

0.8

1.0

a’ = 0.04

0.4

12

24
36
60
84
12

24

48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0

12
24
48
72
0

12

36

48

60

72

0.2

84
Timefollow

0

24

36

48

1.0

0

12
24
36
60
72

0.8

84
Timefollow

0.6

0
12
24
48
60
84

0.4

84

0.0

0
12
36

1.0

84

0.8

0.8
0
12
24
48
72

0.6

0.6
0
36
60

84

12

24

36

60

0.0

Timefollow
0.4

CurvePDS

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

48

1.0

72
84
12
24
48

72

0

12

36

0.8

60

72
0
12
36

60

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24

48

72

0.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow
0
12

36

60

84

Timefollow

0.6

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.4

36

48
60
72
84

CurvePDS

0.2

1.0

Timefollow
0
12

24
48

72

84

12

CurvePDS

24

36

48
60
72
84

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.8

Timefollow
0
12

36

60

72

0

0.2

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

0.0

Timefollow
1.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow
0
12

24

48

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.4

Timefollow
0
12

36

60

84

0.0

0

12

24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

Timefollow
0

12

24

48

72

1.0

84
Timefollow

0
12

36

60

0.4

84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

CurvePDS

84

0.2

84

0.0

0.0
0
12
24
36
48

1.0

1.0

84

0.8

0.8

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0

12

36

0.6

72
84
Timefollow

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60

72
84

Timefollow

0.4

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60
72

84

0.0

60

72
84

CurvePDS

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.2

48
60
72

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48
60

72

84

12

0.0

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

1.0

24

36

48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24

36
48
60

72

84

0.8

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

0.2

0.2

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48

60

72

0.6

0

12

24
36
48
60
72
84

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.8

Timefollow
0

12
24
36

48

1.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0
12
24

36

60

0.6

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0
12

24

48

0.4

84
Timefollow

0

12

36

0.4

84
Timefollow

0.4

0.2

0.4

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

84

CurvePDS

84

0.2

84

0.0

0.0

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

1.0

1.0

0.0

84
Timefollow

0

24

0.2

72
84

Timefollow

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60

72
84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60
72

84

12

0.0

60

72
84

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48
60
72

0

1.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0.6

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

60
72
84

CurvePDS

0.8

60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
24

36
48
60
72

84

0.8

48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48
60

72

0.6

36

48
60
72
84

0.2

0.2

0.6

Timefollow
0

12
24
36
48

60

0.4

24

36

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.0

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48

CurvePDS

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.2

0

12

24
36
48

1.0

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24

36

1.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0
12

24

0.6

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

0.4

0.2

0.6
0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4
0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2
0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0.8

0.0
0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8
0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.6

Timefollow
0

1.0

0.0

0.4
0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2
0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.8

0.8

0.0
0
12
24
36

48
60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8
0
12
24

36
48
60
72

0.6

0.2

0.6
0
12

24
36
48
60

0.4

0.0

0.4
0

12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0
12
24
36
48

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0
12
24
36

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

0.8

0
12
24

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0
12

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0.0

0.0

0.0

g
a’ = 0.64
84
0

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84

0

84

0

84

0

0

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

24
Timefollow

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow
36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60

72

84

60

72

84

60

72

84

60

72

84

36

48

Timefollow

48

Timefollow

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

48

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

Timefollow

—— PDS
—— NACT

Timefollow

Timefollow

—— PDS
—— NACT

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

24

36

36

36

48

48

48

60

60

60

72

72

72

Timefollow

Timefollow

84

84

84

0

0

0

0

12

12

12

12

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36
48

48

48

48

48
60

60

60

60

60
72

72

72

72

72

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

84

84

84

84

84

84

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

48

48

48

48

48

48

48

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow
1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow
1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

60

72

72

72

j
M1 = 1011.5

36
48
60
72

36
48
60
72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow
72

Timefollow
72

u

M1 = 1012.8
36
48
60
72

Timefollow
36
48
60
72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

72

84

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.4

0.6

72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

60

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.6

48

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.4

36

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.2

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

72

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

60

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.4

0.8

M = 106.5

48

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

u
36

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

24

48

1.0

0

12

24

36

48

60

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.2

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.2

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

1.0

0

12

24

36

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

1.0

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.8

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0

12

24

1.0

0.6

1.0

0.6

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0

12

24

48

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

e

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

84

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.4

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

0

12

24

36

48

60
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0

12

24

36

60

0.4

Timefollow
1.0

84

0.8

72
84

CurvePDS

60
72

84

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

0.2

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

60
72

84

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

1.0

36

48
60
72

84

0.8

0.0

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

0.6

24

36
48
60

72

84

Timefollow

0.4

12

24
36
48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0

12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.2

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0

24

36

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

84
0.2

0.2

1.0

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

12

24

0.6

84
0.0

0.0

0.8

0.4

0
12

24

36

48

1.0

84

0.8

1.0

0.6

0.2

1.0

0.6

1.0

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.6

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.4

0.6

0

12

24

36

60

72

0

12

0.4

Timefollow

0.6

84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

72

84

CurvePDS

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

60

72

84

0.2

60
72

84

0.2

0.0

0.0

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

60

72

0.0

48
60

72

84

0.0

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

1.0

36
48

60
72

84

Timefollow

0

1.0

12

24
36

60
72

84

0.8

0.8

M1 = 1012.4
48
60
72

84

12

24

36

48

60

84

0.8

0

12
24

36
48
60
72

0.6

0.8

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

72

0.6

0
12

24
36
48
60

72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.4

0

12
24
36
48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.2

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.6

84
0.0

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

0.2

84

0.8

0.0

0.0

0
12
24

36

48

60

72

0.6

84

Timefollow

0.4

84

CurvePDS

1.0

84

0.2

0.8

1.0

1.0

84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.4

Timefollow

0
12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

72

84

Timefollow

0

24

0.2

60

72

84

0.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

1.0

60
72

84

0.8

60

72

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

M =106.0

60

72

84

12

0.0

48

60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0

1.0

36

48

60
72

84

Timefollow

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

24

36
48

60
72

84

Timefollow

0.4

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.6

12

24
36

48

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

0.4

0

12
24

36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

0
12

24
36
48
60

72

84

0.2

0.8

0

12
24
36
48

60

72

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0.4

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.4

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

CurvePDS

84

CurvePDS

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.0

84

0.2

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.8

60

72
84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

1.0

60
72
84

0.8

60
72
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.6

0.4

0.8

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0

12

0.6

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

0.4

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

0.2

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

24

36
48
60
72
84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

72

0.2

12

24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

60

84

0.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

1.0

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.8

0.4

1.0

0.2

1.0

0.2

1.0

0.2

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

Timefollow

0.4

0.0

0.6

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

84

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.6

1.0

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

12

24

36

72

1.0

72

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

60

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

60

72

0

12

48

0.6

60

72
84

0.6

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.0

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

36

0.4

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

Timefollow

CurvePDS

36

48
60
72
84

0.4

0.0

0.6

Timefollow
0

12

24

36

60

72

84

24

0.2

24

36

48
60
72
84

0.2

Timefollow
1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

60

72

12

0.0

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

1.0

0

12

24
36
48
60
72
84

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

Timefollow

0.6

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

1.0

0.6

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

1.0

0.2

0.2

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

M1 = 1011.0
0

12

36

48

1.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.6

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

60

84

0.8

84

0.0

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.4

84

0.8

84
Timefollow

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

12

24

36

48

72

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

0.4

84

CurvePDS

0.2

84

0.2

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.4

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

CurvePDS

60

72
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

0.0

60

72
84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

60

72

0

12

36

0.2

48

60
72
0
12

24

36

1.0

Timefollow
1.0

0.2

Timefollow
0

12

24

48

60

84

Timefollow

0.0

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

1.0

24

36

48
60
72
84

0.8

0.8

0.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

72

84

12

0.8

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

0.6

0

12

24
36
48
60
72

0.6

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.2

0.0

0.8

Timefollow

0

24

36

60

72

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.0

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

M = 104.5

0.4

84
Timefollow

Timefollow

0.4

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

84

0.0

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

84

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

12

24

48

60

84

CurvePDS

72
84
Timefollow

0

12

36

48

72

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0

24

36

60

0.0

60

72
84
Timefollow

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

12

24

48

1.0

48

60

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.8

36

48

60
72
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

0.4

0.2

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.6

24

36

48
60
84

Timefollow

0

24

0.4

12

24

36
48
72
84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.0

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

48

60

72

84

12

CurvePDS

0

12

24
36
60
72
84

0.2

Timefollow
1.0

1.0

M1 = 1012.0
48
60
72
84

0.0

0.8

0.8

0.0

1.0

0.8

Timefollow
0
12

24

36

48

1.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0.6

0.6

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
0

12

24

36

60

0.6

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

0.2

84

0.0

0.2

0.8

0
12
24
36

1.0

0.0

0.6

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.8

0.0

M1 = 1010.5
48
60
84

Timefollow

0.4

84

0.8

84
Timefollow
0

12

24

48

72

84

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48
72

0.6

1.0

84
Timefollow

0

12

36

60

72

1.0

72
84
Timefollow

0

24

48

60

0.8

60

72
0
12
24
36
60
72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12
24
48
60

72

84

0.2

60

72
84
Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow
0
12
36
48

60

84

12

36

48

0.6

48

60
72
84

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

0.4

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.6

1.0

M = 105.5
72

0

24

36

0.4

36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

Timefollow

0.2

24

36

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.0

1.0

0.0

0.0

1.0

Timefollow
0
24
36
48

60

72

84

12

24

0.0

12

24

36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0

12

1.0

0

12

24
36
48
60
72
84
12
24
36

60

72

84

0.0

0

12
24
36
60
72
0
12
24

48

60

72

0

0.8

84

Timefollow
0
12

36

48

1.0

0
12
24
48
60
72
84

0.8

84

Timefollow
0

24

36

48

60

84

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

Timefollow

0
24
36
48
60
72
84

12

24

36

48

72

0.4

84

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.4

72
84

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

CurvePDS

60

72

84
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

60

72

84

0.8

60
72

84
Timefollow

0

12

36

0.2

48
60

72
0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.0

36

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

24

1.0

24

36

48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

12

0.8

12

24

36
48

60
72
84

CurvePDS

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48

60

72

0

0.6

0

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

0.2

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24

36

48

60

84

0.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
84

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0
12

24

36

48

1.0

0
12

24
36
48

1.0

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.4

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

0.6

0.6

1.0

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.0

1.0

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

72

0.4

84

0.2

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

84

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

60

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0

12

48

0.2

72
84

Timefollow

0

36

0.0

60

72

84

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.0

60

72

84

Timefollow

Timefollow

1.0

48

60
72

84

0.6

0.2

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

60

72

84

24

0.8

36

48
60

72
84

0.4

0.0

0.6

Timefollow
0
12
24

48

60

72

12

0.6

24

36

48

60
72
84

0.2

Timefollow

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.8

0.0

M = 104.0

0.4

12

24

36
48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

CurvePDS

0

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.6

0.0

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow
0
12

36

48

1.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0
12

24
36
48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.2

0.6

Timefollow
0

24

36

48

60

84

0.2

84

0.2

0

12
24
36
48
60
72
84

0.6

84

0.0

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

84

0.8

84
Timefollow

0.6

0.6

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

12

24

36

48

72

1.0

72

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

36

60

0.0

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

0

12

24

48

0.8

60

72

84
Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.2

60

72

84
Timefollow

0

12

36

0.6

48

60
72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12
24
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.4

36

48
60

72
84

Timefollow

0

24

CurvePDS

24

36

48

60
72
84

0.2

0.2

0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

60

72

84

12

0.2

12

24

36
48

60
72
84

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.4

e
0.2

Timefollow
0
12
24

48

60

72

0

0.0

0

12

24
36

48
60
72
84

Timefollow

0.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72
0
12

36

48

60

84

1.0

84

Timefollow
0

24
36

48

1.0

0
12

24
36
48
60
72
84

0.8

0

12
24
36
48

1.0

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84

12
24

36

48

72

0.8

Timefollow
Timefollow

0
12

24

36

60

0.6

84
Timefollow

0

12

24

48

0.6

72

84
Timefollow

0

12

36

0.4

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

Timefollow

0.4

60

72
84
Timefollow

0

24

0.2

48

60

72

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

48

60
72

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

84

0.0

48
60

84

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

60
72

0.6

48

72
Timefollow

0.4

60
84

CurvePDS

48
72

0.2

60
84

0.0

48
72
0
12
24
48

1.0

Timefollow
1.0

60
84

0.8

0.8

Timefollow

0.6

48
72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
36

48
60

72

0.6

0.2

0.8

1.0

60
84
Timefollow

0.4

0.0

0.6

0.8

48
72

CurvePDS

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

60
84

0.2

0.8

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0.6

0.0

0.2

48
72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

60
84

0.0

0.2

0.8

1.0

Timefollow
0
24

36
60

72

12

0.0

36
48
72
84

Timefollow

0

1.0

24

36
60
84
12

24
48

60

84

0.8

12

24

36
48
72
0

12
36
48

1.0

0.0

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0
24
36

48

72

0.6

0

12

24
36
60
72
84

0.8

0

12
24

36
60

84
12
24

36

60

0.6

0
12

24
36
48

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0
12

24

48

0.4

84

0.8

0

12
24
48
72

0

12

36

0.4

84
Timefollow

0.6

0
12
36
60

72

0.4

0.2

0.4

0
24
36
60
84

CurvePDS

84

CurvePDS

84

0.2

84

0.0

0.0

0.2

84
12
24
36
48

1.0

1.0

0.0

0
12
24
36

48
72

Timefollow

CurvePDS

72

84
Timefollow
0

24

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

60
84

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24
36

48
72

0.0

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

60
84

12

0.0

60

72

84
Timefollow

0

1.0

60

72

84

0.8

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48
72

0.6

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.4

60

72
84

CurvePDS

0.8

60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow
0
12
24

36
60

84

0.8

48

60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow
0
12

24
36
48

72

0.6

36

48

60
72
84

0.2

0.2

0.6

Timefollow
0

12
24
36

60

0.4

24

36

48

60
72
84

0.0

0.0

0.4

Timefollow
0
12
24
36

48

CurvePDS

12

24

36
48

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.2

0

12

24
36

48

1.0

0.2

Timefollow

0
12
24

36

1.0

0

12
24

36
48
60
72

84

0.8

0
12

24
36
48
60
72

0
12

24

0.6

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

0.4

0.2

0.6
0

12
24
36
48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0
12
24
36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0.8

0.0

0
12
24
36
48
60

72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.0

0.2

0.6

Timefollow
0

1.0

0.0

0.4

0
12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2
0
12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.8

0.8

0.0
0
12
24
36

48
60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8
0
12
24

36
48
60
72

0.6

0.2

0.6
0
12

24
36
48
60

0.4

0.0

0.4
0

12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0
12
24
36
48

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0
12
24
36

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

0.8

0
12
24

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0
12

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0.0

0.0

0.0

i
M = 105.0
84
0

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84

0

84

0

84

0

0

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

24
Timefollow

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

48

Timefollow

48

Timefollow

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

48

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

48

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60

72

84

60

72

84

60

72

84

60

72

84

48

48

48

48

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

Timefollow

—— PDS
—— NACT

Timefollow

Timefollow

—— PDS
—— NACT

0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
84
0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

72

72

Timefollow

84

84

0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

Timefollow

72

72
84

84
0

0

12

12

24

24

36

36

48

48

60

60

Timefollow

Timefollow

72

72
84

0

84
0

0

12

12

12

24

24

24

36

36

36

48

48

48

Timefollow

60

60

60

72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

72
84

84

84

84

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0

0

0

0

0

0

12

12

12

12

12

12

24

24

24

24

24

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

24
36

24

36

36

36

36

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

48

48

48

48

48

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

Timefollow

60

60

60

60

60

72

Timefollow

72

u

M2 = 1014.5

36
48
60
72

Timefollow

36
48
60
72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

Timefollow

72

72
84

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

60

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

e

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

48

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.8

0.8

1.0

36

60

0.6

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

1.0

24

48

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

72

0.6

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

1.0

36

60

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

12

24

48

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0

12

36

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

84

0.2

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

1.0

84

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

1.0

60

72

84

0.8

48

60

72

0

12

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0

0.4

36

48

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0.2

24

36

60

72

84

0.0

12

24

48

1.0

0

12

36

48

60

72

84

1.0

84

0.8

84

Timefollow

0.6

0.4

CurvePDS

0

24

36

48

60

72

0.8

72

84

12

24

36

48

60

0.4

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

0.6

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0.2

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

0.4

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

CurvePDS

36

48

60

72

0

12

24

0.2

24

36

48

60

72

84

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

0.0

12

24

36

1.0

0.6

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

M2 =1014.0

48

60

72

84

0.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

0

1.0

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

0.6

0

12

24

36

48

60

84

0.8

84

Timefollow

0.4

84

CurvePDS

0.2

0.6

0.8

0

12

24

36

48

72

0.6

72

0

12

24

36

60

0.4

Timefollow

0

12

24

48

CurvePDS

60

72

84

0.2

0.0

0.4

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

36

0.2

48

60

84

Timefollow

0.0

36

48

72

84

0.0

Timefollow

1.0

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0

24

1.0

24

36

60

72

84

0.8

12

24

48

60

72

84

12

0.6

0

12

36

48

60

72

0

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0.6

0

24

36

48

60

72

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.2

0.8

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

CurvePDS

84

0.2

0.8

84

12

24

36

48

60

84

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

72

0.0

72

84

0.0

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

1.0

60

72

84

0.8

48

60

72

0

12

24

60

0.6

0.4

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

48

0.4

36

60

72

84

CurvePDS

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.0

0.4

0.8

0.0

0.6

0.8

1.0

Timefollow

0.2

24

48

60

72

84

0.0

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0

36

1.0

0

12

36

48

1.0

0

24

36

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.8

84

0.8

84

12

24

36

48

60

72

24

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

48

60

12

0.4

72

84

Timefollow

0

CurvePDS

60

72

0

12

24

36

48

84

0.2

48

60

84

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

72

0.0

36

48

72

84

0.4

0.2

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

60

1.0

24

36

60

72

84

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

48

0.8

12

24

48

60

72

0

36

0.6

0
12

36

1.0

0.6

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0.0

0.8

0

24

48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.4

84

Timefollow

0.6

84

12

36

48

60

72

84

24

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

60

72

12

0.2

72

84

12

24

36

48

60

0

0.0

60
72

0

12

24

36

48

84

1.0

48
60

84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow
0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

72

0.8

36
48

72

84

CurvePDS

0.2

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

Timefollow

0

12

24

60

0.6

24
36

60

72

84

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.2

0.6

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

CurvePDS

0.4

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

M2 = 1012.5

0.4

12
24
48

60

72

0

12

48

CurvePDS

0
12
36

48

1.0

0
24

36

60

72

84

0.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.0

0.2

Timefollow

0

36

0.2

84

Timefollow

Timefollow

1.0

72
84
12

24

48

60

72

84

24

0.0

Timefollow
0

12

36

48

60

72

0.6

Timefollow
0

24

36

48

60

12

0.8

60
72
84

Timefollow

0

0.6

48
60

84

12

24

36

48

84

0.4

36
48
72

0

12

24

36

72

CurvePDS

24
36
60

0

12

24

60

0.4

0.2

Timefollow

0

12

48

0.2

12
24
48

72

84

CurvePDS

0.0

1.0

0.4

Timefollow

0

36

0.0

0
12
36
60

72

84

0.2

0
24
48

1.0

0.8

0.2

1.0

0.2

0.8

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0.0

0.8

0.6

0.0

0.8

0.0

0.6

0.8

1.0

M2 = 1013.5
60

72

84

Timefollow

1.0

84

Timefollow

0.6

84
12
36

48

60

72

84

24

0.8

Timefollow
0
24

36

48

60

72

12

0.6

72
84
12

24

36

48

60

0

0.4

60
72
0

12

24

36

48

84

0.2

48
60
84

Timefollow

0.4

Timefollow

0

12

24

36

72

0.0

36
48
72

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0

12

24

60

1.0

24
36
60
72

84

CurvePDS

0.2

1.0

0.6

Timefollow

0

12

48

0.8

12
24
48
60

72

84

0.2

0.0

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

0.8

Timefollow

0

36

0.6

0
12
36
48

60

72

84

Timefollow

0.4

84

Timefollow

0.0

0
24
36

48

1.0

84
12
24

36

60

72

84

24

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0
12

24

48

60

72

12

0.2

72
84

0.8

Timefollow
0

12

36

48

60

0

0.0

60
72
84

Timefollow

0.6

0.6

Timefollow

0

24

36

48

84

1.0

48
60
72

84

12

24

36

72

0.8

36
48
60
72

0

12

24

60

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

48

0.6

24
36
48
60

72

84

CurvePDS

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.6

Timefollow

0

36

0.4

12
24
36
48

60

72

84

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.0

0.2

0.4

Timefollow

Timefollow

CurvePDS

0
12
24
36

48

60

72

84

0.0

0
12
24

36

48

1.0

0.8
0
12

24

36

60

72

24

0.2

84
0.8

0.6

0.2

0

12

24

48

60

12

0.0

Timefollow
0.6

84

Timefollow

0

1.0

72
84

0.4

Timefollow
0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0

12

36

48

84

0.8

60
72
84

0.2

0.2

0.0

1.0

Timefollow

0

24

36

72

0.6

48
60
72

84

0.0

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.0

0.2

M2 = 1012.0

0.4

36
48
60
72

84

12

24

60

CurvePDS

24
36
48
60

72

0

12

48

0.2

12
24
36
48

1.0

0.8

0.6

1.0

0.0

Timefollow

0

36

0.0

0
12
24
36

60

72

84

Timefollow

1.0

84
0.8

0
12
24

48

60

72

0.6

0.6
0
12

36
48

60

84

24

0.8

Timefollow

Timefollow

0.4

84

CurvePDS

Timefollow
0

24
36

48

72

12

0.6

72
84

Timefollow

0

0.4

60
72
84

12
24

36

60

84

CurvePDS

48
60
72

0.4

CurvePDS

Timefollow

0
12

24

48

72

0.2

36
48
60
72

84

0.2

0.2

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0

12

36

60

0.0

24
36
48
60

72
84

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.6

1.0

Timefollow
0

24

48

1.0

12
24
36

60
72

84

12

36

0.8

0
12
24
48

1.0

0
12
36

48
60

72

Timefollow

0.6

84

Timefollow

0

24

0.4

Timefollow
0
24

36
48
60

84

12

0.2

72
84

Timefollow

0

0.0

60
72
84
12

24
36
48

72

84

1.0

Timefollow
0

12
24
36

60

72

0.8

48
60
72
84

0.8

48
60
72

0
12
24

48

60

0.6

0.0

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

Timefollow

0
12

36

48

0.4

Timefollow
1.0

48
60

84

CurvePDS

0.8

0.2

0.6

48

72
0

24

36

0.6

36

60
84

Timefollow

0.4

24
36

48
72
84

12

24

CurvePDS

12
24
36

60

0.6

0.0

0.4

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

1.0

0.2

Timefollow
0

12

0.2

0
12
24

48
72
84

0.2

0
12
36

60
72

0.0

0.2

0.8

0.0

Timefollow

0

1.0

84
0.0

0.6

1.0

0
24

48

1.0

84

0.8

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8

84
12

36
60

84

0.0

Timefollow
0

24
36
48

72

0.8

72
84

12
24
36

60

0.6

60
72

0
12
24
36

48

0.6

0.2

0.6

Timefollow

0
12
24

36

0.4

60
72

84
Timefollow

0.4

48
60
72

84

CurvePDS

0.0

0.4

Timefollow

0
12

24

CurvePDS

36
48
60

72
84

0.2

Timefollow
1.0

0.2

Timefollow
0

12

0.2

24
36
48

60
72
84

0.0

0.8

0.0

Timefollow
0

1.0

12
24
36
48

60
72
84

0.8

0
12
24
36

48
60
72

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

CurvePDS

0.8
0
12
24

36
48
60
72

0.6

0.2

0.6
0
12

24
36
48
60

0.4

0.0

0.4
0

12
24
36
48

1.0

0.2

0
12
24
36
48

CurvePDS

0.8

0.0

0
12
24
36

0.6

1.0

Timefollow

0.4

0.8

0
12
24

0.0

0.6

CurvePDS

0.4

0
12

0.2

0.2

0.2

0

0.0

0.0

0.0

k
M2 = 1013.0
84
0

84
0

84
0

84
0

84

84

84
0

84
0

84
0

0

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

12

24
Timefollow

24

24

24

0
12
24

0
12
24

24

24

24

24

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

36

48

Timefollow

48

Timefollow

48

48

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

Timefollow

36
48
60
72
84

36
48
60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

48

48

48

48

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

60
72
84

—— PDS
—— NACT

Timefollow

Figure S3. Calculated Effects of Varying Parameter Values on Survival Following
PDS or NACT.

b

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

1.0
0.4

0.6

0.8

PDS
NACT

0.2

Percent Survival

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

PDS
NACT

0.0

1.0

c

0.0

Percent Survival

a

84

0

Months after diagnosis

24

36

48

60

72

84

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

Months after diagnosis

1.0
0.4

0.6

0.8

PDS
NACT

0.2

Percent Survival

0.4

0.6

0.8

PDS
NACT

0.0

1.0

f

0.2

Percent Survival

e

0.0

d

12

Months after diagnosis

0

12

24

36

48

60

72

84

Months after diagnosis

Figure S4. Calculated Effects of Varying Model Assumptions on Survival
Following PDS or NACT.

a

Resistant

0.10

0.10

0.00

0.00
0

10

10^4

10^7

0

10

0.30
0.20

1 month
1.5
months
2 months
3 months

0.00

0.10

0.20
0.10
0.00
0

10

c

10^4

10^7

0

10

Sensitive

10^7

0.30
0.00

0.10

0.20

0.30
0.10

0.20

1 month
1.5
months
2 months
3 months

10

10^4

10^7

0

10

10^4

10^7

0.10

0.20

1 month
1.5
months
2 months
3 months

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.20

0.30

Resistant

0.30

Sensitive

0

10

e

10^4

10^7

0

10

10^4

10^7

0.10

0.20

3 cycles
2 cycles
1 cycle

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.20

0.30

Resistant

0.30

Sensitive

f

10^4

Resistant

0.00

0

d

10^7

Resistant

0.30

Sensitive

10^4

0

10

10^4

10^7

0

10

10^4

10^7

Resistant

0.20
0.10

3 cycles
2 cycles
1 cycle

Cell Number

0.00

0.00

0.20
0.10

0.30

0.30

Sensitive

Frequency

b

1 month
1.5
months
2 months
3 months

0.20

0.20

0.30

0.30

Sensitive

0

10

10^4

10^7

0

10

10^4

10^7

Figure S5. Residual Tumor Cells after Different Treatment Strategies.

a

Resistant
Standard
100x lead
10,000x lead

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.10

0.20

0.20

0.30

0.30

Sensitive

0

10

b

10^4

0

10^7

10

10^7

0.10

0.20

Standard
100x lead time
10,000x lead time

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.20

0.30

Resistant

0.30

Sensitive

10^4

0

10

c

10^4

10^7

10

10^7

Standard
100x lead time
10,000x lead time

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.10

0.20

0.20

0.30

10^4

Resistant

0.30

Sensitive

0

0

10

d

10^4

0

10^7

10

10^7

0.10

0.20

Standard
100x lead time
10,000x lead time

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.20

0.30

Resistant

0.30

Sensitive

10^4

0

10

e

10^4

10^7

0

10

10^7

Resistant
Standard
100x lead time
10,000x lead time

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.10

0.20

0.20

0.30

0.30

Sensitive

10^4

10

f

10^4

0

10^7

10

10^7

Resistant
Standard
100x lead time
10,000x lead time

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.10

0.20

0.20

0.30

0.30

Sensitive

10^4

0

10

10^4

10^7

0

10

10^4

Frequency

0

10^7

Figure S6. Tumor Cells Remaining after First-Line Therapy with Earlier
Diagnosis.

Cell Number

