medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Redefining the multidimensional clinical phenotypes of
frontotemporal lobar degeneration syndromes
Alexander G. Murley1,2, Ian Coyle-Gilchrist1,3, Matthew Rouse1, P Simon Jones1, Win Li1,
Julie Wiggins1, Claire Lansdall1, Patricia Vázquez Rodríguez 1, Alicia Wilcox1, Kamen A.
Tsvetanov1, Karalyn Patterson1,4, Matthew A. Lambon Ralph2, 4, James B. Rowe1,2,4
1

Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, 2Cambridge University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 3Norfolk and Norwich NHS Foundation Trust, 4MRC
Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge.

Word Count:
5989 excluding title page, abstract, tables, figure legends and references
Running title:
Clinical phenotypes of FTLD syndromes
Keywords:
Frontotemporal dementia, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal syndrome, primary progressive
aphasia, semantic dementia
Abbreviations:
FTLD: Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration, bvFTD: Behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia,
PPA: Primary progressive aphasia, nfvPPA: Non-fluent variant primary progressive aphasia, svPPA:
Semantic variant primary progressive aphasia, lvPPA: Logopenic variant primary progressive aphasia,
PSP: Progressive supranuclear palsy, CBS: Corticobasal syndrome, CBD: Corticobasal degeneration,
ACER: Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination – Revised, CBIR: Cambridge Behavioural Inventory Revised

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Abstract
The syndromes caused by frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) have highly
heterogenous and overlapping clinical features. There has been great progress in the refinement
of clinical diagnostic criteria in the last decade, but we propose that a better understanding of
aetiology, pathophysiology and symptomatic treatments can arise from a transdiagnostic
approach to clinical phenotype and brain morphometry. In a cross-sectional epidemiological
study, we examined 310 patients with a syndrome likely to be caused by frontotemporal lobar
degeneration, including behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), the non-fluent
(nfvPPA), semantic (svPPA) variants of primary progressive aphasia, progressive supranuclear
palsy (PSP) and corticobasal syndrome (CBS). We also included patients with logopenic
primary progressive aphasia (lvPPA) and those who met criteria for PPA but not one of the
three subtypes. To date, forty-nine patients have a neuropathological diagnosis. A principal
component analysis identified symptom dimensions that broadly recapitulated the core features
of the main clinical syndromes. However, the subject-specific scores on these dimensions
showed considerable overlap across the diagnostic groups. Sixty-two percent of participants
had phenotypic features that met the diagnostic criteria for more than one syndrome.
Behavioural disturbance was prevalent in all groups. Forty-four percent of patients with CBS
had PSP-like features and thirty percent of patients with PSP had CBS-like features. Many
patients with PSP and CBS had language impairments consistent with nfvPPA while patients
with bvFTD often had semantic impairments. Using multivariate source-based morphometry
on a subset of patients (n=133), we identified patterns of co-varying brain atrophy that were
represented across the diagnostic groups. Canonical correlation analysis of clinical and imaging
components found three key brain-behaviour relationships that revealed a continuous spectrum
across the cohort rather than discrete diagnostic entities. In the forty-six patients with
longitudinal follow up (mean 3.6 years) syndromic overlap increased with time. Together, these
results show that syndromes associated with FTLD do not form discrete mutually exclusive
categories from their clinical features or structural brain changes, but instead exist in a
multidimensional spectrum. Patients often manifest diagnostic features of multiple disorders
and deficits in behaviour, movement and language domains are not confined to specific
diagnostic groups. It is important to recognise individual differences in clinical phenotype, both
for clinical management and to understand pathogenic mechanisms. We suggest that the
adoption of a transdiagnostic approach to the spectrum of FTLD syndromes provides a useful
framework with which to understand disease progression, heterogeneity and treatment.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Introduction
The clinical disorders caused by frontotemporal lobar degeneration pathologies (FTLD) are
highly heterogeneous in their pathology and phenotypes (Kertesz et al., 2005; MacKenzie et
al., 2010; Rohrer et al., 2011). Patients are typically diagnosed as having one of several
principal

syndromes,

including

behavioural

variant

frontotemporal

dementia

(bvFTD)(Rascovsky et al., 2011), primary progressive aphasia (with the non-fluent nfvPPA
and semantic svPPA subtypes)(Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011), progressive supranuclear palsy
(PSP)(Höglinger et al., 2017) or corticobasal syndrome (CBS)(Armstrong et al., 2013). The
clinicopathological correlations of these syndromes are imprecise (Irwin et al., 2015). For
example, bvFTD can be associated with Tau, TDP-43, or FUS protein inclusions or mixed
neuropathology (Perry et al., 2017). Some clinical syndromes, such as PSP-Richardson’s
Syndrome, have good correlation with the associated pathology (Gazzina et al., 2019), however
the corresponding pathology may have diverse phenotypic expressions (Respondek et al.,
2014). Recent revisions of diagnostic criteria recognise this heterogeneity (Armstrong et al.,
2013; Höglinger et al., 2017), and there may be future improvements in clinicopathological
correlations by imaging or fluid-based biomarkers, aiming to optimise patient selection for
disease modifying therapies (Irwin et al., 2015; Meeter et al., 2017).
Here we propose that the effort to refine diagnostic segregation of the disorders has
fundamental limitations. These are not merely due to the limits of a given test or biomarker but
are biologically real constraints that can in turn be informative about the nature of the disorders.
We suggest that a better understanding of aetiology and pathophysiology, and more effective
therapies, can be gained by examining the phenotypic patterns across the broad spectrum of all
FTLD-associated disease. Symptomatic therapies may especially benefit from such a
transdiagnostic approach, selecting patients based on the presence of relevant clinical features,
whichever their diagnostic label or proteinopathy.
A transdiagnostic approach is increasingly used in psychiatry, epitomised by the Research
Domain Criteria methodology (Kozak and Cuthbert, 2016; Grisanzio et al., 2018). A similar
approach is applicable to neurodegenerative diseases with overlapping phenotypes (Lambon
Ralph et al., 2003; Husain, 2017) and cognitive deficits after stroke (Butler et al., 2014;
Mirman et al., 2015; Halai et al., 2017). There are many overlapping symptoms and indistinct
phenotypic boundaries between FTLD syndromes (Kertesz et al., 1999, 2005). For example,
executive dysfunction is a common cognitive impairment across FTLD-associated syndromes
(Burrell et al., 2014; K G Ranasinghe et al., 2016) and changes in behaviour, social cognition

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

and personality, while characteristic of bvFTD are also seen in PSP (Cordato et al., 2005;
Ghosh et al., 2012; Gerstenecker et al., 2013), CBS (Huey et al., 2009) and the primary
progressive aphasias (Rosen et al., 2006; Rohrer and Warren, 2010). Neuropsychiatric
symptoms, including apathy and impulsivity, occur in multiple FTLD syndromes (J. Rohrer et
al., 2010; Lansdall et al., 2017). The movement disorders typical of PSP and CBS can also
develop in patients diagnosed with bvFTD (Park et al., 2017) and nfvPPA (Santos-Santos et
al., 2016). Language impairments are seen across all FTLD syndromes, including bvFTD
(Hardy et al., 2015), PSP and CBS (Peterson et al., 2019).
We therefore used a transdiagnostic approach to assess the phenotype of FTLD syndromes. We
tested the hypothesis that syndromes associated with FTLD are multidimensional clinical
spectra, rather than discrete clinical entities. A colour-map symbolises the current most widely
used approach, in which patients have a distinct clinical phenotype of a singular syndrome,
represented by a discrete colour patch (Figure 1A: ‘red bvFTD’ is distinct from ‘blue PSP’)
(Butler et al., 2014). Our alternate hypothesis is that patients lie in a continuous colour-space,
shown in in Figure 1B. Intermediate or mixed phenotypes like PSP-F, CBS-NAV or svPPA
with prominent behavioural disturbance, are readily placed within the continuous phenotypic
space. A corollary hypothesis is that the multivariate clinical spectrum of the disorders can be
mapped to multivariate regional structural brain change. Note that this is not an argument for
‘lumping’ patients into super-ordinate diagnostic groups, or for ‘splitting’ diagnoses into ever
finer subtypes. This type of transdiagnostic approach recognises the clear individual
differences across patients and does not propose an unstructured pool; instead, the key
hypothesis is that the underlying variations in FLTD reflect a statistical structure in the form
of multiple graded dimensions rather than mutually exclusive categories. Thus, the concept of
phenotypic spectra allows for both the recognition of broad similarities and unique
combinations of features.
To test our hypotheses, we exploited the epidemiologically-based PiPPIN dataset (CoyleGilchrist et al., 2016) and a replication dataset acquired four years later. We undertook a
systematic behavioural, cognitive and imaging assessment of patients with syndromes
associated with FTLD, in a region of 1.75 million people in the United Kingdom. We predicted
that while classical syndromes of bvFTD, PPA, PSP and CBS exist, a data-driven approach
would reveal phenotypic continuity without clear separation between phenotypes. With
longitudinal follow up of a subset of participants, we tested the hypothesis that clinical
phenotypes merge by addition of features, with increasing overlap – analogous to the move

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

towards the centre of the colour-space. Moreover, we predicted that clusters of symptoms
would be associated with a specific pattern of brain atrophy, while the extent to which a patient
has this atrophy pattern determines the severity of the associated symptoms.

FIGURE 1 – The FTLD syndrome spectrum. 1A: Schematic of current diagnostic criteria. 1B: Schematic to
highlight our hypothesis that FTLD syndromes occur on a spectrum. 1C and D: Four-way Venn diagrams of
overlap between FTLD syndromes in the study. The numbers in each oval refer to the number of patients who
met the diagnostic criteria for those syndromes. Many patients met the diagnostic criteria for two or more
syndromes. 1C: Overlap between bvFTD, nfvPPA, PSP and CBS. 1D: Overlap between bvFTD, nfvPPA, svPPA
and lvPPA.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Materials and methods
The rapidly evolving field of FTLD/FTD/PSP research can result in confusion in definitions
and diagnostic labels. In this paper we use the current consensus nosology for clinical and
pathological diagnoses. We use frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) to refer to the
pathology, subtyping to tau or TDP43 pathologies where applicable. The phrase
“Frontotemporal lobar degeneration syndromes” refers collectively to the clinical diagnoses of
bvFTD (with or without motor neuron disease), PPA, nfvPPA, svPPA, PSP or CBS and their
intermediate phenotypes. The term corticobasal degeneration is limited to the pathology, while
corticobasal syndrome (CBS) refers to the clinical syndrome. Note that not all patients will
have FTLD pathology (especially lvPPA and mixed PPA patients) and not all those with FTLD
pathology will have had one of the corresponding syndromes.

Participant recruitment
The “Pick’s Disease and Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Prevalence and Incidence study”
(PiPPIN) sought to recruit all patients with a clinical diagnosis of a frontotemporal lobar
degeneration syndrome living in the counties of Cambridgeshire and Norfolk in the United
Kingdom. Cross sectional assessments were performed during two 24-month periods, from 1st
January 2013 to 31st December 2014 and again from 1st January 2017 to 31st December 2018.
Participants were recruited via multiple routes, including specialist cognitive and movement
disorder clinics at tertiary and secondary healthcare services (using paper and electronic health
records), patient support groups (FTD support group, PSP Association), advertisements in local
newspapers and through local research databases and the National Institute for Health Research
“Join Dementia Research” registry. Patients were recruited at all disease stages. We sought to
assess all participants, either at our research centre or at their home or care home. Patients alive
during both study periods were invited to assessment in both periods, but only their first visit
was used for the cross-sectional analysis. 365 patients were identified in the catchment area,
310 of whom were met in person by the study team for phenotypic assessment. Death or endstage disease were the main reasons for our not assessing the remaining 55 cases. All
participants provided written informed consent or, if they lacked capacity to consent, their next
of kin was consulted using the “personal consultee” process established by UK law. The study
had ethical approval from the Cambridge Central Research Ethics Committee (REC
12/EE/0475).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Clinical assessment
We used a structured clinical assessment to record the presence or absence of symptoms and
signs typically seen in frontotemporal lobar degeneration syndromes. This assessment
contained all clinical features included in the current consensus diagnostic criteria
(Supplementary Information) (Rascovsky et al., 2007; Bensimon et al., 2009; Gorno-Tempini
et al., 2011; Armstrong et al., 2013; Höglinger et al., 2017). Each patient’s primary diagnosis
was made according to these criteria, with reference to the dominant features at the time of
presentation and assessment. Patients with a mixed primary progressive aphasia, who met the
diagnostic criteria for PPA but not one of the three subtypes (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011) were
grouped with lvPPA for this study, in view of the low numbers and the association of both
phenotypes with Alzheimer’s pathology (Sajjadi et al., 2012). For patients who met several
sub-diagnostic criteria we grouped disease probable and possible diagnoses together, and
classified by the dominant phenotype and formal MAX-rules where available (Grimm et al.,
2019). We re-applied the other diagnostic criteria to each patient to assess if he or she met the
diagnostic criteria for any of the other FTLD syndromes (excepting the ‘mutual exclusivity’
clause included in several criteria). Patients completed the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive
Examination wherever possible (ACER) (Mioshi et al., 2006) and a carer’s assessment was
obtained using the Cambridge Behavioural Inventory (CBI-R) (Wear et al., 2008). At the time
of writing, forty-nine participants have undergone post mortem examination, via the Cambridge
Brain Bank.

Imaging analysis
One hundred and thirty-three patients (bvFTD n=28, nfvPPA n=15, svPPA n=5 PPA n=10,
PSP n=53, CBS n=22) from the phenotyped cohort were scanned at the Wolfson Brain Imaging
Centre, University of Cambridge on a Siemens 3T system. Structural magnetic resonance
imaging was performed using a T1-weighted magnetisation-prepared rapid acquisition gradient
echo (MPRAGE) sequence. Images were pre-processed using SPM12 with default settings.
Grey and white matter segments were combined to whole brain images for further analysis.
The DARTEL pipeline was used to create a study specific template using all images. Age and
total intracranial volume (TIV) were included in a multiple regression and regressed out of the
data. Source based morphometry was used on the residual images to identify covarying
networks of grey and white matter atrophy, further details of this step are given in the next
paragraph.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Statistical analysis
A summary of the analysis pipeline is shown in Figure 2. First, we examined the relationships
between individual clinical features using distance measures and multidimensional scaling
(Shepard, 1980) (Figure 3). The pairwise Jaccard’s distances between clinical features were
calculated, resulting in a dissimilarity matrix. Non-classical two-dimensional scaling was
performed on this dissimilarity matrix (Shepard, 1980).
Second, we looked for patterns of covariation in the presence or absence of clinical features
(Perry et al., 2017; Grisanzio et al., 2018; Schumacher et al., 2019). We grouped the forty-five
binary clinical features into twenty-four groups of related features by summing the number of
present features in each group. Clinical feature groups were defined by categories in the
diagnostic criteria. A full list of clinical symptoms and signs and their groupings is shown in
supplementary materials. The clinical feature group scores, ACER and CBIR results were
standardised into z scores then entered into a principal component analysis. A Kaiser-MeyerOlkin test was used to determine the suitability of our dataset for principal component analysis.
We selected six components using Cattell’s criteria then performed varimax rotation.
Third, we characterised patterns of covariation in grey and white matter atrophy across all
participants. We used the GIFT software package to perform source based morphometry, a
multivariate alternative to voxel based morphometry which uses independent component
analysis (Xu et al., 2009). Source based morphometry was performed on the residual values
from the pre-processed images (see imaging analysis section of methods for details). We
extracted 15 independent components of covarying brain atrophy (Figure 5), and confirmed the
reliability of these components using ICASSO with 100 repetitions (Himberg and Hyvärinen,
2003).
Fourth, we looked at the relationship between clinical phenotype and brain atrophy (Figure 6).
We used canonical correlation analysis (CCA) to identify canonical variates between the six
principal components from the clinical feature data (Figure 4) and the fifteen components from
the imaging analysis (Figure 5) (Tsvetanov et al., 2018). All inputs were standardised into z
scores before CCA. Pearson’s correlations were corrected for multiple comparisons by
estimating the false discovery rate using the mafdr function in Matlab 2018b.
Finally, we looked at longitudinal change in clinical feature component scores in the subset of
patients (n=46) who were reviewed twice. We converted follow up participant scores into
zscores based on the baseline data, by matching each score to the respective z-score in the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

baseline data. This ensured follow up participants were matched to the cross-sectional dataset.
We then multiplied these standardised follow-up z scores by the baseline principal component
coefficients to get follow-up principal component scores.
All patients had a clinical phenotypic assessment but other measures (including ACER and
CBI-R) were subject to missing data. Missing data (6.32% of the total dataset) were imputed
using trimmed scored regression (Folch-Fortuny et al., 2016) using the partial dataset of that
participant as predictors. All statistical and imaging analysis was performed in Matlab 2018b
(Mathworks, USA) apart from ANOVA and Chi squared tests which were performed in JASP
(version 0.9.2).

FIGURE 2 – Schematic of data processing. First, patients were recruited from the study catchment area for
phenotypic assessment and structural brain imaging. Second, a cluster analysis was performed on clinical features.
Third, we performed a principal component analysis on all clinical features to find latent syndrome dimensions
across FTLD. Fourth, we used source based morphometry (independent component analysis on grey and white
matter) created atrophy components. Finally, we then explored the relationship between phenotype (syndrome
dimensions from the principal component analysis) and brain structure (source-based morphometry imaging
components) using canonical correlation analysis.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Data Availability
Anonymised data are available on reasonable request for academic purposes.

Results
A detailed epidemiological assessment of FTLD syndromes in the study area has previously
been reported (Coyle-Gilchrist et al., 2016). Further demographic details of the study cohort,
including the later recruitment period, are shown in Table 1.
We assessed in person 85% (310/365) of the patients identified as living in the study catchment
area with a FTLD syndrome. Fifty eight patients had a definite diagnosis of FTLD, either by
subsequent post mortem pathological diagnosis (n=49) or a causative genetic mutation on
clinical genetics tests. Of patients who underwent post mortem examination, all patients with a
clinical diagnosis of PSP had PSP pathology (n=14). Most patients with svPPA had FTLDTDP-43C (n=3/4), one had Pick’s pathology. bvFTD was associated with FTLD-tau (Picks’
n=1, PSP n=1) or TDP43 (n=5f). The majority of patients with CBS had either CBD (n=6/19)
or Alzheimer’s disease (8/19). Of the four patients with nfvPPA three had FTLD-tau and one
had Alzheimer’s disease. The one patient with lvPPA had Alzheimer’s Disease pathology.
All

bvFTD

nfvPPA

svPPA

FTLD

PPA

PSP

(lv or

(all)

CBS

P
value

mixed)
Total in catchment area (n)

365

81

40

28

16

123

77

--

Clinical phenotyping n (%

310

64

36

25

16

101

68

ns*

of total population)

(85)

(79)

(93)

(89)

(100)

(82)

(88)

Age, years (mean and SD)

70.26

64.59

72.09

67.55

70.80

72.56

72.08

(8.57)

(9.56)

(8.81)

(6.43)

(7.05)

(7.14)

(7.69)

Male/Female

152/158

33/31

15/21

14/11

7/9

56/45

27/41

ns

Duration of symptoms,

4.75

5.70

2.83

4.96

2.76

4.50

4.71

ns

years

(3.18)

(4.45)

(1.93)

(2.69)

(1.97)

(2.94)

(2.77)

Time from diagnosis to

1.44

1.88

1.09

1.65

1.58

1.02

1.73

study review (mean and SD)

(2.77)

(3.88)

(1.27)

(2.01)

(1.67)

(1.17)

(2.02)

MRI scan (% of phenotyped

133

28

15

5

10

53

22

patients)

(43)

(44)

(41)

(20)

(62)

(52)

(32)

<0.001

(mean and SD)

Table 1 – Demographics of the study cohort. P values are the result of ANOVA or Chi squared test
for each row on FTLD subgroups, ns= not significant (p>0.05), *ANOVA of percentage of total
population in each group, ** ANOVA of percentage of phenotyped patients in each group.

ns

ns**

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Sixty-two percent of patients (n=194) met the core diagnostic criteria for more than one
syndrome, with patients meeting the inclusion criteria for two (n=112), three (n=69) or four
(n=13) diagnoses (Figure 1C and D). The most commonly overlapping syndromes were PSP
and CBS (n=76), bvFTD and either PSP (n=60) or svPPA (n=38) and nfvPPA with either CBS
(n=56) or PSP (n=51).
We used cluster analysis to investigate how closely clinical features related to each other.
Multidimensional scaling of clinical features (across all patients) broadly recapitulated the
phenotypic clustering as represented by the classical phenotypes of each syndrome (Figure 3).
However, there were also many close links between signs conventionally associated with
distinct diagnoses. For example, progressive behavioural change, apathy, inertia and
impulsivity (typical of bvFTD), were close to symmetrical parkinsonism, falls, axial rigidity
and a supranuclear gaze palsy (typical of PSP). Other features suggestive of bvFTD (socially
inappropriate and compulsive behaviour and stereotypy of speech), were close to features
typical of svPPA features (impaired naming, single word comprehension and object
recognition). PSP and CBS features were closely linked, while speech apraxia, agrammatism
and impaired syntactic comprehension (indicative of nfvPPA) overlapped with limb apraxia
(indicative of CBS).

First, we sought latent syndromic dimensions using principal component analysis of the
phenotypic data. Six principal components were identified using Cattell’s criteria, each
representing a group of covarying features (encompassing symptoms, signs, ACER and CBI
scores, varimax-rotated component matrix in Supplementary Materials). These six components
explained 58.52% of the variance in the dataset (Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin=0.86). Syndrome
dimension 1 (Figure 4A) reflected clinician and carer ratings of behaviour and personality
change, with executive dysfunction, impulsivity and disinhibition, loss of empathy, stereotyped
behaviours, hyperorality and dietary change, apathy, endorsements of abnormal behaviour,
altered eating habits and stereotypic and motor behaviour subscales. This “behaviour”
dimension was expressed strongly by patients with bvFTD, but also a high proportion of PSP,
CBS and svPPA patients. Some patients in these latter groups had weightings similar to bvFTD.
The second syndrome dimension (Figure 4B) reflected global cognitive function, with negative
loadings from ACER subscores. Carer ratings of everyday function and memory also had
positive loading onto this dimension (higher CBI score, reflecting greater impairment). There

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

was wide variation in this dimension’s weighting across all groups, with higher scores
reflecting worse cognitive impairment.

FIGURE 3 – Cluster analysis and multidimensional scaling of behavioural, language and motor impairments in
FTLD. Each feature is colour coded by FTLD subtype (same colour codes as Figure 1) based on the primary
diagnostic criteria which the symptom contributes to. The size of each point is scaled based on its prevalence in
the cohort (larger icons have a higher prevalence). Symptoms from each FTLD syndrome cluster together, but
many features are also closely located to those from other syndromes.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 4 – Principal component analysis scores of clinical features in FTLD syndromes. Six principal
components (4A-F) were selected. 4A: Syndrome dimension 1 - clinician and carer ratings of behavioural
impairment. 4B: Syndrome dimension 2 - global cognitive impairment, comprised of all Addenbrooke’s
Cognitive Examination subscores. 4C: Syndrome dimension 3 - supranuclear gaze palsy, postural stability and
symmetrical rigidity (positive loading) and semantic language impairment (negative loading). 4D: Syndrome
dimension 4 - asymmetrical parkinsonism, dystonia, myoclonus with limb apraxia, cortical sensory loss and
alien limb syndrome. 4E: Syndrome dimension 5 - agrammatic, apraxic and logopenic language impairments.
4F: Syndrome dimension 6 - carer ratings of low mood and abnormal beliefs.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

The third dimension (Figure 4C) reflected axial rigidity, postural instability and a supranuclear
gaze palsy (positive loading) in the absence semantic language impairments (negative loading).
Thus, patients with typical PSP and typical svPPA lie at opposite ends of this dimension, with
high and low scores respectively. However other groups had a spread of scores, many patients
with corticobasal syndrome had very high scores (PSP-like). Some bvFTD had high scores
indicating a PSP-overlap, while others had low scores, implying presence of semantic
impairment.
Positive scores on syndrome dimension four (Figure 4D) represented asymmetrical
parkinsonism, dystonia and myoclonus with cortical features of apraxia, cortical sensory loss
and alien limb syndrome. Patients with corticobasal syndrome, and a subset of patients with
PSP had high scores in this dimension. Dimension 5 (Figure 4E) represented language
impairments, agrammatic, apraxic and logopenic speech with motor features (myoclonus and
limb apraxia). Patients with CBS, nfvPPA, logopenic variant and mixed PPA had high
weighting on this dimension, as did a small subset of those with clinical diagnoses of PSP and
bvFTD. Dimension 6 explained less variance than the other components and represented
primarily carer ratings of mood and abnormal beliefs (Figure 4F).
Second, we investigated the structural changes associated with FTLD, and their associations
with the clinically orientated syndromic dimensions. The scanned subset of participants was
similar to the whole population, with no statistically significant differences in weighting for
dimensions 1,2,3,5, and 6. The differences in syndrome dimension 2 (t=2.41, p=0.016)
indicated less severe global cognitive impairment in those who were scanned. Source based
morphometry revealed fifteen significant structural components, each representing a pattern of
covaried atrophy (subset in Figure 5, all components in Supplementary Materials). The
components had high stability across 100 ICASSO runs (mean=0.981, standard
deviation=0.004). The loadings on these imaging components were not confined to single
diagnostic groups.
Imaging components one and two related to the frontal and prefrontal cortex; patients with
bvFTD tended to have low scores on these components (i.e. atrophy), but many patients with
nfvPPA, PSP and CBS also had low scores indicating a frontal cortical atrophy (Figure 5).
Component three, with bitemporal atrophy, had very strong negative scores in all svPPA
patients, but also many bvFTD patients. Some participants with CBS, nfvPPA and PPA had
negative scores on imaging component eight, which reflected biparietal atrophy. Imaging

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

component thirteen represented the volumes of corticospinal tracts and basal ganglia. Many
patients with PSP, but also some patients with bvFTD, CBS and nfvPPA had low scores on
this component. Component fourteen represented brainstem atrophy, with large negative scores
in PSP and CBS but also some nfvPPA patients.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 5 – Source based morphometry (based on independent component analysis) of combined grey and white
matter. A subset of components is shown here, all components are shown in supplementary materials. A total of
15 components were selected, each representing a region of independently covarying grey and white matter
atrophy. Images are standardised group spatial maps for each component, superimposed on an average of all brain
images. The scatter-box plots show the standardised subject loading coefficients, grouped by FTLD syndrome
subtype.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Third, we looked for structure-function correlations between the clinical and imaging
components. Since both cognition and atrophy are intrinsically multivariate, we used canonical
correlation analysis between the six cognitive dimension and fifteen atrophy components.
Three canonical correlations were selected for further analysis (each p<0.05, rejecting the null
hypothesis that the canonical correlation is zero). The first canonical correlation (R=0.81,
p<0.001) represented the association between motor impairments (syndrome dimensions three
and four) and relatively preserved cognition (syndrome dimension two) with motor cortex and
brain stem atrophy (atrophy components six and fourteen). Patients with PSP, CBS and some
patients with bvFTD had positive loadings, while patients with primary progressive aphasia
(notably the svPPA subtype) and some with bvFTD had negative loadings (Figure 6A). Four
of the six FTLD subgroups had significant correlations in this canonical correlation: PSP
(Pearson’s R:0.33, p:0.03), CBS (R:0.81 p:<0.001), bvFTD R:0.70 p:<0.001) and nfvPPA
(R:0.74 p:0.03) (All results in Supplementary Materials).
The second canonical correlation (R=0.71, p<0.001) represented the spectrum between
behavioural impairment (syndrome dimension 1) associated with atrophy in the frontal and
temporal lobes (atrophy components 1 and 3) versus global cognitive impairment, apraxia,
cortical sensory loss and language impairments in association with atrophy in the parietal
cortex (atrophy components 7 and 8). Positive weightings on this canonical correlation were
most common for bvFTD, svPPA and a subset of PSP. Negative loadings were predominantly
seen in CBS and a few patients with nfvPPA and mixed PPA (Figure 6B). bvFTD (R=0.49,
p=0.02), nfvPPA (R=0.79 p=0.001) and CBS (R=0.7, p=0.001) most contributed to this
canonical variate.
The third canonical correlation (R=0.58 p<0.001) represented a combination of behavioural,
cognitive and motor symptoms in association with atrophy in motor and parietal cortices, basal
ganglia and brainstem (Figure 6C). This canonical correlation had positive loadings across a
wide range of diagnoses, with no clear group separation. This canonical variate was driven by
CBS (R=0.62 p=0.005), PSP (R=0.54 p<0.001) and PPA (R=0.87 p=0.002) subgroups with a
weaker contribution from svPPA (R=0.91, p=0.048). The three residual, unselected canonical
covariates did not correlate in any FTLD subgroup.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

FIGURE 6 – Structure-phenotype associations using canonical correlation analysis with phenotypic (syndrome
dimensions from principal component analysis) and structural (atrophy components from source based
morphometry) information. Three canonical correlation components were selected, each comprised of multiple
imaging and clinical phenotype components. 6A: First canonical correlation. Atrophy in the motor cortex and
brainstem had the greatest loading onto the imaging component. Syndrome dimensions 3 (PSP-like motor
features) and 4 (CBS-like motor features) had positive loadings and syndrome dimension 2 (global cognitive
impairment) had negative loading on the clinical component. 6B: Second canonical correlation. Atrophy in the
frontal and temporal lobes had the greatest loading on the imaging component. On the clinical component,
syndrome dimension one (behavioural impairment) had positive loadings. 6C: Third canonical correlation. A
spread of cortical and subcortical atrophy components loaded on the imaging component and syndrome
dimensions 1, 2 and 3 contributed to the clinical component. Plots of loadings onto all imaging and clinical
components is shown in Supplementary Materials.

The final analysis considered the longitudinal change in the forty-six patients who were alive
and assessed in both 2013-2014 and 2017-2018. The mean time between assessments was 3.6
years (standard deviation 0.87 years). Between first and second assessments there was
progression in all syndrome dimensions across all groups. At the second assessment there was
greater overlap between diagnostic groups, across all syndrome dimensions (Figure 7). More
patients met two or more sets of diagnostic criteria (after removing mutual exclusivity criterion)
at follow up (n=42) compared to baseline (n=33) (Chi squared statistic with Yates correction
4.618, p=0.031).

.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 7 – Longitudinal phenotype information. A subset of patients were assessed at two timepoints. Each
circle shows the 95% confidence intervals of the syndrome dimension scores for each FTLD subgroup at
baseline and follow up. At follow up there was greater overlap across all FTLD syndromes in all syndrome
dimensions

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Discussion
This epidemiologically based study used a data-driven analysis of cross-sectional phenotypes
to show that the common syndromes associated with frontotemporal lobar degeneration are not
discrete in their clinical features or structural brain changes (Figure 1A), but instead exist as a
multidimensional spectrum (Figure 1B). Many patients displayed the diagnostic features for
multiple diagnoses (Figure 1C&D). The dimensions of behaviour, movement and language
features occur to varying degrees across all the major diagnostic groups. Differences between
groups were expressed by different weightings along these spectra, rather than by categorical
clinical or imaging features.
Despite the continuity among patient phenotypes, the clinical syndromes are not random
associations. Our analyses revealed close associations between sets of cognitive, behavioural,
language and motor symptoms and signs which are reminiscent of the classical phenotypes
(Figure 2). For example, syndrome dimension three, which represents a supranuclear gaze
palsy, falls, akinesia and preserved semantics, is readily identified as a pattern typical of PSPRichardson’s syndrome. However, forty-four percent of CBS patients expressed this pattern to
the same degree as PSP patients. The recognition of such overlap has contributed to the
development of intermediate diagnoses like PSP-CBS (Höglinger et al., 2017) and CBS-PSP
(Armstrong et al., 2013) but our results indicate that such overlap is common rather than
exceptional. However not all potential intermediate phenotypes occur. For example, a
supranuclear gaze palsy, axial and symmetrical limb rigidity rarely coexist with semantic
impairment, a combination which has only rarely been reported in patients with mixed tau and
TDP43 pathology (Snowden et al., 2019).
We propose that this spectral approach is critical to understand the biological basis of the
complex clinical syndromes, and to target future therapies appropriately. Rather than focus on
the determinants of disease or its treatment by diagnosis, one can focus on the determinants
and treatment of the syndromic dimensions, in whichever diagnostic ‘group’ these dimensions
are expressed. To do otherwise risks the misdirection of a treatment or the dilution of the
effects of aetiological factors, whether genetic, environmental, or aggregate of pathogenic
proteins. In other words, one could understand and potentially treat the “PSP-like” features
whether they occurred in the context of clinically diagnosed PSP-Richardson’s syndrome, CBS
or bvFTD.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

We do not suggest that the current diagnostic criteria are invalid. Instead, our results highlight
the limitations of a categorical approach to diagnosis when the disorders are inherently
multivariate spectra in their clinical and imaging features. Nor do our data suggest incorrect
diagnosis: although only forty nine patients in this study have had post mortem examination,
they confirmed clinicopathological correlations in keeping with the literature (very high for
PSP (Gazzina et al., 2019) and svPPA (Spinelli et al., 2017), predominantly CBD or AD
pathologies for CBS (Alexander et al., 2014), and either Tau or TDP43 pathologies for bvFTD
(Perry et al., 2017)). Indeed, the symptom-based data-driven cluster analysis broadly
reproduced the diagnostic criteria. But, the relative weightings on such clusters were graded,
which highlights the difficulties when applying diagnostic criteria to some patients, especially
those with intermediate or mixed phenotypes.
In our analysis, we did not differentiate features that are more salient to a clinician (e.g.
supranuclear gaze palsy) from those that are more salient to a relative or carer (e.g. behavioural
disturbance, non-fluent aphasia or falls). This difference in perspective is relevant to diagnostic
labelling. For example, a patient with apraxia, akinesia, dystonia and non-fluent agrammatic
speech might be diagnosed as CBS or nfvPPA according to the dominant clinical features, but
whose opinion on dominance matters most, the patient, carer or clinician? This is complicated
further by the change in insight associated with many FTLD syndromes (O’Keeffe et al., 2007).
A further complication for the categorical approach to diagnosis is the evolution of behavioural,
motor or language features over time which raises the question of whether the diagnosis label
should be changed or complimented by a secondary, parallel diagnosis. Our approach largely
resolves this issue by taking a transdiagnostic approach based on clinical and/or imaging
domains, which we consider in the next section.
Our data-driven approach identified close clustering of the clinical features and six latent
syndrome dimensions that demonstrated the high degree of overlap across FTLD syndromes.
Behavioural features were closely clustered and loaded onto one syndrome dimension.
However, they also clustered near cognitive and motor symptoms/signs. Apathy and
impulsivity had a close link, reflecting the fact that they often coexist, rather than representing
opposite ends of a hyper-hypo-kinetic spectrum (Lansdall et al., 2017). A majority of patients
had apathy, which lay near the centre of the multidimensional scaling plot (Figure 3),
suggesting that it is related similarly to other features across FTLD syndromes. The behavioural
syndrome dimension was expressed across multiple groups and was not restricted to the subset
of the cohort with bvFTD (Figure 4A). Interestingly, not all patients with bvFTD had very high

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

scores on this behavioural syndrome dimension. Those with lower behaviour scores, but a
clinical diagnosis of bvFTD, may represent bvFTD with prominent apathetic/dysexecutive
symptoms (O’Connor et al., 2017), or reflect more advanced disease, when many of the more
florid behavioural changes are less pronounced (O’Connor et al., 2016). A proportion of
patients with PSP and CBS had high scores on this syndrome dimension. Behavioural changes
in PSP and CBS are well recognised (Burrell et al., 2014), but are often thought to be mild.
Our findings suggest that behavioural impairments in PSP and CBS can very prominent, in fact
some patients with PSP and CBS had higher scores on syndrome dimension one than some
with bvFTD. Importantly, no other clinical feature had negative loading coefficients on
syndrome dimension one, suggesting that behavioural features can coexist with all other FTLDrelated features. Global cognitive impairment was represented by syndrome dimension two.
All the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination subscores and carer ratings of everyday skills
and memory loaded onto this dimension. However, the reasons for low ACER scores may vary
depending on which other symptom profiles are expressed: a low score on the ACER could be
due to progressive dementia or caused by severe behavioural (syndrome dimension one) or
language (dimension five) or motor (dimensions three and four) impairment, all of which
would interfere with the test session.
Our results are also relevant to the current nosology of primary progressive aphasias. Semantic
impairments loaded onto a different syndrome dimension and clustered separately from the
language impairments associated with non-fluent and logopenic primary progressive aphasia.
This provides partial support for the current distinction between svPPA and other forms of
PPA. However, nfvPPA and lvPPA were not readily distinguished by the data-driven analysis
– as has been noted in a previous independent cohort (Sajjadi et al., 2012). In contrast, patients
with svPPA were similar to bvFTD in many respects (Figure 4), compulsive behaviours,
stereotyped speech and simple repetitive habits were closely linked to semantic language
impairments, including object recognition and single word comprehension (Harris et al., 2016).
Other language features, including impaired syntactic comprehension, agrammatism and
speech apraxia, were closely related to CBS-like motor features (syndrome dimension 3), in
CBS, PSP, and nfvPPA groups - in keeping with the well characterised overlap of non-fluent
(J. D. J. Rohrer et al., 2010; J. Rohrer et al., 2010) and apraxic (Josephs et al., 2006, 2012)
speech with PSP and CBS (Armstrong et al., 2013; Respondek and Höglinger, 2016; Peterson
et al., 2019). The PPA diagnostic criteria require that language impairments are the most
prominent clinical feature and the principal cause of difficulty with activities of daily living.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

This may not be the case in some patients with svPPA; although clinicians may note prominent
semantic impairments, co-existent behavioural impairment may be more conspicuous to
relatives or carers and have a greater impact on independence and daily living. In addition, we
report the practical difficulties applying the current PPA diagnostic criteria. In our
epidemiological-based cohort nineteen patients met criteria for primary progressive aphasia
(Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011) but not one of the PPA subtypes. The current diagnostic criteria
are stringent and require the presence and absence of multiple language features. Patients with
language symptoms may have very isolated deficits (Josephs et al., 2012) or at the other
extreme multiple impairments which span more than one PPA subtype, even at diagnosis
(Utianski et al., 2019).
Many studies have correlated clinical syndromes with structural change, using computational
morphometry on volume, thickness, curvature or cortical diffusivity. Typically, these compare
patient groups to each other or to controls, to reveal group-based patterns of atrophy in bvFTD
(Schroeter et al., 2007; Whitwell et al., 2012; Kamalini G. Ranasinghe et al., 2016; Meeter et
al., 2017; Perry et al., 2017; Y. Chen et al., 2018; Illán-Gala et al., 2019), svPPA (GornoTempini et al., 2004; Schroeter et al., 2007; Kumfor et al., 2016), nfvPPA (Gorno-Tempini et
al., 2004; Schroeter et al., 2007; Santos-Santos et al., 2016), PSP (Brenneis et al., 2004;
Lagarde et al., 2013; Piattella et al., 2015; Dutt et al., 2016; Whitwell, Höglinger, et al., 2017;
Whitwell et al., 2019) and CBS (Josephs et al., 2010; Whitwell et al., 2010; Dutt et al., 2016).
However, these previous methods are limited by the categorical approach to diagnosis. In order
to reveal the associations between phenotypic features and structural change, across diagnostic
groups, we used source based morphometry to identify regions of covarying atrophy patterns
(Xu et al., 2009). We confirmed our hypothesis that individual atrophy patterns are not
confined to specific diagnostic groups. Our imaging cohort was generally representative of the
whole FTLD population, with similar weightings across five out of six dimensions and
demographics. Participants who underwent MRI were less affected in the global cognitive
impairment syndrome dimension, likely due to the practical difficulties of scanning participants
with advanced dementia. Frontal lobe atrophy patterns were seen in participants from all
groups, especially bvFTD and PSP. Subcortical atrophy was more prevalent in PSP and CBS
but was also seen in bvFTD and PPA, and a majority of bvFTD patients had negative scores
on the basal ganglia imaging component. This has been noted previously in symptomatic
bvFTD and PPA (Schroeter et al., 2007; Bocchetta et al., 2018), and those at genetic risk of
FTD (Rohrer et al., 2015). Brainstem atrophy, while characteristic of PSP (Whitwell,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Höglinger, et al., 2017), was also seen in some patients with CBS and nfvPPA, but this has
previously been shown not to predict PSP pathology (Whitwell et al., 2013). The source based
morphometry approach also revealed a group of patients who are not well accommodated in
the current diagnostic criteria. Five patients with a nominal diagnosis of bvFTD had very low
scores on the right temporal lobe imaging component, and we suggest that these might better
be called the right variant of semantic dementia, which causes a combination of behavioural
and semantic impairments with prosopagnosia (Chan et al., 2009; Kumfor et al., 2016). A
subset of patients with CBS and mixed PPA had negative scores on component 8, indicating
posterior cortical atrophy. These patients may be more likely to have Alzheimer’s Disease
pathology (Lee et al., 2011).
We identified three significant canonical “structure-function” correlations in the cohort (Figure
6). These represent the spectrums of anatomical change underlying behavioural, motor and
language impairments. These structure-function correlations did not replicate classical
nosological distinctions. Instead they provide an alternative data-driven approach with which
to understand and target treatments for syndromes associated with FTLD. The first canonical
correlation found an association between motor cortex and brainstem atrophy with PSP or
CBS-like motor impairments. Unsurprisingly, PSP and CBS had significant correlations
between these canonical covariates but so did bvFTD and nfvPPA, reflecting the motor
impairments that are seen in a subgroup of these patients. The second canonical correlation
represented the spectrum between frontotemporal (positive scores) and posterior cortical
atrophy (negative scores). This canonical covariate may differentiate FTLD from Alzheimer’s
disease pathology, as negative scores on this imaging covariate resemble an AD-like atrophy
pattern. The third canonical covariate was associated with significant correlations in all FTLD
subgroups apart from bvFTD, and encompassed a range of cognitive, behaviour and motor
clinical features associated with cortical and subcortical atrophy.
Longitudinal analysis in a subset of patients confirmed that, with disease progression, overlap
between FTLD phenotypes increases (Kertesz et al., 2005). A greater number of patients met
criteria for several FTLD subtypes compared to first assessment and there was greater overlap
between all syndrome dimensions (Figure 7). Our transdiagnostic approach allows disease
progression to be more accurately represented, in terms of worsening clinical features rather
than conflicting diagnoses. Assessing FTLD syndromes in isolation, without reference to the
whole FTLD syndrome spectrum, risks missing evolving signs of other FTLD syndromes and
therefore underestimating disease severity. The time between the two phenotypic assessments

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

was relatively long (mean 3.6 years) given the mean survival in FTLD syndromes (CoyleGilchrist et al., 2016); therefore these results may be biased towards patients with more slowly
progressive disease.
A strength of our analysis is that it is embedded within an epidemiological cohort study.
Previous structure-function studies of these disorders may have been influenced by low sample
sizes and selection bias, by focussing only on patients at earlier disease stages who are well
enough to attend subspecialist research centres for detailed phenotypic assessment. The
representativeness in our study may partly explain why many of our patients lay across
diagnostic criteria. However, our study also has several limitations. Applying multiple
diagnostic criteria across all patients raises challenges. For example, the criteria can include
an exclusion clause, that the illness is not better explained by another diagnosis. We lifted this
criterion and applied the clinical features to the other positive and negative criteria. Patients
may have symptoms or signs that do not quite reach threshold needed to meet a diagnostic
criterion. Our approach was to try to apply the same threshold in all groups, in asserting the
presence of a symptom or sign. Our assessment of clinical features was also cross sectional,
rather than a retrospective estimate of presenting features. Some of the diagnostic criteria (e.g.
for PPA (Gorno-Tempini et al., 2011)) refer to the dominance of a symptom cluster (eg
language disorder) at presentation. This sounds straightforward, but the time of presentation
varies widely, is often late (Coyle-Gilchrist et al., 2016), and is partially dependent on
variations in healthcare services, referral pathways and public awareness of symptoms’
significance (Bradford et al., 2009). These factors interfere with the ability of symptomatology
to inform the diagnosis and likely pathology, especially in overlap syndromes such as CBSNAV, or PSP-F. This transdiagnostic approach to FTLD may not be appropriate in all
situations, for example trials of treatments targeting at a specific proteinopathy. Currently there
are no robust biomarkers that can differentiate between, for example FTLD-tau and FTLDTDP43 (Bevan-Jones et al., 2017; Meeter et al., 2017), and current trials focus recruitment on
subsets of patients with strong clinicopathological correlation like PSP-RS (Boxer et al.,
2019). However, this limits patient access to drug trials, given the poor clinicopathological
correlation in the majority of FTLD syndromes. Emergence of more accurate biomarkers,
whether PET, CSF or blood based (Meeter et al., 2017; Leuzy et al., 2019), may allow a more
transdiagnostic approach. This would facilitate accurate drug targeting while maximising
power and generalisability of results.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Research related to disease nosology often raises the issue of whether to ‘lump’ disorders
together or to ‘split’ them into subtypes (Scaravilli et al., 2005). There may be occasions where
the decision to lump or split aids insight into the neurobiology of disease. But, lumping and
splitting can also obscure insights. We propose an alternative approach, with data-driven
spectral analyses, that neither lump nor split arbitrarily, but allow phenotypic and imaging
variance to elucidate pathogenesis of cognitive syndromes. We acknowledge however that our
brain metrics are only crude measures of atrophy. Other brain measures, of tau burden
(Passamonti et al., 2017; Whitwell, Lowe, et al., 2017; Bevan-Jones et al., 2019), synaptic
density (M. K. Chen et al., 2018), physiology (Hughes et al., 2018; Sami et al., 2018) and
functional connectivity (Seeley et al., 2009; Rittman et al., 2019) may enrich the source based
morphometric approach, integrating PET markers of pathology (Passamonti et al., 2019) or
spectroscopic measures of the neurotransmitter deficits in FTLD (Kantarci et al., 2010; Murley
and Rowe, 2018). Genetic information could further inform the multivariate analysis of
phenotype, mindful that while bvFTD has a strong genetic component, svPPA and PSP do not
(Rohrer et al., 2009). An additional limitation is the potential for multiple pathologies, in which
several pathogenic protein inclusions may co-exist and be synergistic in neurodegeneration
(Robinson et al., 2018).
In conclusion, we have presented evidence from a transdiagnostic, data-driven approach to the
clinical and structural phenotypes in syndromes associated with FTLD. Patient categorisation
and selection should depend on the study or question of interest (Husain, 2017; Coulthard and
Love, 2018), but for understanding the origin of symptoms, designing symptomatic treatment,
and assessment of diagnostic biomarkers, we suggest that the more relevant outcomes are the
data-driven axes of disease. Clinical heterogeneity and phenotypic variance are ‘noise’ in
category-based analysis of disease and treatment effects and undermine the observation of
effects. However, the same variance can be informative in terms of a spectrum of structurefunction abnormality, complementing data-driven approaches to order neurodegenerative
disease using neuropathological features (Cornblath et al., 2019). The adoption of such a datadriven approach provides a comprehensive framework with which to understand disease
progression and heterogeneity.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the patients and their families and carers, the radiographers at the
Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre, University of Cambridge and all the staff at the Cambridge
Centre for Frontotemporal Dementia and Related Disorders, University of Cambridge.

Funding
This work was funded by the Holt Fellowship (AGM), British Academy (KAT, PF160048),
Wellcome Trust (JBR, 103838), the PSP Association, the Medical Research Council, the
National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre and
Cambridge Brain Bank; and the Cambridge Centre for Parkinson Plus.

Competing Interests
JBR serves as an associate editor to Brain, and is a non-remunerated trustee of the Guarantors
of Brain and the PSP Association (UK). He provides consultancy to Asceneuron, Biogen,
UCB and has research grants from AZ-Medimmune, Janssen, Lilly as industry partners in the
Dementias Platform UK.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

References
Alexander SK, Rittman T, Xuereb JH, Bak TH, Hodges JR, Rowe JB. Validation of the new
consensus criteria for the diagnosis of corticobasal degeneration. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry
2014; 85: 925–929.
Armstrong MJ, Litvan I, Lang AE, Bak TH, Bhatia KP, Borroni B, et al. Criteria for the diagnosis of
corticobasal degeneration. Neurology 2013; 80: 496–503.
Bensimon G, Ludolph A, Agid Y, Vidailhet M, Payan C, Leigh PN. Riluzole treatment, survival and
diagnostic criteria in Parkinson plus disorders: The NNIPPS Study. Brain 2009; 132: 156–171.
Bevan-Jones WR, Cope TE, Jones PS, Passamonti L, Hong YT, Fryer TD, et al. [18F]AV-1451
binding in vivo mirrors the expected distribution of TDP-43 pathology in the semantic variant of
primary progressive aphasia. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 2017: jnnp-2017-316402.
Bevan-Jones WR, Cope TE, Jones PS, Passamonti L, Hong YT, Fryer TD, et al. Neuroinflammation
and protein aggregation co-localize across the frontotemporal dementia spectrum. Running title:
Neuroinflammation in FTD Authors: bioRxiv 2019
Bocchetta M, Gordon E, Cardoso MJ, Modat M, Ourselin S, Warren JD, et al. Thalamic atrophy in
frontotemporal dementia — Not just a C9orf72 problem. NeuroImage Clin. 2018; 18: 675–681.
Boxer AL, Qureshi I, Ahlijanian M, Grundman M, Golbe LI, Litvan I, et al. Safety of the tau-directed
monoclonal antibody BIIB092 in progressive supranuclear palsy: a randomised, placebo-controlled,
multiple ascending dose phase 1b trial. Lancet Neurol. 2019; 18: 549–558.
Bradford A, Kunik ME, Schulz P, Williams SP, Singh H. Missed and Delayed Diagnosis of Dementia
in Primary Care. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 2009; 23: 306–314.
Brenneis C, Seppi K, Schocke M, Benke T, Wenning GK, Poewe W. Voxel based morphometry
reveals a distinct pattern of frontal atrophy in progressive supranuclear palsy. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 2004; 75: 246–9.
Burrell JR, Hodges JR, Rowe JB. Cognition in corticobasal syndrome and progressive supranuclear
palsy: A review. Mov. Disord. 2014; 29: 684–693.
Butler RA, Ralph MAL, Woollams AM. Capturing multidimensionality in stroke aphasia: mapping
principal behavioural components to neural structures. Brain 2014; 137: 3248–3266.
Chan D, Anderson V, Pijnenburg Y, Whitwell J, Barnes J, Scahill R, et al. The clinical profile of right
temporal lobe atrophy. Brain 2009; 132: 1287–1298.
Chen MK, Mecca AP, Naganawa M, Finnema SJ, Toyonaga T, Lin SF, et al. Assessing Synaptic

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Density in Alzheimer Disease with Synaptic Vesicle Glycoprotein 2A Positron Emission
Tomographic Imaging. JAMA Neurol. 2018; 75: 1215–1224.
Chen Y, Kumfor F, Landin-Romero R, Irish M, Hodges JR, Piguet O. Cerebellar atrophy and its
contribution to cognition in frontotemporal dementias. Ann. Neurol. 2018; 84: 98–109.
Cordato NJ, Duggins AJ, Halliday GM, Morris JGL, Pantelis C, Melbourne R, et al. Clinical deficits
correlate with regional cerebral atrophy in progressive supranuclear palsy. Brain 2005; 128: 1259–
1266.
Cornblath EJ, Robinson JL, Lee VM-Y, Trojanowski JQ, Bassett DS. Defining and predicting
transdiagnostic categories of neurodegenerative disease. bioRxiv 2019; 25: 664250.
Coulthard EJ, Love S. A broader view of dementia: multiple co-pathologies are the norm. Brain 2018;
141: 1894–1897.
Coyle-Gilchrist ITS, Dick KM, Patterson K, Rodríquez PV, Wehmann E, Wilcox A, et al. Prevalence,
characteristics, and survival of frontotemporal lobar degeneration syndromes. Neurology 2016; 86:
1736–1743.
Dutt S, Binney RJ, Heuer HW, Luong P, Attygalle S, Bhatt P, et al. Progression of brain atrophy in
PSP and CBS over 6 months and 1 year. Neurology 2016; 87: 2016–2025.
Folch-Fortuny A, Arteaga F, Ferrer A. Missing Data Imputation Toolbox for MATLAB. Chemom.
Intell. Lab. Syst. 2016; 154: 93–100.
Gazzina S, Respondek G, Compta Y, Allinson KS, Spillantini MG, Molina-Porcel L, et al.
Neuropathological validation of the MDS-PSP criteria with PSP and other frontotemporal lobar
degeneration. bioRxiv 2019: 520510.
Gerstenecker A, Duff K, Mast B, Litvan I. Behavioral abnormalities in progressive supranuclear
palsy. Psychiatry Res. 2013; 210: 1205–1210.
Ghosh BCP, Calder AJ, Peers P V., Lawrence AD, Acosta-Cabronero J, Pereira JM, et al. Social
cognitive deficits and their neural correlates in progressive supranuclear palsy. Brain 2012; 135:
2089–2102.
Gorno-Tempini M, Dronkers NF, Rankin KP, Ogar JM, Phengrasamy L, Rosen HJ, et al. Cognition
and anatomy in three variants of primary progressive aphasia. Ann. Neurol. 2004; 55: 335–346.
Gorno-Tempini ML, Hillis AE, Weintraub S, Kertesz A, Mendez M, Cappa SF, et al. Classification of
primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology 2011; 76: 1006–1014.
Grimm M, Respondek G, Stamelou M, Arzberger T, Ferguson L, Gelpi E, et al. How to apply the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

movement disorder society criteria for diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy. Mov. Disord.
2019; 34: 1228–1232.
Grisanzio KA, Goldstein-Piekarski AN, Wang MY, Ahmed APR, Samara Z, Williams LM.
Transdiagnostic symptom clusters and associations with brain, behavior, and daily function in mood,
anxiety, and trauma disorders. JAMA Psychiatry 2018; 75: 201–209.
Halai AD, Woollams AM, Lambon Ralph MA. Using principal component analysis to capture
individual differences within a unified neuropsychological model of chronic post-stroke aphasia:
Revealing the unique neural correlates of speech fluency, phonology and semantics. Cortex 2017; 86:
275–289.
Hardy CJD, Buckley AH, Downey LE, Lehmann M, Zimmerer VC, Varley RA, et al. The language
profile of behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 2015; 50: 359–371.
Harris JM, Jones M, Gall C, Richardson AMT, Neary D, Du Plessis D, et al. Co-Occurrence of
Language and Behavioural Change in Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn.
Dis. Extra 2016; 6: 205–213.
Himberg J, Hyvärinen A. ICASSO: Software for investigating the reliability of ICA estimates by
clustering and visualization. Neural Networks Signal Process. - Proc. IEEE Work. 2003; 2003-Janua:
259–268.
Höglinger GU, Respondek G, Stamelou M, Kurz C, Josephs KA, Lang AE, et al. Clinical Diagnosis
of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy - The Movement Disorder Society Criteria. Mov. Disord. 2017; 00:
1–12.
Huey ED, Goveia EN, Paviol S, Pardini M, Krueger F, Zamboni G, et al. Executive dysfunction in
frontotemporal dementia and corticobasal syndrome. Neurology 2009; 72: 453–459.
Hughes LE, Rittman T, Robbins TW, Rowe JB. Reorganization of cortical oscillatory dynamics
underlying disinhibition in frontotemporal dementia. Brain 2018; 141: 2486–2499.
Husain M. Transdiagnostic neurology: neuropsychiatric symptoms in neurodegenerative diseases.
Brain 2017; 140: 1535–1536.
Illán-Gala I, Montal V, Borrego-Écija S, Vilaplana E, Pegueroles J, Alcolea D, et al. Cortical
microstructure in the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia: Looking beyond atrophy. Brain
2019; 142: 1121–1133.
Irwin DJ, Cairns NJ, Grossman M, McMillan CT, Lee EB, Van Deerlin VM, et al. Frontotemporal
lobar degeneration: defining phenotypic diversity through personalized medicine. Acta Neuropathol.
2015; 129: 469–491.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Josephs KA, Duffy JR, Strand EA, Jennifer L, Layton KF, Parisi JE, et al. Clinicopathological and
imaging correlates of progressive aphasia and apraxia of speech. Brain 2006; 129: 1385–1398.
Josephs KA, Duffy JR, Strand EA, MacHulda MM, Senjem ML, Master A V., et al. Characterizing a
neurodegenerative syndrome: Primary progressive apraxia of speech. Brain 2012; 135: 1522–1536.
Josephs KA, Whitwell JL, Boeve BF, Knopman DS, Petersen RC, Hu WT, et al. Anatomical
differences between CBS-corticobasal degeneration and CBS-Alzheimer’s disease. Mov. Disord.
2010; 25: 1246–1252.
Kantarci K, Boeve BF, Wszolek ZK, Rademakers R, Whitwell JL, Baker MC, et al. MRS in
presymptomatic MAPT mutation carriers: A potential biomarker for tau-mediated pathology.
Neurology 2010; 75: 771–778.
Kertesz A, Davidson W, Munoz DG. Clinical and pathological overlap between frontotemporal
dementia, primary progressive aphasia and corticobasal degeneration: the Pick complex. Dement
Geriatr Cogn Disord 1999; 10 Suppl 1: 46–49.
Kertesz A, McMonagle P, Blair M, Davidson W, Munoz DG. The evolution and pathology of
frontotemporal dementia. Brain 2005; 128: 1996–2005.
Kozak MJ, Cuthbert BN. The NIMH Research Domain Criteria Initiative: Background, Issues and
Pragmatics. Psychophysiology 2016; 53: 286–297.
Kumfor F, Landin-Romero R, Devenney E, Hutchings R, Grasso R, Hodges JR, et al. On the right
side? A longitudinal study of left-versus right-lateralized semantic dementia. Brain 2016; 139: 986–
998.
Lagarde J, Valabrègue R, Corvol JC, Pineau F, Le Ber I, Vidailhet M, et al. Are frontal cognitive and
atrophy patterns different in PSP and bvFTD? A comparative neuropsychological and VBM study.
PLoS One 2013; 8: 1–10.
Lambon Ralph MA, Patterson K, Graham N, Dawson K, Hodges JR. Homogeneity and heterogeneity
in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: A cross-sectional and longitudinal study of 55
cases. Brain 2003; 126: 2350–2362.
Lansdall CJ, Coyle-Gilchrist IT, Jones PS, Rodriguez PV, Wilcox A, Wehmann E, et al. Apathy and
impulsivity in frontotemporal lobar degeneration syndromes. Brain 2017; 140
Lee SE, Rabinovici GD, Mayo MC, Wilson SM, Seeley WW, Dearmond SJ, et al. Clinicopathological
correlations in corticobasal degeneration. Ann. Neurol. 2011; 70: 327–340.
Leuzy A, Chiotis K, Lemoine L, Gillberg PG, Almkvist O, Rodriguez-Vieitez E, et al. Tau PET
imaging in neurodegenerative tauopathies—still a challenge. Mol. Psychiatry 2019: 1112–1134.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

MacKenzie IRA, Neumann M, Bigio EH, Cairns NJ, Alafuzoff I, Kril J, et al. Nomenclature and
nosology for neuropathologic subtypes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: An update. Acta
Neuropathol. 2010; 119: 1–4.
Meeter LH, Kaat LD, Rohrer JD, Van Swieten JC. Imaging and fluid biomarkers in frontotemporal
dementia. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 2017; 13: 406–419.
Mioshi E, Dawson K, Mitchell J, Arnold R, Hodges JR. The Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination
Revised (ACE-R): a brief cognitive test battery for dementia screening. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry
2006; 21: 1078–1085.
Mirman D, Chen Q, Zhang Y, Wang Z, Faseyitan OK, Coslett HB, et al. Neural organization of
spoken language revealed by lesion-symptom mapping. Nat. Commun. 2015; 6
Murley AG, Rowe JB. Neurotransmitter deficits from frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Brain 2018
O’Connor C, Landin-Romero R, Clemson L, Kaizik C, Daveson N, Hodges J, et al. Behavioralvariant frontotemporal dementia: Distinct phenotypes with unique functional profiles. Neurology
2017; 0
O’Connor CM, Clemson L, Hornberger M, Leyton CE, Hodges JR, Piguet O, et al. Longitudinal
change in everyday function and behavioral symptoms in frontotemporal dementia. Neurol. Clin.
Pract. 2016; 6: 419–428.
O’Keeffe FM, Murray B, Coen RF, Dockree PM, Bellgrove MA, Garavan H, et al. Loss of insight in
frontotemporal dementia, corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy. Brain 2007;
130: 753–764.
Park HK, Park KHKW, Yoon B, Lee JH, Choi SH, Joung JH, et al. Clinical characteristics of
parkinsonism in frontotemporal dementia according to subtypes. J. Neurol. Sci. 2017; 372: 51–56.
Passamonti L, Tsvetanov KA, Jones PS, Bevan-Jones WR, Arnold R, Borchert RJ, et al.
Neuroinflammation and functional connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease: interactive influences on
cognitive performance. J. Neurosci. 2019; 39: 2574–18.
Passamonti L, Vázquez Rodríguez P, Hong YT, Allinson KSJ, Williamson D, Borchert RJ, et al. 18FAV-1451 positron emission tomography in Alzheimer’s disease and progressive supranuclear palsy.
Brain 2017; 140: 781–791.
Perry DC, Brown JA, Possin KL, Datta S, Trujillo A, Radke A, et al. Clinicopathological correlations
in behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia. Brain 2017; 140: 3329–3345.
Peterson KA, Patterson K, Rowe JB. Language Impairment in Progressive Supranuclear Palsy and
Corticobasal Syndrome. J. Neurol. 2019; 14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Piattella MC, Upadhyay N, Bologna M, Sbardella E, Tona F, Formica A, et al. Neuroimaging
evidence of gray and white matter damage and clinical correlates in progressive supranuclear palsy. J.
Neurol. 2015; 262: 1850–1858.
Ranasinghe K G, Rankin KP, Lobach I V, Kramer JH, Sturm VE, Bettcher BM, et al. Cognition and
neuropsychiatry in behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia by disease stage. Neurology 2016; 86:
600–610.
Ranasinghe Kamalini G., Rankin KP, Pressman PS, Perry DC, Lobach I V., Seeley WW, et al.
Distinct subtypes of behavioral-variant frontotemporal dementia based on patterns of network
degeneration. JAMA Neurol. 2016; 73: 1078–1088.
Rascovsky K, Hodges JR, Kipps CM, Johnson JK, Seeley WW, Mendez MF, et al. Diagnostic criteria
for the behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD): current limitations and future
directions. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 2007; 21: S14-8.
Rascovsky K, Hodges JR, Knopman D, Mendez MF, Kramer JH, Neuhaus J, et al. Sensitivity of
revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia. Brain 2011; 134:
2456–2477.
Respondek G, Höglinger GU. The phenotypic spectrum of progressive supranuclear palsy. Park.
Relat. Disord. 2016; 22: S34–S36.
Respondek G, Stamelou M, Kurz C, Ferguson LW, Rajput A, Chiu WZ, et al. The phenotypic
spectrum of progressive supranuclear palsy: A retrospective multicenter study of 100 definite cases.
Mov. Disord. 2014; 29: 1758–1766.
Rittman T, Borchert R, Jones S, van Swieten J, Borroni B, Galimberti D, et al. Functional network
resilience to pathology in presymptomatic genetic frontotemporal dementia. Neurobiol. Aging 2019;
77: 169–177.
Robinson JL, Lee EB, Xie SX, Rennert L, Suh E, Bredenberg C, et al. Neurodegenerative disease
concomitant proteinopathies are prevalent, age-related and APOE4-associated. Brain 2018; 141:
2181–2193.
Rohrer J, Rossor M, Warren J. Apraxia in progressive nonfluent aphasia. J. Neurol. 2010; 257: 569–
574.
Rohrer JD, Guerreiro R, Vandrovcova J, Uphill J, Reiman D, Beck J, et al. The heritability and
genetics of frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Neurology 2009; 73: 1451–1456.
Rohrer JD, Lashley T, Schott JM, Warren JE, Mead S, Isaacs AM, et al. Clinical and neuroanatomical
signatures of tissue pathology in frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Brain 2011; 134: 2565–2581.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Rohrer JD, Nicholas JM, Cash DM, van Swieten J, Dopper E, Jiskoot L, et al. Presymptomatic
cognitive and neuroanatomical changes in genetic frontotemporal dementia in the Genetic
Frontotemporal dementia Initiative (GENFI) study: A cross-sectional analysis. Lancet Neurol. 2015;
14: 253–262.
Rohrer JD, Warren JD. Phenomenology and anatomy of abnormal behaviours in primary progressive
aphasia. J. Neurol. Sci. 2010; 293: 35–38.
Rohrer JDJ, Paviour D, Bronstein AAM, O’Sullivan SS, Lees A, Warren JD, et al. Progressive
supranuclear palsy syndrome presenting as progressive nonfluent aphasia: A neuropsychological and
neuroimaging analysis. Mov. Disord. 2010; 25: 179–188.
Rosen HJ, Allison SC, Ogar JM, Amici S, Rose K, Dronkers N, et al. Behavioral features in semantic
dementia vs other forms of progressive aphasias. Neurology 2006; 67: 1752–1756.
Sajjadi SA, Patterson K, Arnold RJ, Watson PC, Nestor PJ. Primary progressive aphasia. Neurology
2012; 78: 1670 LP – 1677.
Sami S, Williams N, Hughes LE, Cope TE, Rittman T, Coyle-Gilchrist ITS, et al. Neurophysiological
signatures of Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration: Pathology versus
phenotype. Brain 2018; 141: 2500–2510.
Santos-Santos MA, Mandelli ML, Binney RJ, Ogar J, Wilson SM, Henry ML, et al. Features of
patients with nonfluent/agrammatic primary progressive aphasia with underlying progressive
supranuclear palsy pathology or corticobasal degeneration. JAMA Neurol. 2016; 73: 733–742.
Scaravilli T, Tolosa E, Ferrer I. Progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration:
Lumping versus splitting. Mov. Disord. 2005; 20
Schroeter ML, Raczka K, Neumann J, Yves von Cramon D. Towards a nosology for frontotemporal
lobar degenerations-A meta-analysis involving 267 subjects. Neuroimage 2007; 36: 497–510.
Schumacher R, Halai AD, Lambon Ralph MA. Assessing and mapping language, attention and
executive multidimensional deficits in stroke aphasia. Brain 2019; 142: 3202–3216.
Seeley WW, Crawford RK, Zhou J, Miller BL, Greicius MD. Neurodegenerative Diseases Target
Large-Scale Human Brain Networks. Neuron 2009; 62: 42–52.
Shepard RN. Multidimensional scaling, tree-fitting, and clustering. Science (80-. ). 1980; 210: 390–
398.
Snowden JS, Kobylecki C, Jones M, Thompson JC, Richardson AM, Mann DMA. Association
between semantic dementia and progressive supranuclear palsy. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry
2019; 90: 115–117.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012260; this version posted November 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Spinelli EG, Mandelli ML, Miller ZA, Santos-Santos MA, Wilson SM, Agosta F, et al. Typical and
atypical pathology in primary progressive aphasia variants. Ann. Neurol. 2017; 81: 430–443.
Tsvetanov KA, Ye Z, Hughes L, Samu D, Treder MS, Wolpe N, et al. Activity and connectivity
differences underlying inhibitory control across the adult life span. J. Neurosci. 2018; 38: 7887–7900.
Utianski RL, Botha H, Martin PR, Schwarz CG, Duffy JR, Clark HM, et al. Clinical and
neuroimaging characteristics of clinically unclassifiable primary progressive aphasia. Brain Lang.
2019; 197: 104676.
Wear HJ, Wedderburn CJ, Mioshi E, Williams-Gray CH, Mason SL, Barker R a, et al. The
Cambridge Behavioural Inventory revised. Dement. Neuropsychol. 2008; 2: 102–107.
Whitwell JL, Höglinger GU, Antonini A, Bordelon Y, Boxer AL, Colosimo C, et al. Radiological
biomarkers for diagnosis in PSP: Where are we and where do we need to be? Mov. Disord. 2017; 32:
955–971.
Whitwell JL, Jack CR, Boeve BF, Parisi JE, Ahlskog JE, Drubach DA, et al. Imaging correlates of
pathology in corticobasal syndrome. Neurology 2010; 75: 1879–1887.
Whitwell JL, Jack CR, Parisi JE, Gunter JL, Weigand SD, Boeve BF, et al. Midbrain atrophy is not a
biomarker of progressive supranuclear palsy pathology. Eur. J. Neurol. 2013; 20: 1417–1422.
Whitwell JL, Lowe VJ, Tosakulwong N, Weigand SD, Senjem ML, Schwarz CG, et al. [18F]AV1451 tau positron emission tomography in progressive supranuclear palsy. Mov. Disord. 2017; 32:
124–133.
Whitwell JL, Tosakulwong N, Schwarz CG, Botha H, Senjem ML, Spychalla AJ, et al. MRI
Outperforms [18F]AV-1451 PET as a Longitudinal Biomarker in Progressive Supranuclear Palsy.
Mov. Disord. 2019; 34: 105–113.
Whitwell JL, Weigand SD, Boeve BF, Senjem ML, Gunter JL, Dejesus-Hernandez M, et al.
Neuroimaging signatures of frontotemporal dementia genetics: C9ORF72, tau, progranulin and
sporadics. Brain 2012; 135: 794–806.
Xu L, Groth KM, Pearlson G, Schretlen DJ, Calhoun VD. Source-based morphometry: the use of
independent component analysis to identify gray matter differences with application to schizophrenia.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 2009; 30: 711–724.

