medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A novel methodology to measure waiting times for community-based
specialist care in a public healthcare system
Dr Rachel Wilf Mirona,g, Dr Ilya Novikovb, Arnona Zivc, Prof Avishai
Mandelbaumd, Prof Yaacov Ritove, Dr Osnat Luxenburgf

a

Health Technology Assessment Unit, Gertner Institute for Epidemiology and Health
Policy Research, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, 52621, Israel
b
Biostatistics & Biomathematics Unit, Gertner Institute for Epidemiology and Health
Policy Research, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, 52621, Israel
IliaN@gertner.health.gov.il
c
Information & Computerization Unit, Gertner Institute for Epidemiology and Health
Policy Research, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, 52621, Israel
arnonaz@gertner.health.gov.il
d
Faculty of Industrial Engineering & Management, Technion, Haifa, Israel
avishaimandelbaum51@gmail.com
e
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, USA yaacov.ritov@gmail.com
f
Medical Technology, Health Information and Research Directorate, Ministry of
Health, Jerusalem, Israel osnat.luxenburg@moh.gov.il
g
Department of Health Promotion, School of Public Health, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
Corresponding author: Rachel Wilf Miron, Gertner Institute for Epidemiology and
Health Policy Research, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, 52621, Israel, +972
508800131 r.w.miron@gmail.com

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Background
Monitoring of waiting time (WT) in healthcare systems is essential, since long WT
are associated with adverse health outcomes, reduced patient satisfaction and
increased private financing.
Objective
To develop a methodology for routine national monitoring of WT for communitybased non-urgent specialist appointments, in a public healthcare system.
Design: Observational historical study using data from computerized appointment
scheduling systems of all Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) in Israel.
Data sources: Data included available appointments for community-based specialists
and actual number of visits.
The first 50 available appointments from each specialist appointment book were
collected throughout December 2018. Five most frequently visited specialties orthopedics, ophthalmology, gynecology, dermatology and otolaryngology - were
included.
Data collection/extraction approach: WT offered to HMO members (OWT) were
calculated for two scenarios: "specific" physician and “any" physician in the clinic's
geographical region. Distribution of OWT was calculated separately for each
specialty and geographical region, combined to create the nationwide distribution, and
expressed as mean, standard deviation and percentiles.
Principal findings

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Estimated national median OWT for "specific" physician, ranged from 6 days
(ophthalmology) to 13 days (dermatology), with large variation between geographic
regions. OWT for "any" physician were 28-50% shorter than for "specific" physician.
Conclusions
This novel method offers a solution for ongoing national WT measurement, using
computerized scheduling systems. It integrates patient preferences for physician
choice and allows identification of differences between specialties and regions, setting
the ground for interventions to strengthen public healthcare systems.

Key words: public healthcare system, waiting time, computerized appointment
scheduling systems, Health Maintenance Organizations, physician, specialist

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
In 2001, the Institute of Medicine report identified timeliness as one of the
fundamental properties of high quality healthcare.[1] The amount of time that a
patient needs to wait for a clinician appointment or a treatment, is a key indicator of
overall system performance. However, timeliness is still the least studied and least
understood dimensions of quality care.[2]
Long waiting times (WT) may negatively affect health outcomes [3, 4] and patient
experience with clinical care, including perceived quality of care.[5] Canadian
patients waiting for a consultation with a medical specialist for a new medical
condition reported worry, stress, anxiety, deterioration of health and loss of work.[6]
Longer WT in publicly-funded health systems could increase purchase of private
insurance [7] and increase the national health expenditure.
Controlling WT is a major policy concern in publicly funded health systems across
OECD countries. The majority of OECD countries monitor and publish national WT
statistics and have some form of WT guarantee or target of maximal WT [8]. Most
countries measure WT for elective procedures, based on administrative data.[9] In
Canada, WT for visits to specialists and for diagnostic and surgical procedures are
measured by physician surveys. These surveys measure and report two consecutive
WT segments: From referral by a general practitioner to consultation with a specialist,
and from the consultation with a specialist to the point at which the patient receives
treatment.[10] In the USA, WT for primary and specialist care is measured by "secret
shoppers" who describe a non-urgent clinical scenario and ask for the first available
appointment.[11] The Veteran Affairs (VA) health administration measures and
publicly reports WT across primary and specialty care. WT is calculated as the

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

difference (in days) between the day the veteran requested an appointment and the
date of the appointment, representing actual WT in a retrospective approach.[12]
In Israel, a national health insurance system provides citizens with universal coverage
and guarantees all citizens the right to health services "at a reasonable time, distance
and quality".[13] Four competing Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) provide
their members with access to a statutory benefits package. Most specialized
ambulatory care is provided in community settings.[14] A "named" or chosen
physician is usually recommended by the HMOs and is also the preference of
members themselves. All Israeli HMOs have Computerized Appointment Scheduling
Systems (CASS). The proportion of physicians that utilize the CASS differs among
HMOs, geographical regions and medical specialties, averaging 85% (range 65% to
97%).
Long WTs for consultations and surgical procedures and progressive increase of
private financing were the focus of public concern in Israel in recent years: In a public
survey carried out in 2012, 28% of respondents reported waiting more than one month
for an appointment with a specialist, a period twice as long as the 2 weeks that Israeli
health consumers perceive as "acceptable".[15] Respondents with higher education or
those living in central Israel had a higher chance of visiting a community-based
specialist.[15] The above mentioned issues of access and equity were among the
reasons for creating the Advisory Committee for Strengthening the Public Health
System, headed by the Minister of Health. In 2014 the committee published its
recommendations, including the recommendation to develop a national measurement
system and to make this information available to the public, to set WT targets and use
financial incentives in order to encourage providers to achieve those targets.[16]
Between 2012 and 2018, the proportion of respondents who visited a specialist in the
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

public system and waited more than a month for their appointment, increased from
28% to 33%; one in three respondents reported seeing a specialist in the private
sector, with "desire to reduce WT" quoted as the leading reason for shifting from the
public to the private health system.[17]
However, attempts to develop national indices for WT have encountered challenges,
mainly due to different information technology (IT) systems, resulting in different
measurement approaches among the Israeli healthcare providers. At the time of the
study, one HMO had implemented retrospective measurement of WT, while the other
three HMOs measure the first or second available appointments offered to their
members, in a prospective approach.
In recent years, the issue of significant variation in access to specialist care among
specialties and between geographic areas, and its deleterious effects on equity and
efficiency, led the Ministry of Health (MOH) to accelerate efforts geared towards the
creation of a national WT measurement scheme.
Comparison of methodologies for measurement of WT demonstrates substantial
differences among countries. The measurement approach can be retrospective, like the
current system at the VA;[12] prospective, i.e. time to the first available appointment,
as in a survey of 15 US cities [11] or to the third available appointment, which is used
for example as an access measure at Cincinnati Children's Hospital;[18] or a
combined measure. New Zealand, for example, measures time to first specialist
appointment – in a prospective approach, as well as retrospective collection of patient
flow data.[19] Routine monitoring should be based on operational databases, which
are preferred over surveys. Retrospective measures permit estimation of Actual
Waiting Time (AWT) if databases include the time of the first attempt to set an

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

appointment and the time of the corresponding actual visit. Currently no Israeli
HMO's database includes all the necessary information. Distribution of WT to first,
third or fifth available appointment cannot represent the real distribution of the
corresponding WT offered by the HMOs to their members. The three first available
appointments may underestimate WT because of cancellations and other last minute
changes in appointment schedules. On the other hand, many physicians see less than
100 patients per month. For such physicians, in a steady state (i.e. supply equals
demand), no more than three patients on average look for an appointment each day,
therefore using fourth or fifth appointment would overestimate OWT. Such
considerations led us to develop a different approach, utilizing the exact number of
available appointments, representing the expected number of patients looking daily
for an available appointment, for each of the physicians.
The first step towards the establishment of a national OWT measurement was directed
towards community-based specialty care. It was decided to focus at the first stage on
the five most frequent specialties (orthopedics, ophthalmology, otolaryngology,
dermatology and obstetrics & gynecology) which comprise 66-70% of communitybased encounters with specialists [16, 17] and do not require a physician referral.
Information about available appointments for non-urgent care is available to HMO
members for self-scheduling on the internet sites or with the help of staff members at
designated Call Centers. Appointments for urgent health conditions are provided by
the HMOs in diverse ways and are not transparent to the public as available
appointments.
The study was designed to develop a methodology for national measurement of WT
for non-urgent community-based appointments with specialist physicians in the public
healthcare system.
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods
Design and setting
This is an observational historical study using administrative data from all four HMOs
in Israel, covering the whole population (except for those in active military service).
Institutional review board approval was not required since patient records were not
accessed, but rather routine data on next available appointments from HMOs was
used. After studying the existing measurement approaches and computerized
infrastructures of HMOs, it was decided to adopt a prospective approach based on the
HMO's computerized appointment scheduling systems (CASS) for regular, nonurgent care. All 6,040, community-based physician practices in the following
specialties - orthopedics, ophthalmology, obstetrics and gynecology, dermatology and
otolaryngology, were included.
A unified data structure was defined to guide data extraction from the HMO
operational systems. During 31 consecutive days in December 2018, the first 50
available appointments were extracted daily from the CASS of each physician
practice (a specialist can work in more than one practice, each with a separate
appointment schedule). This process produced a total of 1,017,478 available
appointments for analysis. Concomitantly, the number of actual patient visits at each
physician's practice during the same time period (31 days) was collected.
The measurement approach
A multidisciplinary team of experts in medicine, computer sciences, statistics,
mathematics, and queuing theory, participated in the methodological "journey". An
algorithm was developed, in order to measure WT for available appointments, offered
by HMOs to their members for non-urgent care (offered wait time; OWT). The
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

algorithm was designed for two distinct scenarios of patient preferences: a)
appointment with a "specific" or "named" physician – when the patient chooses a
physician and tries to schedule the first available appointment for the chosen
specialist, and b) appointment with "any" physician – when the patient tries to
schedule the first available appointment with any physician in a determined specialty
and a determined region. Since patients look for available appointments within a
reasonable distance from their place of residence, analysis was carried out both at
town level and at the wider level of "natural" area (the smallest official classification
of the country, consisting of 52 geographical areas).
The following assumptions were utilized to estimate the distribution of OWT: 1) A
"steady state” assumption which states that supply equals demand. In other words, the
number of actual visits that took place at a particular physician's practice in a given
period of time (supply) is equal to the number of patients who look for available
appointments for that physician in the same period of time (demand). Since we did
not have demand data, demand was estimated from supply. 2) The daily demand, or
the daily number of patients who look for available appointments at a specialist
practice, is identical for all the days in that period and is equal to the daily average of
actual number of visits that took place at this physician's practice in this period of
time. These assumptions are further examined in the discussion.

Development of the algorithm
The first 50 appointments available on each day of the study period ("execution date")
were collected from each of the 6,040 appointment schedules. The decision to collect
this number of the first available appointments was based on all the assumptions
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mentioned above and on the maximal number of patients admitted per day across 99.9
percent of all appointment books. On each execution date, WT for all available
appointments were calculated as the difference, in days, between the available
appointment date and the execution date. This first step of the algorithm is illustrated
in Figure 1. For convenience of the illustration, it presents only the first 10 available
appointments in one physician's practice appointment book, for 3 selected execution
dates in December 2018. The calculated results are presented for each available
appointment date in the book, for example: On 2nd December, WT to the first
available appointment (which is on 6th December) is 4 days, while WT to the sixth
available appointment, on 10th December, is 8 days.
Figure 1: Schematic representation of WT calculation for three selected execution
dates extracted from one physician practice appointment book.

The second step of the algorithm is to determine how many available appointments,
offered to HMO members, can be utilized in the OWT calculation.
For the "specific" physician scenario, the daily demand is calculated by dividing the
total number of actual visits of the physician by the number of days in the period
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(n=31). Under the steady state assumption (demand=supply), the number of the first
available appointments that should be utilized for the calculation from the physician's
appointment book each day (supply), is equal to the daily demand. For "any"
physician scenario, demand is calculated as the number of actual visits of all the
physicians of the selected specialty in the region, divided by the number of days in the
period (n=31). The supply, or the number of the first available appointments that
should be utilized, from all appointment books each day, in each geographical region
(supply), is equal to the above calculated demand. In both scenarios, calculation was
done separately for each specialty.
Figure 2 demonstrates the process of determining supply and demand sizes in OWT
calculation, in an illustrative region with two specialists. It is demonstrated for both
"specific" and "any" physician scenarios, on a single execution date (01/12/2018).
Figure 2: Scheme of supply and demand size determination, in "specific" vs "any"
physician scenario, on a single execution date (01/12/2018). The yellow and green
colors represent two illustrative physician practices ( no. 1 no. 2). Dark shades of
yellow and green represent the first available appointments equal to demand for each
physician; light shades refer to all other available appointments for that physician.

The yellow and green colors represent two illustrative physician practices.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The number of the first available appointments taken from each appointment book
was based on each physician's average daily demand. In the "specific" physician
scenario, the first five available appointments were extracted from the "yellow"
physician (no. 1) and the first three available appointments were extracted from the
"green" physician's (no. 2) appointment book. In the "any" physician scenario, the
number of the first available appointments that were utilized from appointment books
was based on the average daily demand of all physicians in the region: In the
illustration there are two physicians' practices in the region, and the average daily
demand for both physicians is eight. For this scenario only two of the soonest
available appointments were extracted from the "yellow" physician while six of the
soonest available appointments were extracted from the "green" physician's
appointment book.
The same process should be performed for each execution date. As seen in Figure 3,
in the "specific" physician scenario five available appointments were extracted from
the yellow physician and three were extracted from the green physician's appointment
book on each extraction date. In the "any" physician scenario the algorithm used eight
appointments on each extraction date, but different numbers of available
appointments were extracted from each physician's practice appointment book on
each date, considering the shortest waiting times that were calculated in the region.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3: Extraction of available appointments, according to demand, in a determined
specialty, region and period of time: "specific" vs "any" physician scenarios

The third phase of the algorithm is to calculate the distribution of OWT, expressed in
days, for all execution dates for each specialty and geographical region. The
histogram in Figure 4 demonstrates the distribution of OWT for an illustrative case of
two physician practices in a given region. As expected, the right tale is longer and
higher for "specific" physician than for "any" physician, since patients have to wait
for longer periods in the case of a chosen physician. In the "any" physician scenario,
more appointments are available sooner (shorter OWT), compared with specific
physician.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4: OWT histograms for a given specialty and region, in "any" vs. "specific"
physician scenarios

The last phase of the algorithm is to calculate OWT distribution for geographical
areas. In order to do so, OWT distributions of all "natural" areas, were summarized
both at the district and at the national level. Distributions at each geographic level
were used to calculate diverse statistical indices.

Results
1,017,478 available appointments were collected during December 2018 from all
computerized appointment books of 6,040 physician practices, covering five medical
specialties, from all Israeli HMOs.
At the national level, median OWT for "specific" physician scenario ranged from 6
and 7 days, in ophthalmology and otolaryngology respectively, to 13 days in
dermatology. Median OWT for "any" physician scenario ranged from 4 days, in
gynecology and ophthalmology, to 8 days in dermatology (Figure 5). Median OWT in

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the "any" physician scenario were between 28% (otolaryngology) to 50%
(gynecology) shorter compared to the "specific" physician scenario.
Figure 5: National level median OWT, by medical specialty: "specific" vs. "any"
physician scenario

Mean OWT at the national level for "specific" physician ranged from 13.3 days
(otolaryngology) to 21.7 days (obstetrics & gynecology). For "any" physician, mean
OWT ranged from 4.9 (gynecology) to 9.5 days (dermatology). As expected, mean
OWT are longer, compared with median OWT, since the mean takes into account a
"long tail" that includes appointments with experts in high demand, for whom patients
are willing to wait longer.
Israel is divided into 6 districts. Analysis of OWT by district demonstrated
considerable geographical variation, with longest waiting times in the Southern,
compared with the other districts, in 4 out of 5 specialties examined. For example,

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

median OWT for consultation with an ophthalmologist, was more than three times
longer in the Southern district, compared with Tel Aviv district (13.0 versus 4.0 days,
respectively). The 75th percentile of OWT for an ophthalmologist was 33 days in the
Southern district, compared with 11 days in Tel Aviv. In Be'er-Sheva, the "capital" of
the Southern district, the 75th percentile of OWT for a specific physician, was 55 days,
i.e. one in four consumers had to wait for more than 55 days to see an eye doctor for
non-urgent care. Analysis of OWT at all geographical levels, from national level to
city level, presents shorter OWT for "any" physician scenario than "specific"
physician scenario, across the board. For example, in the city of Haifa, median wait
for any physician was 3 days, (75th percentile of 4 days), and for a specific physician
was 4 days, (75th percentile of 11 days). Other cities showed greater differences such
as Jerusalem where the median wait for any physician was 3 days, compared to 8 days
for specific physician.

Discussion
This study presents the step-by-step development of a methodology that creates, for
the first time, the basis for a national measurement of offered wait time (OWT) for
community-based specialty care. The method is based on a common denominator that
utilizes the existing CASS of the four healthcare providers. It provides information of
great importance to patients, caregivers and policy makers, enabling transparency
within the healthcare system and providing the opportunity to improve access to care.
Long waiting times may reflect socioeconomic inequalities. Moscelli et al
demonstrated socioeconomic inequalities in WT for non-emergency coronary
revascularization in the British National Health Service, a publicly funded health
16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

system. Only a fraction of the inequalities were explained by patient choice.[20]
Siciliani and Verzulli found that more educated patients had lower waiting times for
specialist consultation and nonemergency surgery.[9] In Israel, the expected waiting
time for surgeries was longer for patients with more comorbidities and those in the
geographic periphery.[21] Long WT can also increase socioeconomic inequalities,
when the weakest segments of the population find it more difficult to find private or
other pathways to shorten WT.[22] In a representative survey carried out in Israel
during 2018, 32% of respondents belonging to the lower quintile of income reported
forgoing some kind of medical care during the year prior to the survey due to long
WT. [17]
Our study demonstrated considerable variations in OWT between geographic regions,
for example much longer OWT for consultation with an ophthalmologist in the
Southern district, compared with Tel Aviv district. These differences, along with the
difference in OWT across cities, highlight the issues of equity and the need for a
transparent reporting of these disparities to decision makers and the public.
The methodology presented in this study should be compared with existing WT
metrics that utilize a prospective approach. The approach of calculating WT based on
the first available appointment or the third next available appointment can cause bias,
since it is sensitive to last minute cancellation and other unexpected events. Both the
first or third available appointments might, therefore, under-estimate OWT. On the
other hand, fourth or fifth available appointment can over-estimate OWT, since less
than 4 patients were looking for available appointments each day in a third of the
physician practices in our study. Our approach uses all first available appointments
for each physician (supply), and utilizes for calculation an amount equal to the
average daily number of visits (demand). Since no physician had daily average
17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

demand greater than 50 appointments, it was deemed that this approach produced the
best estimation of real OWT distribution. The number of available appointments
introduced into the algorithm can be customized to different health systems.
When comparing OWT with AWT, two situations may act in opposing directions:
people do not necessarily choose the first available offered appointment (as calculated
in OWT measurement), and may prefer a delayed appointment, due to time
preferences, physician's requests, follow-up visits etc. This situation can lengthen
AWT compared with OWT. On the other hand, HMOs invest a lot of effort in order to
shorten long OWT by managing computerized waiting lists, sending automated
repeated reminders to confirm arrival or cancellation etc. These efforts can shorten
AWT compared with OWT. Measurement of OWT is important in its own right, most
accurately representing patients’ experience when trying to book a specialist
appointment, and should be one of the basic elements for measuring healthcare
systems’ performance.
Some assessments of waiting time rely on survey data, as has been previously
conducted in Israel and elsewhere.[11, 15, 17] Comparison of WT estimated by the
proposed methodology to WT reported by a consumer survey of a representative
Israeli sample that took place in parallel months,[17] yielded similar results. This
strengthens the contribution of the methodology presented in our study as a less
expensive, easier to use alternative, compared with consumer surveys for the
estimation of WT. While a well-organized survey may minimize biases in estimation
of OWT, a complete administrative database produces better accuracy, at lower costs.
Another contribution of the methodology is its ability to estimate WT for two
possible scenarios of physician choice - "specific" or "any" physician. Longer wait for

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

a chosen doctor might cause patients to prefer "any" doctor, thus seeing a different
doctor on each visit in order to reduce WT. There is a tradeoff between continuity of
care and waiting time. High continuity of care is typically associated with better
health outcomes but has also been associated with longer WT.[23] Few studies have
addressed this difference. Fyie et al [24] reported that patients selecting a particular
surgeon led to what they termed 'voluntary delays' in surgery or consultation, though
this type of delay was not tracked in the system. A Canadian patient satisfaction
survey reported that median wait time was longer for patients requesting a specific
physician compared to any physician.[25] However, to the best of our knowledge, the
ability to calculate waiting times, based on administrative data, separately for
"specific" versus "any" physician, is unique.
Although developed in a given setting of one nation's public healthcare system, the
methodology described here is very flexible and can be adapted to diverse settings.
When adapting the algorithm, each healthcare provider (or regulating authority) can
decide on the reasonable distance that a patient can travel for a specialist, and widen
or narrow the geographic units of reference, accordingly. The method can also be
adopted to measure OWT for consultation with physicians from other medical
specialties, as well as primary care; it can be used in public and private health
systems. Its core competencies are derived from its ease of using existing
administrative data, allowing ongoing monitoring at relatively low costs. Once the
physician scenario and number of first available appointments are set, it can serve for
ongoing monitoring of OWT at the local, regional and national levels. The complexity
of comparing waiting times between countries was demonstrated by Viberg et al,[8]
showing the considerable barriers caused by different measurement systems. The
authors called for "a more coherent approach to waiting time measurement". The
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

methodology developed here has succeeded in overcoming system differences
between HMOs to create a national measure, and may in the future lead the way for
standardization and comparison across nations.
The algorithm presented in this study bears several limitations: 1) The assumption that
the number of HMO enrollees seeking an available appointment is identical
throughout all days of a given month. This number, representing the actual average
daily demand, might change between weekdays and weekends, or be higher on the
first workday of the week, for instance. This assumption can be resolved, if the
information on volume by type of day is available, by calculating the average daily
demand by type of day (weekday, weekend, vacation) and accounting for the weekly
cycle and the effect of holidays;
2) In a steady state, demand equals supply, i.e. the number of HMO enrollees looking
for an appointment equals the number of actual visits to a specialist practice in a given
period of time. However, in the real world, there are two exceptions that should be
considered in estimating OWT. Some patients visit the physician without scheduling
an appointment ("walk-ins"). OWT for these patients is 0 days, because the physician
accepted them on the same day. Under the steady state assumption, we included these
visits in calculation of the demand, resulting in over-estimation of OWT. On the other
hand, 19% of patients who needed a consultation with a specialist, did not book an
appointment because of long WT.[26] Thus, the real demand may be higher than the
actual number of visits. This leads to under-estimation of OWT. If the proportion of
patients who give up in advance is known, one can correct the demand side of the
OWT estimation accordingly. Our study did correct the demand for such situations,
which presumably balance each other out;

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

3) Extraction of data took place once a day, not allowing for cancelations and
rescheduling of appointments after extraction time to be included in the calculation.
The ideal measurement of WT may be obtained by developing a computerized
process that continuously collects the following parameters: The time when a patient
enters the system, a list of available appointments for the relevant physicians at this
moment and the actual appointment that the patient chooses. These measures will be
incorporated into the next stage of the national measurement.

Conclusions
The novelty of this methodology lies in the utilization of existing computerized
scheduling systems to create a national measurement of WT, and the integration of
patient preferences for physician choice, which allows analysis of the tradeoff
between continuity of care and waiting time. The designed method was further able to
overcome differences in IT systems between health providers, thus providing a tool
for the comprehensive assessment of waiting times for specialist care, and supplying
essential information to policy makers and the public. This is a vast improvement on
previously available survey data and anecdotal media reporting of WT, which was the
case in Israel. This low-cost method allows ongoing monitoring and periodic public
reporting of data. It is already being utilized by the MOH as an ongoing tool for
monitoring and dialogue with the HMOs and is reported to the public on a quarterly
basis.
This tool can inform better allocation of resources, both by HMO managers and by
the regulator. Future comparative reporting of WT by health provider will provide
transparency and allow patients to make informed choices. Accurate assessment of
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

WT by geographic regions can identify disparities in care access and help target
interventions. These might reduce WT and improve equity and ultimately strengthen
the public healthcare system.

References
1.

2.
3.

4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.
11.
12.

13.
14.

Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st century. 2001,
Committee on Quality of Health Care in America, & Institute of Medicine
Staff.
Institute of Medicine, Transforming Health Care Scheduling and Access:
Getting to Now. 2015.
Reichert, A. and Jacobs, R., The impact of waiting time on patient outcomes:
Evidence from early intervention in psychosis services in England. Health
Econ, 2018. 27(11): 1772-1787.
Pizer, S.D. and Prentice, J.C., What Are the Consequences of Waiting for
Health Care in the Veteran Population? . J Gen Int Med, 2011. 26(Supp 2):
676-682.
Bleustein, C., Rothschild, D.B., Valen, A., et al., Wait times, patient
satisfaction scores, and the perception of care. Am J Manag Care, 2014. 20(5):
393-400.
Harrington, D.W., Wilson, K., and Rosenberg, M.W., Waiting for a specialist
consultation for a new condition in Ontario: impacts on patients' lives. Health
Policy, 2014. 9(4): 90-103.
Jofre-Bonet, M., Public Health Care and Private Insurance Demand: The
Waiting Time as a Link. Health Care Manag Sci, 2000. 3(1): 51-71.
Viberg, N., Forsberg, B.C., Borowitz, M., et al., International comparisons of
waiting times in health care–Limitations and prospects. Health Policy, 2013
112(1-2): 53-61.
Siciliani, L., Moran, V., and Borowitz, M., Measuring and Comparing Health
Care Waiting Times in OECD Countries, in OECD Health Working Papers.
2013, OECD: Paris.
Barua, B. and Jacques, D., Waiting Your Turn Wait Times for Health Care in
Canada, 2018 Report. 2018, Fraser Institute.
Survey of Physician Appointment Wait TImes. 2017, Merritt Hawkins: Dallas,
TX, USA.
Penn, M., Bhatnagar, S., Kuy, S., et al., Comparison of wait times for new
patients between the private sector and United States department of veterans
affairs medical centers. JAMA Network open, 2019. 2(1): e187096-e187096.
National Health Insurance Law, 5754-1994 (Hebrew). 1994, Official
Government Gazette.
Rosen, B., Waitzberg, R., and Merkur, S., Israel: Health system review, in
Health Systems in Transition. 2015, World Health Organization.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013367; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

15.

16.
17.

18.
19.

20.

21.
22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

Brammli Greenberg, S., Waitzberg, R., and Guberman, D., Waiting times for
ambulatory services from patient’s perspective. 2014, Myers-Brookdale
Institute: Jerusalem.
Ministry of Health, Report of the Advisory Committee for Strengthening the
Public Health System. 2014: Jerusalem.
Brammli-Greenberg, S. and Yaari, I., Public opinion on the level of service
and performance of the healthcare system in 2018. 2019, Myers-JDC
Brookdale Institute.
Cincinnati Children's Hospital, 3rd Next Available Appointment. A system
level measure at Cincinnati Children's Hospital. .
New Zealand Ministry of Health, National Patient Flow. 2016; Available
from: https://www.health.govt.nz/nz-health-statistics/national-collections-andsurveys/collections/national-patient-flow/national-patient-flow-phase-1.
Moscelli, G., Siciliani, L., Gutacker, N., et al., Socioeconomic inequality of
access to healthcare: Does choice explain the gradient? J Health Econ, 2018.
57: 290-314.
Shmueli, A., Do rich Israelis wait less for medical care? Isr J of Health Policy
Res, 2014. 3(30).
Brammli Greenberg, S., Inequalities in waiting times by socioeconomic status
– a possible causal mechanism. Isr J of Health Policy Res, 2015. 4(2).
Jaakkimainen, L., Glazier, R., Barnsley, J., et al., Waiting to see the specialist:
patient and provider characteristics of wait times from primary to specialty
care. BMC Fam Practice, 2014. 15(1): 16.
Fyie, K., Frank, C., Noseworthy, T., et al., Evaluating the primary‐to‐specialist
referral system for elective hip and knee arthroplasty J Eval Clin Pract, 2014.
20(1): 66-73.
Wetmore, S., Boisvert, L., Graham, E., et al., Patient satisfaction with access
and continuity of care in a multidisciplinary academic family medicine clinic.
Can Fam Physician, 2014. 60(4): e230-6.
Brammli-Greenberg, S., Medina-Artom, T., Yaari, I., et al., Public opinion on
the level of service and performance of the healthcare system in 2016. 2017,
Myers-JDC Brookdale Institute.

23

