medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Methodology for tDCS integration with fMRI

Zeinab Esmaeilpour1, A. Duke Shereen2, Peyman Ghobadi-Azbari3, Abhishek Datta4, Adam J.
Woods5, Maria Ironside6,7, Jacinta O'Shea8, Ulrich Kirk9, Marom Bikson1, Hamed Ekhtiari10

1Neural

Engineering Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Engineering, The City College of the

City University of New York, City College Center for Discovery and Innovation New York NY USA
2

Advanced Science Research Center, The Graduate Center, City University of New York, NY,

USA
3 Department
4 Soterix
5

of Biomedical Engineering, Shahed University, Tehran, Iran

Medical, New York, NY, USA

Center for Cognitive Aging and Memory, McKnight Brain Institute, Department of Clinical and

Health Psychology, University of Florida, USA
6

Center for Depression, Anxiety and Stress Research, McLean Hospital, 115 Mill Street, Belmont,

MA 02478, USA
7

Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA

8

Nuffield Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Medical Science Division, University of Oxford,

UK
9 Department
10 Laureate

of Psychology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark

Institute for Brain Research, Tulsa, OK, US

Abstract:
Integration of tDCS with fMRI holds promise for investigation the underlying mechanism of
stimulation effect. There are 118 published tDCS studies (up to 1st Oct 2018) that used fMRI as a
proxy measure of neural activation to answer mechanistic, predictive, and localization questions
1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

about how brain activity is modulated by tDCS. FMRI can potentially contribute as: a measure of
cognitive state-level variance in baseline brain activation before tDCS; inform the design of
stimulation montages that aim to target functional networks during specific tasks; and act as an
outcome measure of functional response to tDCS. In this systematic review we explore
methodological parameter space of tDCS integration with fMRI. Existing tDCS-fMRI literature
shows little replication across these permutations; few studies used comparable study designs.
Here, we use a case study with both task and resting state fMRI before and after tDCS in a crossover design to discuss methodological confounds. We further outline how computational models
of current flow should be combined with imaging data to understand sources of variability in
responsiveness. Through the case study, we demonstrate how modeling and imaging
methodology can be integrated for individualized analysis. Finally, we discuss the importance of
conducting tDCS-fMRI with stimulation equipment certified as safe to use inside the MR scanner,
and of correcting for image artifacts caused by tDCS. tDCS-fMRI can address important questions
on the functional mechanisms of tDCS action (e.g. target engagement) and has the potential to
support enhancement of behavioral interventions, provided studies are designed rationally.

Key words: Methodology, tDCS-fMRI integration, neuroimaging, brain stimulation

Contents
1. Introduction
2. Literature review of parameter space in tDCS-MR imaging trial design
3. tDCS-MR imaging: trial design parameter space
3.1.

Case study for nuance in trial design

4. How tDCS studies can benefit from functional MR imaging
4.1.

Montage selection using fMRI

4.2.

Prediction studies
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4.3.

Mechanistic studies

5. Practical considerations when combining tDCS with MR imaging
5.1.

Safety

5.2.

MR-compatible stimulator setup

5.3.

RF coils

5.4.

Electrode hydration

5.5.

Voltage compliance

5.6.

Stray magnetic field from tDCS wires

5.7.

Data quality considerations for concurrent MR imaging & tDCS

6. Gyri-precise finite element head models to address variability in tDCS-MR imaging
6.1.

Case study: technical issues for intensity-response questions

7. Concluding remarks

1. Introduction

Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) applies direct current through electrodes
placed on the scalp to modulate excitability (and consequently functioning) of the central nervous
system (Y.-Z. Huang et al., 2017; Michael A Nitsche & Walter Paulus, 2000; Woods et al., 2016).
In humans, tDCS is being used to investigate brain-behavior relationships and is currently under
investigation for treatment potential in various neurological and psychiatric disorders (Andre
Russowsky Brunoni et al., 2012). However, despite encouraging results in human
neurophysiological experiments (M. A. Nitsche & W. Paulus, 2000; M. A. Nitsche & Paulus, 2001;
Stagg & Nitsche, 2011), clinical trials (Antal et al., 2017; Marom Bikson et al., 2016; Boggio et al.,
2008; A. R. Brunoni et al., 2013; Fregni et al., 2006; Lefaucheur et al., 2017; Valle et al., 2009)
and detailed characterization of its physiological mechanisms of action in animal models (Marom
Bikson et al., 2004; Ironside et al., 2018; Jackson et al., 2016; O'Shea & Revol, 2017), questions
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

remain about protocol optimization, especially as relating to inter and intra individual variability
(Chew, Ho, & Loo, 2015; Dyke, Kim, Jackson, & Jackson, 2016; Horvath, Vogrin, Carter, Cook,
& Forte, 2016; Lopez-Alonso, Fernandez-Del-Olmo, Costantini, Gonzalez-Henriquez, & Cheeran,
2015; Worsching et al., 2017). The integration of tDCS with modern neuroimaging techniques
(Saiote, Turi, Paulus, & Antal, 2013; Turi, Paulus, & Antal, 2012) is likely to represent a key
methodological approach for advancing our understanding of the functional correlates of tDCS
mechanisms in terms of changes in patterns of brain activation and for understanding individual
differences in response to stimulation (Buch et al., 2017; Esmaeilpour et al., 2018; Giordano et
al., 2017).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) supports noninvasive imaging of brain structure and
function. The former is capable of providing high spatial resolution in terms of identifying
anatomical regions while the latter allows the study of dynamic physiological changes (Symms,
Jäger, Schmierer, & Yousry, 2006). Functional MRI signal is approximately proportional to a
measure of local neural activation integrated over a spatial extent of several millimeters (Heeger
& Ress, 2002). Integration of tDCS with MR imaging techniques provides a tool to directly perturb
neuronal function while monitoring brain state. Therefore, it enables researchers to study not only
how stimulation modulates targeted brain regions, but also how tDCS modulates activity across
the brain in the context of anatomical and functional connectivity. In addition, this integration may
also provide critical insight for understanding how, where and when stimulation is likely to be most
effective – useful for optimization purposes.
In recent years, there has been increasing interest in functional magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) techniques to study the effects of tDCS - both in healthy controls and clinical
populations. The first paper that utilized fMRI to investigate how tDCS modulates neuronal activity
was published in 2001, where imaging was done sequentially before and after stimulation
(Baudewig, Nitsche, Paulus, & Frahm, 2001). The majority of studies (>80%) to date have used
fMRI to evaluate effects of stimulation on cortical regions underneath the electrodes as well as
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

distal areas. However, it also can potentially help to optimize stimulation protocols or may serve
as a possible biomarker for variability in responsiveness among subjects (Cavaliere et al., 2016;
Kasahara, Tanaka, Hanakawa, Senoo, & Honda, 2013).
The organization of this document centers around methodological aspects of tDCS
integration with MR imaging techniques. The goal of this document is not to recommend, embargo
or critique a single paper. While we review the overall literature to assess the breath of technology
and highlight the diversity (lack of consistency in methodological approach), individual papers are
cited applicable to specific arguments. We start with a literature review to analyze the parameter
space for trial design in tDCS-MR imaging studies and discuss how MR imaging could contribute
in tDCS montage selection, response prediction and as an outcome measure in terms of neural
activation. Through a case study we then introduce potential confounds in the experimental
design of tDCS-fMRI studies; where best practices from fMRI trials and tDCS trials (each in
isolation) nonetheless produce unexpected interactions in combined tDCS-fMRI experiments. We
further discuss practical considerations regarding MR-compatible stimulation devices and
imaging artifacts. Lastly, we discuss how computational finite element models could be integrated
in MR imaging studies to reduce variability in responsiveness. Here again we use a case analysis
to demonstrate how modeling and image processing can influence outcomes.

2. Literature review of parameter space in tDCS-MR imaging trial design

The authors adopted a systematic search strategy in accordance with the most updated
preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) (Moher, Liberati,
Tetzlaff, & Altman, 2010). Electronic search was performed in PubMed using logical combinations
of the following keywords: (“fMRI” OR “functional MRI” OR “functional magnetic resonance
imaging” OR “rsfMRI” OR “resting-state MRI” OR “fcMRI” OR “functional connectivity MRI”) AND

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(“tDCS” OR “transcranial direct current stimulation”). The PubMed research database was
searched from inception to 1st October 2018 with restriction on human studies in English.
Original studies of functional MRI with different paradigms for combining with tDCS were
included in this review. We excluded reviews, guidelines, book chapters, case reports, clinical trial
study protocol/design articles, studies on the combination of fMRI with non-tDCS techniques (e.g.,
TMS, tACS, tPCS, and tRNS), studies on combining tDCS with electrophysiological/neuroimaging
methods other than fMRI and ASL (e.g. EEG, ERP, MEG, DTI/DWI, MRS, and structural MRI),
and tDCS or fMRI-only articles (Fig 1).
The titles and abstracts of the 391 full-length articles found by the search were screened.
171 studies were excluded based on the above exclusion criteria to yield 220 full-length articles.
Then, the same investigators scrutinized the full texts of relevant articles (n=220) against the
above inclusion and exclusion criteria, which resulted in further exclusion of 102 articles. This
resulted in 118 articles included in the qualitative synthesis (Fig 1).

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1: Search strategy for inclusion, exclusion criteria. To identify relevant studies, we searched PubMed using
logical combination of keywords “tDCS” OR “transcranial direct current stimulation”) AND (“functional magnetic
resonance imaging” OR “fMRI” OR “functional MRI” OR “fcMRI” OR “functional connectivity MRI” OR “rsfMRI” OR
“resting-state MRI”.

3. tDCS-MR imaging: trial design parameter space
The study protocol is selected based on several assumptions and hypotheses such as time
course of tDCS effect (Michael A Nitsche & Walter Paulus, 2000), cellular mechanism of
stimulation (Marom Bikson et al., 2004; Rahman et al., 2013), state dependency of tDCS as a
subthreshold stimulation method (Hsu, Juan, & Tseng, 2016; Li et al., 2019) and dose-response
relationship. Ultimately, these considerations get to the heart of how tDCS research benefits from
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

functional MR imaging and how to address inherent challenges in experimental design. Parameter
space in tDCS-fMRI trial design includes:

1) fMRI timing relative to tDCS: In research studies timing can be divided into three approachesSequential-inside scanner approach, where imaging data are collected before and/or after tDCS
intervention inside the bore of magnet, sequential-outside scanner approach, where imaging data
are collected before and/or after tDCS intervention with stimulation done outside the scanner and
concurrent approach, where imaging data are acquired during (and often before and after) tDCS
stimulation inside the scanner. The sequential approach allows evaluation of the functional brain
state before stimulation and/or the lasting “after-effects” of stimulation, while the concurrent
approach allows studying the effects of stimulation applied during ongoing neural activity. The
two main difference between “sequential-inside scanner” and “sequential-outside scanner”
approach is tDCS timing and posture during stimulation (i.e. upright position vs supine). Modeling
studies suggest that inter-postural difference influences cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) distribution and
consequently current flow in brain (Mikkonen & Laakso, 2019).
Prior to MR-compatible tDCS systems, studies were limited to the sequential-outside scanner
approach, which represents the majority of studies in this review (72% of studies). In longitudinal
studies, there can be follow-up imaging sessions hours or days after stimulation or several
stimulation sessions with imaging over the course of days or weeks (Fig 2).

2) MR imaging protocol and sequence (task/ rest and BOLD, ASL): Stimulation could be
paired with specific tasks to investigate the effect of stimulation on ongoing task dependent
activity/connectivity (i.e. functional targeting) or be done during resting-state (Fig 3). There are
different perfusion fMRI sequences available, like arterial spin labeling (ASL). However, the
majority of tDCS-MR imaging studies to date have used task and resting-state BOLD (blood
oxygenation level dependent) fMRI (95% of studies). There is a wide range of specific MRI
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

sequences for ASL and fMRI as well as a large variety of post-processing methods that may also
lead to different results (Wörsching et al., 2016). Therefore, care must be taken to ensure the
experimental design and methods chosen are robust and sensitive to capturing tDCS effects.

3) Control condition (sham and/or active control): The usual approach for blinding a study is
to use a sham stimulation (no stimulation during the session but inducing sensations at the
beginning and/or end of the session via ramp up/ ramp down of current). However, inconsistency
in sham-controlled studies in tDCS literature resulted in debates on whether different sham
protocols are equivalent (Fonteneau et al., 2019). Another approach in blinding a study is active
control, which refers to a condition where the stimulation is performed over an area irrelevant for
the purpose of study.

4) Study design (parallel, crossover or open label): The majority of tDCS-fMRI studies are
designed either as randomized controlled trials (89%) which consist of “parallel studies” (31%)
where participants are randomly assigned to either an active or sham tDCS group, and “crossover studies” (58%), where each participant is assigned to both active and sham sessions in a
randomized order (Fig 2 B). However, “open label studies” are used as well, depending on study
objectives (e.g. intent-to-treat, dose optimization) and only represent 11% of studies.

5) Stimulation dose and individual factors: Dose can be defined base on several factors such
as montage, electrode size, duration of stimulation, current intensity and waveform (see
(Peterchev et al., 2012) for detailed information). Anatomical and biological factors such as head
size (Marom Bikson, Rahman, & Datta, 2012), skull thickness and individual gyrification of cortex
(Opitz, Paulus, Will, Antunes, & Thielscher, 2015), structural and functional connections (C.
Rosso et al., 2014) neurotransmitter levels (Krause & Cohen Kadosh, 2014), age (Minhas, Bikson,
Woods, Rosen, & Kessler, 2012) and genetics (Thair, Holloway, Newport, & Smith, 2017) are
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

among the parameters that can cause variability in response to a given dose across participants.
Notably, models and measures of current flow show that for the same applied current, substantial
differences in induced electric field in brain can occur across individuals (Esmaeilpour et al., 2018;
Truong et al., 2014).

6) Objective (cognitive, clinical or behavioral) or subjective (clinician rated or self-report)
measurements: Studies can use objective and/or subjective measures before, during or after
stimulation. The measure should be selected in harmony with other parameters of the study to
enhance the probability of detecting an effect and reducing noise.

Figure 2: Permutations in trial design for integration of MRI-based neuroimaging methods with tDCS. (A)
fMRI timing can occur pre and/or post-stimulation outside scanner (sequential-outside scanner approach), pre and/or
post-stimulation inside scanner (sequential-inside scanner approach) or concurrently during stimulation to evaluate
tDCS effect on ongoing neural activities. (B) Study designs include single arm open label studies with no control
condition, parallel approach where subjects are randomly assigned to either active or sham group and crossover
approach, where subjects participate in both active and sham sessions with a random order. (C) Control conditions
consist of sham, active control or both. (D) tDCS may be applied over multiple sessions with an expectation of
cumulative (time) effect. (E) Imaging may include multiple follow up sessions to evaluate after effects longitudinally. (F)
Stimulation dose (i.e. electrode montage, stimulation duration and intensity) and combination with task will determine
outcomes. (G) Essentially any functional imaging sequence can be utilized to evaluate stimulation effects depending

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

on the study questions/hypothesis. (H) tDCS-imaging study designs can combine a multitude of other objective or
subjective assessments concurrent or combined with imaging and/or tDCS.

When behavioral/clinical outcome measures are collected these can be correlated with functional
imaging measures. In principle, the correlation between changes in brain activation with changes
in behavioral/clinical outcomes would provide evidence for target engagement; namely providing
support that the behavioral/clinical outcome is associated with neuromodulation of a functional
brain regions or networks. However, the numerous permutations in study design (Fig 2) including
imaging sequence (Fig 2 G) and known dependence of tDCS effect on dose (Fig 2 F), time, and
brain-state (task), as well as questions on ideal trial design and sham (Fig 2 C) provides much
complexity. At a minimum, investigators must be cognizant of experimental limitations and
carefully design suitable experiments to address the specific research question, as unexpected
interactions may produce misleading study conclusions. For example, it may be important to
consider the differences between diffuse stimulation when conventional two-pads as opposed to
focal stimulation with HD-tDCS (Datta et al., 2009b). For these reasons of potential heterogeneity,
care must also be taken in any attempt to extrapolate across tDCS-imaging trials or meta-analysis
(M. Nitsche, Bikson, & Bestmann, 2015). Moreover, we show next that tDCS-imaging studies
must be designed with nuance on both stimulation and MRI parameters, such that combining a
trial design optimized for stand-alone imaging may not be suitable when integrating tDCS, and
vice versa.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3: Functional imaging sequences and analysis methods used in literature of tDCS-fMRI studies.

7) Task/ brain state:
Task-based fMRI is used to inform our understanding of how tDCS modulates brain activity while
performing a task. In study design, it is important to consider that tDCS effects are task-specific;
meaning stimulation does not necessarily produce the same effect while performing two different
tasks (Saucedo Marquez, Zhang, Swinnen, Meesen, & Wenderoth, 2013). In contrast, restingstate fMRI is a technique performed in wakefulness without a superimposed task to execute. If
the nature of tDCS is (profoundly) influenced by brain state (Li et al., 2019; A. Shahbabaie et al.,
2014), stimulation of different individuals with same current flow profile could lead to different
results based on their brain state.

3.1.

Case study for nuance in trial design

We describe an fMRI study design which adapted best practices for imaging without stimulation
and integrated a typical tDCS stimulation trial design (typical in stand-alone studies with imaging),
yet resulted in complex interactions (Alireza Shahbabaie et al., 2018). In a double blind, crossover
(counterbalanced order), sham controlled study on methamphetamine abstinent subjects (Fig 4),

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

functional MR scans were acquired using sequential-outside scanner approach and subjects
completed a cue-induced craving task inside scanner (a block-design task with two types of
blocks: the active blocks consisted of 4 drug-related images and the control block consisted of 4
neutral images matched for psychophysical features with drug-related images). For each scan,
response to drug-related blocks (cue induced craving) was contrasted with neutral. Subjects also
rated their immediate methamphetamine craving before and after each session of stimulation and
imaging (i.e. 4 timepoints) (Fig 4, A). There was at least a one-week washout period between the
two sessions. Importantly, in this design, drug cues presented during imaging served as a
stimulus to activate brain regions associated with craving. The induced craving was measured
with fMRI and subjective reports (i.e. self-reported visual analogue scale pre and post-imaging).
The key questions were 1) whether tDCS reduced drug craving (self-reported measure)
heightened by drug-cues presented before tDCS/sham, and was this benefit maintained when
second set of drug-cues were presented, 2) does tDCS compared to sham changed brain
activation in regions associated with craving. Notwithstanding this sophisticated design for
imaging trials, in this case tDCS produced a significant change in self-reported craving (Wilcoxon
test, mean score change in tDCS session= −15.42 ± 5.42 SE, mean score change in sham
session = −1 ± 2.63 SE; p = .03). This means subjects in the tDCS arm had less self-reported
craving after stimulation compared to sham condition (before the second fMRI, Fig 5, B). This
effect could be due to the non-linear interaction of tDCS effect with individual’s brain state (i.e.
activations remained after the first cue-induced craving task).
In analyzing neural activation changes induced by tDCS, three nested fixed effect
comparisons are required for each subject: at the first level of analysis, the contrast of cues (drug
vs. neutral images) in the first and second fMRI scans in each session (time effect); and then at
the second level the contrast across conditions (tDCS vs. sham). At the third level, these contrasts
are then passed up to test for a group effect across participants using a mixed effects analysis.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

In addition to non-linear dependence of tDCS effect on brain state, second exposure of a
task that involves emotion/motivation (i.e. first drug-cue task may have residual effect that interact
with second exposure) would make non-linear interaction with tDCS effect more complex.
For a tDCS trial focused only on determining the subjective (self-report) effects of tDCS
on baseline craving, this protocol might not optimal - even disregarding the cost/burden of fMRI.
Alternatives for an imaging study would be 1) a straightforward design for acute changes that
uses resting-state imaging before and/or after stimulation, 2) task-based fMRI only after
tDCS/sham, 3) tDCS/sham over multiple sessions followed by assessment of drug craving, as
well as other outcome measures significant for addiction medicine such as abstinence. Each of
the above options for integrations of task based or rest fMRI with tDCS will have their own pros
and cons. The goal of this case analysis is not to question the validity of any given tDCS-imaging
trial, but to say that although there are validated and thorough imaging trial designs and accepted
protocols to test behavioral or neurophysiological effects of tDCS, their integration with fMRI is
not trivial. Investigators should be cognizant of all the limitations and possible interactions of the
design.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4: An experiment design and self-report (subjective) results in a double blind, crossover, sham
controlled study. (A) Each subject underwent a counterbalanced study design with two stimulation types (real and
sham) on two separate days with a one-week wash out period. Functional MRI (fMRI) data were acquired before and
after each stimulation session. Subjects rated their immediate methamphetamine craving before and after both
stimulation and imaging sessions on a visual analogue scale (VAS), with a score range from 0 to 100, where 0 and 100
indicated 'no craving' and 'extreme craving', respectively. (B) Self-report results for 4 different timepoints within the
experiment. Subjects rated their craving level before and after each functional MR scan and stimulation session (i.e.
sham, active). (B.3) tDCS significantly reduced craving compared to sham (p<0.05). (B.4). Study includes 15 subjects
(colored circles represent each subject).

4. How tDCS studies can benefit from functional MR imaging
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Based on the literature review, functional MR imaging is being used to benefit tDCS
studies in three different ways: study design, outcome evaluation at the neural network level, and
serving as potential biomarkers for responsiveness to tDCS. When functional imaging is
conducted before stimulation, it could potentially provide valuable information about functional
localization to guide montage selection (see montage selection, Fig 5). Functional imaging before
the tDCS intervention could also be used to quantify factors predictive of response to tDCS (see
prediction studies, Fig 5). Imaging the brain response to tDCS during or before and/or after
stimulation is used to reveal the immediate effects of ongoing tDCS on functional brain activation
and/or the lasting after-effects of stimulation (see mechanistic studies, Fig 5).

4.1.

Montage selection using MR imaging: An essential question in tDCS protocol
design is which stimulation montage should be selected to 1) optimally target the brain
area to modulate– broadly called anatomical targeting; 2) understand which brain
regions are active in a specific task/person and whether targeting active regions
increases stimulation efficacy – broadly called functional targeting (Guleyupoglu,
Schestatsky, Edwards, Fregni, & Bikson, 2013). MR imaging could provide an index
of neural activation and is therefore invaluable for functional targeting purposes.
Optimal targeting of a selected brain region requires head modeling based on
structural MRI (Datta et al., 2009a; Miranda, 2013). In the literature, 11% of studies
(13 out of 118) utilized task or resting MRI for designing the tDCS montage (Baker,
Rorden, & Fridriksson, 2010; Clark et al., 2012; Hu et al., 2017; Mizuguchi, Uehara,
Hirose, Yamamoto, & Naito, 2016; Woods et al., 2014). For instance, Fischer and
colleagues selected a stimulation montage to target a motor network identified by
resting-state functional connectivity. The hypothesis was that stimulating motor
network would increase tDCS effect compared to motor area (M1). Using a modeling
16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

approach, 8 HD (high definition) electrodes were used in an arrangement to target the
defined motor network with the purpose of increasing stimulation efficacy (Fischer et
al., 2017a).

4.2.

Prediction studies: A challenge in tDCS studies is inconsistency in outcome; the
effects of tDCS appear to vary among individuals (Datta, Truong, Minhas, Parra, &
Bikson, 2012; Krause & Kadosh, 2014). However, the sources of variability remain to
be determined. Functional imaging may provide critical information for response
prediction (Fig 5). In the literature, there are 4 studies that utilized functional or restingstate MR imaging as a predictive measure of responsiveness (Cavaliere et al., 2016;
Kasahara et al., 2013; Polania, Paulus, & Nitsche, 2012; Charlotte Rosso et al., 2014).
For example, in minimally conscious state (MCS) patients, resting state functional
connectivity before tDCS was suggested as a potential biomarker of responsiveness,
detecting neural conditions necessary for tDCS to facilitate transitory recovery of
consciousness and potentially improve behavior in MCS (Cavaliere et al., 2016).

4.3.

Mechanistic studies: The majority of studies (101 out of 118) in this review reside in
this category. In this group of studies, MR-based functional imaging methods (i.e. ASL,
task and resting-state) are used to investigate underlying neural correlates of tDCS
mechanisms in terms of changes in brain activation not only in targeted areas but
across functionally activated task-relevant brain regions and large-scale neural
networks (Keeser et al., 2011; M. Meinzer et al., 2012; Peña-Gómez et al., 2012;
Wörsching et al., 2016) (Fig 5).

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 5: Three major roles functional MRI can play in integration with tDCS. 1) Montage selection studies:
functional imaging could contribute to montage selection to localize stimulation to target functionally activated brain
areas. (2) Prediction studies: baseline fMRI could provide baseline measures of neural network activation and inform
the interpretation of later behavioral/neural responses to tDCS (i.e. “Baseline fMRI as Predictor”). (3) Mechanistic
studies: utilizing fMRI to investigate brain changes underlying tDCS effects and ultimately determine where, when and
how stimulation affects brain function and associated behavior.

5. Practical considerations when combining tDCS with functional MRI
Concurrent tDCS/fMRI data acquisition as well as sequential-inside scanner experiments
have additional considerations over and above those required for sequential-outside scanner
tDCS and fMRI experiments. These include: MRI-compatible stimulator setup, choice of RF coil,
electrode hydration, stray fields induced from tDCS wires, and disambiguating physiological signal
from tDCS artifacts in the fMRI data.

5.1.

Safety

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

TDCS in general is considered safe and well-tolerated (M. Bikson et al., 2016). A safety concern
in combining tDCS and MRI is the possibility of heating under the electrodes due to radiofrequency pulses of scanner (Saiote et al., 2013). MRI compatible tDCS requires careful insertion
of specially designed MRI-compatible tDCS cables and conductive polymer electrodes through
the magnet through waveguide or filter box and into the magnet bore. Outside the MRI, salinesaturated sponges are typical in tDCS while gel is used for HD-tDCS, but for a range of reasons
(including increased properties for electrolyte spread during prone subject adjustment, drying over
extended time), conductive paste is preferred in the MRI. Conductive paste, such as ten20 paste,
should be applied between the MRI safe conductive polymer electrodes and the scalp. The cables
leading to these electrodes should be in series with RF filters and run parallel to the bore, without
loops and away from the subject to prevent the risk of eddy current induction and potential RF
burns. In general risk assessment should rely on overall protocol and imaging sequence rather
than the device in isolation. This is of particular importance as newer imaging sequence and
hardware, for example multiband sequences and stronger/faster gradients, become available.

5.2.

MRI-compatible stimulator setup

A main hardware precaution to be aware of when bringing any electronic equipment into
the MRI scanner is not allowing the wires to become RF transmitters and introduce noise into the
MRI data. To prevent this, currently two similar hardware configurations for MRI-compatible tDCS
are used (Marcus Meinzer et al., 2014; Williams et al., 2017). The procedures are described
below:

I. Connect the leads from the tDCS power supply to an RF filter box (MRI control room),
from the RF filter box to a nonmagnetic, shielded local network cable that enters the MRI scanner
room via the RF waveguide tube, carefully oriented to reduce resonant capacitive coupling, and
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

then finally sent through another RF filter box (MRI-compatible, inside scanner room) before
connecting to the tDCS electrodes (Fig 6, A).

II. Connect the leads from the tDCS power supply (MRI control room) to an RF filter
attached to the penetration panel, and then connect the other end of the penetration panel (MRI
scanner room) to the electrode leads (Fig 6, B).

Figure 6: Different MR-compatible stimulator setups inside scanner. (A) setup comprises of two filter boxes
(inside scanner room (MR-compatible) and outside scanner room (not MR-compatible)) and cables come from the
control room through RF waveguide tube. (B) setup include a RF filter adapter that connects to RF penetration panel
(device will have the same ground as the RF shield of MRI room).

Ideally, better imaging quality is expected when the tDCS wiring is run through the RF
penetration panel as this further reduces the possibility of introducing electromagnetic noise
picked up by the receiver MRI coils. While setup II inherently accomplishes this by having the RF
filter mount directly onto the penetration panel, setup I can be modified slightly to include extra
connections to send the wiring through the penetration panel rather than the waveguide and is
the recommended approach.

5.3.

RF coils

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Many fMRI experiments utilize receive-only parallel RF coils (16, 32, or 64 channel head
coils) to detect signal. However, as the number of coils, and therefore sensitivity increases, the
empty space inside the head coil typically decreases. MRI compatible headphones and head
padding further restrict available space, making some montages especially challenging.
Accommodating particular montages may require advanced experimental consideration. In many
cases the simplest solution is to compromise by using a larger, but less sensitive head coil.

5.4.

Electrode preparation

In addition to these MRI-specific hardware modifications, it is important to be aware of
modifications to the electrode setup. Saline soaked sponges have disadvantages in imaging
settings. They tend to dehydrate over the course of the experiment. One solution, developed for
a PET study (DosSantos et al., 2012), is to use two long cannulas in each sponge connected to
syringes with saline slowly supplemented over the course of the stimulation/scan. Use of saline
is also complicated because fluid may be displaced from the sponges and potentially bridge the
electrodes and/or create loops, compromising both the integrity of the experiment and the safety
of the subject. The recommended modification is to use electrically conductive pastes, but special
precautions should be taken (Woods et al., 2016). With conventional (pad) tDCS, penetration of
the conductive rubber electrode through the paste and contacting skin will produce skin burns,
hence it is important to ensure minimum recommended paste thickness of ~3 (preferably ~5 mm)
(Woods et al., 2016). With HD-tDCS, the plastic holder controls this separation. While using these
pastes prevents dehydration, it is still possible that the paste will create bridges between
electrodes if electrodes are placed too close to one another or physically shifted as part of
subject/coil adjustment in the scanner (Fig 7).

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 7: Induced cortical electric field magnitude for the montages considered. From left to right: 3D surfaces
of skin and brain, cross-sectional coronal and sagittal images. OPEN: Enough gel for satisfactory impedance in the
interface between electrode and skin but gel is contained in HD cups. SHORT: Excessive gel smeared between
adjacent electrodes reflecting excessive gel application and/or head-gear motion. This results in highly conductive path
for current to flow above the surface of skin (“short circuit”) that reduces current penetration to the brain.

5.5.

Voltage compliance

MR safe electrodes typically have higher resistance than conventional tDCS electrodes.
Therefore, some standard tDCS devices are not capable of providing sufficient voltage to induce
typically used experimental current amplitudes (e.g. 2 mA) whilst using these electrodes. For
example, if voltage compliance of a device is 40 volts and it needs to provide 2 mA current for
stimulation, the resistance should be less than 20 KΩ (i.e. R=V/I) otherwise the device could not
provide the target 2 mA for intensity. Comprehensive test of stimulation device is required before
starting any experiment regardless of device brand or type.

5.6.

Stray magnetic field from tDCS wires

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The interaction of tDCS and MRI equipment creates other additional potential
complications. For example, despite isolating the tDCS wires to filter out potential RF noise,
simply passing current through the wires and electrodes induces stray magnetic fields that will
increase magnetic field inhomogeneities and potential artifacts (Fig 8). Because the current
density in the wires is generally much larger than that flowing through the brain, the induced local
magnetic field from the tDCS wires is also much larger than that from currents in the brain. The
resulting inhomogeneities can be difficult for field shimming to correct, which may influence fMRI
adversely. While it is possible to calculate and subtract these stray fields, in practice this is
challenging and rarely done (Göksu et al., 2018).

Figure 8: Effect of current induced stray magnet field on Bz in watermelon. Electrodes (white arrows) are positioned on
left and right side along the equator (orientation visible in proton density MRI in (b)). MGE data from +/-2mA current
injection was used to calculate effective Bz(+4mA) for cables oriented along z (c) and ~25° from z (d). Cables immersed
in agar (red arrows) provide contrast in the T1 underlays of the Bz images (c), (d). After experiments, the watermelon
was sliced and photographed (a) at the level of (b), showing the structural sources of heterogeneity in (b).

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

5.7.

Data quality considerations for concurrent MR imaging & tDCS

In the concurrent tDCS/fMRI approach, electrical current interacts with the magnetic field
generated by the scanner, and therefore can potentially result in warping of the images acquired.
This artefact must be considered as it can potentially cause false positive changes. The
magnitude and nature of any artefacts is likely to depend on the exact experimental setup. When
stimulation is performed inside scanner, effect of stimulation should be considered in image
quality (i.e. reducing signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)) (Saiote et al., 2013).
One study using functional imaging and head models in two cadavers strongly suggested
that tDCS could potentially cause significant BOLD signal changes (Antal et al., 2014). Another
study demonstrated susceptibility artefacts underneath the electrodes restricted to skull layer and
no visual evidence of any distortion in brain EPI images (Antal, Polania, Schmidt-Samoa,
Dechent, & Paulus, 2011; Gbadeyan, Steinhauser, McMahon, & Meinzer, 2016). Therefore,
careful inspection of signal in concurrent data acquisition protocols is of critical importance to
diminish concerns over false positive results.
Taking precautions to mitigate the above negative effects of introducing tDCS concurrent
with fMRI acquisition may not fully negate the potential for poor data or erroneous results,
however. It is noteworthy that often the region most likely affected by tDCS induced artifacts is
the same as that from which an experiment tests for changes in tDCS-driven functional
activation—i.e. the region under the anode/cathode (Fig 9). In a concurrent tDCS and fMRI
experiment (Shereen et al, in preparation), false positive fMRI results persisted even when
comparing finger tapping to rest condition within the tDCS stimulation session inside scanner (Fig
9). This increases the likelihood of false positives (Antal et al., 2014) and it is difficult to
disambiguate the extent to which increased fMRI BOLD results are due to genuine tDCS-induced
neuromodulation of brain activity rather than tDCS-induced false positive artifacts. Moreover,

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

traditional controls (sham, active sham at different location) would not account for dose specific
artifacts.

Figure 9: Concurrent stimulation & imaging artifact. fMRI activation during hand motor task (finger tapping) in
a healthy subject with tDCS sponge electrodes placed over hand motor region. Clearly, the rectangular ‘deactivation’
seen as a green vertical line on the scalp (B), and that overlaps exactly with the position of the cathode, is an artifact
(Shereen et al, in preparation).

Creating concurrent tDCS & fMRI acquisition and processing pipelines that consider,
prevent, and correct for the above-mentioned potential pitfalls, and additional considerations, is
an active area of research. Most likely, a combination of improvements in pulse sequence design,
MRI-compatible tDCS hardware, and concurrent tDCS/fMRI specific field inhomogeneity
correction techniques will need to be developed in concert to address these issues. It is interesting
to note that the activation maps in Figure 9.B were created comparing time blocks of fingertapping versus rest, all during the tDCS condition. Intuitively, any tDCS related artifacts would
arise when comparing fMRI with tDCS on versus off, but would cancel when analyzing activations

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

within the tDCS on condition. A possible explanation of this unintuitive artifact is that slight
movements associated with finger tapping may be correlated with large signal intensity changes
resulting from altering the magnetic field distribution associated with tDCS, particularly near the
electrodes where it is strongest. Whatever the explanation, artifact removal is not trivial and may
depend on specific tasks, imaging sequences, and processing methods. Ultimately, if artifacts are
not obvious and direct artifact removal is not experimentally considered, then the possibility to
misinterpret false positive fMRI activation as being caused by tDCS effects on neuronal activity is
increased.
6. Gyri-precise finite element head models to address variability in MR imaging
studies

A central challenge in optimizing tDCS efficacy is individual variability, which limits
population-level effect size (Ammann, Lindquist, & Celnik, 2017; Lukasik et al., 2018; Wiethoff,
Hamada, & Rothwell, 2014) and highlights the potential importance of dose customization
(Kessler et al., 2013). Two main sources of variability are: 1) anatomical, leading to variation in
brain current flow pattern and intensity among individuals (regional electric fields, EF;(Csifcsák,
Boayue, Puonti, Thielscher, & Mittner, 2018; Datta, 2012; I. Laakso, Tanaka, Koyama, De Santis,
& Hirata, 2015; Ilkka Laakso et al., 2016)), and 2) brain state, which leads to different responses
even for the same brain current flow pattern (Chrysikou, Berryhill, Bikson, & Coslett, 2017;
Esmaeilpour et al., 2018).
Computational models of current flow are well suited to address anatomical variability and
can be retrospectively used as a regressor in tDCS-imaging data to control for differences in
response based on individual brain current flow. Simulation of EF distribution based on high
resolution structural images have informed study design and optimization of stimulation
parameters in tDCS (Datta et al., 2009b) and model predictions have been repeatedly validated
(Datta, Zhou, Su, Parra, & Bikson, 2013; Esmaeilpour et al., 2017; Y. Huang, A. A. Liu, et al.,
26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2017; Opitz et al., 2016). The precise pattern of electric field distribution through the brain is
determined by stimulation dose (i.e. electrode location and current intensity) as well as underlying
anatomy and tissue properties (Marom Bikson et al., 2012). With the development of increasingly
automated MRI-based individualized modeling pipelines (Huang, Datta, Bikson, & Parra, 2017),
regression of current flow in imaging studies is increasingly accessible. However, the relationship
between regional current flow intensity and neuromodulation remains unclear and may not be
linear or even monotonic (Esmaeilpour et al., 2017). Conversely, imaging data can be used to
retrospectively address the role of brain state in response variability. Combining current flow
modeling and imaging, as well as behavioral and other biomarkers, can explain variability in how
brain current flow and brain state influence and shape the effects of tDCS – but as we will explain,
such hypothesis testing requires nuance.
Regional functional changes can be correlated to regional current intensity making the
combination of current flow modeling and imaging in principle tractable (Halko et al., 2011). The
regression can be done across the whole head (i.e. comparing the two maps of EF and fMRI data
in the entire brain and connectivity values between different regions), as well as in specific regions
of interest (ROI) that are segmented based on study hypothesis (i.e. comparing averaged EF and
brain activity in each ROI). The anatomical images needed for individual models (Datta et al.,
2009a) should have a wide field of view (all scalp down to neck) and high resolution (i.e. at least
1 mm) to support ideal current flow modeling (Y. Huang, A. A. Liu, et al., 2017).
Local EF intensities do not have a trivial relationship with resulting neuromodulation in
neuronal network activity level and ultimately complex behaviors (Esmaeilpour et al., 2018).
Therefore, combining imaging data and current flow predictions requires assumptions on 1) the
scaling of “neuromodulation” with regional EF (which itself requires decision on if to use maximum
e-field, average, or some other aggregate measure) and 2) the measure of brain “activation”
based on imaging. Indeed, the sub-threshold nature of tDCS may make the effects of stimulation

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

state dependent in a region-specific manner, but then regions may also interact. The result is a
complicated mosaic of interactions that neither current flow or imaging in isolation can dissect.
However, if tDCS produces a strong enough EF to affect targeted areas of the brain, it
would also affect several other brain regions simultaneously using conventional montages (i.e.
large sponge electrodes). More to the point, brain regions do not operate in isolation, they rather
communicate in micro, meso and large-scale networks (Polanía, Nitsche, & Paulus, 2012).
Diffusivity of current flow with conventional tDCS application (Fig 10) in a complex, highly active
and interconnected network, complicates intensity-response studies in a voxel-wise manner.
Intensity-response depends on how a targeted brain region responds to the applied EF and how
other brain areas interact with the targeted area. Its highly important to include connectivity
analysis (i.e. functional and/or structural) in dose-response studies in tDCS-MR imaging.
Technically, given the two maps of EF and brain activation, in the first step, the two
sources of information should be in the same space with the same resolution (Fig 10). The next
question is whether variability in EF intensity and ongoing brain activation can explain variability
in the resulting change in neural activation and ultimately in the behavioral outcome. Based on
the specific study hypothesis, cortical regions could be segmented using standard structural
atlases allowing an assessment of the effect of EF and baseline ongoing activation in the given
structural region. Alternatively, cortical areas could be segmented based on EF intensity
distribution. Moreover, it could be informative to investigate the effect of EF direction (e.g. radial
or tangential) on neural activation (Marom Bikson et al., 2004; Fischer et al., 2017b; Radman,
Ramos, Brumberg, & Bikson, 2009).

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 10: Workflow of computational modeling integration with functional MRI. Given the two separate maps
of standard space used in fMRI and head models used in modelling, in the first step, high resolution EF map in fine
meshed geometry should be interpolated to voxel-wise standard space. Then, both head models and functional images
should be registered to standard space to enable comparison.

6.1.

Case study: technical issues for intensity-response questions
The relationship between applied current over skin and induced electric field in brain is

linear and determined by the physics of tDCS (i.e. electric field intensity in the brain will increase
29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

linearly with applied current; more applied current, more electric field in brain (M. Bikson et al.,
2015; Esmaeilpour et al., 2018)). However, the challenging question is whether increasing current
intensity necessarily increases neural and behavioral responses? We do not have a clear
understanding of intensity responses at the neural network level. In our case study, in a crossover, sham controlled study in a population of methamphetamine abstinent subjects (as described
in previous section, Fig 4 A), the main question was simply: is there a monotonic relationship
between induced EF in each brain region and changes in neural activation using fMRI? Each
participant was assigned to receive both active and sham arms in a randomized order and a
conventional montage (bipolar balanced, bilateral DLPFC, 5x7 cm electrodes, 2 mA) was used
for tDCS. To determine whether the EF induced in the targeted brain area could explain variability
in fMRI response to tDCS (i.e. changes in activation after stimulation compared to before),
prefrontal cortex (PFC) was segmented into different structural regions using FSL based on the
Harvard Oxford atlas (Fig 11. A) and registered to MNI space of each subject (Smith et al., 2004).
Regions of interest included separate masks for Frontal Pole (FP), Superior Frontal Gyrus (SFG),
Medial Frontal Gyrus (MFG), Frontal Orbital Cortex (FOC) and Frontal Medial Cortex (FMC).
Based on modeling results using a bilateral DLPFC montage in this study, majority of prefrontal
cortex will receive electric field (Fig 11. B). Another method of segmentation could be based on
current flow distribution profile. Regions of interest in current-flow segmentation in our study
include: Superior Frontal Gyrus (SFG), Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex (vlPFC), medial
Orbitofrontal Cortex (mOFC) and Frontal Pole (FP). Our results did not show any correlation in
any of the ROIs in current-flow segmentation and atlas-based segmentation except Frontal Pole
(r=0.7, p=0.0041). Statistical tests were corrected for multiple comparisons (Bonferroni
correction). FP was the area that received maximum EF compared to other regions (Fig 11).
However, although there was a correlation between current intensity and activation changes in
FP, diffusivity and lack of clear targeting complicated the analysis of intensity-response in this
case study. Regressing out interactive effects between different cortical regions is challenging
30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

when e-field modeling reveals that all frontal brain regions are functionally engaged by
conventional montages. Using montages that produce more focal stimulation such as HD or using
functional connectivity analyses that incorporate the interactions between different brain regions
could potentially provide critical insights about intensity-response relationship in tDCS at the
neural network level.

Figure 11: Correlation of electric field with neural activation change (post-pre) in the study introduced in figure
4. (A) Atlas based segmentation. Regions include: Frontal Pole (FP), Superior Frontal Gyrus (SFG), Medial Frontal
Gyrus (MFG), Frontal Orbital Cortex (FOC) and Frontal Medial Cortex (FMC). (B) Current flow-based segmentation.
Areas are selected based on current flow pattern generated based on bilateral DLPFC montage, 5x7 electrodes.
Regions of interest include: Superior Frontal Gyrus (SFG), ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex (vlPFC), medial Orbitofrontal
Cortex (mOFC) and Frontal Pole (FP). Blue circles: sham stimulation, red circles: active stimulation.

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

7. Concluding remarks

This methodological review explains the parameter space in tDCS-MR imaging trial design.
Functional MR imaging could contribute to answer predictive, mechanistic and localization
questions regarding neural modulation resulting from tDCS stimulation. tDCS-MR imaging can
potentially address important questions on functional correlates of tDCS mechanisms. However,
to be meaningful, trial design requires nuanced understanding of both imaging and tDCS
biophysics. For example, protocols optimized for either imaging or tDCS in isolation may not be
suitable for combined tDCS-fMRI studies. Leveraging MR-based functional neuroimaging
methods as indicators of neural states and traits for predicting variance in response to tDCS,
requires carefully integrated study design. Also, individualized finite element head models provide
a measure of anatomical variability in tDCS studies and could be utilized to regress out this
variability in fMRI studies. In research studies with the intention of addressing dose-response
relationship, use of conventional tDCS protocols with two large pads, as opposed to HighDefinition (HD) tDCS, complicates analysis, especially because of how different brain regions
interact functionally. Therefore, more focal stimulation protocols and/or using functional
connectivity analyses that incorporate the interaction between brain regions along with induced
electric field in each cortical area could be a better method to approach these questions in tDCSMR imaging studies. We further discussed the importance of MR compatible devices and potential
source of artifact that should be carefully investigated when imaging concurrently with stimulation.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported (to MB) National Institutes of Health: NIH–NINDS 1R01NS101362,
NIH–NIMH

1R01MH111896,

NIH–NCI

U54CA137788/U54CA132378,

and

NIH–NIMH

1R01MH109289. HE received supports from Warren K Family foundation and supported by a

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

NARSAD young investigator grant (27305) from Brain and Behavior Research Foundation for this
work. ZE was supported by Iranian Cognitive Sciences and Technologies Council.

Conflict of interest
CUNY has patents on brain stimulation with M. Bikson as inventor. M.Bikson has equity in Soterix
Medical Inc. and serves on the scientific advisory boards of Boston Scientific and GlaxoSmithKline
None of the remaining authors have potential conflicts of interest to be disclosed.

References:
Ammann, C., Lindquist, M. A., & Celnik, P. A. (2017). Response variability of different anodal transcranial
direct current stimulation intensities across multiple sessions. Brain stimulation, 10(4), 757‐763.
Antal, A., Alekseichuk, I., Bikson, M., Brockmöller, J., Brunoni, A., Chen, R., . . . Flöel, A. (2017). Low
intensity transcranial electric stimulation: safety, ethical, legal regulatory and application
guidelines. Clinical Neurophysiology, 128(9), 1774‐1809.
Antal, A., Bikson, M., Datta, A., Lafon, B., Dechent, P., Parra, L. C., & Paulus, W. (2014). Imaging artifacts
induced by electrical stimulation during conventional fMRI of the brain. Neuroimage, 85, 1040‐
1047.
Antal, A., Polania, R., Schmidt‐Samoa, C., Dechent, P., & Paulus, W. (2011). Transcranial direct current
stimulation over the primary motor cortex during fMRI. Neuroimage, 55(2), 590‐596.
Baker, J. M., Rorden, C., & Fridriksson, J. (2010). Using transcranial direct‐current stimulation to treat
stroke patients with aphasia. Stroke, 41(6), 1229‐1236.
Baudewig, J., Nitsche, M. A., Paulus, W., & Frahm, J. (2001). Regional modulation of BOLD MRI responses
to human sensorimotor activation by transcranial direct current stimulation. Magnetic Resonance
in Medicine, 45(2), 196‐201.
Bikson, M., Grossman, P., Thomas, C., Zannou, A. L., Jiang, J., Adnan, T., . . . Boggio, P. (2016). Safety of
transcranial direct current stimulation: evidence based update 2016. Brain stimulation, 9(5), 641‐
661.
Bikson, M., Grossman, P., Thomas, C., Zannou, A. L., Jiang, J., Adnan, T., . . . Woods, A. J. (2016). Safety of
Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation: Evidence Based Update 2016. Brain Stimul, 9(5), 641‐661.
doi:10.1016/j.brs.2016.06.004
Bikson, M., Inoue, M., Akiyama, H., Deans, J. K., Fox, J. E., Miyakawa, H., & Jefferys, J. G. (2004). Effects of
uniform extracellular DC electric fields on excitability in rat hippocampal slices in vitro. The Journal
of physiology, 557(1), 175‐190.
Bikson, M., Rahman, A., & Datta, A. (2012). Computational models of transcranial direct current
stimulation. Clinical EEG and Neuroscience, 43(3), 176‐183.
Bikson, M., Truong, D. Q., Mourdoukoutas, A. P., Aboseria, M., Khadka, N., Adair, D., & Rahman, A. (2015).
Modeling sequence and quasi‐uniform assumption in computational neurostimulation. Prog Brain
Res, 222, 1‐23. doi:10.1016/bs.pbr.2015.08.005
Boggio, P. S., Rigonatti, S. P., Ribeiro, R. B., Myczkowski, M. L., Nitsche, M. A., Pascual‐Leone, A., & Fregni,
F. (2008). A randomized, double‐blind clinical trial on the efficacy of cortical direct current
33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

stimulation for the treatment of major depression. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol, 11(2), 249‐254.
doi:10.1017/s1461145707007833
Brunoni, A. R., Nitsche, M. A., Bolognini, N., Bikson, M., Wagner, T., Merabet, L., . . . Pascual‐Leone, A.
(2012). Clinical research with transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS): challenges and future
directions. Brain stimulation, 5(3), 175‐195.
Brunoni, A. R., Valiengo, L., Baccaro, A., Zanao, T. A., de Oliveira, J. F., Goulart, A., . . . Fregni, F. (2013). The
sertraline vs. electrical current therapy for treating depression clinical study: results from a
factorial,
randomized,
controlled
trial.
JAMA
Psychiatry,
70(4),
383‐391.
doi:10.1001/2013.jamapsychiatry.32
Buch, E. R., Santarnecchi, E., Antal, A., Born, J., Celnik, P. A., Classen, J., . . . Nitsche, M. A. (2017). Effects
of tDCS on motor learning and memory formation: a consensus and critical position paper. Clinical
Neurophysiology, 128(4), 589‐603.
Cavaliere, C., Aiello, M., Di Perri, C., Amico, E., Martial, C., Thibaut, A., . . . Soddu, A. (2016). Functional
connectivity substrates for tDCS response in minimally conscious state patients. Frontiers in
cellular neuroscience, 10.
Chew, T., Ho, K. A., & Loo, C. K. (2015). Inter‐ and Intra‐individual Variability in Response to Transcranial
Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) at Varying Current Intensities. Brain Stimul, 8(6), 1130‐1137.
doi:10.1016/j.brs.2015.07.031
Chrysikou, E. G., Berryhill, M. E., Bikson, M., & Coslett, H. (2017). Revisiting the Effectiveness of
Transcranial Direct Current Brain Stimulation for Cognition: Evidence, Challenges, and Open
Questions. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 11, 448.
Clark, V. P., Coffman, B. A., Mayer, A. R., Weisend, M. P., Lane, T. D., Calhoun, V. D., . . . Wassermann, E.
M. (2012). TDCS guided using fMRI significantly accelerates learning to identify concealed objects.
NeuroImage, 59(1), 117‐128.
Csifcsák, G., Boayue, N. M., Puonti, O., Thielscher, A., & Mittner, M. (2018). Effects of transcranial direct
current stimulation for treating depression: A modeling study. Journal of affective disorders, 234,
164‐173.
Datta, A. (2012). Inter‐individual variation during transcranial direct current stimulation and normalization
of dose using MRI‐derived computational models. Frontiers in psychiatry, 3, 91.
Datta, A., Bansal, V., Diaz, J., Patel, J., Reato, D., & Bikson, M. (2009a). Gyri‐precise head model of
transcranial direct current stimulation: improved spatial focality using a ring electrode versus
conventional rectangular pad. Brain stimulation, 2(4), 201‐207. e201.
Datta, A., Bansal, V., Diaz, J., Patel, J., Reato, D., & Bikson, M. (2009b). Gyri‐precise head model of
transcranial direct current stimulation: improved spatial focality using a ring electrode versus
conventional rectangular pad. Brain Stimulation: Basic, Translational, and Clinical Research in
Neuromodulation, 2(4), 201‐207. e201.
Datta, A., Truong, D., Minhas, P., Parra, L. C., & Bikson, M. (2012). Inter‐individual variation during
transcranial direct current stimulation and normalization of dose using MRI‐derived
computational models. Frontiers in psychiatry, 3.
Datta, A., Zhou, X., Su, Y., Parra, L. C., & Bikson, M. (2013). Validation of finite element model of
transcranial electrical stimulation using scalp potentials: implications for clinical dose. Journal of
neural engineering, 10(3), 036018.
DosSantos, M. F., Love, T. M., Martikainen, I. K., Nascimento, T. D., Fregni, F., Cummiford, C., . . . DaSilva,
A. F. (2012). Immediate effects of tDCS on the μ‐opioid system of a chronic pain patient. Frontiers
in psychiatry, 3, 93.
Dyke, K., Kim, S., Jackson, G. M., & Jackson, S. R. (2016). Intra‐Subject Consistency and Reliability of
Response Following 2 mA Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation. Brain Stimul, 9(6), 819‐825.
doi:10.1016/j.brs.2016.06.052
34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Esmaeilpour, Z., Marangolo, P., Hampstead, B. M., Bestmann, S., Galletta, E., Knotkova, H., & Bikson, M.
(2018). Incomplete evidence that increasing current intensity of tDCS boosts outcomes. Brain
stimulation, 11(2), 310‐321.
Esmaeilpour, Z., Milosevic, M., Azevedo, K., Khadka, N., Navarro, J., Brunoni, A., . . . Fonoff, E. T. (2017).
Proceedings# 21. Intracranial voltage recording during transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS) in human subjects with validation of a standard model. Brain Stimulation: Basic,
Translational, and Clinical Research in Neuromodulation, 10(4), e72‐e75.
Fischer, D., Fried, P., Ruffini, G., Ripolles, O., Salvador, R., Banus, J., . . . Fox, M. (2017a). Multifocal tDCS
targeting the resting state motor network increases cortical excitability beyond traditional tDCS
targeting unilateral motor cortex. NeuroImage.
Fischer, D., Fried, P., Ruffini, G., Ripolles, O., Salvador, R., Banus, J., . . . Fox, M. (2017b). Multifocal tDCS
targeting the resting state motor network increases cortical excitability beyond traditional tDCS
targeting unilateral motor cortex. NeuroImage, 157, 34‐44.
Fonteneau, C., Mondino, M., Arns, M., Baeken, C., Bikson, M., Brunoni, A. R., . . . Pascual‐Leone, A. (2019).
Sham tDCS: A hidden source of variability? Reflections for further blinded, controlled trials. Brain
stimulation.
Fregni, F., Thome‐Souza, S., Nitsche, M. A., Freedman, S. D., Valente, K. D., & Pascual‐Leone, A. (2006). A
controlled clinical trial of cathodal DC polarization in patients with refractory epilepsy. Epilepsia,
47(2), 335‐342. doi:10.1111/j.1528‐1167.2006.00426.x
Gbadeyan, O., Steinhauser, M., McMahon, K., & Meinzer, M. (2016). Safety, tolerability, blinding efficacy
and behavioural effects of a novel MRI‐compatible, high‐definition tDCS set‐up. Brain stimulation,
9(4), 545‐552.
Giordano, J., Bikson, M., Kappenman, E. S., Clark, V. P., Coslett, H. B., Hamblin, M. R., . . . McKinley, R. A.
(2017). Mechanisms and effects of transcranial direct current stimulation. Dose‐Response, 15(1),
1559325816685467.
Göksu, C., Hanson, L. G., Siebner, H. R., Ehses, P., Scheffler, K., & Thielscher, A. (2018). Human in‐vivo brain
magnetic resonance current density imaging (MRCDI). NeuroImage, 171, 26‐39.
Guleyupoglu, B., Schestatsky, P., Edwards, D., Fregni, F., & Bikson, M. (2013). Classification of methods in
transcranial electrical stimulation (tES) and evolving strategy from historical approaches to
contemporary innovations. Journal of neuroscience methods, 219(2), 297‐311.
doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.07.016
Halko, M., Datta, A., Plow, E., Scaturro, J., Bikson, M., & Merabet, L. B. (2011). Neuroplastic changes
following rehabilitative training correlate with regional electrical field induced with tDCS.
NeuroImage, 57(3), 885‐891.
Heeger, D. J., & Ress, D. (2002). What does fMRI tell us about neuronal activity? Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 3(2), 142.
Horvath, J. C., Vogrin, S. J., Carter, O., Cook, M. J., & Forte, J. D. (2016). Effects of a common transcranial
direct current stimulation (tDCS) protocol on motor evoked potentials found to be highly variable
within individuals over 9 testing sessions. Exp Brain Res, 234(9), 2629‐2642. doi:10.1007/s00221‐
016‐4667‐8
Hsu, T.‐Y., Juan, C.‐H., & Tseng, P. (2016). Individual differences and state‐dependent responses in
transcranial direct current stimulation. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 10, 643.
Hu, J., Li, Y., Yin, Y., Blue, P. R., Yu, H., & Zhou, X. (2017). How do self‐interest and other‐need interact in
the brain to determine altruistic behavior? NeuroImage, 157, 598‐611.
Huang, Y.‐Z., Lu, M.‐K., Antal, A., Classen, J., Nitsche, M., Ziemann, U., . . . Jaberzadeh, S. (2017). Plasticity
induced by non‐invasive transcranial brain stimulation: a position paper. Clinical Neurophysiology.
Huang, Y., Datta, A., Bikson, M., & Parra, L. C. (2017). ROAST: an open‐source, fully‐automated, Realistic
vOlumetric‐Approach‐based Simulator for TES.
35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Huang, Y., Liu, A. A., Lafon, B., Friedman, D., Dayan, M., Wang, X., . . . Parra, L. C. (2017). Measurements
and models of electric fields in the in vivo human brain during transcranial electric stimulation.
Elife, 6, e18834.
Ironside, M., Browning, M., Ansari, T. L., Harvey, C. J., Sekyi‐Djan, M. N., Bishop, S. J., . . . O'Shea, J. (2018).
Effect of Prefrontal Cortex Stimulation on Regulation of Amygdala Response to Threat in
Individuals With Trait Anxiety: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Psychiatry.
doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2018.2172
Jackson, M. P., Rahman, A., Lafon, B., Kronberg, G., Ling, D., Parra, L. C., & Bikson, M. (2016). Animal
models of transcranial direct current stimulation: methods and mechanisms. Clinical
Neurophysiology, 127(11), 3425‐3454.
Kasahara, K., Tanaka, S., Hanakawa, T., Senoo, A., & Honda, M. (2013). Lateralization of activity in the
parietal cortex predicts the effectiveness of bilateral transcranial direct current stimulation on
performance of a mental calculation task. Neuroscience letters, 545, 86‐90.
Keeser, D., Meindl, T., Bor, J., Palm, U., Pogarell, O., Mulert, C., . . . Padberg, F. (2011). Prefrontal
transcranial direct current stimulation changes connectivity of resting‐state networks during
fMRI. Journal of Neuroscience, 31(43), 15284‐15293.
Kessler, S. K., Minhas, P., Woods, A. J., Rosen, A., Gorman, C., & Bikson, M. (2013). Dosage considerations
for transcranial direct current stimulation in children: a computational modeling study. PloS one,
8(9), e76112.
Krause, B., & Cohen Kadosh, R. (2014). Not all brains are created equal: the relevance of individual
differences in responsiveness to transcranial electrical stimulation. Frontiers in systems
neuroscience, 8, 25.
Krause, B., & Kadosh, R. C. (2014). Not all brains are created equal: the relevance of individual differences
in responsiveness to transcranial electrical stimulation. Frontiers in systems neuroscience, 8.
Laakso, I., Tanaka, S., Koyama, S., De Santis, V., & Hirata, A. (2015). Inter‐subject Variability in Electric
Fields of Motor Cortical tDCS. Brain Stimul, 8(5), 906‐913. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2015.05.002
Laakso, I., Tanaka, S., Mikkonen, M., Koyama, S., Sadato, N., & Hirata, A. (2016). Electric fields of motor
and frontal tDCS in a standard brain space: a computer simulation study. NeuroImage, 137, 140‐
151.
Lefaucheur, J.‐P., Antal, A., Ayache, S. S., Benninger, D. H., Brunelin, J., Cogiamanian, F., . . . Langguth, B.
(2017). Evidence‐based guidelines on the therapeutic use of transcranial direct current
stimulation (tDCS). Clinical Neurophysiology, 128(1), 56‐92.
Li, L. M., Violante, I. R., Leech, R., Ross, E., Hampshire, A., Opitz, A., . . . Sharp, D. J. (2019). Brain state and
polarity dependent modulation of brain networks by transcranial direct current stimulation.
Human brain mapping, 40(3), 904‐915.
Lopez‐Alonso, V., Fernandez‐Del‐Olmo, M., Costantini, A., Gonzalez‐Henriquez, J. J., & Cheeran, B. (2015).
Intra‐individual variability in the response to anodal transcranial direct current stimulation. Clin
Neurophysiol, 126(12), 2342‐2347. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2015.03.022
Lukasik, K. M., Lehtonen, M., Salmi, J., Meinzer, M., Joutsa, J., & Laine, M. (2018). No Effects of Stimulating
the Left Ventrolateral Prefrontal Cortex with tDCS on Verbal Working Memory Updating. Frontiers
in neuroscience, 11, 738.
Meinzer, M., Antonenko, D., Lindenberg, R., Hetzer, S., Ulm, L., Avirame, K., . . . Floel, A. (2012). Electrical
brain stimulation improves cognitive performance by modulating functional connectivity and
task‐specific activation. J Neurosci, 32(5), 1859‐1866. doi:10.1523/jneurosci.4812‐11.2012
Meinzer, M., Lindenberg, R., Darkow, R., Ulm, L., Copland, D., & Flöel, A. (2014). Transcranial direct current
stimulation and simultaneous functional magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of visualized
experiments: JoVE(86).

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Mikkonen, M., & Laakso, I. (2019). Effects of posture on electric fields of non‐invasive brain stimulation.
Phys Med Biol, 64(6), 065019. doi:10.1088/1361‐6560/ab03f5
Minhas, P., Bikson, M., Woods, A. J., Rosen, A. R., & Kessler, S. K. (2012). Transcranial direct current
stimulation in pediatric brain: a computational modeling study. Paper presented at the 2012
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society.
Miranda, P. C. (2013). Physics of effects of transcranial brain stimulation. In Handbook of clinical neurology
(Vol. 116, pp. 353‐366): Elsevier.
Mizuguchi, N., Uehara, S., Hirose, S., Yamamoto, S., & Naito, E. (2016). Neuronal Substrates Underlying
Performance Variability in Well‐Trained Skillful Motor Task in Humans. Neural plasticity, 2016.
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., & Altman, D. G. (2010). Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews
and meta‐analyses: the PRISMA statement. International journal of surgery, 8(5), 336‐341.
Nitsche, M., Bikson, M., & Bestmann, S. (2015). On the use of meta‐analysis in neuromodulatory non‐
invasive brain stimulation. Brain Stimulation, 8 (3), 666e667. In.
Nitsche, M. A., & Paulus, W. (2000). Excitability changes induced in the human motor cortex by weak
transcranial direct current stimulation. J Physiol, 527 Pt 3, 633‐639.
Nitsche, M. A., & Paulus, W. (2000). Excitability changes induced in the human motor cortex by weak
transcranial direct current stimulation. The Journal of physiology, 527(3), 633‐639.
Nitsche, M. A., & Paulus, W. (2001). Sustained excitability elevations induced by transcranial DC motor
cortex stimulation in humans. Neurology, 57(10), 1899‐1901.
O'Shea, J., & Revol, P. (2017). Induced sensorimotor cortex plasticity remediates chronic treatment‐
resistant visual neglect. 6. doi:10.7554/eLife.26602
Opitz, A., Falchier, A., Yan, C.‐G., Yeagle, E. M., Linn, G. S., Megevand, P., . . . Schroeder, C. E. (2016).
Spatiotemporal structure of intracranial electric fields induced by transcranial electric stimulation
in humans and nonhuman primates. Scientific reports, 6, 31236.
Opitz, A., Paulus, W., Will, S., Antunes, A., & Thielscher, A. (2015). Determinants of the electric field during
transcranial direct current stimulation. NeuroImage, 109, 140‐150.
Peña‐Gómez, C., Sala‐Lonch, R., Junqué, C., Clemente, I. C., Vidal, D., Bargalló, N., . . . Bartrés‐Faz, D. (2012).
Modulation of large‐scale brain networks by transcranial direct current stimulation evidenced by
resting‐state functional MRI. Brain stimulation, 5(3), 252‐263.
Peterchev, A. V., Wagner, T. A., Miranda, P. C., Nitsche, M. A., Paulus, W., Lisanby, S. H., . . . Bikson, M.
(2012). Fundamentals of transcranial electric and magnetic stimulation dose: definition, selection,
and reporting practices. Brain Stimul, 5(4), 435‐453. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2011.10.001
Polanía, R., Nitsche, M. A., & Paulus, W. (2012). Modulation of functional connectivity with transcranial
direct current stimulation. In Cortical Connectivity (pp. 133‐144): Springer.
Polania, R., Paulus, W., & Nitsche, M. A. (2012). Reorganizing the intrinsic functional architecture of the
human primary motor cortex during rest with non‐invasive cortical stimulation. PloS one, 7(1),
e30971. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030971
Radman, T., Ramos, R. L., Brumberg, J. C., & Bikson, M. (2009). Role of cortical cell type and morphology
in subthreshold and suprathreshold uniform electric field stimulation in vitro. Brain stimulation,
2(4), 215‐228. e213.
Rahman, A., Reato, D., Arlotti, M., Gasca, F., Datta, A., Parra, L. C., & Bikson, M. (2013). Cellular effects of
acute direct current stimulation: somatic and synaptic terminal effects. J Physiol, 591(10), 2563‐
2578. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.2012.247171
Rosso, C., Valabregue, R., Arbizu, C., Ferrieux, S., Vargas, P., Humbert, F., . . . Meunier, S. (2014).
Connectivity between right inferior frontal gyrus and supplementary motor area predicts after‐
effects of right frontal cathodal tDCS on picture naming speed. Brain stimulation, 7(1), 122‐129.
Rosso, C., Valabregue, R., Arbizu, C., Ferrieux, S., Vargas, P., Humbert, F., . . . Lehericy, S. (2014).
Connectivity between right inferior frontal gyrus and supplementary motor area predicts after‐
37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

effects of right frontal cathodal tDCS on picture naming speed. Brain Stimul, 7(1), 122‐129.
doi:10.1016/j.brs.2013.08.007
Saiote, C., Turi, Z., Paulus, W., & Antal, A. (2013). Combining functional magnetic resonance imaging with
transcranial electrical stimulation. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 7, 435.
Saucedo Marquez, C. M., Zhang, X., Swinnen, S. P., Meesen, R., & Wenderoth, N. (2013). Task‐specific
effect of transcranial direct current stimulation on motor learning. Front Hum Neurosci, 7, 333.
doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00333
Shahbabaie, A., Ebrahimpoor, M., Hariri, A., Nitsche, M. A., Hatami, J., Fatemizadeh, E., . . . Ekhtiari, H.
(2018). Transcranial DC stimulation modifies functional connectivity of large‐scale brain networks
in abstinent methamphetamine users. Brain and behavior, 8(3), e00922.
Shahbabaie, A., Golesorkhi, M., Zamanian, B., Ebrahimpoor, M., Keshvari, F., Nejati, V., . . . Ekhtiari, H.
(2014). State dependent effect of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) on
methamphetamine
craving.
Int
J
Neuropsychopharmacol,
17(10),
1591‐1598.
doi:10.1017/s1461145714000686
Smith, S. M., Jenkinson, M., Woolrich, M. W., Beckmann, C. F., Behrens, T. E., Johansen‐Berg, H., . . .
Flitney, D. E. (2004). Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and implementation
as FSL. NeuroImage, 23, S208‐S219.
Stagg, C. J., & Nitsche, M. A. (2011). Physiological basis of transcranial direct current stimulation.
Neuroscientist, 17(1), 37‐53. doi:10.1177/1073858410386614
Symms, M., Jäger, H., Schmierer, K., & Yousry, T. (2006). A review of structural magnetic resonance
neuroimaging. In Neuroscience For Neurologists (pp. 343‐375): World Scientific.
Thair, H., Holloway, A. L., Newport, R., & Smith, A. D. (2017). Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS):
a beginner's guide for design and implementation. Frontiers in neuroscience, 11, 641.
Truong, D. Q., Guleyupoglu, B., Datta, A., Minhas, P., Magerowski, G., Parra, L. C., & Bikson, M. (2014).
Inter‐Individual Variation during Transcranial Direct Current Simulation and Normaliziation of
Dose Using MRI‐Derived Computational Models. Brain Stimulation: Basic, Translational, and
Clinical Research in Neuromodulation, 7(2), e10.
Turi, Z., Paulus, W., & Antal, A. (2012). Functional neuroimaging and transcranial electrical stimulation.
Clinical EEG and Neuroscience, 43(3), 200‐208.
Valle, A., Roizenblatt, S., Botte, S., Zaghi, S., Riberto, M., Tufik, S., . . . Fregni, F. (2009). Efficacy of anodal
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) for the treatment of fibromyalgia: results of a
randomized, sham‐controlled longitudinal clinical trial. J Pain Manag, 2(3), 353‐361.
Wiethoff, S., Hamada, M., & Rothwell, J. C. (2014). Variability in response to transcranial direct current
stimulation of the motor cortex. Brain stimulation, 7(3), 468‐475.
Williams, K. A., Cabral‐Calderin, Y., Schmidt‐Samoa, C., Weinrich, C. A., Dechent, P., & Wilke, M. (2017).
Simultaneous transcranial alternating current stimulation and functional magnetic resonance
imaging. Journal of visualized experiments: JoVE(124).
Woods, A. J., Antal, A., Bikson, M., Boggio, P. S., Brunoni, A. R., Celnik, P., . . . Kappenman, E. S. (2016). A
technical guide to tDCS, and related non‐invasive brain stimulation tools. Clinical
Neurophysiology, 127(2), 1031‐1048.
Woods, A. J., Hamilton, R. H., Kranjec, A., Minhaus, P., Bikson, M., Yu, J., & Chatterjee, A. (2014). Space,
time, and causality in the human brain. NeuroImage, 92, 285‐297.
Wörsching, J., Padberg, F., Ertl‐Wagner, B., Kumpf, U., Kirsch, B., & Keeser, D. (2016). Imaging transcranial
direct current stimulation (tDCS) of the prefrontal cortex—correlation or causality in stimulation‐
mediated effects? Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 69, 333‐356.
Worsching, J., Padberg, F., Helbich, K., Hasan, A., Koch, L., Goerigk, S., . . . Keeser, D. (2017). Test‐retest
reliability of prefrontal transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) effects on functional MRI

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006288; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

connectivity
in
healthy
subjects.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.04.052

39

NeuroImage,

155,

187‐201.

