medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The Genetic Links to Anxiety and Depression (GLAD) Study: online recruitment into the largest
recontactable study of depression and anxiety

Authors: Molly R. Daviesa,d, Gursharan Kalsia,d, Anamaria Braileanc, Anthony J. Cleareb,c,d, Jonathan R.I.
Colemana,d, Charles J. Curtisa,d, Susannah C.B. Curzonsa,d, Katrina A.S. Davisb,c,d, Kimberley A. Goldsmithe,
Megan Hammond Bennetta,d, Matthew Hotopfb,c,d, Christopher Hüebela,d,f, Jennifer Lenga,d, Bethany D.
Masona,d, Monika McAtarsney-Kovacsa,d, Dina Monssena,d, Elisavet Palaiologoua,d, Carmine Parianteb,c,d,
Shivani Parikha, Alicia J. Peela,d, Katharine A. Rimes, Henry C. Rogersa,d, Megan Skeltona,d, Anna Spaula,d,
Eddy L.A. Suareza,d, Bronte L. Sykesa,d, Katie M. Whitea, Allan H. Youngb,c,d, Evangelos Vassosa,d, David
Vealea,b, Janet Wingroveb, Thalia C. Eleya,d *, Gerome Breena,d *
*Joint senior authors
Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and
Neuroscience, King's College London, Denmark Hill, Camberwell, London, SE5 8AF, United Kingdom
b
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, Bethlem Royal Hospital, Monks Orchard Road,
Beckenham, Kent, BR3 3BX, United Kingdom.
c
Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s
College London, Denmark Hill, Camberwell, London, SE5 8AF, United Kingdom
d
UK National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre, South London and
Maudsley Hospital, London, United Kingdom
e
Mental Health and Neuroscience Clinical Trials Unit, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London,
London, United Kingdom
f
Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
g
Department of Psychology, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London,
London, SE5 8AF, United Kingdom
a

Corresponding Author

Corresponding author: Dr Gerome Breen, Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute
of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, Denmark Hill, Camberwell, London,
SE5 8AF, United Kingdom
Email: gerome.breen@kcl.ac.uk
Tel: +44 020 7848 0409

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background: Anxiety and depression are common, debilitating and costly. These disorders are

influenced by multiple risk factors, from genes to psychological vulnerabilities and environmental
stressors but research is hampered by a lack of sufficiently large comprehensive studies. We are
recruiting 40,000 individuals with lifetime depression or anxiety, with broad assessment of risks to
facilitate future research.
Methods: The Genetic Links to Anxiety and Depression (GLAD) Study (www.gladstudy.org.uk) recruits
individuals with depression or anxiety into the NIHR Mental Health BioResource. Participants invited to
join the study (via media campaigns) provide demographic, environmental and genetic data, and
consent for medical record linkage and recontact.
Results: Online recruitment was effective; 41,892 consented and 26,877 participants completed the
questionnaire by July 2019. Participants’ questionnaire data identified very high rates recurrent
depression, severe anxiety and comorbidity. Participants reported high rates of treatment receipt. The
age profile of sample is biased toward young adults, with higher recruitment of females and the better
educated, especially at younger ages.
Discussion: This paper describes the study methodology and descriptive data for GLAD, which
represents a large, recontactable resource that will enable future research into risks, outcomes and
treatment for anxiety and depression.
Key Words

“Anxiety” “Depression” “Behavior genetics” “Psychiatric Genetics” “Data Sharing” “Life Events”
Highlights
•
•
•
•

Online recruitment of 40,000 individuals with lifetime depression or anxiety (77 characters)
Detailed online phenotyping combined with genetic and clinical data (66 characters)
The study sample is severe, highly comorbid, with chronic psychopathology (62 characters)
The study protocol enables recall of participants for future research and trials (82 characters)

Abbreviations

SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism), GLAD (Genetic Links to Anxiety and Depression),NIHR (National
Institute for Health Research), Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT), South London and
Maudsley (SLaM), NHS (National Health Service), Service User Research Enterprise (SURE), Feasibility
and Acceptability Support Team for Researchers (FAST-R), public relations (PR), standard operating
procedures (SOPs), Clinical Research Networks (CRN), general practitioner (GP), Clinical Commissioning
Group (CCG),
Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge the participation of all GLAD Study volunteers, and thank the NIHR Mental
Health BioResource staff for their help with volunteer recruitment. This study presents independent
research funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at
South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London. Further information can
be found at http://brc.slam.nhs.uk/about/core-facilities/bioresource.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, NIHR, Department
of Health or King's College London
Declaration of Interests

Dr Breen has received honoraria, research or conference grants and consulting fees from Eli Lilly,
Illumina and Otsuka. Prof Eley and Dr Breen are part-funded by a program grant from the UK Medical
Research Council (MR/M021475/1). Prof Cleare has in the last three years received honoraria, travel
funding, or consultancy fees from Lundbeck, Livanova, and Janssen.
Funding

This work was supported by the National Institute of Health Biomedical Research Centre [IS-BRC-121520018].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction

Anxiety and depression are the most common psychiatric disorders worldwide, with a lifetime
prevalence of at least 30% (Bandelow & Michaelis, 2015; R. C. Kessler et al., 2005). They are the most
common psychiatric disorders, are highly comorbid (Mineka, Watson, & Clark, 1998), and account for
10% of all years lived with disability (World Health Organisation, 2017). The World Health Organisation
now considers depression to be the number one disorder by burden of disease (World Health
Organisation, 2017). Many risk factors for depression and anxiety are shared, including psychological
(e.g. cognitive biases (Michl, McLaughlin, Shepherd, & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2013; Naragon-Gainey, 2010)),
environmental (e.g. stressful life events (Michl et al., 2013)), and genetic influences (which are ~60-100%
shared (Purves et al., 2017; Waszczuk, Zavos, Gregory, & Eley, 2014)). These findings on aetiology have
been accompanied by an increasing evidence base of effective treatments, especially psychological
(talking) therapies (Deacon & Abramowitz, 2004; Dobson, 1989; Hofmann & Smits, 2008). Nevertheless,
despite advancements in psychological therapies as well as medication, clinicians are unable to predict
which treatment will work for whom. This means that the choice of first and subsequent treatments
currently progresses by trial and error at the cost of prolonged disability, reduced hope of
success/engagement, and increased risk of adverse events.
Decades of work estimate twin study heritability of both anxiety and depression at ~30-40% (Sullivan,
Neale, & Kendler, 2000), rising to ~60-70% for the recurrent forms of these disorders across several
years (Kendler, Neale, R.C. Kessler, Heath, & Eaves, 1993). Recent UK Biobank analyses confirm that
common genetic variants (single nucleotide polymorphisms, or “SNPs”) account for a smaller but still
significant ~15-30% of variation (“SNP-heritability”) in lifetime anxiety (Purves et al., 2017). Depression
has a SNP-heritability of ~12-14% and shows substantial genetic overlap with anxiety (Purves et al.,
2017). Recent studies have identified 44 genetic variants for depression (Wray et al., 2018) and 5 genetic
variants for anxiety (Purves et al., 2017), indicating that we are now entering the era where it will be
possible to finally discover new biology for both disorders. In addition these genetic advances suggest
that it may be time to include genetic risk factors in research aimed at developing new treatments, or
predicting which therapies will work best for each patient (Keers et al., 2016; Lewis & Vassos, 2017).
Despite the broad range of established risk factors (Burcusa & Iacono, 2007; Craske et al., 2017; Fliege,
Lee, Grimm, & Klapp, 2009), it is unclear how different types of influences combine to increase risk and
influence treatment response. In particular, clinical/psychological (e.g. comorbidities), demographic (e.g.
age), environmental (e.g. life events) and genetic influences have been studied largely independently,
despite their evident interplay (Kendler, Gardner, & Prescott, 2002). As such, more multidisciplinary
research is needed. However, efforts to better understand the aetiology of these disorders require large
sample sizes and detailed information on symptom presentation. Many studies exist worldwide with
either the number of participants or the thorough phenotyping needed, but few have both the scale and
detail required. In response to these issues, the Genetic Links to Anxiety and Depression (GLAD) Study
was developed to recruit 40,000 individuals into the newly established National Institute for Health
Research (NIHR) Mental Health BioResource. This will be one of the largest single studies to date (as
compared to previous meta-analyses) of individuals with a lifetime experience of clinical depression and
anxiety.
The NIHR Mental Health BioResource is an integral part of the overall NIHR BioResource for
Translational Research (https://bioresource.nihr.ac.uk/), which has previously recruited approximately
100,000 individuals. However, a large majority of volunteers are either healthy controls or have a
physical health condition and no reported mental health disorder, which led to the creation of the NIHR

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Mental Health Bioresource. GLAD is its first project and has the specific goal of recruiting a large number
of participants with anxiety and depression to facilitate future recall and secondary data analysis
studies. Recall studies would involve recontacting participants to take part in further research, such as
clinical trials aimed at developing better therapies and interventions for anxiety and depression. The
GLAD Study will also directly explore both genetic and environmental risk factors for depression and
anxiety disorders, including the potential of polygenic risk scores (Purcell et al., 2009) created from
analyses of related phenotypes to predict response to treatment and prognosis. GLAD aims to facilitate
studies which need to combine genetic, phenotypic, and environmental exposure data by creating a
large, homogeneously phenotyped cohort of individuals with depression or anxiety with all these types
of data.
Methods

Pre-Launch Preparation
A focused and intense social media campaign was utilised to inform the public about the GLAD study.
We hoped that individuals with anxiety and depression would be encouraged to join given the online
methodology, allowing them to respond to the questionnaires in a convenient time and location. The
timeline leading up to the media launch is outlined in Figure 1. Experts in the field, patients and
individuals with lived experience of depression or anxiety were consulted at each stage of study
development. The study team also consulted regularly with collaborators from the Australian Genetics
of Depression Study who provided guidance and advice based on their experience of successfully
implementing a similar study design in Australia (https://www.geneticsofdepression.org.au/).
Figure 1. Steps to prepare for launch of the GLAD Study

Website Development, Design, and User Testing

The website was developed in collaboration with a local company (Mindwave Ventures) in various
stages. During the early stages of development and the design phase, we conducted user testing on the
website by contacting individuals with lived experience through various routes. The first user testers

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

were patient volunteers within the Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) service at South
London and Maudsley (SLaM) National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust. The second group of
volunteers were members of the King’s College London Service User Research Enterprise (SURE) and the
Feasibility and Acceptability Support Team for Researchers (FAST-R). Third were volunteer individuals
with lived experience who were actively involved with the charity Mind. Finally, staff from the charities
Mind, MQ Mental Health, and the Mental Health Foundation gave feedback. All individuals provided
input on the website content and usability, appearance, and study information and all volunteers (but
not charity staff) were compensated £10 for their time. All feedback was reviewed by the study team
and the lead investigators and incorporated into the final version of the website.
GLAD Study Spokespeople

A wide range of charities, professional bodies, companies, influencers (defined as individuals with a
large number of followers on social media), and individuals with lived experience were identified based
on previous advocacy, involvement, or openness of mental health and treatment. These individuals and
organisations were approached by the public relations (PR) company (Four Health Communications), the
study team, and/or the co-investigators to introduce the study and invite them to collaborate.
We received support from many UK charities including Mind, MQ, Mental Health Foundation, Anxiety
UK, OCD Action, Bipolar UK, HERO, No Panic, the Charlie Waller Memorial Trust, BDD Foundation,
Maternal OCD, Rethink Mental Illness, SANE, MHFA England, Universities UK, and UK Youth. We also
received significant support from two UK professional bodies for psychologists and psychiatrists, the
British Psychological Society and the Royal College of Psychiatrists. Finally, three organisations (Royal
Mail, Priory Group, and Barnardo’s) agreed to circulate study information internally to their employees,
and Priory Group additionally shared study information on social media.
Many of the charities, professional bodies, and influencers provided a quote about the GLAD Study to be
shared with news outlets and on social media. Other forms of support from charities or professional
bodies included circulating study information in member newsletters or magazines, publishing study
information on their websites, and sharing the study on social media (http://wke.lt/w/s/Ymfhz).
Influencers helped to promote the study on their social media channels or blogs. Individuals with lived
experience allowed the GLAD Study team to share their stories on social media and to news outlets. Of
utmost importance, these individuals were available for interviews with broadcast and newspaper
agencies and gave a personal voice to the campaign. Spokespeople who became actively involved in the
publicity and circulation of the GLAD Study in the media and/or online were vital to the success of the
campaign.
Standard Operating Procedures and Templates

We created a variety of standard operating procedures (SOPs) and response templates to prepare for
the logistical and administrative aspects of study launch and management. These included SOPs for
saliva sample kit preparation and posting, website management, data protection, and participant
contact. We established guides and SOPs for responding to participant questions, concerns, and
expressions of distress. These response guidelines were reviewed by clinicians and by the Mental Health
Foundation to ensure responses were appropriate, straightforward, and clear.
Social Media Content and Visuals

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Social media content and visuals were designed with the aid of the PR company (which had experience
of working on NHS projects), an independent videographer, and an animation company. These included
a range of infographics and short videos, each designed to be informative and provide basic details for
the public about aims of GLAD and how to join the project. The campaign was targeted to a younger
demographic (age 16 - 30) to enable more prolonged collection of longitudinal data and reflect the
young age of onset of depression and anxiety disorders (Bandelow & Michaelis, 2015; Christie et al.,
1988; R. C. Kessler et al., 2005).
The infographics (Figure 2) emphasised the simplicity and ease of taking part. The consent animation
(https://youtu.be.com/SAE0yVNvWaA) outlined key elements of the consent process to provide a
simple and clear way to learn about the study, consistent with guidance from the Health Research
Authority regarding multimedia use as a patient-friendly method of delivering vital consent information
(Health Research Authority, 2017). The consent animation was also included with the website version of
the information sheet. The second video was a short film (https://youtu.be/wzgvS8gU2Ss which
outlined the study sign-up steps in a real-life, relatable way. Finally, the animation
(https://youtu.be.com/HUI5eFXevvk) was an engaging ‘call to action’ to join the community of
volunteers participating in the GLAD Study.
Figure 2. GLAD Study infographic shared on Twitter

Example of the infographic shared on Twitter to promote the GLAD study and explain the key steps involved in signing up

We created a 6-week social media schedule for planned posts across Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter
platforms which included both organic and promoted content. Most of the posts were accompanied by
a video, infographic, or other imagery developed by the study team.
Outreach to News Outlets

The PR company circulated the press release and study information to news and broadcast agencies
across England. Interested parties organised interviews with the study investigators and/or influencers,
charity or professional body representatives, and individuals with lived experience. The press releases

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

and broadcasts were embargoed until the launch date to prevent pre-emptive publicity and provide
uniform, widespread coverage across different media.
Recruitment
Media Campaign: Study launch

The PR company helped us to organise a widespread national media campaign which included
traditional media (TV, radio, newspaper) and social media (Twitter, Facebook, Instagram) outreach
during the study launch. Examples from the campaign can be viewed at this link:
http://wke.lt/w/s/Ymfhz. In the first 24 hours, 8004 participants had registered to the website,
demonstrating the effectiveness of this strategy. The prepared social media schedule helped to maintain
our recruitment numbers over the 6-week period. Between 300-1,500 participants signed up to the
study daily, with numbers fluctuating based on campaign expenditure and social media support from
influencers and organisations.
Clinical Recruitment

In the 9 months following the launch, many NHS organisations contacted us interested in supporting the
GLAD Study. As of July 2019, these included 12 Clinical Research Networks (CRN), 7 family
doctor/general practitioner (GP) practices, 93 Trusts, 1 Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG), and 1 GP
Federation. Sites were classified in 2 different categories with varying levels of involvement: 1)
advertising sites which displayed study posters and leaflets in clinics and waiting areas, and 2) recruiting
sites which conducted mail-outs, approached patients in the clinic or over the phone, and assisted
patients through the study sign-up process.
Sign-up Process
The sign-up process for enrolment in GLAD is given in Figure 3. Personal information and phenotypic
data are collected entirely online through the GLAD Study website (www.gladstudy.org.uk). Participants
register on the website with their name, email address, phone number, date of birth, sex, and gender.
They are then able to read the information sheet and provide consent. As part of the consenting process
participants agree to long-term storage of their sample, requests to complete follow-up questionnaires,
anonymised data sharing, recontact for future research studies based on their phenotype/genotype
information, and access to their full medical and health related records. Following consent, participants
complete the sign-up questionnaire to assess their eligibility. Eligibility criteria are restricted to
participants that meet DSM-5 criteria for MDD or any anxiety disorder, based on responses to screening
measures in our online sign-up questionnaire. More information about the measures in the sign-up
questionnaire are included below. Eligible participants are then sent an Isohelix saliva DNA sample kit.
Saliva samples are sent via Freepost to the NIHR National Biosample Centre in Milton Keynes for
processing and storage. Once participants have returned their saliva sample, they become full members
of the GLAD Study (and of the NIHR BioResource).
Email reminders are sent to participants who do not complete their sign-up steps. Up to four automated
reminder emails are sent through the website up to 6 months post starting sign-up. Once online sign-up
steps are completed, a maximum of four reminder emails are sent to participants regarding the saliva
samples up to 6 months from the date the kit was sent. We conduct additional phone call reminders to
participants who have not returned their saliva kits within three months of signing-up.
Clinical data will be linked to genotype and phenotype data to provide additional information about
participants’ medical history, diagnoses, and treatments relevant to current and future research

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

projects. Eligibility for collaborating studies can then be assessed utilising all phenotypic, genetic, and
clinical data. Members may then be contacted up to four times per year to take part in future studies,
either through the website or by the GLAD Study or NIHR BioResource teams, with access granted via
established NIHR BioResource access protocols (see below for further detail). As part of the community
of members, participants will also have access to useful information and links on the “Useful Links” page
of the study website. Members will also be invited to take part in follow-up questionnaires to provide
longitudinal data on their symptoms.
Figure 3. Stages of participant sign-up and involvement in the GLAD Study

1. Registration

2. Consent

3. Questionnaires

4. Eligibility and
genetic
data collection

5. Data linkage

6. Study sign up

7. Community
of members

8. Follow-up
questionnaires

Measures
Sign-up Questionnaire

The sign-up questionnaire was designed to assess core demographic and personal information as well as
detailed psychological and behavioural phenotyping relevant to anxiety and depression (for full measure
names see Table 1). We included lifetime measures of major depressive disorder, atypical depression,
and generalised anxiety disorder (adapted from CIDI-SF (Patten, Brandon-Christie, Devji, & Sedmak,
2000) and ICD-11 checklists (Kogan et al., 2016)), supplemented with items enabling lifetime assessment
of DSM-5 specific phobia, social phobia, panic disorder and agoraphobia. These items were adapted
from the Australian Genetics of Depression Study questionnaire
(https://www.geneticsofdepression.org.au/).
We also assessed current depressive symptoms (PHQ-9 (Kroenke, Spitzer, & Williams, 2001)) and those
with a score of 5 or above on the PHQ 9 (indicating a current episode of depression) were asked
additional questions related to current treatment-resistant depression (MSM-SR (Fekadu, Donocik, &
Cleare, 2018)). Other measures of current psychopathology included possible mania/hypomania (MDQ
(Hirschfeld, 2002)), current general anxiety symptoms (GAD-7 (Spitzer, Kroenke, Williams, & Löwe,
2006)), post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms (PCL-6 (Lang et al., 2012)), alcohol use (AUDIT-C
(Saunders, Aasland, Babor, de La Fuente, & Grant, 1993)), psychotic symptoms (adapted CIDI (McGrath
et al., 2015)), personality disorder symptoms (SAS-PD (Olajide et al., 2018)), and work and social
adjustment (WSAS (Mundt, Marks, Shear, & Greist, 2002)). Additional measures were included to assess
subjective well-being (Group, Whoqol, 1994), recent adverse life events, 5 childhood trauma items
(Glaesmer et al., 2013) representing the 5 subscales of the full Childhood Trauma Questionnaire
(Pennebaker & Susman, 2013), domestic violence (Davis et al., 2018), and catastrophic trauma (Davis et
al., 2018).
To facilitate future meta-analyses with other cohorts, measures were selected when possible to coincide
with the UK Biobank Mental Health Questionnaire (MHQ) (Davis et al., 2018). Some aspects of the UK

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Biobank MHQ were not selected for the sign-up questionnaire in order to make space for additional
measures more relevant here. Furthermore, detailed questions on self-harm and suicide were asked
during sign-up due to concerns from the study team and the SLaM Research and Development (R&D)
department of insufficient clinical support in the case of reported adverse events, although the single
suicidal ideation item in the PHQ-9 was retained.
Table 1. GLAD Study sign-up questionnaire measures

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Assessment/Topic

Source
Adapted Composite International Diagnostic
Interview – Short Form (CIDI-SF)

Lifetime specific phobia

Purpose
Lifetime assessment of major
depressive disorder
Lifetime assessment of atypical
depression
Lifetime assessment of generalised
anxiety disorder
Lifetime assessment of specific
phobia

Lifetime social phobia

Lifetime assessment of social phobia

Adapted DSM-5/ICD-11 checklists

Lifetime panic disorder

Lifetime assessment of panic disorder Adapted DSM-5/ICD-11 checklists

Lifetime agoraphobia

Lifetime assessment of agoraphobia
Assess severity and
presence/absence of current
depression.
Assess treatments during most recent
or current depressive episode to
screen for treatment-resistant
Screen participants for possible
episodes of hypomania or mania

Adapted DSM-5/ICD-11 checklists

Assess the severity and
presence/absence of current anxiety
Screen for presence and severity of
PTSD symptoms.
Screen for alcohol dependence in the
past year

Generalised Anxiety Disorder 7-item scale
(GAD-7)
Post-traumatic stress disorder checklist,
civilian version 6-items (PCL-6)
Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test
(AUDIT)
Adapted CIDI (McGrath et al., 2015)
Standardized Assessment of Severity of
Personality Disorder 9-items (SASPD)

Adversities in childhood

Assess lifetime psychotic experiences
Assess the severity of personality
disorders.
Assess functional impairment due to
psychopathology
Assesses subjective well-being,
specifically positive emotion and
meaning
Identify presence/absence of
childhood abuse and neglect

Adult domestic abuse and
catastrophic trauma

Identify victims of adult domestic
abuse.

Lifetime depression
Lifetime atypical
depression
Lifetime anxiety

Current depressive
symptoms
Treatment-resistant
depression
Possible
mania/hypomania
Current general anxiety
symptoms
Current post-traumatic
stress disorder symptoms
Alcohol use
Psychotic symptoms
Personality disorders
Work and social
adjustment
Subjective wellbeing

Adapted DSM-5/ICD-11 checklists
Adapted Composite International Diagnostic
Interview – Short Form (CIDI-SF)
Adapted DSM-5/ICD-11 checklists

Patient Health Questionnaire 9-items (PHQ9)
Maudsley Staging Model of Treatment
Resistance, Modified Self-Report (MSM-SR)
The Mood Disorder Questionnaire (MDQ)

Work and Social Adjustment Scale (WSAS)
Two hedonic ('positive emotion') questions
and a eudaimonic ('meaning') question from
WHO-Quality of Life (WHOQOL)
Childhood Trauma Screener short version
(CTS-5)
A 5-item domestic abuse screen developed
for the UK Biobank Mental Health
Questionnaire (Davis et al., 2018), adapted
from the national crime survey and CTS-5,
and 5 items on catastrophic trauma

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Optional Questionnaires

Once participants completed the sign-up questionnaire, they were invited to take part in additional,
optional questionnaires (SM 1). Optional questionnaires to assess a wider number of psychiatric
phenotypes and symptoms included measures of fear (Fear Survey Schedule (Wolpe & Lang, 1964)),
drug use (DUDIT (Berman, Bergman, Palmstierna, & Schlyter, 2003)), obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCI-R (Foa et al., 2002)), post-traumatic stress disorder (PCL-5 (Frank W. Weathers et al., 2013)),
trauma (K Kopenen, personal communication), postnatal depression (EPDS (Cox, Holden, & Sagovsky,
1987)), body dysmorphic disorder (DCQ (Mancuso, Knoesen, & Castle, 2010)), eating disorders (Allison,
Stunkard, & Thier, 2004; Herman et al., 2016; Hildebrandt, Langenbucher, & Schlundt, 2004; Thornton et
al., 2018), and vomit phobia (SPOVI (Veale et al., 2013)).
Other optional projects relate to lifestyle and personal history, asking detailed questions on participants’
experience of healthcare, life events (F. W. Weathers et al., 2013), work and sleep, general health and
lifestyle, gambling, and headaches and migraines (https://www.geneticsofdepression.org.au/). Optional
questionnaires were made available to all participants, except those on vomit phobia and postnatal
depression which were only offered to participants based on responses to screening questions in the
sign-up questionnaire. Additional follow-up questionnaires will be sent to participants annually to
provide longitudinal data on symptoms and outcomes.
Genotyping
All GLAD samples will be genotyped as part of core NIHR BioResource funding. For genotyping we are
using the UK Biobank v2 Axiom array, consisting of >850,000 genetic variants (Bycroft et al., 2018),
designed to give optimal information about other correlated genetic variants. This careful design means
that imputation of the data with large whole genome sequencing reference datasets will yield >10
million common genetic variants per individual. We use Affymetrix software and the UK Biobank
pipeline software to assign genotypes and perform standard quality control measures in PLINK (Chang et
al., 2015) or equivalent software packages and R (Team, 2015). Analyses will be conducted in PLINK in
the first instance.
Ethical Approval
The GLAD Study was approved by the London - Fulham Research Ethics Committee on 21st August, 2018
(REC reference: 18/LO/1218) following a full review by the committee. The NIHR BioResource has been
approved as a Research Tissue Bank by the East of England - Cambridge Central Committee (REC
reference: 17/EE/0025). Prior to submission for ethical approval, this research was reviewed by a team
with experience of mental health problems and their carers who have been specially trained to advise
on research proposals and documentation through the Feasibility and Acceptability Support Team for
Researchers (FAST-R): a free, confidential service in England provided by the NIHR Maudsley Biomedical
Research Centre via King’s College London and South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust.
Analysis
Genetics and combined predictors of anxiety and depression

The GLAD data can be used alongside UK Biobank for meta-analyses, with UK Biobank participants
and/or other NIHR Bioresource participants as healthy controls, to provide adequate statistical power.
One of our primary genomic aims is to utilise polygenic scores created from very large genome-wide
analyses of related traits (e.g. anxiety) as potential predictors of depression, anxiety, and treatment
response in our sample. There are a number of well-powered polygenic scores now available in the field

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

not only for psychiatric traits but also intelligence and its proxies(Selzam et al., n.d.) and other relevant
predictors. We aim to combine these polygenic scores with significant clinical predictors to produce a
combined clinical/genetic risk index.
We envision the GLAD sample to also be incorporated either in large genome-wide association studies,
contributing to meta-analyses, or in clinical trials, for example researching genetic, epidemiological or
social risk factors of anxiety and depression.
Future Research and Collaborations
Researchers wishing to access GLAD Study participants or data are invited to submit a data and sample
access request to the NIHR BioResource to request a collaboration, following the procedures outlined in
the access request protocol (SM 2). Applications will be reviewed by the NIHR Steering Committee to
assess the study aims and to check ethical approvals and protocols. Collaborations can range from
sharing of anonymised data or samples to recontact of participants for additional studies, including
experimental medicine studies and clinical trials. Eligibility for future research can be targeted to specific
genotypes and/or phenotypes of interest.
Results
Sample Descriptors

Recruitment of the GLAD Study is ongoing. All results that follow are from participants recruited before
04 July 2019. As of this date, 41,892 participants had consented to the GLAD Study, with approximately
60% drop-off rate at each stage of the sign-up process. This resulted in 27,475 (65.6%) having completed
the questionnaire, with 27,264 (99.2%) screened as eligible and sent a saliva kit. Of those participants
which were sent a kit, 17,539 (64.3%) have returned a saliva sample thus far.
In the current sample, the mean age is 36.9 with most participants being female, white, and in paid
employment or self-employed (Table 2). The GLAD sample is younger and more female (Figure 4) and
has a higher proportion of individuals with a university degree (Figure 5) than the general population of
England. For example, of those aged 25-29 years, 15.2% of our sample is female compared to only 4.5%
of the population of England. This difference is seen across most/all age-groups. Similarly, in the agerange 16-24 years, 40.4% of the sample have a university degree whereas across England as a whole this
is only 13.7%.
Table 2. Descriptors of GLAD sample, July 2019

Sex

Male
Female
Gender
Transgender
Sexuality
Heterosexual
Homosexual
Bisexual
Asexual

Percent
22.8%
76.5%
1.4%
72.4%
6.3%
15.8%
1.3%

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Self-define
Ethnicity
White
Mixed
Asian or Asian British
Black or Black British
Arab
Other
Education (highest level achieved)
College or university degree
A levels/AS levels or equivalent
O levels/GCSEs or equivalent
CSEs or equivalent
Employment
Employed
Retired
Unable to work because of sickness or disability
Unemployed, looking after home/family, or doing voluntary work
Full or part-time student
Relationship status
Single
Relationship
Married/civil partnership
Divorced/separated
Widowed
Smoking status
Current
Former
Never
Handedness
Right handed
Left handed
Ambidextrous
Received treatment*
Any treatment
Psychological (talking) therapies
Medication

2.8%
93.0%
2.9%
1.4%
0.4%
0.1%
1.1%
59.6%
21.5%
12.5%
1.4%
61.7%
5.4%
9.4%
8.7%
13.1%
27.4%
32.0%
31.5%
6.7%
0.8%
16.0%
31.2%
52.1%
87.4%
11.0%
1.6%
95.2%
81.7%
88.5%

*Treatment percentages were only calculated for participants who screened positively for MDD or GAD. Participants were
asked to select all that applied in response to the question “Did you ever try or are currently trying the following for these
problems?” Participants are considered to have received treatment if they indicated they tried medication prescribed for at
least two weeks or tried psychotherapy or other talking therapy more than once.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4. Distribution of gender and age in the GLAD sample compared to the England population

Comparison of age and sex characteristics between the GLAD sample and the general population of England as measured in the 2011 census
(Office for National Statistics, National Records of Scotland, & Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency, 2016). Proportions of males in
each age group are displayed on the left side of the graph, with female proportions on the right. GLAD participants are represented in light
(male) and dark (female) shades of blue, while the England population is represented in light (male) and dark (female) shades of green.

Figure 5. Proportion of individuals with university degrees by age group in the GLAD sample compared

to the England population

Comparison of education level by age group between the GLAD sample and the general population of England as measured in the 2011 census
(Office for National Statistics et al., 2016). Proportions of individuals without university degrees in each age group are displayed on the left side
of the graph, with proportions of individuals with university degrees on the right. GLAD participants are represented in dark (no university
degree) and light (university degree) shades of blue, while the England population is represented in dark (female) shades of green and light
(university degree).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A high proportion of GLAD participants report the occurrence of at least one form of trauma or abuse
throughout their lives. Child abuse was most commonly reported, with emotional abuse by parents or
family being endorsed by almost 40% of the sample. Other forms of life stress are also frequently
endorsed with 82.8% of the sample reporting at least one traumatic experience in their lives. Of note,
few participants reported periods of inability to pay rent, reflecting low rates of poverty in the sample.
Table 3. Proportion of the GLAD sample reporting previous child abuse/neglect, domestic abuse, or

traumatic life events

Child abuse/neglecta

Proportion of sample

Any abuse or neglect
Emotional abuse
Physical abuse
Sexual abuse
Emotional neglect
Physical neglect

52.1%
39.6%
18.2%
17.7%
13.4%
3.7%

Any abuse
Emotional abuse
Physical abuse
Sexual abuse

40.9%
33.5%
15.6%
20.6%

Domestic abuseb

Stressful life event

a

Any stressful/traumatic life eventd
Sexual assaultc
Attacked, mobbed, or robbedc
Life-threatening accidentc
Witnessed sudden/violent deathc
Life-threatening illnessc
War zonec
Inability to pay rentb

42.3%
26.4%
12.9%
14.2%
7.8%
1.6%
1.4%

Childhood abuse was assessed by the Childhood Trauma Survey (CTS) (Glaesmer et al., 2013) which includes 5 items on a Likert scale, each
relating to the frequency of a distinct type of abuse (emotional, physical, sexual) or neglect (emotional, physical). Percentages reflect the
b
proportion of the sample scoring above the defined cut-off point for clinical utility on each item out of the total. Domestic abuse and inability
to pay rent was assessed by a separate adult trauma scale without pre-defined cut-offs, therefore cut-off points were devised by the study
a,b
team based on the CTS scoring. Any abuse or stressful/traumatic life event was defined as individuals who scored above the cut-off on at
c
least one item on the respective scale. The remaining stressful life events were assessed by combining the sum total of participants indicating
d
“Yes, in the past 12 months” or “Yes, but not in the past 12 months” for each item. Any stressful/traumatic life event was defined as individuals
who scored above the cut-off point for inability to pay rent or indicated they had experienced one of the stressful/traumatic life events either in
the past 12 months or in their lifetime.

Psychopathology

As shown in Figure 6, the majority of participants reached diagnostic criteria for major depressive
disorder (MDD), followed by panic disorder and generalised anxiety disorder (GAD). The majority of
participants with depression reported recurrent episodes across the lifespan. A figure demonstrating
self-reported clinician-provided diagnoses of mental health disorders (as opposed to questionnaireassessed) in the GLAD sample can be found in supplementary materials (SM 3). Of note, self-reported
clinician-provided diagnoses of GAD (77.3%) are twice as high as cases assessed by the questionnaire.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The sample also has high rates of comorbidity, with 66.2% of screened MDD cases also screening
positively for at least one of the anxiety disorders (generalised anxiety, specific phobia, social phobia,
panic disorder, or agoraphobia), and 92.4% of screened GAD cases also screening positively for major
depressive disorder.
Figure 6. Prevalence of probable psychiatric disorders in the GLAD sample
100.0%
90.0%

86.1%

82.4%

80.0%
70.0%

62.7%

60.0%
50.0%

41.8%

40.0%

32.9%

30.0%
20.0%
10.0%

22.3%

20.9%
7.5%

15.6%

19.4%

3.1%

0.0%

Percentages refer to the proportion of participants who meet cut-off criteria for the specified disorder as defined by the DSM-5 (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013) out of the total. Possible mania was assessed by the Mood Disorder Questionnaire (MDQ) (Hirschfeld, 2002).

Retrospective reports of age of onset indicate a young average onset for the lifetime measures of major
depressive disorder, specific phobia, social phobia, panic disorder, and agoraphobia (Table 4). Average
age of onset across the anxiety disorders was ~15. Age of onset was not measured for generalised
anxiety disorder but will be added to the questionnaire in March 2019.
Table 4. Age of onset in GLAD sample for major depressive disorder, specific phobias, social phobia,

panic disorder, and agoraphobia

Major depressive disorder
Specific phobia
Social phobia
Panic disorder
Agoraphobia

Median

Mean

SD

16
10
12
17
15

18.32
11.07
13.52
18.74
16.49

8.57
8.13
8.09
9.87
9.54

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Measures of current symptoms of psychopathology included in the questionnaire demonstrate high
rates of current clinical presentation of major depressive disorder and generalised anxiety disorder, with
high levels of functional impairment (Table 5).
Table 5. Current symptoms of psychopathology and impairment in the GLAD sample.
Mean

Range

0 - 27

6.866

Generalised anxiety disorderb

9.02

0 - 21

5.987

Post-traumatic stress disorderc
Personality disorderd

15.35
7.98

0-30
0 - 25

15.35
3.586

Alcohol usee

7.15

0 - 40

6.392

Functional Impairmentf

16.35

0-40

8.948

Major depressive disorder

a

11.08

SD

Proportion Clinical Severity

Clinical (total)
Mild (5 - 9)
Moderate (10 - 14)
Moderately severe (15 - 19)
Severe (20+)
Clinical (total)
Mild (5 - 9)
Moderate (10 - 14)
Severe (15+)
Clinical (14+)
Clinical (total)
Mild (8 - 9)
Moderate (10+)
At-risk (total)
Increasing risk (8 - 15)
Higher risk (16 - 19)
Possible dependence (20+)
Clinical (total)
Significant impairment (10 - 20)
Severe impairment (21+)

80.5%
26.3%
23.2%
17.0%
14.0%
73.5%
31.0%
20.9%
21.6%
56.5%
51.8%
21.8%
30.0%
37.7%
26.6%
5.4%
5.8%
76.1%
44.3%
31.8%

Percentages refer to the proportion of participants out of the total sample who meet cut-off criteria for the specified disorder (as defined by the measures
a
b
outlined below). Criteria met for major depressive disorder on PHQ-9 (Kroenke et al., 2001) Criteria met for generalised anxiety disorder on GAD-7 (Spitzer et
c
d
e
al., 2006) Criteria met for PTSD on PCL-6 (Lang et al., 2012) in the past month Criteria met for a personality disorder on SASPD (Olajide et al., 2018) Criteria
f
met for at-risk alcohol dependence on AUDIT (Saunders et al., 1993) in the past year Criteria met for functional impairment on WSAS (Mundt et al., 2002)

Media Campaign

In order to assess the success of the media campaign, participants were asked to report how they found
out about the GLAD Study at the end of the sign-up questionnaire. Of the 12,714 participants that
completed the questionnaire, the 3 most common ways of hearing about the study were through
Facebook, newspaper, and Twitter (SM 4).
The effectiveness of each recruitment strategy varied by age (see Figure 7). Of participants aged 16-29,
the majority learned about the study through social media (Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, search
engine), with only 12% receiving study information through traditional media (TV, radio, newspaper,
online tabloid). Participants aged 30-49 also primarily learned about the study through social media, but
22% within that range learned about the study through traditional media. Social media was less
effective in reaching individuals aged 50+, with traditional media being the primary means of
recruitment above that age.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 7. Media campaign drivers to complete questionnaires, by age group

Participants were prompted to select all relevant responses to the question “How did you hear about the GLAD Study?” Social media refers to
Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, bloggers, and search engines. Traditional media refers to radio, TV, newspaper, and online tabloids. All remainingg
responses are included in the Other category.

Discussion

Overall, the GLAD Study represents a very large and comprehensive study of anxiety and depression and
a valuable resource for future research. By achieving our goal of recruiting 40,000 participants with a
lifetime occurrence of one of these disorders into the NIHR Mental Health BioResource, the study will
collect detailed, homogenous phenotype and genotype data, thereby increasing power for genetic
analyses. Importantly, the recontactable nature of the GLAD means that researchers will be able to
conduct new studies integrating psychological and genetic data.
External researchers will be able to apply for access to anonymised data and will have the opportunity too
recontact participants for additional data collection. This offers the prospect of a wide range of future
recall studies, including clinical trials, observational studies, neuroimaging, and experimental medicine.
Recruitment for recall studies could also be targeted to participants with phenotypes or genotypes of
interest by utilising GLAD data to screen for specific eligibility criteria, thereby simplifying and expeditingg
the recruitment process for future studies. Furthermore, measures were in part selected to match other
cohorts and facilitate meta-analysis with samples such as the UK Biobank, Generation Scotland, and the
Australian Genetics of Depression Study, although demographic differences between the samples would
need to be taken into account (e.g. age differences between GLAD and UK Biobank participants). We
propose that the GLAD data could be useful for stratifying cases into distinct phenotypes of depression
and anxiety to reduce heterogeneity, a strategy which has been shown to increase the power of genetic
analyses to detect significant effects (CONVERGE consortium, 2015; Power et al., 2017; Verduijn et al.,
2017).
Initial descriptive analyses reveal that the current GLAD sample does not reflect the demographics of
general population of England. The limited ethnic diversity within the sample is not representative, with

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

94% of participants being white compared to 85% of the population. Similarly, although common mental
disorders are more than twice as common in young women compared to young men, and 1.5 times
more common in women overall (NHS Digital, 2016), the GLAD sample remains disproportionately
female. Finally, the study sample report roughly double the proportion of participants with a university
degree compared to the English population.
The GLAD sample as a whole also shows severe psychopathology. Our lifetime questionnaire diagnostic
algorithm indicated that the majority of the sample have recurrent depression, and 20.9% report
possible mania/hypomania. Over half the sample screen positively for a lifetime anxiety disorder, with
panic disorder being the most common. Participants also show substantial comorbidity, in particular for
GAD cases reporting a concurrent diagnosis of MDD. Our results show significantly higher comorbidity
rates for GAD cases compared to a previous epidemiological study whereby 62.4% of GAD cases had a
lifetime occurrence of MDD (Judd et al., 1998). However, this is likely further indication of the sample’s
severity, reflecting previous reports of higher rates of comorbid anxiety in patients with recurrent
lifetime depression (Boland, Keller, Gotlib, & Hammen, 2002; Moffitt et al., 2007). In terms of current
symptoms, GLAD participants report moderate symptoms of depression, mild to moderate symptoms of
anxiety, and significant functional impairment, indicating poor work and social adjustment. Finally, it
was interesting to note that 51.8% of participants screened positive for mild personality disorder.
Severity levels are also demonstrated by the 95% of GLAD participants who report receiving treatment
for depression or anxiety, although the study is open to individuals regardless of treatment receipt. In
Western countries, it is estimated that between one-thirds and one half of patients with depression or
anxiety disorders do not receive a diagnosis and/or treatment (D. Kessler, Bennewith, Lewis, & Sharp,
2002), a group not represented in our sample. However, even in those patients receiving treatment,
recent research suggests that only 20% get minimally adequate treatment (Thornicroft et al., 2017),
meaning that follow-up research on treatment efficacy in the GLAD sample would be highly valuable.
An unanticipated benefit of the campaign was the interest it generated from UK NHS sites around the
country. Over 45 NHS sites, including Trusts and GP practices, contacted the study team with interest in
supporting recruitment, and many had learned about the study from the media campaign. The study
was also adopted onto the NIHR Clinical Research Network (CRN) Portfolio which provides support and
funding for NHS organisations that are involved in research. The combined approach of both general and
clinical recruitment reaches a wider demographic of participants than either strategy alone. Patients
recruited through clinics can also be assisted in signing up by a local clinician or research team to
provide support throughout the process if needed.
In addition to collecting a large amount of data, the GLAD study represents a template for future online
studies. The media campaign proved highly effective in recruiting a large number of participants in a
short amount of time and demonstrates the success of such a broad outreach approach. Caution must
be taken when interpreting the success of the different media campaign strategies, given the prolonged
use of social media promotions in comparison to traditional media outlets; nonetheless social media
was the most effective strategy for recruiting individuals under 50. Recruiting younger participants not
only reflects the young average age of onset of anxiety and depression, approximately 11 (Bandelow &
Michaelis, 2015) and 24 (Christie et al., 1988; R. C. Kessler et al., 2003) respectively, but also helps to
facilitate long-term follow up and recontact.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Limitations
As previously mentioned, the current demographics of study participants who completed the
questionnaire are not representative of the population of England, indicating a likely self-referral bias.
Results from analyses of the current GLAD sample therefore may not be generalisable to the whole
population. Smaller studies could overcome these biases by selectively over-sampling males and
individuals at the lower end of educational attainment to be more representative of the population.
However, efforts are being taken to recruit a wider demographic of participants into the study.
Specifically, we will develop a targeted social media campaign to reach young men and collaborate with
young male influencers to appeal to that audience. We will additionally prepare a future media
campaign that focuses on depression and anxiety separately, with wording specific to each disorder, to
attempt to reduce the high comorbidity rates in the sample. Furthermore, we are collaborating with
local branches of the charity Mind. These are typically placed within the community and provide a range
of mental health support services. Branches will be displaying posters and leaflets on site, posting on
social media, and answering questions or providing assistance to potential participants interested in
signing up. Recruitment through NHS services and the availability of local research teams within those
sites will also help reach the general population and recruit individuals with a wider range of educational
attainment.
Of particular importance, we are working with Black, Asian, and minority ethnic charities and influencers
to conduct additional user testing to understand the barriers to participating for non-white individuals
and increase outreach to diverse communities. Previous genetic studies have involved primarily
individuals of white European ancestry (Haga, 2010), and findings from these studies may not apply to
individuals of non-white descent. By actively recruiting a diverse sample, our objective is to additionally
facilitate research on typically underrepresented groups.
Another challenge of the study design is the drop-out rates following recruitment. At each stage of the
sign-up process, a substantial number of participants did not complete the next step despite multiple
reminders. Unfortunately, we are unable to assess the demographics of participants who do not
complete the sign-up questionnaire, but it is possible that the drop-outs are non-random and represent
a certain phenotype, such as individuals with more severe symptoms or lower health literacy.
Conclusion
The GLAD study offers a recontactable resource of participants with a lifetime occurrence of depression
and anxiety disorders to facilitate future health research. The online study design and media
recruitment strategy were effective in recruiting a large number of individuals with these disorders into
the NIHR Mental Health BioResource. Recruitment is ongoing with the goal of completing recruitment of
40,000 individuals, making this the largest single study of depression and anxiety. We hope that this
paper will not only demonstrate the effectiveness of the study methodology but will also raise
awareness of the availability of this cohort to researchers in the field and promote future collaboration.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
Allison, K. C., Stunkard, A. J., & Thier, S. L. (2004). Overcoming Night Eating Syndrome: A Step-bystep Guide to Breaking the Cycle. New Harbinger Publications. Retrieved from
https://market.android.com/details?id=book-Lk5kDxJRCqcC
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-5®). American Psychiatric Pub. Retrieved from
https://market.android.com/details?id=book--JivBAAAQBAJ
Australian Genetics of Depression study – Genetics of depression. (n.d.). Retrieved January 23,
2019, from https://www.geneticsofdepression.org.au/
Bandelow, B., & Michaelis, S. (2015). Epidemiology of anxiety disorders in the 21st century.
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 17(3), 327–335. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26487813
Berman, A., Bergman, H., Palmstierna, T., & Schlyter, F. (2003). The Drug Use Disorders
Identification Test (DUDIT) Manual. Stockholm, Sweden: Karolinska Institutet.
Boland, R. J., Keller, M. B., Gotlib, I. H., & Hammen, C. L. (2002). Course and outcome of
depression. In Robert J. Boland and Martin B. Keller (Ed.), Handbook of Depression 2 (pp. 23–
43). The Guilford Press. Retrieved from https://theeye.eu/public/Books/BioMed/Handbook%20of%20Depression%202nd%20ed.%20%20I.%20Gotlib%2C%20et.%20al.%2C%20%28Guilford%20Press%2C%202009%29%20WW.
pdf#page=35
Burcusa, S. L., & Iacono, W. G. (2007). Risk for recurrence in depression. Clinical Psychology
Review, 27(8), 959–985. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2007.02.005
Bycroft, C., Freeman, C., Petkova, D., Band, G., Elliott, L. T., Sharp, K., … Marchini, J. (2018). The
UK Biobank resource with deep phenotyping and genomic data. Nature, 562(7726), 203–209.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0579-z

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Chang, C. C., Chow, C. C., Tellier, L. C., Vattikuti, S., Purcell, S. M., & Lee, J. J. (2015). Secondgeneration PLINK: rising to the challenge of larger and richer datasets. GigaScience, 4, 7.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13742-015-0047-8
Christie, K. A., Burke, J. D., Jr, Regier, D. A., Rae, D. S., Boyd, J. H., & Locke, B. Z. (1988).
Epidemiologic evidence for early onset of mental disorders and higher risk of drug abuse in
young adults. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 145(8), 971–975.
https://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.145.8.971
CONVERGE consortium. (2015). Sparse whole-genome sequencing identifies two loci for major
depressive disorder. Nature, 523(7562), 588–591. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14659
Cox, J. L., Holden, J. M., & Sagovsky, R. (1987). Detection of postnatal depression. Development of
the 10-item Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale. The British Journal of Psychiatry: The
Journal of Mental Science, 150, 782–786. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3651732
Craske, M. G., Stein, M. B., Eley, T. C., Milad, M. R., Holmes, A., Rapee, R. M., & Wittchen, H.-U.
(2017). Anxiety disorders. Nature Reviews. Disease Primers, 3, 17024.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2017.24
Davis, K. A. S., Coleman, J. R. I., Adams, M., Allen, N., Breen, G., Cullen, B., … Hotopf, M. (2018).
Mental health in UK Biobank: development, implementation and results from an online
questionnaire completed by 157 366 participants. BJPsych Open, 4(3), 83–90.
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjo.2018.12
Deacon, B. J., & Abramowitz, J. S. (2004). Cognitive and behavioral treatments for anxiety
disorders: a review of meta-analytic findings. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 60(4), 429–441.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.10255
Dobson, K. S. (1989). A meta-analysis of the efficacy of cognitive therapy for depression. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57(3), 414–419. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2738214

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fekadu, A., Donocik, J. G., & Cleare, A. J. (2018). Standardisation framework for the Maudsley
staging method for treatment resistance in depression. BMC Psychiatry, 18(1), 100.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-018-1679-x
Fliege, H., Lee, J.-R., Grimm, A., & Klapp, B. F. (2009). Risk factors and correlates of deliberate selfharm behavior: a systematic review. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 66(6), 477–493.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychores.2008.10.013
Foa, E. B., Huppert, J. D., Leiberg, S., Langner, R., Kichic, R., Hajcak, G., & Salkovskis, P. M.
(2002). The Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory: development and validation of a short version.
Psychological Assessment, 14(4), 485–496. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12501574
Glaesmer, H., Schulz, A., Häuser, W., Freyberger, H. J., Brähler, E., & Grabe, H.-J. (2013). Der
Childhood Trauma Screener (CTS) – Entwicklung und Validierung von Schwellenwerten zur
Klassifikation. Psychiatrische Praxis, 40(04), e1–e1. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0032-1321481
Group, Whoqol. (1994). Development of the WHOQOL: Rationale and Current Status. International
Journal of Mental Health, 23(3), 24–56. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207411.1994.11449286
Haga, S. B. (2010). Impact of limited population diversity of genome-wide association studies.
Genetics in Medicine: Official Journal of the American College of Medical Genetics, 12(2), 81–
84. https://doi.org/10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181ca2bbf
Health Research Authority. (2017). Applying a proportionate approach to the process of seeking
consent (No. 1.01). Policy and Public Affairs Directorate.
Herman, B. K., Deal, L. S., DiBenedetti, D. B., Nelson, L., Fehnel, S. E., & Brown, T. M. (2016).
Development of the 7-Item Binge-Eating Disorder Screener (BEDS-7). The Primary Care
Companion to CNS Disorders, 18(2). https://doi.org/10.4088/PCC.15m01896
Hildebrandt, T., Langenbucher, J., & Schlundt, D. G. (2004). Muscularity concerns among men:
development of attitudinal and perceptual measures. Body Image, 1(2), 169–181.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2004.01.001

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Hirschfeld, R. M. A. (2002). The Mood Disorder Questionnaire: A Simple, Patient-Rated Screening
Instrument for Bipolar Disorder. Primary Care Companion to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
4(1), 9–11. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15014728
Hofmann, S. G., & Smits, J. A. J. (2008). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for adult anxiety disorders: a
meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trials. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 69(4),
621–632. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18363421
Judd, L. L., Kessler, R. C., Paulus, M. P., Zeller, P. V., Wittchen, H. U., & Kunovac, J. L. (1998).
Comorbidity as a fundamental feature of generalized anxiety disorders: results from the National
Comorbidity Study (NCS). Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica. Supplementum, 393, 6–11.
Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9777041
Keers, R., Coleman, J. R. I., Lester, K. J., Roberts, S., Breen, G., Thastum, M., … Eley, T. C. (2016).
A Genome-Wide Test of the Differential Susceptibility Hypothesis Reveals a Genetic Predictor
of Differential Response to Psychological Treatments for Child Anxiety Disorders.
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 85(3), 146–158. https://doi.org/10.1159/000444023
Kendler, K. S., Gardner, C. O., & Prescott, C. A. (2002). Toward a comprehensive developmental
model for major depression in women. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(7), 1133–1145.
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.159.7.1133
Kendler, K. S., Neale, M. C., Kessler, R. C., Heath, A. C., & Eaves, L. J. (1993). The lifetime history
of major depression in women. Reliability of diagnosis and heritability. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 50(11), 863–870. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8215812
Kessler, D., Bennewith, O., Lewis, G., & Sharp, D. (2002). Detection of depression and anxiety in
primary care: follow up study. BMJ , 325(7371), 1016–1017.
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.325.7371.1016
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Koretz, D., Merikangas, K. R., … National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. (2003). The epidemiology of major depressive disorder: results

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). JAMA: The Journal of the American
Medical Association, 289(23), 3095–3105. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.289.23.3095
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime
prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(6), 593–602.
https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.593
Kogan, C. S., Stein, D. J., Maj, M., First, M. B., Emmelkamp, P. M. G., & Reed, G. M. (2016). The
classification of anxiety and fear-related disorders in the ICD-11. Depression and Anxiety,
33(12), 1141–1154. Retrieved from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/da.22530
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., & Williams, J. B. (2001). The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression
severity measure. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 16(9), 606–613. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11556941
Lang, A. J., Wilkins, K., Roy-Byrne, P. P., Golinelli, D., Chavira, D., Sherbourne, C., … Stein, M. B.
(2012). Abbreviated PTSD Checklist (PCL) as a guide to clinical response. General Hospital
Psychiatry, 34(4), 332–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2012.02.003
Lewis, C. M., & Vassos, E. (2017). Prospects for using risk scores in polygenic medicine. Genome
Medicine, 9(1), 96. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-017-0489-y
Mancuso, S. G., Knoesen, N. P., & Castle, D. J. (2010). The Dysmorphic Concern Questionnaire: A
screening measure for body dysmorphic disorder. The Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry, 44(6), 535–542. https://doi.org/10.3109/00048671003596055
McGrath, J. J., Saha, S., Al-Hamzawi, A., Alonso, J., Bromet, E. J., Bruffaerts, R., … Kessler, R. C.
(2015). Psychotic Experiences in the General Population: A Cross-National Analysis Based on
31,261 Respondents From 18 Countries. JAMA Psychiatry , 72(7), 697–705.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.0575
Michl, L. C., McLaughlin, K. A., Shepherd, K., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2013). Rumination as a
mechanism linking stressful life events to symptoms of depression and anxiety: longitudinal

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

evidence in early adolescents and adults. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 122(2), 339–352.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0031994
Mineka, S., Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1998). Comorbidity of anxiety and unipolar mood disorders.
Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 377–412. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.49.1.377
Moffitt, T. E., Harrington, H., Caspi, A., Kim-Cohen, J., Goldberg, D., Gregory, A. M., & Poulton, R.
(2007). Depression and generalized anxiety disorder: cumulative and sequential comorbidity in
a birth cohort followed prospectively to age 32 years. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64(6),
651–660. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.64.6.651
Mundt, J. C., Marks, I. M., Shear, M. K., & Greist, J. H. (2002). The Work and Social Adjustment
Scale: a simple measure of impairment in functioning. The British Journal of Psychiatry: The
Journal of Mental Science, 180, 461–464. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11983645
Naragon-Gainey, K. (2010). Meta-analysis of the relations of anxiety sensitivity to the depressive
and anxiety disorders. Psychological Bulletin, 136(1), 128–150.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018055
NHS Digital. (2016, September 29). Survey shows one in three adults with common mental
disorders report using treatment services - NHS Digital. Retrieved January 29, 2019, from
https://digital.nhs.uk/news-and-events/news-archive/2016-news-archive/survey-shows-one-inthree-adults-with-common-mental-disorders-report-using-treatment-services
Office for National Statistics, National Records of Scotland, & Northern Ireland Statistics and
Research Agency. (2016). 2011 Census aggregate data. UK Data Service (Edition: June 2016)
[Data set]. https://doi.org/10.5257/census/aggregate-2011-1
Olajide, K., Munjiza, J., Moran, P., O’Connell, L., Newton-Howes, G., Bassett, P., … Crawford, M. J.
(2018). Development and Psychometric Properties of the Standardized Assessment of Severity
of Personality Disorder (SASPD). Journal of Personality Disorders, 32(1), 44–56.
https://doi.org/10.1521/pedi_2017_31_285

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Patten, S. B., Brandon-Christie, J., Devji, J., & Sedmak, B. (2000). Performance of the composite
international diagnostic interview short form for major depression in a community sample.
Chronic Diseases in Canada, 21(2), 68–72. Retrieved from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11007657
Pennebaker, J.W. & Susman, J.R. (2013). Childhood Trauma Questionnaire. Measurement
Instrument Base for the Social Science. Retrieved from
http://www.midss.org/sites/default/files/trauma.pdf
Power, R. A., Tansey, K. E., Buttenschøn, H. N., Cohen-Woods, S., Bigdeli, T., Hall, L. S., … Lewis,
C. M. (2017). Genome-wide Association for Major Depression Through Age at Onset
Stratification: Major Depressive Disorder Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics
Consortium. Biological Psychiatry, 81(4), 325–335.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.05.010
Purcell, S. M., Wray, N. R., Stone, J. L., Visscher, P. M., O’Donovan, M. C., Sullivan, P. F., & Sklar,
P. (2009). Common polygenic variation contributes to risk of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
Nature, 460(7256), 748–752. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08185
Purves, K. L., Coleman, J. R. I., Rayner, C., Hettema, J. M., Deckert, J., McIntosh, A. M., … Eley, T.
C. (2017). The Common Genetic Architecture of Anxiety Disorders. bioRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.1101/203844
Saunders, J. B., Aasland, O. G., Babor, T. F., de La Fuente, J. R., & Grant, M. (1993). Development
of the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT): WHO Collaborative Project on Early
Detection of Persons with Harmful Alcohol Consumption-II. Addiction , 88(6), 791–804.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1993.tb02093.x
Selzam, S., Krapohl, E., von Stumm, S., O’Reilly, P. F., Rimfeld, K., & Kovas, Y. (n.d.). & Plomin,
R.(2016). Predicting educational achievement from DNA. Molecular Psychiatry, 22, 267–272.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Spitzer, R. L., Kroenke, K., Williams, J. B. W., & Löwe, B. (2006). A brief measure for assessing
generalized anxiety disorder: the GAD-7. Archives of Internal Medicine, 166(10), 1092–1097.
https://doi.org/10.1001/archinte.166.10.1092
Sullivan, P. F., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2000). Genetic epidemiology of major depression:
Review and meta analysis. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1552–1562.
Team, R. C. (2015). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing$}$. Retrieved from
http://143.107.212.50/web/packages/dplR/vignettes/timeseries-dplR.pdf
Thornicroft, G., Chatterji, S., Evans-Lacko, S., Gruber, M., Sampson, N., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., …
Kessler, R. C. (2017). Undertreatment of people with major depressive disorder in 21 countries.
The British Journal of Psychiatry: The Journal of Mental Science, 210(2), 119–124.
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.116.188078
Thornton, L. M., Munn-Chernoff, M. A., Baker, J. H., Juréus, A., Parker, R., Henders, A. K., … Bulik,
C. M. (2018). The Anorexia Nervosa Genetics Initiative (ANGI): Overview and methods.
Contemporary Clinical Trials, 74, 61–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cct.2018.09.015
Veale, D., Ellison, N., Boschen, M. J., Costa, A., Whelan, C., Muccio, F., & Henry, K. (2013).
Development of an Inventory to Measure Specific Phobia of Vomiting (Emetophobia). Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 37(3), 595–604. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10608-012-9495-y
Verduijn, J., Milaneschi, Y., Peyrot, W. J., Hottenga, J. J., Abdellaoui, A., de Geus, E. J. C., …
Penninx, B. W. J. H. (2017). Using Clinical Characteristics to Identify Which Patients With Major
Depressive Disorder Have a Higher Genetic Load for Three Psychiatric Disorders. Biological
Psychiatry, 81(4), 316–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.05.024
Waszczuk, M. A., Zavos, H. M. S., Gregory, A. M., & Eley, T. C. (2014). The Phenotypic and Genetic
Structure of Depression and Anxiety Disorder Symptoms in Childhood, Adolescence, and
Young Adulthood. JAMA Psychiatry , 71(8), 905–916.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.655

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Weathers, F. W., Blake, D. D., Schnurr, P. P., Kaloupek, D. G., Marx, B. P., & Keane, T. M. (2013).
The Life Events Checklist for DSM-5 (LEC-5) - Standard. National Center for PTSD. Retrieved
from https://www.ptsd.va.gov/professional/assessment/documents/LEC-5_Standard_Selfreport.pdf
Weathers, F. W., Litz, B. T., Keane, T. M., Palmieri, P. A., Marx, B. P., & Schnurr, P. P. (2013). The
PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5). National Center for PTSD. Retrieved from www.ptsd.va.gov
Wolpe, J., & Lang, P. J. (1964). Fear Survey Schedule III. PsycTESTS Dataset.
https://doi.org/10.1037/t13760-000
World Health Organisation. (2017). Depression and Other Common Mental Disorders: Global Health
Estimates. Retrieved from http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/254610/WHO-MSDMER-2017.2-eng.pdf;jsessionid=30EE4D2178D63E3F6CD72073F6526614?sequence=1
Wray, N. R., Ripke, S., Mattheisen, M., Trzaskowski, M., Byrne, E. M., Abdellaoui, A., … Sullivan, P.
F. (2018). Genome-wide association analyses identify 44 risk variants and refine the genetic
architecture of major depression. Nature Genetics, 50(5), 668–681.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-018-0090-3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002022; this version posted July 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

