medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Achieving coordinated national immunity and cholera elimination in Haiti through
vaccination
Elizabeth C. Lee*​1​, Dennis L. Chao*​2​, Joseph Lemaitre*​3​, Laura Matrajt*​4​, Damiano Pasetto​3​,
Javier Perez-Saez​3​, Flavio Finger​5,6​, Andrea Rinaldo​3​, Jonathan D. Sugimoto​4​, M. Elizabeth
Halloran​4,7​, Ira M. Longini Jr.​8,9​, Ralph Ternier​10​, Kenia Vissieres​10​, Andrew S. Azman​‡1​, Justin
Lessler​‡1​, and Louise C. Ivers​‡11,12
*denotes equal contribution
‡​
denotes co-senior author

1 Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore,
MD, USA
2 Institute for Disease Modeling, Bellevue, WA, USA
3 Laboratory of Ecohydrology, School of Architecture, Civil and Environmental Engineering,
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
4 Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA, USA
5 Centre for Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK
6 Department for Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Faculty of Epidemiology and Population
Health, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
7 Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
8 Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health and Health Professions, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
9 Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
10 Partners In Health/Zanmi Lasante, Port-au-Prince, Haiti
11 Department of Global Health and Social Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA
12 Center for Global Health, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Summary
Background
Cholera was introduced into Haiti in 2010. Since, there have been over 820,000 reported cases
and nearly 10,000 deaths. The year 2019 has seen the lowest reported number of cases since
the epidemic began. Oral cholera vaccine (OCV) is safe and effective, but has generally not
been seen as a primary tool for cholera elimination due to a limited period of protection and
constrained supplies. Regionally, epidemic cholera is contained to the island of Hispaniola.
Hence, Haiti may represent a unique opportunity to eliminate cholera by use of OCV.
Methods
We assess the probability of elimination and the potential health impact of OCV use in Haiti by
leveraging simulations from four independent modeling teams. For a 10-year projection period,
we compared the impact of five vaccination campaign scenarios, differing in geographic scope,
vaccination coverage, and rollout duration to a status quo scenario without vaccination. Teams
used common calibration data and assumptions for vaccine efficacy and vaccination scenarios,
but all other model features and assumptions were determined independently.
Findings
A two-department OCV campaign proposed in Haiti’s national plan for elimination had less than
50% probability of elimination across models, and only ambitious, nationwide campaigns had a
high probability of reaching this goal. Despite their low probability of elimination, two-department
campaigns averted a median of 13-58% of infections across models over the five years after the
start of vaccination campaigns; a nationwide campaign implemented at the same coverage and
rollout duration averted a median of 58-95% of infections across models.
Interpretation
Despite recent declines in cholera cases in Haiti, bold action is needed to promote elimination of
cholera from the region. Large-scale cholera vaccination campaigns in Haiti offer the opportunity
to synchronize nationwide immunity, providing near-term protection to the population while
improvements to water and sanitation infrastructure create an environment favorable to
long-term cholera elimination.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Research in Context
Evidence before this study
We searched PubMed without language or date restrictions on October 4, 2019 for all records
matching (“cholera*” AND “Haiti” AND (“vaccin*” OR “elim*”)) in any field and added one known
article on the probability of elimination of cholera that was not indexed by PubMed to our review.
Of 94 results, four articles were not about the cholera outbreak in Haiti or the use of cholera
vaccination, and 34 were not original research articles. Fourteen articles presented research on
cholera biology or cholera vaccine biology, either through discussion of ​Vibrio cholerae
genetics, immunogenicity of oral cholera vaccine (OCV), or prospective vaccine candidate
antigens. Twenty articles assessed OCV vaccine effectiveness, evaluated OCV campaign
implementation or attitudes and knowledge about cholera control, or presented lessons learned
on outbreak response and policy as a result of the Haiti cholera outbreak. Seven articles were
about general cholera outbreak epidemiology in Haiti, and six articles were related to cholera
transmission models outside our research scope.
Of the nine remaining articles, five examined the impact of potential OCV campaigns at an early
time point when Haiti’s cholera outbreak still exhibited epidemic dynamics, and one other
projected the impact of the OCV campaigns planned after Hurricane Matthew in 2016. Two of
the articles considered prospects for cholera elimination in Haiti in 2013 and 2014 and found
that further targeted interventions were needed. One final study from 2017 modeled the
possibility for OCV campaigns to eliminate cholera transmission in the Ouest department within
a few years.
Added value of this study
Previous assessments of the impact of OCV use in Haiti occurred during early points of the
outbreak when OCV campaigns were unlikely to lead to cholera elimination. Our study projects
cholera transmission in Haiti with multiple years of more recent data, and directly examines
prospect of cholera elimination in the status quo and under various mass OCV campaign
scenarios. In bringing together results from multiple modeling teams, our study provides robust
evidence about the current state of cholera transmission across Haiti and the potential impact of
multiple mass OCV campaign scenarios.
Implications of all of the available evidence
While 2019 has seen the lowest number of cholera cases in Haiti since the outbreak began,
model simulations suggest that it may be possible for cholera transmission to persist without
additional cholera control interventions.While a single two-department vaccination campaign
may avert roughly 13-58% of infections with ​V. cholerae​ over a five year period, only a
nationwide campaign led to a high probability of cholera elimination. Ambitious nationwide
vaccination campaigns may break the cycle of endemic cholera transmission in Haiti as
long-term improvements to water and sanitation infrastructure, which will limit the effects of
potential re-introductions of ​Vibrio cholerae,​ are being made.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Introduction
In January 2010 a massive earthquake struck Haiti, displacing over one million people and
further disrupting the already inadequate water and sanitation infrastructure.​1–4​ Shortly
thereafter, pandemic ​Vibrio cholerae​ O1 was introduced into Haiti for the first time by soldiers
from the United Nations Stabilization Mission, who were themselves using deficient sanitation
facilities.​5​ This confluence of events initiated one of the largest cholera outbreaks in the modern
era, resulting in over 600,000 reported cases and 7,000 deaths in the first two years.​6
Subsequent studies suggest there may have been many more deaths, especially in rural
communities with limited access to health services and poor disease surveillance.​7​ Cholera has
since become endemic in the country, resulting in over 820,000 reported cases and nearly
10,000 deaths as of June 2019. Although incidence rates have declined markedly in recent
years, in 2018, nine of the ten departments reported a total of over 3,700 cholera cases and 41
deaths.​8
Killed oral cholera vaccine (OCV) has become accepted as a safe and effective tool for cholera
prevention and control. The standard two-dose course is 76% (95% CI 62-85%) effective
against clinical disease.​9​ However, the protection from the vaccine wanes over time, and OCV is
far less effective among young children than in adults (vaccine efficacy is 30% in children under
five).​9​ Further, despite pre-qualification of the vaccine by the World Health Organization (WHO)
in 2011, global vaccine supplies have been constrained. Approximately 23 million doses were
produced (and delivered) in 2018 to serve the estimated 1.3 billion people who may be at risk
worldwide.​10​ For these reasons, OCV is not generally considered a practical tool for sustained
cholera elimination, as herd immunity would be difficult to achieve and maintain.
The current cholera situation in Haiti, however, may present a unique opportunity to eliminate
cholera from a region through the use of vaccine as a complement to investment in long term
WASH infrastructure. Outside of Haiti, the Americas are largely free from sustained cholera
transmission. Only the Dominican Republic, which shares the island of Hispaniola with Haiti, has
reported ongoing transmission; though at far lower rates (2,800 versus 58,700 suspected cases
annually in Haiti from 2014 through 2017).​8​ It is unclear if cholera transmission could be
sustained in the Dominican Republic in the absence of transmission in Haiti. Further, Haiti is a
relatively small country (<13 million people) compared to other homes of endemic cholera such
as the Democratic Republic of the Congo (85 million people) and Bangladesh (160 million
people). If mass vaccination of the entire country could achieve coordinated cholera immunity
throughout Haiti, and this immunity could be maintained for a period sufficient to flush cholera
out of local water supplies, the country would become cholera-free, and would likely remain so
due to the low probability of reintroduction.​11​ Elimination of cholera would also present an
opportunity to focus much needed investments on transformative water and sanitation
infrastructure.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Several previous studies have simulated the impact of cholera control interventions in Haiti. A
few studies compared the effects of OCV campaigns and WASH improvements,​12,13​. However,
these and other studies focused solely on OCV campaigns examined the impact of strategies
within the first few years of the outbreak (when epidemic cholera dynamics prevailed),​12–16​ did
not perform long-term projections that account for immune dynamics,​13,15,16​ or focused on a
single department​17​ or historical OCV campaigns.​14,18​ Other studies considered prospects for
cholera elimination in Haiti outside the context of vaccination campaigns,​19,20​ and found that
additional cholera control measures were needed to achieve these goals.
In this study, we assessed the impact of five prospective oral cholera vaccination campaign
scenarios as compared to a status quo scenario for a projected 10-year period in Haiti. Four
independent modeling teams expanded on previously developed models of cholera
transmission and vaccination interventions in Haiti​15,18,19,21–24​ to simulate the effects of mass
vaccination campaigns of varying geographic scope, vaccination coverage, and rollout duration
to assess the probability and time to elimination and the percentage of cases averted in each
vaccination scenario. The aim of these analyses was to determine the feasibility of cholera
elimination from Haiti in the status quo and through OCV use alone, and to inform ongoing
policy discussions about the scope and rollout of potential OCV campaigns in Haiti in the near
future.

Methods
Overview
We examined the health impact and feasibility of cholera elimination in Haiti with mass
vaccination campaigns by establishing a consortium among four independent research teams
that had previously modeled cholera transmission in Haiti. Teams fit their models to a common
cholera incidence data source and generated model projections of true and reported cholera
incidence 10 years past the end of the data available for model fitting. Multiple projections were
produced by each model; a status quo scenario and five vaccination campaign scenarios that
differed by deployment and vaccination coverage. Teams were asked to estimate the probability
of cholera elimination, time to cholera elimination, and the health impact due to mass OCV
campaigns for each scenario.
Project Coordination
We discussed the goals of the project and methods with partners in the Haiti Ministry of Public
Health and Population (MSPP) at the onset of this initiative for feedback on the approach and
primary assumptions. Once work had started, we had multiple consultative meetings in Haiti and
by teleconference with epidemiologists, researchers, and clinicians that were involved in the
cholera response in Haiti in their individual capacities.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

To coordinate the modeling consortium, we held bi-weekly phone calls to discuss timelines,
discuss modeling progress, and troubleshoot problems. For ease of comparison, the consortium
decided upon common parameters and assumptions related to vaccine protection and vaccine
campaign logistics. We also shared common data sources, including weekly, department-level
incidence data for model fitting,​25​ used common definitions of disease elimination, and produced
comparable outputs for figures and analyses. These common assumptions are detailed below.
All other modeling decisions and assumptions were left to the discretion of each team, and are
described in detail in the team supplements. The final outputs for each model and model
supplement underwent internal review from individuals of at least one other team.

Data Sources
All teams calibrated their models to publicly available weekly department-level cholera reports of
suspected cases from the Haiti Ministry of Public Health and Population (MSPP) website.​25​ Data
were available for the epidemiological week ending on October 23, 2010 through that ending on
January 12, 2019 (​Figure 1​). Teams also had access to optional shared data sources on
diagnostic testing and prior OCV campaigns, which were used to calibrate or validate the
models (Supplementary Material 1.1.1).
Epidemiological Modeling
The models ranged from simple stochastic compartmental models to agent-based models of
cholera dynamics in the entire country (​Table 1​). Model-1 (Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health) represents all of Haiti as a single population in a stochastic compartmental
model. Model-2 (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center and University of Florida) and
Model-3 (École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne) are, respectively, deterministic and
stochastic metapopulation models, each with an independent approach to modeling
inter-departmental connectivity and the dynamics of cholera reservoirs. Model-4 (Institute for
Disease Modeling) is an agent based model that uses a synthetic representation of the Haitian
population, its household structure, connectivity, and interaction with aquatic reservoirs. All
modeling teams have comprehensive supplementary method, results, and model code (See
Supplementary Material Sections 2.1, 3.1, 4.1, and 5.1), which are assembled collectively at the
summary DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3361800.
Teams simulated six scenarios that employed different combinations of parameters for vaccine
campaign logistics and vaccination coverage. The parameters are described in detail below
sections and the six scenarios are summarized as follows (​Figure 2​):
1. Status quo (no vaccination)
2. Two-department OCV campaign over 2 years with baseline vaccination coverage
(2-department)
3. Three-department OCV campaign over 2 years with baseline vaccination coverage
(3-department)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

4. National OCV campaign over 2 years with baseline vaccination coverage (national)
5. National OCV campaign over 5 years with baseline vaccination coverage (slow national)
6. National OCV campaign over 2 years with high vaccination coverage (high coverage
national)
Table 1​. Summary of key model features across teams.
Model
(refs)

Spatial
Scale

Seasonality
Function

Environmental
Transmission

Age
Structure

Spatial
Transmission
Dynamics

1​15

National

Basis
splines

None

None

None

2

Department

Sinusoidal

Yes

None

Road and river
networks

3​18,19,22

Department

Rainfalldriven

Yes

None

Calibrated human
mobility

1 km x 1 km
grid

Rainfalldriven

Yes

Yes

Road and river
networks, commuting

–24

4​16

Vaccine Campaign Logistics
We implemented four vaccine campaign deployment strategies, each starting the day or week
(depending on model implementation) after the last data point used for model calibration (week
ending January 12, 2019). Campaigns targeted departments in order of 2017-2018 cumulative
incidence from highest to lowest (​Figure 1​, Table S1).
The campaign deployment strategies are as follows:
●
●
●
●

Two-department: Vaccination limited to the departments of Centre and Artibonite over a
2-year period, similar to plans outlined in the national cholera elimination plan for Haiti​26
Three-department: Vaccination limited to the departments of Centre, Artibonite, and
Ouest (which includes the populous capital Port-au-Prince) over a 2-year period.
National: Countrywide vaccination implemented over a 2-year period.
Slow national: Countrywide vaccination implemented over a 5-year period.

Vaccination Coverage
Killed OCVs are licensed as a two-dose regimen, with doses taken at least two weeks apart.​9​ All
simulated campaigns aimed to vaccinate everyone with two doses, however, following data from

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

previous vaccination campaigns, a fraction of individuals only received a single dose and some
remained unvaccinated. Our baseline scenario assumes that vaccine coverage is the same in
all departments with 70% two-dose coverage, 10% one-dose coverage and 20% receiving no
vaccine. We also simulated one ‘high coverage’ campaign, where departments achieved 95%
two-dose coverage, 1.67% one-dose coverage and 3.33% unvaccinated at the end of the
campaign.
Vaccine Efficacy Among Adults
All teams assumed that initial vaccine efficacy was 76%, as estimated by a recent case-control
study in Haiti.​27​ We estimated waning vaccine efficacy for 60 months after vaccination by fitting
a log-linear weighted regression model to the raw data from a published meta-analysis on killed
OCV efficacy (excluding a single outlier estimate of vaccine efficacy in India after 5 years to be
conservative) (​Figure 2​, Table S3).​9​ We assumed that the vaccine afforded no protection after
the end of five years.
Vaccine Efficacy Among Children
Following estimates from a recent meta-analysis, the average efficacy among children under
five years old was 46.9% (0.30/0.64) as effective as that in adults.​9​ As there are limited data on
vaccine efficacy among children, we used this ratio as a conservative multiplier to adjust the
adult vaccine efficacy for vaccine efficacy among children under five (​Figure 2​, Table S3).
Vaccine Efficacy from a Single Dose
In the first year after vaccination, individuals who received a single vaccine dose were assumed
to have the same protection as those with two doses, after which the single dose efficacy
dropped to zero (​Figure 2​, Table S3).​9,27–29
Model Outcomes
Each team estimated the “probability of elimination” within ten years after the start of vaccination
campaigns, which was defined as the proportion of simulations that achieved less than one
infection with ​Vibrio cholerae​ (includes reported and unreported infections) over at least 52
consecutive weeks. The ten-year period without resurgence was deemed adequate to limit the
possibility of cholera reseeding from human or environmental reservoirs. As defined in these
experiments, elimination represents a state of ​“no underlying transmission,​ ​”​ and not a state of
“no reported cases​.​”​ We also recorded the “elimination date” for each simulation, which was
defined as the first date where a simulation achieved less than one cholera infection for at least
52 consecutive weeks.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

In addition to elimination metrics, we calculated the number and percentage of infections
averted in vaccination campaign scenarios after the start of vaccination campaigns (as
compared to the status quo scenario).

Results
Teams performed model selection, model calibration, and assessment of model fit
independently, as described in the Supplementary Material of each individual team supplement.
Model projections for true infections with ​Vibrio cholerae​ and reported cholera cases are
available for each scenario in Figures S1-S12.
The consensus across the four models is that a two-year nationwide campaign with coverage
similar to that achieved by previous, smaller scale, OCV campaigns in Haiti (70% two-dose
coverage)​30,31​ has a moderate chance of achieving true cholera elimination at five years
post-campaign (34-100% of simulations, summarized across teams) (​Figure 3​, Figure S13,
Table S4). If high coverage is achieved (95% two-dose coverage), the models agree that
cholera elimination is almost guaranteed after a nationwide campaign (88-100% of simulations).
In contrast, simulations with vaccine deployments based on Haiti’s current strategy to eliminate
cholera, which aims to target 1.8 million people primarily in the two most cholera-affected
departments (Centre and Artibonite),​32​ suggest there is a very low probability for this strategy to
achieve elimination (0-33% of simulations) through the impact of OCV alone. There was a
substantial difference between the outcomes of the 2-department and 3-department campaigns
because it administered over 2.5 times more doses; the third highest incidence department
(Ouest) is the most populous department in Haiti. While models were designed primarily to
examine the impact of vaccination campaigns, we also projected cholera incidence in the status
quo, without added vaccination campaigns, and found that there was a 0-18% probability of
elimination by January 2024.
We examined the date of elimination (first date among at least 52 consecutive weeks where
there was less than one infection) among model and scenario simulations that achieved
elimination (​Figure 3​). There was substantial heterogeneity in when simulations achieved
elimination; for most vaccination scenarios, median elimination dates across models fell roughly
within a 2-year window. The median elimination date for Model-1 was within one year of the end
of vaccination rollout for the 2- and 3-department campaigns (September and March 2021,
respectively) and in the middle of the vaccination rollout for all three national campaigns
(ranging from December 2019 to November 2020). The median elimination date for Model-2
was mostly outside of the vaccination rollout period of campaigns (ranging from June 2021 to
April 2024), while the median elimination date for Model-3 was always achieved before the end
of the vaccination campaigns (ranging from March 2020 to May 2021). Model-4 only achieved
elimination in the national and high coverage national scenarios with median elimination dates
in November 2021 and June 2021, respectively.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Beyond assessing the feasibility of cholera elimination through vaccination, we compared the
percentage of averted infections within five years of the start of vaccination campaigns for
various scenarios (​Figure 4​, Figure S14). The 2-department campaign averted a median of
13-58% of infections, while the national campaign averted a median of 58-94% of infections
across models.
Discussion
While the cholera epidemic has declined substantially in Haiti over the past year, our study
suggests that cholera transmission may persist in the face of low incidence at
historically-observed rates of underreporting and asymptomatic infection. The most recent
national plan for the elimination of cholera in Haiti proposes to target the two departments with
the highest cholera incidence (Centre and Artibonite),​32​ and our multimodeling effort suggests
that this strategy may avert 13-58% of infections within a five year period and yield a low
probability (0-33%) of achieving elimination. Only when the models simulated a nationwide
vaccination campaign with relatively short rollout duration (two years) did all models project at
least some probability of elimination with 58-95% of infections averted within a five year period.
Our study lends credence to the idea that cholera elimination in Haiti through mass vaccination
is an achievable goal, albeit one that may require a larger and more ambitious campaign than
those previously achieved in the country. As the United Nations acknowledges responsibility for
the introduction of cholera into Haiti, support for such an ambitious effort would be a direct way
to start making amends for this tragedy. Even if unsuccessful in eliminating cholera, such a
campaign would result in reductions of cholera incidence in Haiti, providing substantial, if not
sustained, benefits to its inhabitants.
The call for mass OCV use in Haiti should in no way be construed as a call to decrease efforts
to improve access to safely managed and sustainable water and sanitation facilities in the
country, and instead should be used to leverage larger funding for this critical infrastructure.
Water and sanitation improvements protect individuals from a suite of diseases beyond cholera,
and universal access to clean water and sanitation is a critical component of the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals. Further, until there is widespread access to clean water and
adequate sanitation, Haiti remains vulnerable to reintroduction of cholera. However, halting
endemic transmission through vaccination could remove cholera from the Americas for
decades, protecting vulnerable populations from one of the deadliest water-borne pathogens.
This is perhaps all the more relevant in the current sociopolitical context of Haiti in which reports
of water insecurity in urban areas abound as fuel crises and political protests hamper access to
clean water for some of the population.​33
Cholera incidence in Haiti has been steadily declining since 2012, and there is some thought
that the country may be on track to elimination with current control activities. Despite this decline
in reported cases, model simulations suggest the probability of elimination (in contrast to the
absence of clinical cases) is low (0-18% of simulations) without changes to current conditions.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Recent resurgences of measles in Madagascar​34​ and elsewhere show that we should be
cautious about the sustainability of apparent reductions in disease incidence. As immunity from
infection and previous vaccine campaigns wanes in Haiti, it is not unreasonable to believe the
country may soon be at risk for a cholera resurgence. Our modeling shows that it is possible to
have periods of low to no ​detected c​ holera cases followed by disease resurgence (Figures
S7-S12).
Individual models each had their own set of limitations with regard to its mechanisms for
characterizing cholera transmission and vaccine dynamics; one or multiple models in our
exercise did not include spatial heterogeneity in cholera transmission, population movement
data, population dynamics, differences in vaccine efficacy by age, and environmental reservoir
or transmission components (See Supplementary Material). To combat these individual model
deficiencies, we interpreted model results collectively and focused on the convergent findings of
model outcomes. The collective exercise was limited more generally by our lack of information
related to community-wide rates of the loss of acquired immunity, the importance of
environmental reservoirs in cholera transmission, and reporting and asymptomatic rates of
cholera in Haiti.
If vaccine supplies and other resources were unconstrained, there would be little downside to a
mass vaccination campaign (the vaccine has few if any side effects). In reality, cholera vaccine
supplies are severely limited and resources for public health are insufficient. Haiti’s unique
situation provides a rare opportunity to use OCV to eliminate cholera from an entire region of
the world, rather than as a bandaid to respond to continuing flare ups and disasters. Our
modeling studies suggest that this goal is achievable with a high quality, large-scale campaign
with high population coverage. Such an effort would represent an innovative, and perhaps
radical, use of public health resources, but might offer substantial long-term benefits and a
reprieve to the already-stressed public health facilities and emergency response sector in Haiti.
If a national OCV campaign prevented future outbreaks for decades or contributed to the
elimination of cholera from the entire region, it would ultimately consume fewer resources than
the status quo. These resources could then be devoted to transformative systems change in the
water and sanitation sector, accelerating progress towards achieving Sustainable Development
Goal 6.
To take this bold approach, the global health community, from donors to local actors, needs to
step up. The United Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund, established in
response to the United Nations’ role in cholera’s introduction into Haiti, is woefully short of its
400-million-dollar fundraising goal. Haiti’s cholera control plan is likewise underfunded. Now that
cases of cholera are at an all-time low in Haiti, a national OCV campaign could serve as a
rallying point for local and international stakeholders; potentially eliminating an illness that has
brought almost a decade of suffering to the poorest and making a first step in protecting the
country from water-borne diseases over the long haul.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figures

Figure 1​. Historical cholera incidence and 10-year projections of the probability of
elimination in Haiti. ​A) Weekly reports of cholera to the Ministère de la Santé Publique et de la
Population in Haiti from October 2010 to January 2019, with an inset of the period after January
2017. The grey box represents the two-year vaccination campaign period in the modeling
exercise. B) Map of reported cholera incidence per 1,000 persons from 2017-2018 across
Haitian departments.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 2​. Vaccination campaign scenarios and vaccine efficacy assumptions.​ A) Summary
of the geographic scope, vaccination campaign deployment, and total number of OCV doses
needed for each of the five modeled vaccination campaign scenarios. B) Common vaccine
efficacy assumptions for 2-doses administered to adults, children, and 1-dose.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 3​. Model outcomes for probability of elimination and elimination date.​ A) Probability
of elimination across simulations during the 10-year projection period across four models
(colors) in six primary scenarios (sub-panels). B) Median elimination date (and 95% CI) for each
model (colors) and scenario (sub-panels) across simulations that achieved elimination. Model
scenarios with no depicted information had zero probability of elimination. For each sub-panel,
the grey shaded area depicts the duration of the vaccination campaign.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 4​. Model outcomes for percentage of infections averted. ​Median percentage of
infections averted within five years after the start of vaccination campaigns, by model and
vaccination campaign scenario.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful for the input and critical discussions with various public health officials
acting in their individual capacities.
Funding
ECL, LM, ASA, and JL (JHU) are supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
(OPP1171700). DLC acknowledges Bill and Melinda Gates for their active support of the
Institute for Disease Modeling and their sponsorship through the Global Good Fund. JL (EPFL),
DP, JP-S, and AR acknowledge funds provided by the Swiss National Science Foundation via
the project “Optimal control of intervention strategies for waterborne disease epidemics”
(200021-172578). LM, JDS, MEH, and IML are supported by the National Institutes of Health
National Institute of General Medical Sciences (U54GM111274). FF acknowledges support from
the Swiss National Science Foundation through the Early Postdoc Mobility Fellowship
(P2ELP3_175079). LCI is supported by the National Institutes of Health National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (R01AI099243) and acknowledges Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation support for cholera control and prevention (OPP1148213). The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of any funding
organization.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

References
1

Lantagne D, Balakrish Nair G, Lanata CF, Cravioto A. The Cholera Outbreak in Haiti:
Where and How did it begin? Berlin: Springer, 2013.

2

Walton DA, Ivers LC. Responding to cholera in post-earthquake Haiti. ​N Engl J Med​ 2011;
364​: 3–5.

3

Jenson D, Szabo V, Duke FHI Haiti Humanities Laboratory Student Research Team.
Cholera in Haiti and other Caribbean regions, 19th century. ​Emerg Infect Dis​ 2011; ​17​:
2130–5.

4

Gelting R, Bliss K, Patrick M, Lockhart G, Handzel T. Water, sanitation and hygiene in Haiti:
past, present, and future. ​Am J Trop Med Hyg​ 2013; ​89​: 665–70.

5

Frerichs RR, Keim PS, Barrais R, Piarroux R. Nepalese origin of cholera epidemic in Haiti.
Clin Microbiol Infect​ 2012; ​18​: E158–63.

6

Barzilay EJ, Schaad N, Magloire R, ​et al.​ Cholera surveillance during the Haiti
epidemic--the first 2 years. ​N Engl J Med​ 2013; ​368​: 599–609.

7

Luquero FJ, Rondy M, Boncy J, ​et al.​ Mortality Rates during Cholera Epidemic, Haiti,
2010-2011. ​Emerg Infect Dis​ 2016; ​22​: 410–6.

8

World Health Organization. Weekly Epidemiological Record.
https://www.who.int/cholera/statistics/en/​.

9

Bi Q, Ferreras E, Pezzoli L, ​et al.​ Protection against cholera from killed whole-cell oral
cholera vaccines: a systematic review and meta-analysis. ​Lancet Infect Dis​ 2017; 1
​ 7​:
1080–8.

10 Ali M, Nelson AR, Lopez AL, Sack DA. Updated global burden of cholera in endemic
countries. ​PLoS Negl Trop Dis​ 2015; 9
​ ​: e0003832.
11 Lewnard JA, Antillón M, Gonsalves G, Miller AM, Ko AI, Pitzer VE. Strategies to Prevent
Cholera Introduction during International Personnel Deployments: A Computational
Modeling Analysis Based on the 2010 Haiti Outbreak. ​PLoS Med​ 2016; ​13​: e1001947.
12 Fung IC-H, Fitter DL, Borse RH, Meltzer MI, Tappero JW. Modeling the effect of water,
sanitation, and hygiene and oral cholera vaccine implementation in Haiti. ​Am J Trop Med
Hyg​ 2013; ​89​: 633–40.
13 Andrews JR, Basu S. Transmission dynamics and control of cholera in Haiti: an epidemic
model. ​Lancet​ 2011; ​377​: 1248–55.
14 Tuite AR, Tien J, Eisenberg M, Earn DJD, Ma J, Fisman DN. Cholera epidemic in Haiti,
2010: using a transmission model to explain spatial spread of disease and identify optimal
control interventions. ​Ann Intern Med​ 2011; ​154​: 593–601.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

15 Azman AS, Luquero FJ, Ciglenecki I, Grais RF, Sack DA, Lessler J. The Impact of a
One-Dose versus Two-Dose Oral Cholera Vaccine Regimen in Outbreak Settings: A
Modeling Study. ​PLoS Med​ 2015; ​12​: e1001867.
16 Chao DL, Halloran ME, Longini IM Jr. Vaccination strategies for epidemic cholera in Haiti
with implications for the developing world. ​Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A​ 2011; ​108​: 7081–5.
17 Kirpich A, Weppelmann TA, Yang Y, Morris JG Jr, Longini IM Jr. Controlling cholera in the
Ouest Department of Haiti using oral vaccines. ​PLoS Negl Trop Dis​ 2017; ​11​: e0005482.
18 Pasetto D, Finger F, Camacho A, ​et al.​ Near real-time forecasting for cholera decision
making in Haiti after Hurricane Matthew. ​PLoS Comput Biol​ 2018; 1
​ 4​: e1006127.
19 Bertuzzo E, Finger F, Mari L, Gatto M, Rinaldo A. On the probability of extinction of the Haiti
cholera epidemic. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment. 2016; ​30​:
2043–55.
20 Rebaudet S, Gazin P, Barrais R, ​et al.​ The dry season in haiti: a window of opportunity to
eliminate cholera. ​PLoS Curr​ 2013; ​5​.
DOI:​10.1371/currents.outbreaks.2193a0ec4401d9526203af12e5024ddc​.
21 Chao DL, Longini IM, Glenn Morris J. Modeling Cholera Outbreaks. Cholera Outbreaks.
2013; : 195–209.
22 Lemaitre J, Pasetto D, Perez-Saez J, Sciarra C, Wamala JF, Rinaldo A. Rainfall as a driver
of epidemic cholera: Comparative model assessments of the effect of intra-seasonal
precipitation events. ​Acta Trop​ 2019; ​190​: 235–43.
23 Rinaldo A, Bertuzzo E, Mari L, ​et al.​ Reassessment of the 2010-2011 Haiti cholera outbreak
and rainfall-driven multiseason projections. ​Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A​ 2012; ​109​: 6602–7.
24 Bertuzzo E, Mari L, Righetto L, ​et al.​ Prediction of the spatial evolution and effects of control
measures for the unfolding Haiti cholera outbreak. Geophysical Research Letters. 2011; ​38​.
DOI:​10.1029/2011gl046823​.
25 Profil statistique du Cholera. Republique d’Haiti, Ministère de la Santé Publique et de la
Population. ​http://mspp.gouv.ht/newsite/​.
26 Ministere de la Sante Publique et de la Population et Direction Nationale de L’Eau Potable
et de L'Assainissement RD. Plan National D’Elimination Du Cholera, Developpement Du
Moyen Terme, Juillet 2016 - Decembre 2018. 2016.
27 Franke MF, Ternier R, Jerome JG, Matias WR, Harris JB, Ivers LC. Long-term
effectiveness of one and two doses of a killed, bivalent, whole-cell oral cholera vaccine in
Haiti: an extended case-control study. ​Lancet Glob Health​ 2018; ​6​: e1028–35.
28 Ferreras E, Chizema-Kawesha E, Blake A, ​et al.​ Single-Dose Cholera Vaccine in Response
to an Outbreak in Zambia. ​N Engl J Med​ 2018; ​378​: 577–9.
29 Qadri F, Ali M, Lynch J, ​et al.​ Efficacy of a single-dose regimen of inactivated whole-cell
oral cholera vaccine: results from 2 years of follow-up of a randomised trial. ​Lancet Infect

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011072; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Dis​ 2018; ​18​: 666–74.
30 Tohme RA, François J, Wannemuehler K, ​et al.​ Oral Cholera Vaccine Coverage, Barriers to
Vaccination, and Adverse Events following Vaccination, Haiti, 2013. ​Emerg Infect Dis​ 2015;
21​: 984–91.
31 Pierre K. Use and perspectives of the oral cholera vaccine (OCV) as a component of the
cholera response. December 5-6, 2018.
https://www.fondation-merieux.org/en/events/5th-gtfcc-working-group-on-oral-cholera-vacci
ne/​.
32 Plan national d’elimination du cholera, Developpement du plan long terme 2018-2022.
Ministère de la Santé Publique et de la Population, Direction Nationale de L’eau Potable et
de L'assainissement, Republic of Haiti, 2019. ​http://mspp.gouv.ht/newsite/​.
33 Thornton C, Dupain E, Barnes T, Castillo J. Humanitarian crisis increases in Haiti as
anti-government protests grip the nation. CNN. 2019; published online Oct 3.
https://www.cnn.com/2019/10/03/americas/haiti-anti-government-protests/index.html​.
34 WHO | Measles – Madagascar. 2019; published online Jan 25.
http://www.who.int/csr/don/17-january-2019-measles-madagascar/en/​ (accessed May 14,
2019).

