medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF FUNCTIONAL ASSAY EVIDENCE USE BY CLINGEN VARIANT
CURATION EXPERT PANELS

Dona M. Kanavy1*, Shannon M. McNulty1*, Meera K. Jairath1, Sarah E. Brnich1, Chris Bizon2,
Bradford C. Powell1, Jonathan S. Berg1†

1

Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel

Hill, North Carolina, USA
2

Renaissance Computing Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North

Carolina, USA

*Contributed equally
†

Correspondence: jonathan_berg@med.unc.edu

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ABSTRACT
Background
The 2015 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) and Association
for Molecular Pathology (AMP) guidelines for clinical sequence variant interpretation state that
“well-established” functional studies can be used as evidence in variant classification. These
guidelines articulated key attributes of functional data, including that assays should reflect the
biological environment and be analytically sound; however, details of how to evaluate these
attributes were left to expert judgment. The Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) designates
Variant Curation Expert Panels (VCEPs) in specific disease areas to make gene-centric
specifications to the ACMG/AMP guidelines, including more specific definitions of appropriate
functional assays. We set out to evaluate the existing VCEP guidelines for functional assays.
Methods
We evaluated the functional criteria (PS3/BS3) of six VCEPs (CDH1, Hearing Loss,
Inherited Cardiomyopathy-MYH7, PAH, PTEN, RASopathy). We then established criteria for
evaluating functional studies based on disease mechanism, general class of assay, and the
characteristics of specific assay instances described in primary literature. Using these criteria,
we extensively curated assay instances cited by each VCEP in their pilot variant classification to
analyze VCEP recommendations and their use in the interpretation of functional studies.
Results
Unsurprisingly, our analysis highlighted the breadth of VCEP-approved assays, reflecting
the diversity of disease mechanisms among VCEPs. We also noted substantial variability
between VCEPs in the method used to select these assays and in the approach used to specify

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

strength modifications, as well as differences in suggested validation parameters. Importantly,
we observed discrepancies between the parameters VCEPs specified as required for approved
assay instances and the fulfillment of these requirements in the individual assays cited in pilot
variant interpretation.
Conclusions
Interpretation of the intricacies of functional assays often requires expert-level
knowledge of the gene and disease and current VCEP recommendations for functional assay
evidence are a useful tool to improve the accessibility of functional data. However, our analysis
suggests that further guidance is needed to standardize this process and ensure consistency in
the application of functional evidence.

KEYWORDS
Clinical Genome Resource, Clinical exome sequencing, Clinical genome sequencing, Functional
assays, Variant interpretation

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

BACKGROUND
In 2015, the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) and
Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) established standards and guidelines [1] for clinical
variant interpretation. These guidelines provided criteria for classifying variants as pathogenic
(P), likely pathogenic (LP), variant of uncertain significance (VUS), likely benign (LB), or benign
(B) using distinct evidence types, each of which was assigned a level of strength. Additional
rules specified combinations of the types and strengths of criteria sufficient to reach a
pathogenic or benign classification. In cases of insufficient or conflicting evidence, variants were
classified as VUS, which present a challenge in clinical molecular genetic testing as they should
not alone be used to define clinical decision-making according to ACMG/AMP standards.
Functional data has considerable potential to aid in variant classification, particularly VUS
reclassification [2]. In contrast to the opportunistic nature of many types of evidence (such as
the fortuitous discovery of a family with sufficient segregation data to aid interpretation),
functional assays are the most amenable to development and therefore the most tractable to
be produced in a timely manner after a variant is observed. The ACMG/AMP guidelines state
that results of “well-established” functional studies can qualify as evidence for functional
criteria application coded as PS3 or BS3 (an abbreviation for functional evidence in the direction
of a pathogenic or benign interpretation, respectively, at a default evidence strength of strong)
and that validation, reproducibility, robustness, and ability of the assay to reflect the biological
environment should be considered. However, it is unclear how these attributes should be
evaluated and selecting appropriate functional evidence often requires expert-level knowledge
of the gene and disease.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) has founded Variant Curation Expert Panels
(VCEPs) in multiple disease areas, each tasked with developing adaptations of the ACMG/AMP
rules for their disease or gene of interest [3]. These VCEP specifications regarding functional
data provided expert interpretations of the qualities required for an assay to be deemed “wellestablished.”
In this study, we sought to define the characteristics of functional assays that satisfy
PS3/BS3 criteria by conducting a comparative analysis of VCEP recommendations for these
criteria. The six VCEPs that have published disease- and gene-specific adaptations to the
ACMG/AMP guidelines (CDH1, Hearing Loss, Inherited Cardiomyopathy-MYH7, PAH, PTEN, and
RASopathy [3–8]) served as a case study, allowing us to assess the validation parameters and
evidence strength for each approved assay, as well as the features of assays that were not
approved by the VCEPs. We curated instances of assays in the primary literature cited by each
VCEP both in their recommendation publication and in the course of their pilot variant
classification using consistent criteria. This approach allowed us to assess the extent to which
cited instances of assays satisfy VCEP-specified recommendations and how they differed.

METHODS
Evaluation of ClinGen VCEP Specifications
We assessed the guidance for the use of PS3/BS3 by six ClinGen VCEPs with approved
and published variant interpretation recommendations as of April 2019: CDH1, Hearing Loss,
Inherited Cardiomyopathy (MYH7), PAH, PTEN, and RASopathy. In our initial survey of
recommendations, we noticed certain parameters (replicates, controls, thresholds, and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

validation measures) were identified by more than one group. We evaluated how often these
four assay parameters were specified by the VCEPs and whether each VCEP provided
recommendations for modifying PS3/BS3 evidence strength to a moderate (PS3_M) or
supporting (PS3_P/BS3_P) level.
Literature Search and Variant Identification
To identify relevant primary literature for each VCEP, we catalogued each of the variants
classified by the VCEP as part of their pilot variant classification effort and the final classification
of each pilot variant (P, LP, VUS, LB, or B). Next, we determined which pilot variant
interpretations included PS3/BS3 evidence and the specific instances of assay cited as evidence
utilizing information in the VCEP publication, as well as ClinVar
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/) and the ClinGen Evidence Repository
(https://erepo.clinicalgenome.org/evrepo/). In addition to curating primary literature cited as
evidence in pilot variant interpretation, we curated primary literature and reviews the VCEPs
cited in their publications in support of their approval or exclusion of a given assay (see
Literature Curation Approach).
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
We focused our curation efforts on assays that determined the function of a gene
product. We excluded assays that tested splicing, as these typically evaluated the transcript
rather than the encoded protein function. We conducted a limited evaluation of assay instances
using cells or tissue derived from affected individuals as the primary experimental material, as
the variant in question was not isolated from the individual’s genetic background and, as a
result, abnormal gene product function cannot be definitively attributed to the genetic variant.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Literature Curation Approach
We developed consistent criteria for evaluating classes of functional assays and specific
instances of their use in evaluating the impact of a variant by establishing three main domains
to describe a given assay. First, we curated the disease mechanism for a given gene-disease pair
using the associated Monarch Disease Ontology (MONDO) identifier [10], the functional
pathway using Gene Ontology (GO) terms [11–13], the molecular etiology using controlled
vocabulary (e.g., loss-of-function, dominant negative, or gain-of-function), and the inheritance
pattern, also using a controlled vocabulary. Next, we identified the general class of each assay
used in the primary literature each VCEP cited using ontology terms from Bioassay Ontology
(BAO; http://bioassayontology.org/) [14,15] and Evidence and Conclusion Ontology (ECO;
http://www.evidenceontology.org/) [16]. In some cases, ontologies describing the class of assay
were found in only one of the two ontology databases. Finally, we used a structured narrative
to describe the specific instance of an assay being performed. We summarized multiple
attributes, including PubMed Identifier (PMID), study purpose, entity performing the assay,
methodology (including replicates, controls, thresholds, and validation measures), and assay
results. We also catalogued other details specific to the assay, such as experimental material,
quantitation measures, and statistical analyses.

RESULTS
Each VCEP approved between one and seven assays for use as evidence for PS3/BS3
application (Table 1), all reflective of the disease mechanism but with widely varying specificity
regarding the descriptions of approved assays. These ranged from detailed assays evaluating

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the myristoylation status of a single residue in a given protein (RASopathy VCEP) to broader
specification of any mammalian variant-specific knock-in model (Inherited Cardiomyopathy
VCEP). Two VCEPs (Hearing Loss and PTEN) approved any sufficiently validated assays not
explicitly approved in their recommendations if deemed appropriate by the analyst in future
variant interpretation efforts. We also noted variability in the inclusion of guidance for
downgrading strength modifications to a moderate or supporting level. We next surveyed the
parameters stipulated by each VCEP (Table 2). We also observed variation in the frequency and
methods by which these parameters were specified, with most VCEPs detailing a need for one
to two of these four parameters to be fulfilled by an individual instance of a functional assay.
The frequency of functional criteria application in pilot variant interpretation varied
widely among VCEPs (Fig. 1a), with the PAH and RASopathy VCEPs using PS3/BS3 at the highest
frequency in their pilot variant classification (31/85 variants and 36/103 variants, respectively)
while the CDH1 and Inherited Cardiomyopathy VCEPs applied PS3/BS3 less commonly (4/49
variants and 4/60 variants, respectively). Variants that were ultimately classified as VUS rarely
included PS3/BS3 evidence codes (Fig. 1b). We noted general agreement between the
functional data criteria applied to pilot variants and the overall variant classification (Fig. 1c).
Pilot variant interpretations that included PS3 criteria were frequently given an overall
classification of LP or P, with very few classified as VUS and none classified as LB or B. Similarly,
those that included BS3 criteria were often classified as LB or B, with one interesting exception
of a variant with BS3 evidence ultimately classified as P. Given the variation observed in our
broad analysis of parameter specification across VCEPs, we used consistent criteria to curate

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

primary literature cited by each of the six VCEPs to assess their application of these parameters
(see Methods).
CDH1 VCEP
The CDH1 VCEP set guidelines for functional studies of the E-cadherin protein encoded
by CDH1 (Table 1; see also Additional File 1) [3]. Loss-of-function variants in the CDH1 gene
have been associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer [9] through a loss of cell adhesion
and an increase in cell motility [10]. In vitro studies commonly test CDH1 variants for retention
of two main functions: cell-cell adhesion and invasion suppression, through aggregation assays
or collagen invasion assays, respectively [11]. The CDH1 VCEP evaluated 49 variants in their
pilot study and assigned the PS3 criterion to four [3]. The only approved assays were those that
measure abnormal splicing of the CDH1 gene, as this measures one of the main disease
mechanisms. For the purpose of this analysis, we only assessed functional studies that evaluate
the effect of CDH1 variants on protein function and not those assessing splicing variation (see
Methods and Discussion).
This VCEP also reviewed literature studying the effect of missense variants and
identified 14 variants with two or more published “abnormal” functional assay results, six of
which were included in the pilot set. However, this VCEP ultimately decided these assays
(aggregation/invasion, wound closure, and proximity ligation) were not sufficient predictors of
pathogenicity, in part because none of the 14 variants were found in a large database of CDH1
variants from individuals with disease [3]. To better understand why the VCEP deemed these
assays poor predictors of pathogenicity for missense variants, we evaluated each functional
assay the VCEP considered (Fig. 2; see also Additional File 2: Tables S1 and S2). We then

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

compared the findings from these functional studies to assertions in ClinVar, both from the
VCEP and other clinical labs (Additional File 2: Table S3), to examine if the functional assays that
tested CDH1 missense variants could predict pathogenicity. While most clinical lab entries in
ClinVar did not specify which rule codes they used in their interpretation, many commented on
the functional data. Only one of the 14 variants analyzed had a likely pathogenic assertion,
while the remaining variants were classified as benign (5), VUS (8), conflicting (1), or not listed
in ClinVar (3). We also noted that while each assay instance incorporated wild type and mock
controls, no known pathogenic or benign controls were used to validate the assays. This limited
validation coupled with an absence of identified definitively pathogenic missense variants
makes it difficult to determine the positive predictive value of these assays and likely
contributed to the VCEP not approving any existing functional studies of missense variants.
Hearing Loss VCEP
The Hearing Loss (HL) VCEP developed disease-specific recommendations for variant
interpretation in the context of nine genes commonly associated with hearing loss: CDH23,
COCH, GJB2, KCNQ4, MYO6, MYO7A, SLC26A4, TECTA, and USH2A (Table 1; see also Additional
File 1) [5]. A single assay type, a variant-specific knock-in mouse model recapitulating the
hearing loss phenotype, was the only functional study approved for PS3 application at the
strong level. Additional guidelines for PS3/BS3 application at reduced strength levels were given
for three genes: COCH, GJB2, and SLC26A4. Given the heterogeneity in disease mechanism
underlying the multiple types of hearing loss, each gene was associated with a unique set of
approved functional assays (Table 1). The HL VCEP calculated the positive and negative
predictive value of functional assays commonly used to assess variants in these three genes

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(COCH, GJB2, SLC26A4) by comparing published assay results with ClinVar classifications [5]. For
a P or LP ClinVar variant, an “abnormal” assay result compared to wild type was considered a
true positive, while an assay result similar to wild type was considered a false negative.
Similarly, for a variant classified as B or LB in ClinVar, a wild type-like assay result was
considered a true negative, while an “abnormal” result was considered a false positive.
In the VCEP pilot variant classification of 41 variants, PS3 (at any strength level) was
applied to eight variants and BS3 (at a supporting strength level) was applied to two variants.
The VCEP did not cite any mouse models in their final variant curations, despite previous
reports of mouse models generated for two pilot variants (GJB2 c.109G>A and SLC26A4 c.9192A>G) [20,21]. Assays testing transport capability (electrical coupling, dye transfer, anion
transport) were the most commonly used functional evidence (applied as PS3/BS3 assertions at
reduced strength for eight variants). We assessed each of the 31 specific instances of these
assays cited by the VCEP, in which some variants were evaluated more than once, to determine
how often the parameters defined by the VCEP were satisfied (Fig. 3; see also Additional File 2:
Tables S4 and S5). While all instances [22,23,32–41,24,42–48,25–31] tested a wild type control,
water-injected or non-transfected controls were less consistently used (24/31), despite the
VCEP’s stated requirement. Statistical testing was included in 17/31 cited instances of assay. In
particular, no statistical analysis was done for the dye transfer assays, possibly because the
results of this test are qualitative rather than quantitative. Finally, the HL VCEP applied
PS3_supporting to a variant in an additional gene not given assay-specific recommendations,
KCNQ4 c.853G>A p.(Gly285Ser). Two instances of an electrical coupling assay [49,50] showing
little to no electrical current in cells expressing KCNQ4 p.Gly285Ser were used as evidence for

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

PS3_supporting. Although no specific guidance was given for KCNQ4 variant interpretation,
functional assays with limited validation were generally approved by the VCEP at the
PS3_supporting level for all hearing loss-associated genes.
A variant in the pilot set, SLC26A4 c.349C>T p.(Leu117Phe), was assigned
BS3_supporting, but given an overall pathogenic classification (and, post-publication,
downgraded to likely pathogenic in the ClinGen Evidence Repository). Although a radioactive
anion isotope transport assay [46] found no statistically significant difference in rate of iodide
efflux in cells expressing the SLC26A4 variant, the VCEP reasoned that the functional assay may
not assess all ion transport functions of the protein or fully reflect the biological environment,
and noted that the benign functional evidence at a supporting level was not considered to be in
conflict with other pathogenic evidence leading to the final classification. While the VCEP did
not give specific recommendations for handling conflicting criteria, this case suggests that
functional assays, even if VCEP-approved, are limited in their ability to test all functions of a
protein. Functional evidence, especially evidence supporting BS3 criteria, must be weighed with
other types of evidence in making an overall classification determination (see Discussion).
Inherited Cardiomyopathy (MYH7) VCEP
The Inherited Cardiomyopathy VCEP published recommendations for interpretation of
variants in MYH7, encoding α (alpha) cardiac myosin heavy chain, a gene associated with
multiple forms of cardiomyopathy (dilated, hypertrophic, and restrictive) (Table 1; see also
Additional File 1) [6]. The expert panel reviewed published functional evidence for their 60 pilot
variants to determine which assays qualified for PS3/BS3 evidence. After evaluating in vivo and
in vitro functional evidence for 23 of these variants, they approved only in vivo mammalian,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

variant-specific knock-in models to serve at the strong level and applied this evidence to four
variants. Given the poor predictive value of the 16 in vitro assays evaluated in their review, no
in vitro assays were approved at any strength level and were not cited as evidence for any pilot
variants.
When assessing the various functional assays this expert panel reviewed but ultimately
did not approve, we noted that the MYH7 c.1208G>A p.(Arg403Gln) variant was tested in many
of the functional studies. We used this variant to compare the characteristics of the assays that
this VCEP did approve for use as evidence of PS3/BS3 (knock-in mouse model) to those that
were not approved (in vitro motility assay and ATPase assay) (Fig. 4; see also Additional File 2:
Tables S6 and S7). The first knock-in mouse model of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy introduced
the c.1208G>A p.(Arg403Gln) variant into the endogenous murine Myh7 [51]. The mice had a
heart phenotype similar to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy that was recapitulated in multiple
instances, which reported defective myocyte function and development of cardiac hypertrophy
and lethal cardiomyopathy [36,52–57] in mice bearing an p.Arg403Gln Myh7 variant. The VCEP
considered this strong evidence for pathogenicity. We also reviewed two classes of in vitro
functional assay commonly used to assess the effect of MYH7 c.1208G>A p.(Arg403Gln), but
not approved by the VCEP: the in vitro motility assay and the ATPase assay. The in vitro motility
assay measures the velocity of actin filament sliding on a surface coated with myosin, a motion
required for normal muscle contraction in vivo [58,59], while the ATPase assay measures the
enzymatic function of ATP exchange required for force generation [60,61]. We examined
several instances of each assay type [57,62–70] and noted heterogeneity in the source of
myosin used, as well as a general lack of controls with known effect (other than wild type) for

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

comparison to the variant myosin [57,62–70]. Furthermore, distinct instances of this assay
examining the c.1208G>A p.(Arg403Gln) MYH7 variant yielded conflicting results, with some
studies finding increased actin filament velocity [57,65–69] or ATPase activity [57,66,67] and
others reporting decreased actin filament velocity [62–64,70] or ATPase activity [64,68,70].
Poor reproducibility of the motility assay has been previously reported [71] and is thought to
arise, at least partially, due to technical complications in myosin isolation. Ultimately, this case
study demonstrates that poor reproducibility across instances of an assay class complicates the
interpretation of the results in aggregate and no evidence from this assay class was approved
for application.
PAH VCEP
The PAH VCEP published functional study guidelines for variants in the phenylalanine
hydroxylase (PAH) gene associated with phenylketonuria (PKU) (Table 1; see also Additional File
1) [7]. They reviewed existing literature for functional studies and approved a well-established
in vitro PAH enzyme activity assay involving expression of the variant allele in cultured cells and
measurement of the variant enzyme activity in comparison to wild type activity. In vitro PAH
enzyme activity correlates with the severity of the PKU phenotype [72]. A threshold of 0-50%
residual enzyme activity compared to wild type was recommended for evidence of abnormal
activity sufficient for PS3 application [7]. The VCEP assessed 85 variants in their pilot study and
assigned PS3 to 29 variants with residual PAH activity values of ≤50% compared to wild type.
The VCEP did not recommend the use of other assays described in the primary literature
measuring PAH expression or protein folding, aggregation, or stability [73].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

To assess use of the enzyme activity assay by the VCEP, we evaluated specific instances
of assays measuring PAH activity cited as evidence in their pilot variant classification. We noted
several discrepancies in assay methodology among the different research groups (Fig. 5; see
also Additional File 2: Tables S8 and S9). In most instances, PAH variants were expressed in COS
monkey kidney cells and enzyme activity was measured in cell extracts [73–79], though some
expressed the variant in E. coli and measured enzyme activity of the purified protein [73,80,81].
In some instances, a synthetic cofactor 6-MPH4 [73,74,76,79,82] was used in place of the
natural cofactor BH4 [76–78,80,81,83]. The method for measuring the conversion of
phenylalanine to tyrosine also differed among experiments, with early researchers using paper
chromatography or thin layer chromatography (TLC) and visualizing the results with
autoradiography and quantifying via a liquid scintillation counter [73,75,79,83]. As technology
advanced, experiments used high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with fluorometric
detection [80,84] or the more sophisticated method of liquid chromatography measured with
electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometer [78].
Given the differences in assay methodologies in instances of the PAH enzyme activity
assay, we concluded that PAH activity results may vary among different instances of the assay
analyzing the same variant. To test this, we compared enzyme activity results from multiple
sources to the final enzyme activity cited by the VCEP as evidence for the interpretation of a
given variant. One such source, a meta-analysis of in vitro PAH enzyme activity assays of 87 PAH
variants from 49 publications also noted different methodologies for measuring PAH activity,
including different cell expression systems, cofactors, temperatures, reaction times, and
measurement methods, and variation in the final assay result [72]. Of the 29 variants assessed

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in the VCEP pilot study and ultimately assigned PS3, 18 had more than one result reported in
the sources we reviewed (Table 3). We observed consistency in the activity levels of more
severe variants that were often identified in individuals with classical PKU, but the milder
variants had a wide range of reported enzyme activity levels. Of note, nine variants had at least
one report of enzyme activity ≥50% of wild type, which would exceed the VCEP-established cut
off and conflict with the VCEP-cited evidence in support of a PS3 assertion. The variation in
enzyme activity levels may be dependent on experimental design, thus further guidance is
needed on the most appropriate method to measure activity level and/or on how to resolve
conflicting results.
PTEN VCEP
The PTEN VCEP outlined specific recommendations for seven accepted general classes
of functional assays testing the effect of variants in this gene associated with hereditary cancer
(Table 1; see also Additional File 1) [8]. In the VCEP pilot variant classification of 36 PTEN
variants, PS3 was applied to four variants, PS3_supporting was applied to one variant, and
BS3_supporting was applied to one variant. Phosphatase activity was the most commonly used
assay (three of four variants assigned PS3), with a single study [85] testing the ability of purified
proteins to dephosphorylate PIP3 in vitro used to support the PS3 assertion for all three
variants. Each of these variants displayed >90% reduction in phosphatase activity, well below
the VCEP-approved threshold of ≥50% reduction in protein activity compared to wild type
PTEN, and were replicated in three independent experiments, but the VCEP-specified
catalytically inactive control was not included (Fig. 6; see also Additional File 2: Tables S10 and
S11). Two variants were classified PS3 or BS3 based on splicing assays [86,87], which we did not

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

evaluate (see Methods). The final variant in the pilot set was assigned PS3_supporting based on
altered protein localization [88].
The VCEP cited a study that assessed PTEN protein levels in lymphoblast cell lines
derived directly from individuals with Cowden syndrome [89]. Further guidance on the use of
tissues and cell lines derived from affected individuals in functional assays is needed to inform
application of this type of evidence (see Methods and Discussion). Additional guidance may also
be necessary to interpret transgenic model organism evidence. Although the VCEP specified
that this class of functional assay could be used in support of PS3_supporting, no studies of
transgenic model organisms were used by the VCEP in pilot variant classification and the exact
phenotypes required to use this type of evidence are unclear. Also of note was a highthroughput assay cited by the VCEP, but not used in pilot variant interpretation. This study used
saturation mutagenesis to assess the pathogenicity of over 8000 PTEN variants, nearly all
possible missense variants, by expressing PTEN in yeast cells and using cell growth rate as a
readout for phosphatase activity [90]. The same three variants in the pilot set found to have
reduced phosphatase activity in an in vitro phosphatase activity assay [85] were also tested in
this high-throughput assay [90]. Fitness scores of all three of these variants were lower than
that observed for wild type or “wild type-like” variants, suggesting agreement of this approach
with small-scale in vitro assays.
RASopathy VCEP
The RASopathy VCEP published recommendations for PS3/BS3 application in
interpretation of variants in nine genes linked to RASopathy conditions: BRAF, HRAS, KRAS,
MAP2K1, MAP2K2, PTPN11, RAF1, SHOC2, and SOS1 (Table 1; see also Additional File 1) [9].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Assays measuring MAP2K1/2 and ERK1/2 phosphorylation [91,92,101–104,93–100] were the
mostly commonly cited functional evidence in pilot variant classification (24/36 variants). The
VCEP indicated that MAP2K1/2 and ERK1/2 activation should be measured both basally and
following receptor tyrosine kinase stimulation, typically via epidermal or fibroblast growth
factor addition (EGF and FGF). We noted disparities of assay instances with respect to whether
measurements were taken in serum-starved cells, stimulated cells, or both, and in the method
of stimulation (serum addition vs. purified EGF or FGF addition) (Fig. 7; see also Additional File
2: Tables S12 and S13). Direct quantification was not required, but was completed in many
instances, as were statistical analyses.
Gain-of-function BRAF variants leading to an increase in kinase activity are most
commonly associated with Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome; however, gain-of-function
variants that result in reduced kinase activity and impaired stimulation of MAP2K1/2 and
ERK1/2 phosphorylation have also been observed [101,105]. Although the VCEP specified that
increased kinase activity could be used in support of PS3, no guidelines were given for variants
that result in kinase impairment, despite their application of PS3 to variants with reduced BRAF
kinase activity (e.g. BRAF c.1787G>T p.Gly596Val). Similarly, PS3 was applied to a PTPN11
variant (c.1403C>T p.Thr468Met) with impaired phosphatase activity measured in different
instances of the same assay type, but the VCEP only gave recommendations for variants that
resulted in increased phosphatase activity. In two instances, the VCEP cited an ELK
transactivation assay as evidence for PS3 application. While this assay was not explicitly
approved by the VCEP, it appears to reflect the disease mechanism, as it measures the ability of
BRAF to activate downstream transcription of ELK transcription factor.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

DISCUSSION
Our review of disease- and gene-specific functional assay evidence recommendations by
six VCEPs highlighted a general uniformity across VCEPs in the approval of assays reflective of
disease mechanism and, in some cases, the explicit exclusion of assays deemed to be poor
predictors of variant pathogenicity. Our efforts also identified differences among VCEPs in
parameter specification and evidence capturing, suggesting the need for a baseline guide for
functional evidence assessment and a consistent criteria for capturing functional evidence.
Along with the evidence curation criteria described in this study, standardized ClinGen criteria
for functional assay evaluation should be developed to ensure consistency among VCEPs. Use
of standard operating procedures for curating functional assay evidence could also improve
transparency by encouraging complete recording of evidence used in variant classification,
including documenting any conflicting evidence and whether a given piece of functional
evidence for a variant was considered but not deemed appropriate, versus not evaluated at all.
We noted five recurring points of interest that will likely require further elucidation by
the ClinGen Sequence Variant Interpretation Working Group to streamline functional evidence
interpretation: (1) methodology for estimating the predictive power of assays, (2) consideration
of splicing assays within PS3/BS3 criteria, (3) use of functional data from experimental materials
derived from affected individuals, (4) unclear recommendations for creation and interpretation
of model organism evidence, and (5) limited guidance for conflicting evidence.
Two VCEPs, Hearing Loss (HL) and CDH1, detailed their approach for estimating the
predictive power of assays to determine which assays should be approved for use as PS3/BS3
evidence. The HL VCEP calculated the positive and negative predictive value of functional assays

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

commonly used to assess variants in three genes (COCH, GJB2, SLC26A4) by comparing
published assay results with ClinVar classifications [5], while the CDH1 VCEP compared
published assay results with data from affected individuals (see CDH1 VCEP and Hearing Loss
VCEP in Results) [4]. Importantly, these estimations were limited by the number of variants
assessed, with 10 to 23 variants analyzed per hearing loss-related assay or by its reliance on
previous identification of the variant in populations of affected individuals. Furthermore, the HL
VCEP used aggregated results of multiple specific instances of a general class of assay, rather
than assessing each instance and its validation parameters independently. In our view, the
predictive value of a functional assay is most reliably determined using variants of known
pathogenic or known benign interpretation (interpreted as such without using functional
evidence) in the same instance of the assay, rather than attempting a post hoc calculation
across different instances of the same assay. Clearly, additional guidance on appropriate
methods for estimating the predictive power of assays is needed.
For the purpose of this analysis, we defined functional assays as systematic experiments
(either in vitro or in vivo) used to elucidate the function of a protein in a cellular pathway or
biological process [106]. With this in mind, we did not curate splicing assay evidence, despite
splicing assessment being explicitly approved by the CDH1, PAH, and PTEN VCEPs and implicitly
approved by the HL VCEP (via use of splicing evidence in interpretation of a pilot variant). While
these assays can provide evidence of abnormal splicing and confirm results from in silico
predictors, it does not directly test the function of the protein and, as a result, we suggest that
splicing evidence represents a distinct type of evidence that may require separate
interpretation recommendations.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

We also observed relatively frequent citation of functional studies using cells or tissue
derived from affected individuals in the primary literature used as evidence for PS3/BS3 criteria.
As reasoned by Strande et al. [107], studies conducted using tissue or cells from an affected
individual can provide high level information about the clinical phenotype (biochemical or
enzymatic dysfunction), but not the variant-level effect, as the variant being tested cannot be
isolated from other variants present in the individual’s genome. In general, this evidence may
be better suited as evidence for the application of PP4 (supporting evidence of variant
pathogenicity based on the individual’s specific phenotype as it relates to a disease).
Knock-in animal models were approved in some capacity by four of the six VCEPs;
however, we noted a lack of guidance in their recommendations for model creation and
interpretation. Some VCEPs gave no specifications for the number or type of different strains
that should be used, the number of individual organisms that should be analyzed, or the
features the animal must display to sufficiently recapitulate the disease phenotype. It was also
unclear if studies using cells or tissue derived from a model organism for in vitro experiments
should be considered model organism evidence. For example, although the Inherited
Cardiomyopathy VCEP only approved mammalian variant-specific knock-in models, we noted at
least one study used as pilot variant classification evidence that created a mouse model but did
not directly assess the phenotype of the organism [69]. Instead, this study used myosin derived
from these mice for in vitro assays of myosin motility and ATPase activity. Additional guidance
on the interpretation of model organisms is necessary to reduce variability in evidence
interpretation and application.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Our primary literature curation uncovered multiple instances of conflicting functional
evidence for a single variant, yet only the HL VCEP provided guidance on interpretation of
conflicting evidence from functional studies, suggesting “no criteria should be applied if
multiple assay results do not agree” [5]. A striking example of the prevalence of conflicting data
can be seen in different instances of the PAH VCEP-approved enzyme activity assay (Table 3).
Variation in study design likely contributed to the wide range of activity levels observed for the
same variant; however, this was not addressed by the VCEP and it is unclear how the VCEP
selected which activity level to ultimately use as evidence for the PS3 criteria. This highlights
the importance of not solely approving all assays of a given class, but rather evaluating the
specific result of an assay in the context of that assay’s validation. In addition to conflicts
between functional evidence, we also noted a need for guidance surrounding cases of
functional evidence that conflict with other types of evidence gathered for a variant. The
ACMG/AMP guidelines suggest that a variant with conflicting evidence should be classified as a
VUS [1]. A Bayesian reinterpretation of ACMG/AMP guidelines specified a method for weighting
combinations of pathogenic and benign evidence [108] that may help to solve this problem. For
example, the Hearing Loss VCEP classified the SLC26A4 variant c.349C>T as pathogenic (and
later downgraded the variant to likely pathogenic), despite also applying BS3_supporting
criteria to the variant. In doing so, the VCEP acknowledged that the anion isotope transport
assay cited as evidence may not assess all aspects of protein function. Although not explicity
stated, we infer that the VCEP did not want a “supporting” piece of evidence to call into
question the overall interpretation, when other lines of evidence more strongly suggested a
pathogenic interpretation. This example also raises the question of how functional assays that

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

examine only one aspect of protein function should be interpreted when a variant
demonstrates a normal result, and whether some form of combinatorial evidence from more
than one class of assay should be required to support a benign interpretation.
Finally, through our curation of primary literature cited by the VCEPs, we observed that
studies used as evidence for PS3/BS3 often did not satisfy all of the VCEP-recommended
parameters (Fig. 2-7). Understandably, many functional assays have been performed in basic
science laboratories for the purpose of understanding the gene, and not to provide clinically
validated evidence of a pathogenic or benign classification. That being said, it is critical for
VCEPs and others evaluating variants to approach this data critically and conservatively. While
we suggest the development and implementation of criteria that sets baseline quality
requirements, we also believe this finding demonstrates a need for the ACMG/AMP guidelines
and VCEP recommendations surrounding PS3/BS3 criteria to be conveyed to research
laboratories for incorporation into the study design of future research assays. Inclusion of
pathogenic and benign controls, assay replication, and statistical analyses, among other
practices, have the power to improve the clinical utility of studies conducted in research labs by
aiding in clinical variant interpretation.

CONCLUSIONS
In summary, our comparative analysis identified both commonalties and discrepancies
among the functional assay evidence evaluation recommendations made by six ClinGen VCEPs.
We observed multiples areas of discordance that warrant additional guidance, including setting
a standard for basic validation parameters that should be fulfilled by functional studies,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

establishing if assays using experimental material derived from affected individuals are
appropriate for PS3/BS3 evidence, and determining how conflicting evidence should be
assessed. Although VCEP recommendations are an indispensable tool for the interpretation of
functional evidence in a given disease area, further general guidance for functional evidence
use is needed to take full advantage of the power of functional studies.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ACMG: American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics; AMP: Association for Molecular
Pathology; ATP: Adenosine Triphosphate; BH4: Tetrahydrobiopterin; DFNA9: autosomal
dominant nonsyndromic deafness 9; DFNB1: autosomal recessive nonsyndromic deafness 1;
DFNB3: autosomal dominant nonsyndromic deafness; DFNB4: autosomal recessive
nonsyndromic deafness 4; BAO: Bioassay Ontology; B: benign; ClinGen: Clinical Genome
Resource; ECO: Evidence and Conclusion Ontology; EGF: Epidermal Fibroblast Growth; FGF:
Fibroblast Growth Factor; GO: Gene Ontology; HL: Hearing Loss; HPLC: high-performance liquid
chromatography; LB: likely benign; LP: likely pathogenic; MONDO: Monarch Disease Ontology
identifier; P: pathogenic; pAKT: phosphorylated AKT; PKU: Phenylketonuria; PMID: PubMed
identifier; TLC: thin-layer chromatography; VCEP: Variant Curation Expert Panel; VUS: variant of
uncertain significance

DECLARATIONS
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Consent for publication
Not applicable
Availability of data and material
All data generated or analyzed during this study supporting the conclusions of the article are
included in this published article and its supplementary information files.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Funding
This work was supported by the following grants: UNC/ACMG/Geisinger/Kaiser under the
award number U41HG009650 and 3U41HG009650-02S1. ClinGen is primarily funded by the
National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), through the following three grants:
U41HG006834, U41HG009649, U41HG009650. ClinGen also receives support for content
curation from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (NICHD), through the following three grants: U24HD093483, U24HD093486,
U24HD093487. SEB is supported in part by National Institute of General Medical Sciences
grants 5T32 GM007092 and 5T32 GM008719-6. SEB is also a recipient of support from the
University Cancer Research Fund as an MD/PhD scholar. JSB is a recipient of the Yang Family
Biomedical Scholars Award. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
Authors’ contributions
DMK, MKJ, SEB, CB, BCP, and JSB designed the study. DMK, SMM, and MKJ conducted the VCEP
specification evaluation, variant identification, literature search, and curations. DMK, MKJ,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

SMM, SEB, CB, BCP, and JSB participated in data analysis. DMK, SMM, MKJ, and JSB wrote the
original manuscript draft. DMK, MKJ, SMM, SEB, CB, BCP, and JSB reviewed and edited the final
manuscript draft. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to ClinGen Sequence Variant Interpretation Working Group Chairs Leslie G.
Biesecker (NIH/NHGRI) and Steven M. Harrison (Broad Institute) for their critical reading of this
manuscript and valuable comments. We also appreciate helpful discussion with the ClinGen
Functional Studies Team at Stanford University (Matt W. Wright, Michael A. Iacocca, Arturo
Lopez Pineda, and Hannah Wand).

REFERENCES
1.

Richards S, Aziz N, Bale S, Bick D, Das S, Gastier-Foster J, et al. Standards and guidelines
for the interpretation of sequence variants: a joint consensus recommendation of the
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular
Pathology. Genet Med. 2015 May 5;17(5):405–23.

2.

Brnich SE, Rivera-Muñoz EA, Berg JS. Quantifying the potential of functional evidence to
reclassify variants of uncertain significance in the categorical and Bayesian interpretation
frameworks. Hum Mutat. 2018 Nov;39(11):1531–41.

3.

Rivera-Muñoz EA, Milko L V, Harrison SM, Azzariti DR, Kurtz CL, Lee K, et al. ClinGen
Variant Curation Expert Panel experiences and standardized processes for disease and
gene-level specification of the ACMG/AMP guidelines for sequence variant
interpretation. Hum Mutat. 2018 Nov;39(11):1614–22.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4.

Lee K, Krempely K, Roberts ME, Anderson MJ, Carneiro F, Chao E, et al. Specifications of
the ACMG/AMP variant curation guidelines for the analysis of germline CDH1 sequence
variants. Hum Mutat. 2018 Nov;39(11):1553–68.

5.

Oza AM, DiStefano MT, Hemphill SE, Cushman BJ, Grant AR, Siegert RK, et al. Expert
specification of the ACMG/AMP variant interpretation guidelines for genetic hearing loss.
Hum Mutat. 2018 Nov 1;39(11):1593–613.

6.

Kelly MA, Caleshu C, Morales A, Buchan J, Wolf Z, Harrison SM, et al. Adaptation and
validation of the ACMG/AMP variant classification framework for MYH7-associated
inherited cardiomyopathies: recommendations by ClinGen’s Inherited Cardiomyopathy
Expert Panel. Genet Med. 2018 Mar 4;20(3):351–9.

7.

Zastrow DB, Baudet H, Shen W, Thomas A, Si Y, Weaver MA, et al. Unique aspects of
sequence variant interpretation for inborn errors of metabolism (IEM): The ClinGen IEM
Working Group and the Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Gene. Hum Mutat. 2018
Nov;39(11):1569–80.

8.

Mester JL, Ghosh R, Pesaran T, Huether R, Karam R, Hruska KS, et al. Gene-specific
criteria for PTEN variant curation: Recommendations from the ClinGen PTEN Expert
Panel. Hum Mutat. 2018 Nov 1;39(11):1581–92.

9.

Gelb BD, Cavé H, Dillon MW, Gripp KW, Lee JA, Mason-Suares H, et al. ClinGen’s
RASopathy Expert Panel consensus methods for variant interpretation. Genet Med. 2018
Nov 1;20(11):1334–45.

10.

Mungall CJ, McMurry JA, Köhler S, Balhoff JP, Borromeo C, Brush M, et al. The Monarch
Initiative: an integrative data and analytic platform connecting phenotypes to genotypes

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

across species. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 Jan 4;45(D1):D712–22.
11.

Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, et al. Gene Ontology:
tool for the unification of biology. Nat Genet. 2000 May;25(1):25–9.

12.

The Gene Ontology Consortium. The Gene Ontology Resource: 20 years and still GOing
strong. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Jan 8;47(D1):D330–8.

13.

Carbon S, Ireland A, Mungall CJ, Shu S, Marshall B, Lewis S, et al. AmiGO: online access to
ontology and annotation data. Bioinformatics. 2009 Jan 15;25(2):288–9.

14.

Abeyruwan S, Vempati UD, Küçük-McGinty H, Visser U, Koleti A, Mir A, et al. Evolving
BioAssay Ontology (BAO): modularization, integration and applications. J Biomed
Semantics. 2014;5(Suppl 1):S5.

15.

Vempati UD, Przydzial MJ, Chung C, Abeyruwan S, Mir A, Sakurai K, et al. Formalization,
annotation and analysis of diverse drug and probe screening assay datasets using the
BioAssay Ontology (BAO). Cox D, editor. PLoS One. 2012 Nov 14;7(11):e49198.

16.

Giglio M, Tauber R, Nadendla S, Munro J, Olley D, Ball S, et al. ECO, the Evidence &amp;
Conclusion Ontology: community standard for evidence information. Nucleic Acids Res.
2019 Jan 8;47(D1):D1186–94.

17.

Green KJ, Getsios S, Troyanovsky S, Godsel LM. Intercellular junction assembly, dynamics,
and homeostasis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2010 Feb;2(2):a000125.

18.

Gabbert H, Wagner R, Moll R, Gerharz CD. Tumor dedifferentiation: an important step in
tumor invasion. Clin Exp Metastasis. 1985;3(4):257–79.

19.

Suriano G, Oliveira C, Ferreira P, Machado JC, Bordin MC, De Wever O, et al.
Identification of CDH1 germline missense mutations associated with functional

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

inactivation of the E-cadherin protein in young gastric cancer probands. Hum Mol Genet.
2003 Mar 1;12(5):575–82.
20.

Chen Y, Hu L, Wang X, Sun C, Lin X, li L, et al. Characterization of a knock-in mouse model
of the homozygous p.V37I variant in Gjb2. Sci Rep. 2016 Dec 13;6(1):33279.

21.

Lu Y-C, Wu C-C, Shen W-S, Yang T-H, Yeh T-H, Chen P-J, et al. Establishment of a knock-in
mouse model with the SLC26A4 c.919-2A>G mutation and characterization of its
pathology. Sham MH, editor. PLoS One. 2011 Jul 21;6(7):e22150.

22.

Ambrosi C, Walker AE, DePriest AD, Cone AC, Lu C, Badger J, et al. Analysis of Trafficking,
Stability and Function of Human Connexin 26 Gap Junction Channels with DeafnessCausing Mutations in the Fourth Transmembrane Helix. Koval M, editor. PLoS One. 2013
Aug 15;8(8):e70916.

23.

Bicego M, Beltramello M, Melchionda S, Carella M, Piazza V, Zelante L, et al.
Pathogenetic role of the deafness-related M34T mutation of Cx26. Hum Mol Genet. 2006
Sep 1;15(17):2569–87.

24.

Bizhanova A, Chew T-L, Khuon S, Kopp P. Analysis of cellular localization and function of
carboxy-terminal mutants of pendrin. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2011;28(3):423–34.

25.

Bruzzone R, Veronesi V, Gomès D, Bicego M, Duval N, Marlin S, et al. Loss-of-function and
residual channel activity of connexin26 mutations associated with non-syndromic
deafness. FEBS Lett. 2003 Jan 2;533(1–3):79–88.

26.

Choi BY, Stewart AK, Madeo AC, Pryor SP, Lenhard S, Kittles R, et al. Hypo-functional
SLC26A4 variants associated with nonsyndromic hearing loss and enlargement of the
vestibular aqueduct: genotype-phenotype correlation or coincidental polymorphisms?

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Hum Mutat. 2009 Apr;30(4):599–608.
27.

Choung YH, Moon S-K, Park H-J. Functional study of GJB2 in hereditary hearing loss.
Laryngoscope. 2002 Sep;112(9):1667–71.

28.

Cirello V, Bazzini C, Vezzoli V, Muzza M, Rodighiero S, Castorina P, et al. Molecular and
functional studies of 4 candidate loci in Pendred syndrome and nonsyndromic hearing
loss. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Apr 4;351(2):342–50.

29.

D’Andrea P, Veronesi V, Bicego M, Melchionda S, Zelante L, Di Iorio E, et al. Hearing loss:
frequency and functional studies of the most common connexin26 alleles. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Aug 23;296(3):685–91.

30.

Dossena S, Bizhanova A, Nofziger C, Bernardinelli E, Ramsauer J, Kopp P, et al.
Identification of allelic variants of pendrin (SLC26A4) with loss and gain of function. Cell
Physiol Biochem. 2011;28(3):467–76.

31.

Dossena S, Nofziger C, Brownstein Z, Kanaan M, Avraham KB, Paulmichl M. Functional
characterization of pendrin mutations found in the Israeli and Palestinian populations.
Cell Physiol Biochem. 2011;28(3):477–84.

32.

Dossena S, Rodighiero S, Vezzoli V, Bazzini C, Sironi C, Meyer G, et al. Fast fluorometric
method for measuring pendrin (SLC26A4) Cl-/I- transport activity. Cell Physiol Biochem.
2006;18(1–3):67–74.

33.

Dossena S, Vezzoli V, Cerutti N, Bazzini C, Tosco M, Sironi C, et al. Functional
characterization of wild-type and a mutated form of SLC26A4 identified in a patient with
Pendred syndrome. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2006;17(5–6):245–56.

34.

Fugazzola L, Cirello V, Dossena S, Rodighiero S, Muzza M, Castorina P, et al. High

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

phenotypic intrafamilial variability in patients with Pendred syndrome and a novel
duplication in the SLC26A4 gene: clinical characterization and functional studies of the
mutated SLC26A4 protein. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 Sep;157(3):331–8.
35.

Gillam MP, Sidhaye AR, Lee EJ, Rutishauser J, Stephan CW, Kopp P. Functional
characterization of pendrin in a polarized cell system. Evidence for pendrin-mediated
apical iodide efflux. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):13004–10.

36.

Haack B, Schmalisch K, Palmada M, Böhmer C, Kohlschmidt N, Keilmann A, et al. Deficient
membrane integration of the novel p.N14D-GJB2 mutant associated with non-syndromic
hearing impairment. Hum Mutat. 2006 Nov;27(11):1158–9.

37.

Ishihara K, Okuyama S, Kumano S, Iida K, Hamana H, Murakoshi M, et al. Salicylate
restores transport function and anion exchanger activity of missense pendrin mutations.
Hear Res. 2010 Dec 1;270(1–2):110–8.

38.

Jang JH, Jung J, Kim AR, Cho YM, Kim MY, Lee SY, et al. Identification of novel functional
null allele of SLC26A4 associated with enlarged vestibular aqueduct and its possible
implication. Audiol Neurootol. 2014;19(5):319–26.

39.

Lee JR, Derosa AM, White TW. Connexin mutations causing skin disease and deafness
increase hemichannel activity and cell death when expressed in Xenopus oocytes. J
Invest Dermatol. 2009 Apr;129(4):870–8.

40.

Mani RS, Ganapathy A, Jalvi R, Srikumari Srisailapathy CR, Malhotra V, Chadha S, et al.
Functional consequences of novel connexin 26 mutations associated with hereditary
hearing loss. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Apr 22;17(4):502–9.

41.

Meşe G, Londin E, Mui R, Brink PR, White TW. Altered gating properties of functional

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Cx26 mutants associated with recessive non-syndromic hearing loss. Hum Genet. 2004
Aug 7;115(3):191–9.
42.

Palos F, García-Rendueles MER, Araujo-Vilar D, Obregon MJ, Calvo RM, CameselleTeijeiro J, et al. Pendred syndrome in two Galician families: insights into clinical
phenotypes through cellular, genetic, and molecular studies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2008 Jan;93(1):267–77.

43.

Pera A, Dossena S, Rodighiero S, Gandía M, Bottà G, Meyer G, et al. Functional
assessment of allelic variants in the SLC26A4 gene involved in Pendred syndrome and
nonsyndromic EVA. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 25;105(47):18608–13.

44.

Reimold FR, Heneghan JF, Stewart AK, Zelikovic I, Vandorpe DH, Shmukler BE, et al.
Pendrin function and regulation in Xenopus oocytes. Cell Physiol Biochem.
2011;28(3):435–50.

45.

Scott DA, Wang R, Kreman TM, Andrews M, McDonald JM, Bishop JR, et al. Functional
differences of the PDS gene product are associated with phenotypic variation in patients
with Pendred syndrome and non-syndromic hearing loss (DFNB4). Hum Mol Genet. 2000
Jul 1;9(11):1709–15.

46.

Taylor JP, Metcalfe RA, Watson PF, Weetman AP, Trembath RC. Mutations of the PDS
gene, encoding pendrin, are associated with protein mislocalization and loss of iodide
efflux: implications for thyroid dysfunction in Pendred syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2002 Apr;87(4):1778–84.

47.

Yuan Y, Guo W, Tang J, Zhang G, Wang G, Han M, et al. Molecular epidemiology and
functional assessment of novel allelic variants of SLC26A4 in non-syndromic hearing loss

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

patients with enlarged vestibular aqueduct in China. Schrijver I, editor. PLoS One. 2012
Nov 21;7(11):e49984.
48.

Zhang Y, Tang W, Ahmad S, Sipp JA, Chen P, Lin X. Gap junction-mediated intercellular
biochemical coupling in cochlear supporting cells is required for normal cochlear
functions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Oct 18;102(42):15201–6.

49.

Bal M, Zhang J, Zaika O, Hernandez CC, Shapiro MS. Homomeric and heteromeric
assembly of KCNQ (Kv7) K+ channels assayed by total internal reflection
fluorescence/fluorescence resonance energy transfer and patch clamp analysis. J Biol
Chem. 2008 Nov 7;283(45):30668–76.

50.

Kubisch C, Schroeder BC, Friedrich T, Lütjohann B, El-Amraoui A, Marlin S, et al. KCNQ4, a
novel potassium channel expressed in sensory outer hair cells, is mutated in dominant
deafness. Cell. 1999 Feb 5;96(3):437–46.

51.

Geisterfer-Lowrance AAT, Christe M, Conner DA, Ingwall JS, Schoen FJ, Seidman CE, et al.
A Mouse Model of Familial Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. Vol. 272, New Series. 1996.

52.

Spindler M, Saupe KW, Christe ME, Sweeney HL, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, et al. Diastolic
dysfunction and altered energetics in the alphaMHC403/+ mouse model of familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Clin Invest. 1998 Apr 15;101(8):1775–83.

53.

Fatkin D, Christe ME, Aristizabal O, McConnell BK, Srinivasan S, Schoen FJ, et al. Neonatal
cardiomyopathy in mice homozygous for the Arg403Gln mutation in the alpha cardiac
myosin heavy chain gene. J Clin Invest. 1999 Jan;103(1):147–53.

54.

Georgakopoulos D, Christe ME, Giewat M, Seidman CM, Seidman JG, Kass DA. The
pathogenesis of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: Early and evolving effects from an

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

α-cardiac myosin heavy chain missense mutation. Nat Med. 1999 Mar 1;5(3):327–30.
55.

Kim S-J, Iizuka K, Kelly RA, Geng Y-J, Bishop SP, Yang G, et al. An α-cardiac myosin heavy
chain gene mutation impairs contraction and relaxation function of cardiac myocytes.
Am J Physiol Circ Physiol. 1999 May;276(5):H1780–7.

56.

McConnell BK, Fatkin D, Semsarian C, Jones KA, Georgakopoulos D, Maguire CT, et al.
Comparison of Two Murine Models of Familial Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. Circ Res.
2001 Mar 2;88(4):383–9.

57.

Palmer BM, Fishbaugher DE, Schmitt JP, Wang Y, Alpert NR, Seidman CE, et al.
Differential cross-bridge kinetics of FHC myosin mutations R403Q and R453C in
heterozygous mouse myocardium. Am J Physiol Circ Physiol. 2004 Jul;287(1):H91–9.

58.

Honda H, Nagashima H, Asakura S. Directional movement of F-actin in vitro. J Mol Biol.
1986 Sep 5;191(1):131–3.

59.

Kron SJ, Spudich JA. Fluorescent actin filaments move on myosin fixed to a glass surface.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Sep 1;83(17):6272–6.

60.

Taussky HH, Shorr E. A microcolorimetric method for the determination of inorganic
phosphorus. J Biol Chem. 1953 Jun;202(2):675–85.

61.

Perry SV. [94] Myosin adenosinetriphosphatase. Methods Enzymol. 1955 Jan 1;2:582–8.

62.

Cuda G, Fananapazir L, Zhu WS, Sellers JR, Epstein ND. Skeletal muscle expression and
abnormal function of beta-myosin in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Clin Invest. 1993
Jun 1;91(6):2861–5.

63.

Cuda G, Fananapazir L, Epstein ND, Sellers JR. The in vitro motility activity of beta-cardiac
myosin depends on the nature of the beta-myosin heavy chain gene mutation in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Muscle Res Cell Motil. 1997 Jun;18(3):275–83.
64.

Fujita H, Sugiura S, Momomura S, Omata M, Sugi H, Sutoh K. Characterization of mutant
myosins of Dictyostelium discoideum equivalent to human familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy mutants. Molecular force level of mutant myosins may have a
prognostic implication. J Clin Invest. 1997 Mar 1;99(5):1010–5.

65.

Palmiter KA, Tyska MJ, Haeberle JR, Alpert NR, Fananapazir L, Warshaw DM. R403Q and
L908V mutant beta-cardiac myosin from patients with familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy exhibit enhanced mechanical performance at the single molecule level. J
Muscle Res Cell Motil. 2000;21(7):609–20.

66.

Tyska MJ, Hayes E, Giewat M, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, Warshaw DM. Single-molecule
mechanics of R403Q cardiac myosin isolated from the mouse model of familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ Res. 2000 Apr 14;86(7):737–44.

67.

Yamashita H, Tyska MJ, Warshaw DM, Lowey S, Trybus KM. Functional consequences of
mutations in the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain at sites implicated in familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 8;275(36):28045–52.

68.

Wang Q, Moncman CL, Winkelmann DA. Mutations in the motor domain modulate
myosin activity and myofibril organization. J Cell Sci. 2003 Oct 15;116(Pt 20):4227–38.

69.

Debold EP, Schmitt JP, Patlak JB, Beck SE, Moore JR, Seidman JG, et al. Hypertrophic and
dilated cardiomyopathy mutations differentially affect the molecular force generation of
mouse alpha-cardiac myosin in the laser trap assay. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007
Jul;293(1):H284-91.

70.

Di Domenico M, Casadonte R, Ricci P, Santini M, Frati G, Rizzo A, et al. Cardiac and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

skeletal muscle expression of mutant β-myosin heavy chains, degree of functional
impairment and phenotypic heterogeneity in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Cell
Physiol. 2012 Oct;227(10):3471–6.
71.

Lowey S. Functional Consequences of Mutations in the Myosin Heavy Chain at Sites
Implicated in Familial Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2002 Nov
1;12(8):348–54.

72.

Himmelreich N, Shen N, Okun JG, Thiel C, Hoffmann GF, Blau N. Relationship between
genotype, phenylalanine hydroxylase expression and in vitro activity and metabolic
phenotype in phenylketonuria. Mol Genet Metab. 2018 Sep;125(1–2):86–95.

73.

Pey AL, Desviat LR, Gámez A, Ugarte M, Pérez B. Phenylketonuria: genotype-phenotype
correlations based on expression analysis of structural and functional mutations in PAH.
Hum Mutat. 2003 Apr 1;21(4):370–8.

74.

John SW, Scriver CR, Laframboise R, Rozen R. In vitro and in vivo correlations for I65T and
M1V mutations at the phenylalanine hydroxylase locus. Hum Mutat. 1992 Jan
1;1(2):147–53.

75.

Okano Y, Asada M, Kang Y, Nishi Y, Hase Y, Oura T, et al. Molecular characterization of
phenylketonuria in Japanese patients. Hum Genet. 1998 Nov;103(5):613–8.

76.

Liang Y, Huang M-Z, Cheng C-Y, Chao H-K, Fwu VT, Chiang S-H, et al. The mutation
spectrum of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene and associated haplotypes reveal
ethnic heterogeneity in the Taiwanese population. J Hum Genet. 2014 Mar 9;59(3):145–
52.

77.

Ho P, Huang M-Z, Fwu VT, Lin S-C, Hsiao K-J, Su T-S. Simultaneous assessment of the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

effects of exonic mutations on RNA splicing and protein functions. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2008 Sep 5;373(4):515–20.
78.

Trunzo R, Santacroce R, Shen N, Jung-Klawitter S, Leccese A, De Girolamo G, et al. In vitro
residual activity of phenylalanine hydroxylase variants and correlation with metabolic
phenotypes in PKU. Gene. 2016 Dec 5;594(1):138–43.

79.

Marvit J, DiLella AG, Brayton K, Ledley FD, Robson KJ, Woo SL. GT to AT transition at a
splice donor site causes skipping of the preceding exon in phenylketonuria. Nucleic Acids
Res. 1987 Jul 24;15(14):5613–28.

80.

Steventon GB, Mitchell SC, Pérez B, Desviat LR, Ugarte M. The activity of wild type and
mutant phenylalanine hydroxylase with respect to the C-oxidation of phenylalanine and
the S-oxidation of S-carboxymethyl-L-cysteine. Mol Genet Metab. 2009 Jan 1;96(1):27–
31.

81.

Cerreto M, Cavaliere P, Carluccio C, Amato F, Zagari A, Daniele A, et al. Natural
phenylalanine hydroxylase variants that confer a mild phenotype affect the enzyme’s
conformational stability and oligomerization equilibrium. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011
Nov 1;1812(11):1435–45.

82.

Okano Y, Eisensmith RC, Güttler F, Lichter-Konecki U, Konecki DS, Trefz FK, et al.
Molecular basis of phenotypic heterogeneity in phenylketonuria. N Engl J Med. 1991 May
2;324(18):1232–8.

83.

Dworniczak B, Aulehla-Scholz C, Kalaydjieva L, Bartholomé K, Grudda K, Horst J. Aberrant
splicing of phenylalanine hydroxylase mRNA: the major cause for phenylketonuria in
parts of southern Europe. Genomics. 1991 Oct 1;11(2):242–6.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

84.

Danecka MK, Woidy M, Zschocke J, Feillet F, Muntau AC, Gersting SW. Mapping the
functional landscape of frequent phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genotypes promotes
personalised medicine in phenylketonuria. J Med Genet. 2015 Mar 1;52(3):175–85.

85.

Han SY, Kato H, Kato S, Suzuki T, Shibata H, Ishii S, et al. Functional evaluation of PTEN
missense mutations using in vitro phosphoinositide phosphatase assay. Cancer Res. 2000
Jun 15;60(12):3147–51.

86.

Chen HJ, Romigh T, Sesock K, Eng C. Characterization of cryptic splicing in germline PTEN
intronic variants in Cowden syndrome. Hum Mutat. 2017 Oct;38(10):1372–7.

87.

Guénard F, Labrie Y, Ouellette G, Beauparlant CJ, Bessette P, Chiquette J, et al. Germline
mutations in the breast cancer susceptibility gene PTEN are rare in high-risk nonBRCA1/2 French Canadian breast cancer families. Fam Cancer. 2007 Oct 18;6(4):483–90.

88.

Gil A, Rodríguez-Escudero I, Stumpf M, Molina M, Cid VJ, Pulido R. A functional dissection
of PTEN N-terminus: implications in PTEN subcellular targeting and tumor suppressor
activity. Uversky VN, editor. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 15;10(4):e0119287.

89.

Tan M-H, Mester J, Peterson C, Yang Y, Chen J-L, Rybicki LA, et al. A Clinical Scoring
System for Selection of Patients for PTEN Mutation Testing Is Proposed on the Basis of a
Prospective Study of 3042 Probands. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan 7;88(1):42–56.

90.

Mighell TL, Evans-Dutson S, O’Roak BJ. A Saturation Mutagenesis Approach to
Understanding PTEN Lipid Phosphatase Activity and Genotype-Phenotype Relationships.
Am J Hum Genet. 2018 May 3;102(5):943–55.

91.

Chen P-C, Yin J, Yu H-W, Yuan T, Fernandez M, Yung CK, et al. Next-generation
sequencing identifies rare variants associated with Noonan syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

U S A. 2014 Aug 5;111(31):11473–8.
92.

Denayer E, Parret A, Chmara M, Schubbert S, Vogels A, Devriendt K, et al. Mutation
analysis in Costello syndrome: functional and structural characterization of the HRAS
p.Lys117Arg mutation. Hum Mutat. 2008 Feb;29(2):232–9.

93.

Gremer L, Merbitz-Zahradnik T, Dvorsky R, Cirstea IC, Kratz CP, Zenker M, et al. Germline
KRAS mutations cause aberrant biochemical and physical properties leading to
developmental disorders. Hum Mutat. 2011 Jan;32(1):33–43.

94.

Lee BH, Kim J-M, Jin HY, Kim G-H, Choi J-H, Yoo H-W. Spectrum of mutations in Noonan
syndrome and their correlation with phenotypes. J Pediatr. 2011 Dec;159(6):1029–35.

95.

Martinelli S, Nardozza AP, Delle Vigne S, Sabetta G, Torreri P, Bocchinfuso G, et al.
Counteracting effects operating on Src homology 2 domain-containing protein-tyrosine
phosphatase 2 (SHP2) function drive selection of the recurrent Y62D and Y63C
substitutions in Noonan syndrome. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 3;287(32):27066–77.

96.

Pandit B, Sarkozy A, Pennacchio LA, Carta C, Oishi K, Martinelli S, et al. Gain-of-function
RAF1 mutations cause Noonan and LEOPARD syndromes with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Nat Genet. 2007 Aug 1;39(8):1007–12.

97.

Pannone L, Bocchinfuso G, Flex E, Rossi C, Baldassarre G, Lissewski C, et al. Structural,
Functional, and Clinical Characterization of a Novel PTPN11 Mutation Cluster Underlying
Noonan Syndrome. Hum Mutat. 2017 Apr;38(4):451–9.

98.

Rauen KA, Tidyman WE, Estep AL, Sampath S, Peltier HM, Bale SJ, et al. Molecular and
functional analysis of a novel MEK2 mutation in cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome:
transmission through four generations. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Apr;152A(4):807–14.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

99.

Razzaque MA, Nishizawa T, Komoike Y, Yagi H, Furutani M, Amo R, et al. Germline gainof-function mutations in RAF1 cause Noonan syndrome. Nat Genet. 2007 Aug
1;39(8):1013–7.

100. Roberts AE, Araki T, Swanson KD, Montgomery KT, Schiripo TA, Joshi VA, et al. Germline
gain-of-function mutations in SOS1 cause Noonan syndrome. Nat Genet. 2007 Jan
3;39(1):70–4.
101. Rodriguez-Viciana P, Rauen KA. Biochemical Characterization of Novel Germline BRAF
and MEK Mutations in Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous Syndrome. Methods Enzymol. 2008 Jan
1;438:277–89.
102. Senawong T, Phuchareon J, Ohara O, McCormick F, Rauen KA, Tetsu O. Germline
mutations of MEK in cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome are sensitive to MEK and RAF
inhibition: implications for therapeutic options. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Feb 1;17(3):419–
30.
103. Smith MJ, Neel BG, Ikura M. NMR-based functional profiling of RASopathies and
oncogenic RAS mutations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 19;110(12):4574–9.
104. Wu X, Yin J, Simpson J, Kim K-H, Gu S, Hong JH, et al. Increased BRAF heterodimerization
is the common pathogenic mechanism for noonan syndrome-associated RAF1 mutants.
Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Oct 1;32(19):3872–90.
105. Rodriguez-Viciana P, Tetsu O, Tidyman WE, Estep AL, Conger BA, Cruz MS, et al. Germline
Mutations in Genes Within the MAPK Pathway Cause Cardio-facio-cutaneous Syndrome.
Science (80- ). 2006 Mar 3;311(5765):1287–90.
106. Simpson JC. Functional Assays. In: Encyclopedic Reference of Genomics and Proteomics

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in Molecular Medicine. Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2005. p. 617–20.
107. Strande NT, Brnich SE, Roman TS, Berg JS. Navigating the nuances of clinical sequence
variant interpretation in Mendelian disease. Genet Med. 2018 Sep 10;20(9):918–26.
108. Tavtigian S V., Greenblatt MS, Harrison SM, Nussbaum RL, Prabhu SA, Boucher KM, et al.
Modeling the ACMG/AMP Variant Classification Guidelines as a Bayesian Classification
Framework. Genet Med. 2018;20(9):1054.

Table 1: Overview of Variant Curation Expert Panel (VCEP) disease areas and mechanisms, functional assay classes, and
accompanying strength level modifications.
VCEP

CDH1

Gene

MONDO ID for Disease

Molecular
Etiology

Inheritance
Pattern

CDH1

MONDO:0007648
(Hereditary Diffuse Gastric
Adenocarcinoma)

LOF

AD

COCH

MONDO:0011058 (DFNA9)

GOF/DN

AD

MONDO:0009076 (DFNB1)
MONDO:0011103 (DFNA3A)

DFNB1:
LOF
DFNA3A:
DN

GJB2
Hearing Loss

DFNB1: AR
DFNA3A: AD

GO Term for Disease MechanismRelated Function/Localization
GO:0098641 (Cadherin Binding
Involved in Cell-Cell Adhesion)
GO:0030336 (Negative Regulation
of Cell Migration)
GO:0016342 (Catenin Complex)
GO:0032940 (Secretion by Cell)
GO:0005615 (Localization in
Extracellular Space)

MONDO:0010933 (DFNB4)

LOF

Inherited
Cardiomyopathy

PAH

PTEN

MONDO:0019497
(Nonsyndromic Genetic
Deafness)

MYH7

MONDO:0024573 (Familial
Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy)
MONDO:0005021 (Dilated
Cardiomyopathy)
MONDO:0005201
(Restrictive Cardiomyopathy)

GOF

MONDO: 0009861
(Phenylketonuria)

LOF

PAH

PTEN

MONDO:0017623
(Hamartoma Tumor
Syndrome)

Varies

S

S

Cell Aggregation Assay

Not Approved

Cell Invasion Assay
Wound Closure Assay
Proximity Ligation Assay
Secretion Assay

Not Approved
Not Approved
Not Approved
M
P

Localization Assay

M

P

M

P

Electrical Coupling Assay

M

P

GO:0007267 (Cell-Cell Signaling)

Dye Diffusion Assay

M

P

P

P

P

P

AR

Varies

GO:0060048 (Cardiac Muscle
Contraction)

LOF

Splicing Assessment

Dimerization Assay

GO:0006885 (Regulation of pH)
All genes

Max Evidence
Level
PS3
BS3

GO:0005243 (Gap Junction Channel
Activity)

GO:0006811 (Ion Transport)
SLC26A4

Class of Assay

Radioactive Anion Isotope
Transport Assay
Fluorescent Anion Transport
Assay
Mouse Knock-In Model
Other Functional Assays with
Limited Validation

S
P

Mammalian Knock-In Model

S

Motility Assay

Not Approved

ATPase Assay

Not Approved

PAH Enzyme Activity Assay

S

S

Phosphatase Activity Assay

S

S*

Splicing Assessment
PTEN/pAKT Expression Assay

S
P

S

Localization Assay

P

Cell Migration/Invasion Assay

P

AD

AR

AD

GO:0000146 (Microfilament Motor
Activity)
GO:0051117 (ATPase Binding)
GO:0004505 (Phenylalanine 4Monooxygenase Activity)
GO:0046856 (Phosphatidylinositol
Dephosphorylation)

GO:0005634 (Localization in
Nucleus)
GO:0030336 (Negative Regulation
of Cell Migration)

Table 1: Overview of Variant Curation Expert Panel (VCEP) disease areas and mechanisms, functional assay classes, and
accompanying strength level modifications.
GO:0042127 (Regulation of Cell
Proliferation)

BRAF

HRAS

KRAS
MAP2K1/2

RASopathy

PTPN11

RAF1

SHOC2

SOS1

MONDO:0015280 (CardioFacio-Cutaneous Syndrome)

MONDO:0009026 (Costello
Syndrome)
MONDO:0015280 (CardioFacio-Cutaneous Syndrome)
MONDO:0015280 (CardioFacio-Cutaneous Syndrome)

MONDO:0018997 (Noonan
Syndrome)

MONDO:0018997 (Noonan
Syndrome)

MONDO:0018997 (Noonan
Syndrome)

MONDO:0018997 (Noonan
Syndrome)

GOF

GOF

AD

AD

GOF

AD

GOF

AD

GOF

GOF

GOF

GOF

AD

AD

AD

AD

GO:0000186 (Activation of MAPKK
Activity)
GO:0004674 (Protein
Serine/Threonine Kinase Activity)
GO:0009887 (Animal Organ
Morphogenesis)
GO:0043410 (Positive Regulation of
MAPK Cascade)
GO:0005525 (GTP Binding)
GO:0009887 (Animal Organ
Morphogenesis)
GO:0043406 (Positive Regulation of
MAP Kinase Activity)
GO:0004708 (MAP Kinase Kinase
Activity)
GO:0004725 (Protein Tyrosine
Phosphatase Activity)
GO:0000187 (Activation of MAPK
Activity)
GO:0009887 (Animal Organ
Morphogenesis)
GO:0000186 (Activation of MAPKK
Activity)
GO:0004674 (Protein
Serine/Threonine Kinase Activity)
GO:0009887 (Animal Organ
Morphogenesis)
GO:0005634 (Localization in
Nucleus)
GO:0005088 (Ras GuanylNucleotide Exchange Factor
Activity)
GO:0007265 (Ras Protein Signal
Transduction)
GO:0009887 (Animal Organ
Morphogenesis)

Cell Proliferation Assay

P

Transgenic Model Organism
MAP2K1/2 and ERK1/2
Phosphorylation Assay

P
S

S

BRAF Kinase Activity Assay

S

S

Mouse or Zebrafish Model

S

S

S

S

S

S

Mouse or Zebrafish Model

S

S

MAP2K1/2 and ERK1/2
Phosphorylation Assay

S

S

ERK1/2 Phosphorylation Assay

S

S

SHP-2 Phosphatase Activity
Assay

S

S

ERK1/2 Activation Assay

S

S

S

S

S

S

RAF1 Kinase Activity Assay

S

S

Mouse Model

S

S

Myristoylation Assay

S

S

RAS Activation Assay

S

S

ERK1/2 Activation Assay

S

S

Mouse Model

S

S

MAP2K1/2 and ERK1/2
Phosphorylation Assay
RAF1 or RBD Binding Assay

Mouse, Zebrafish, or
Drosophila Model
MAP2K1/2 and ERK1/2
Phosphorylation Assay

*Must be accompanied by a second assay demonstrating no statistically significant difference from wild type to be used as evidence for BS3 application.
Abbreviations: AD: autosomal dominant; AR: autosomal recessive; DN: dominant negative; GOF: gain-of function; LOF: loss-of-function
Evidence strength level modifications of PS3 or BS3 evidence abbreviated as “S” for strong, “M” for moderate and “P” for supporting.
See Additional File 1 for supporting information and references.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 2: Summary of PS3/BS3 assay parameter specifications and strength modification
recommendations by each Variant Curation Expert Panel (VCEP).
VCEP

Replication

Controls

CDH1

Validation

✓

✓

Strong, supporting

✓

Moderate, supporting

✓

Strong

✓

Hearing Loss
Inherited Cardiomyopathy
(MHY7)
PAH

✓

PTEN

✓

RASopathy

Possible PS3
Evidence Levels

Thresholds

Strong

✓

✓

Strong, supporting

✓

Strong

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 3: Comparison of PAH enzyme activities reported in a meta-analysis publication
Himmelreich et al., 2018, the PAH locus-specific database (PAHvdb), and the PAH Variant
Curation Expert Panel (VCEP) variant evidence for PS3 assertion.
PAH Variant

% Enzyme Activity by Source
Himmelreich et al., 2018
(PMID: 30037505)
Literature Review
Assay*

cDNA

Protein

c.194T>C

p.(Ile65Thr)

26, 27, 33, 48, 60†

c.311C>A

p.(Ala104Asp)

67†

c.473G>A

77

PAHvdb

VCEP Evidence for
PS3 Assertion

33

25

27

26

p.(Arg158Gln)

†

2 , 5, 9, 10, 29

10

0.2-1.8

c.533A>G

p.(Glu178Gly)

31

39

39

c.721C>T

p.(Arg241Cys)

25

57

25

25

c.754C>T

p.(Arg252Trp)

0, 0

15

0

1

c.755G>A

p.(Arg252Gln)

24

3

3

c.782G>A

p.(Arg261Gln)

27, 30, 43, 47, 52†

44

15-30

c.842C>T

p.(Pro281Leu)

0, 1, 1†

2

2

c.898G>T

p.(Ala300Ser)

32

65

31

31

c.916A>G

p.(Ile306Val)

12

25

39

18

c.926C>T

p.(Ala309Val)

70

c.1162G>A

†

†

23

12

42

30

p.(Val388Met)

†

15, 23 , 43

83

28

15

c.1208C>T

p.(Ala403Val)

32, 100

33

66

43

c.1222C>T

p.(Arg408Trp)

0, 1, 3, 5

2

2

1.3-1.85

c.1223G>A

p.(Arg408Gln)

9 , 33, 55, 84

41

46

46

c.1238G>C

p.(Arg413Pro)

2

11

35

<3

c.1241A>G

p.(Tyr414Cys)

28, 38†, 50, 80

57

50

†

*Indicates results generated in a PAH enzyme activity assay conducted in Himmelreich et al., 2018
(PMID: 30037505). Other results were derived as part of literature review conducted in Himmelreich et
al., 2018.
†Indicates enzyme activity result generated by PAH expression in E. Coli. All other results were generated
by PAH expression in COS cells.
Bolded values indicate measured enzyme activity levels above the >50% enzyme activity range specified
by the VCEP and in direct conflict with the VCEP-cited enzyme activity value in support of PS3 assertion.

Numb

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June4028, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
204.0 International license .
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND
0

Fig. 1

CDH1 Hearing Loss

MYH7

PAH

No functional criteria applied

PS3 applied

Number of Pilot Variants Classified as VUS

120

Number of Pilot Variants

100
80
60
40

BS3 applied

20

MYH7

No functional criteria applied

PAH

PTEN

PS3 applied

16
14
12
10
No functional criteria applied

MYH7

2

56

4

0

54

29

PTEN
RASopathy
RASopathy
BS3 applied

CDH1 Hearing Loss

MYH7

VUS, no functional criteria applied

Number
NumberofofPilot
PilotVariants
Variants
with
Criteria
withPS3/BS3
PS3/BS3
Criteria

Number of Pilot Variants Classified as VUS

8

41

PTEN36 RASopathy
67
VUS, PS3 applied
VUS, BS3 applied

5

PAH

35

c

CDH1

Hearing Loss

P
P
VCEP

4

4

40
40
16
35
35
14
30
VCEP
30
12
Hearing Loss
25
10
25
RASopathy
8
20
CDH1
20
VCEP
No functional
criteria applied
PS3 applied
Inherited Cardiomyopathy
6
15
CDH1
45
4
PTEN
15
Hearing Loss 4
41
8
10
MYH7
56
4
2
10
PAH
54
29
5
0
5
PTEN
5
CDH1 Hearing Loss MYH7
PAH
PTEN36 RASopathy
RASopathy
67
35
0
VUS, no functional criteria applied0 VUS, PS3 applied
VUS, BS3 applied
PS3
PS3
BS3
PS3
PS3
BS3
PS3
PS3
PS3
BS3
PS3
PS3
BS3
PS3
18

PS3 applied
45

Hearing Loss
PAH
CDH1 Hearing Loss

18

8
VCEP
6

CDH1

0

No functional criteria applied

MYH7

LP
LP

PAH

VUS
VUS

No functional criteria applied

BS3
BS3

PTEN

LB
LB

PS3
PS3

PS3 applied (at any strength)
41

8

67

35

45

4

56

4

36

5

BS3
BS3

RASopathy

B
B

PS3 applied (at any strength)

Hearing Loss

41

8

RASopathy

67

35

45
4
Fig. 1 Use of the PS3/BS3 criteria in Variant
Curation Expert Panel
(VCEP) pilot variant
56
4
classification. a Comparison of PS3 criterion
application at any5 strength level (purple) and BS3
36
criterion application
at
any
strength
level
(orange)
in the pilot variant classification
of each
BS3 applied
VCEP
BS3 applied
VCEP
0 application at any strength level
CDH1 (purple) and BS3 criterion
VCEP. b Comparison of PS3 criterion
0
CDH1
2
Hearing Loss
Inherited
Cardiomyopathy
application at any strength level (orange)
to variants ultimately classified
as variants of
2
Hearing
InheritedLoss
Cardiomyopathy
0
(MYH7 )
0
(MYH7VCEP.
)
uncertain significance (VUS) in the pilot
variant
classification
of
each
c Comparison of the
2
PAH
2
PAH
final classification (P, LP, VUS, LB, or1B) of pilot variants with PS3/BS3
PTEN criteria (at any strength
1
PTEN
1
RASopathy
level). The CDH1 VCEP and the Inherited
Cardiomyopathy-MYH7RASopathy
VCEP did not use BS3 evidence
1
in the interpretation of any pilot variants.

Inherited Cardiomyopathy
PTEN

RASopathy

b

a

CDH1

PTEN

BS3 applied (at any strength)
BS3 applied (at any strength)

2
2
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1

Total Number of Variants
Percentage
in Pilot
of Variants
Set
with PS3/BS applied
Total Number of Variants
Percentage
in Pilot
of Variants
Set
with PS3/BS applied
51
19.60784314
51
19.60784314
103
34.95145631
103
34.95145631
49
8.163265306
49
8.163265306
60
6.666666667
60
6.666666667
42
14.28571429
42
14.28571429

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 2

CDH1

VCEP/Gene
Class of Assay

Wound Closure*

Proximity Ligation*

BAO:0000499

ECO:0001099

BAO:0002990

12944922
4 variants

✓

✓

✓

✓

Controls

Wild Type

✓

✓

✓

✓

Mock

✓

✓

✓

Technical
Replicates

Experimental
Material

18772194
2 variants

Replication

12588804 16924464
3 variants 13 variants

22470475
3 variants

Output

Validation Parameters

Methods

PMID and # of Variants
Tested in Publication

Aggregation/Invasion*

In Vitro

✓

12588804
3 variants

14500541
4 variants

22850631
7 variants

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

In Vivo

✓
✓

Biological
Replicates

Quantification

Statistical
Analysis

✓

✓

✓

Fig. 2 Representative findings from curation of specific instances of CDH1 functional assays. We
assessed the following methods and validation parameters of aggregation/invasion, wound
closure, and proximity ligation assays: experimental material, controls, replication, and output.
*Indicates assays not approved by the Variant Curation Expert Panel (VCEP). See Additional File
2: Tables S1 and S2 for full primary literature curation results.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 3
Hearing Loss
GJB2

VCEP/Gene

Class of Assay

Experimental
Material

Controls

23967136
6 variants

Replication

12505163†
9 variants

Dye Transfer

BAO:0000062

BAO:0002477

17041897
1 variants

15241677
5 variants

Human Cells

Xenopus
Oocytes

✓

✓

✓

✓

Wild Type

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Water

Mock

16849369†
1 variant

✓

✓

✓

✓

18987669
4 variants

23967136
6 variants

✓

✓

✓

✓

16217030
3 variants

16849369†
1 variant

12352684†
2 variants

12176036†
7 variants

18941476
4 variants

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

10-51

40

✓
✓

✓
4-14

15-25

Quantification

✓

✓

Statistical
Analysis

✓

# of Cell Pairs

16217030†
13 variants

✓

Clinically
Benign

Output

Validation Parameters

Methods

PMID and # of Variants
Tested in Publication

Electrical Coupling

Biological
Replicates

12

10-43

5-10

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

7-12

10

10-12

67-135

3

✓

✓
✓

Fig. 3 Representative findings from curation of specific instances of GJB2 functional assays. We
assessed the following methods and validation parameters of electrical coupling and dye
transfer assays: experimental material, controls, replication, and output.†Indicates specific
instance of assay cited by the Variant Curation Expert Panel (VCEP) as evidence for the PS3/BS3
criteria in pilot variant classification. See Additional File 2: Tables S4 and S5 for full primary
literature curation results.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 4
Inherited Cardiomyopathy
MYH7

VCEP/Gene
Variant Specific Knockin Mouse Model

Class of Assay

ATPase Assay*

Motility Assay*

BAO:0002594

BAO:0002992

ECO:0001131

Replication Controls Experimental Material

Output

Validation Parameters

Methods

PMID and # of Variants
Tested in Publication
Mouse
Model

17351073†§
4 variants

20811150†
2 variants

24829265†
3 variants

8614836†
1 variant

16983074†
11 variants

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Recombinant
Myosin

10882745
5 variants

9062359
6 variants

Amoeba cDNA

Chicken cDNA

Mouse Tissue

17351073
4 variants

15010274
2 variants

22213221
2 variants

9172070
3 variants

Cardiac

Cardiac and
Soleus

Cardiac and
Soleus

Cardiac

Human
Tissue

Wild Type

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

# of samples
(n)

Wild Type:2+
Variant: 2+

Wild Type:5
Variant:4-6

Wild Type:12
Variant:21

Wild Type:100+
Variant:2-7

Wild Type:9-49
Variant:6-12

Wild Type: 1
Variant: 4

Wild Type: 1
Variant: 7

Wild Type: 1
Variant: 4

100 actin
filaments

50-100 actin
filaments

33-122 actin
filaments

Technical
Replicates

✓

✓

✓

Thresholds

Statistical
Analyses

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓
✓

✓

Fig. 4 Representative findings from curation of specific instances of MYH7 functional assays. We
assessed the following methods and validation parameters of variant specific knock in mouse
models, ATPase activity, and motility assays: experimental material, controls, replication, and
output. *Indicates assays not approved by the Variant Curation Expert Panel (VCEP). †Indicates
specific instance of assay cited by the VCEP as evidence for the PS3/BS3 criteria in pilot variant
classification. See Additional File 2: Tables S6 and S7 for primary literature curation results.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 5

PAH

VCEP/Gene
Class of Assay

Cofactor

COS Cells

3615198†
1 variant
1987

2014036†
3 variants
1991

✓

✓

19036622†
8 variants
2009

Protein Folding/Stability*

BAO:0002994

BAO:0002998/0002804

21820508†
7 variants
2011

E. Coli

✓

✓

BH 4

✓

✓

6-MPH4

✓

✓

TLC

✓

✓

HPLCFluorescence

✓

24401910†
15 variants
2014

25596310†
19 variants
2015

✓

✓

27620137†
8 variants
2016

✓

12655546
18 variants
2003

✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓
✓

LC-MS

✓

Controls

✓

Mock

✓

Replication

✓

Wild Type

Technical
Replicates

✓

Output

Validation Parameters

Detection
Method

Methods

Experimental
Material

PMID, # of Variants
Tested in Publication,
Publication Year

Enzyme Activity

Statistical
Analysis

Biological
Replicates

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Fig. 5 Representative findings from curation of specific instances of PAH functional assays. We
assessed the following methods and validation parameters of enzyme activity and protein
folding/stability assays: experimental material, cofactor, detection method, controls,
replication, and output. *Indicates assays not approved by the Variant Curation Expert Panel
(VCEP). †Indicates specific instance of assay cited by the VCEP as evidence for the PS3/BS3
criteria in pilot variant classification. Abbreviations: TLC: Thin-layer chromatography; HPLCFluorescence: High-performance liquid chromatography coupled with fluorescence detection;
LC-MS: Liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry. See Additional File 2: Tables
S8 and S9 for full primary literature curation results.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 6

PTEN

VCEP/Gene
Class of Assay

Experimental
Material

Controls
Output Replication

Validation Parameters

Methods

PMID and # of Variants
Tested in Publication

pAKT Level

BAO:0000466

BAO:0002013

Protein
Localization

Cell
Proliferation

Cell
Migration

BAO:0002196

BAO:0002805

BAO:0000499

10866302†

29706350

21828076

26504226

19915616

25875300

28263967

21194675

25527629

25875300†

19457929

26504226

26504226

8012 variants

68 variants

4 variants

11 variants

8 variants

2 variants

155 variants

9 variants

59 variants

3 variants

1 variant

1 variant

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Yeast
In Vitro

✓

Wild Type

✓

Mock

✓

✓

✓

✓

# of Cells (n)

✓

✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

≥100

100

✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

✓
≥100+
(Yeast)

✓
✓

✓

Catalytically
Dead

✓

✓

✓

Clinically
Benign

Statistical
Analysis

PTEN Level

BAO:0002762

42 variants

Mammalian
cells

Biological
Replicates

Phosphatase Activity

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

≥150

✓
✓

✓

3

✓
✓

✓

Fig. 6 Representative findings from curation of specific instances of PTEN functional assays. We
assessed the following methods and validation parameters of phosphatase activity, PTEN level,
pAKT level, protein localization, cell proliferation, and cell migration assays: experimental
material, controls, replication, and output. †Indicates specific instance of assay cited by the
Variant Curation Expert Panel (VCEP) as evidence for the PS3/BS3 criteria in pilot variant
classification. See Additional File 2: Tables S10 and S11 for full primary literature curation
results.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000661; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 7
Gene

BRAF

HRAS

MAP2K1/2

KRAS

Cell Treatment

Controls
Output Replication

Methods
Validation Parameters

Serum-Starved

BAO:0003005
18413255†‡
12 variants

17979197†
1 variant

✓

20949621†‡
10 variants

25049390†
1 variant

17981815†
6 variants

20358587†
1 variant

22711529†
2 variants

28074573†
5 variants

17603482†
5 variants

17603483†
4 variants

22826437†
3 variants

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

SerumStimulated

✓

Growth FactorStimulated

Wild Type

✓

Mock

✓

✓

Activating

✓

✓

Statistical
Analysis

21784453†‡
2 variants

23487764†
13 variants

17143285†
5 variants

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

# of samples
(n)
Biological
Replicates

SOS1

RAF1

MAP2K1/2 and/or ERK1/2 Phosphorylation

Class of Assay
PMID and # of Variants
Tested in Publication

PTPN11

4

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

Fig. 7 Representative findings from curation of specific instances of RASopathy functional
assays. We assessed the following methods and validation parameters of MAP2K1/2 and
ERK1/2 phosphorylation assays: cell treatment, controls, replication, and output.†Indicates
specific instance of assay cited by the Variant Curation Expert Panel (VCEP) as evidence for the
PS3/BS3 criteria in pilot variant classification. ‡Indicates specific instance of assay cited by the
VCEP as evidence for the PS3/BS3 criteria in pilot variant classification for variants in multiple
genes: PMID 18413255 cited as evidence for the PS3/BS3 criteria for variants in BRAF and
MAP2K1/2; PMID 16439621 cited as evidence for PS3/BS3 for variants in KRAS and MAP2K1/2;
PMID 21784453 cited as evidence for PS3/BS3 for variants in RAF1 and SOS1. See Additional File
2: Tables S12 and S13 for full primary literature curation results.

