medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

An integrated deep mutational scanning approach provides clinical insights on PTEN
genotype-phenotype relationships
Taylor L. Mighell1,8, Stetson Thacker2,3,8, Eric Fombonne4,5,6, Charis Eng2,3,7,*, Brian J. O’Roak1,**
1

Department of Molecular & Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239;

Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA;
Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA;
Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239;
University, Portland, OR 97239;
University, Portland, OR 97239;

7

6

5

4

2
3

Department of Psychiatry, Oregon

Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science

Department of Behavioral Neuroscience, Oregon Health & Science

Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, and Germline High Risk

Cancer Focus Group, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine;
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. 8These authors contributed equally to this work.
*Correspondence: engc@ccf.org; @CharisEngMDPhD
**Correspondence: oroak@ohsu.edu; @TheRealDrOLab.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Germline variation in PTEN results in variable clinical presentations, including benign and malignant neoplasia
and neurodevelopmental disorders. Despite decades of research, it remains unclear how PTEN genotype is
related to clinical outcomes. In this study, we combined two recent deep mutational scanning (DMS) datasets
probing the effects of single-amino acid variation on enzyme activity and steady-state cellular abundance with
the largest well-curated clinical cohort of PTEN-variant carriers. We sought to connect variant-specific
molecular phenotypes to the clinical outcomes of individuals with PTEN variants. We found that DMS data
partially explain quantitative clinical traits, including head circumference and Cleveland Clinic (CC) score,
which is a semi-quantitative surrogate of disease burden. We built a logistic regression model using DMS and
CADD scores to separate clinical PTEN variation from gnomAD control-only variation with high accuracy (AUC
= 0.892). Using a survival-like analysis, we identified molecular phenotype groups with differential risk of earlyonset as well as lifetime risk of cancer. Finally, we identified classes of DMS-defined variants with significantly
different risk levels for classical hamartoma-related features (odds ratios range of 4.1-102.9). In stark contrast,
the risk for developing autism or developmental delay does not significantly change across variant classes
(odds ratios range of 5.4-12.4). Together, these findings highlight the potential impact of combining DMS
datasets with rich clinical data, and provide new insights that may guide personalized clinical decisions for
PTEN-variant carriers.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Germline mutation of the tumor suppressor gene phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN [MIM: 601728])
manifests with variable and complex phenotypes, including macrocephaly (with increased occipital-frontal
circumferences [OFC]), benign hamartomas affecting all three germ layers, malignant neoplasia across
multiple tissues, and neurodevelopmental abnormalities, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD).1,2 This
heterogeneity is reflected clinically with germline PTEN mutations found in variable subsets of defined
syndromes, including Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (CWS1 and BRRS [MIM:
158350]), as well as macrocephalic ASD (MAS [MIM: 605309]), among others.2–5 Collectively, these
syndromes have been termed PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) when a germline PTEN variant is
identified.1,2
The dramatic variability of these clinical presentations has sparked efforts to correlate PTEN variants
with clinically-relevant phenotypic classes. However, PTEN variants resist simple classification approaches
based on secondary domain clustering or variant type. Recently, the mapping of a limited subset of germline
PTEN variants onto the three-dimensional, crystal structure failed to reveal a distinct pattern of distribution
between ASD- or cancer-predisposition-associated variants.6 Classification efforts have also been impacted by
limited sample sizes in terms of both functional data and PTEN variant cohorts.7,8 Additionally, the PTEN
protein has multiple functional roles in the cell apart from lipid phosphatase activity, which may also play a role
in this phenotypic complexity.2,9–11
These challenges have prompted recent creative high-throughput methods to functionally measure the
molecular phenotypes for thousands of nonsynonymous PTEN variants, collectively termed deep mutational
scanning (DMS).8,12 We previously reported the effect of nearly all PTEN nonsynonymous variants on lipid
phosphatase activity by utilizing a humanized yeast assay where lipid phosphatase activity was linked to cell
survival (so called fitness score).8 These data demonstrated that the solvent exposure of a wild-type residue is
a critical determinant of mutational tolerance for lipid phosphatase fitness, with solvent exposed residues being
much more tolerant to mutation. As expected, PTEN lipid phosphatase activity was generally intolerant to
mutation in the catalytic pocket and phosphatase domain, though not without exception. Further, in line with
suggestions from prior more limited functional studies7, PTEN missense variants associated with ASD tended
to retain partial lipid phosphatase activity.8
In a second independent study, the effect of ~54% of all PTEN nonsynonymous variants on the steadystate cellular protein abundance were estimated using fluorescently tagged PTEN variant proteins (so called
abundance score). It was observed that PTEN abundance is, in part, explained by thermodynamic stability and
cell-membrane interactions of a given variant. While variant abundance inversely correlates with pathogenicity,
notable exceptions are putative dominant-negative PTEN variants, which are highly stable but catalytically
inactive12.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

While these two DMS studies have added essential insights into the effect of PTEN variants on protein
function, they were limited in their clinical analyses as both relied on previously published clinical reports and
ClinVar database13 variants with varying degrees of validation and phenotypic description. In this study, to
further uncover PTEN genotype-phenotype relationships and clarify patient risk for these diverse clinical
presentations, we integrated these datasets with the largest, prospectively accrued and comprehensively
clinically characterized cohort of PTEN variant-positive individuals (Cleveland Clinic [CC] cohort). These
analyses demonstrate that molecular phenotypes associate with quantitative clinical traits, can be combined to
improve pathogenicity prediction, delineate differential lifetime cancer risk, and indicate unexpected risk ratio
relationships for neurodevelopmental and hamartoma-associated phenotypes.
Materials and Methods
PTEN Variant Function Data and Imputation
We made use of two DMS datasets in this study.8,12 Briefly, fitness scores were previously determined by
assessing a PTEN variant’s ability to reverse toxicity by means of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-triphosphate
(PIP3) dephosphorylation in a humanized yeast system14 that expresses a hyperactive kinase.8 High
confidence fitness scores were previously generated for 86% of all variants and a random forest algorithm was
used to impute fitness scores for the remaining unmeasured variants.8 Abundance scores were previously
determined by measuring the steady-state level of PTEN variants using the VAMP-Seq assay in human cells.12
Abundance scores were generated for 54% of all variants. Using a random forest framework similar to what
was used to impute fitness scores, here, we imputed abundance scores for the remaining unmeasured variants
(Figure

S1).

Modeling

was

(sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestRegressor,

implemented
n_estimators=500,

in

Scikit-learn
criterion=

“mse”,

version

0.19.0

max_features=0.33,

random_state=0, oob_score=True). We trained a model on position average, i.e. the average score of all other
substitution variants at that amino acid position and the n-1 and n+1 positions. If there were no measured
variants at the n-1, n, or n+1 positions, we included the n-2 and n+2 positions. We then iteratively trained
models incorporating features in the order of their importance until the model Pearson correlations plateaued.
Feature importance was calculated as the relative increase in error upon random permutation of a feature. The
final model was assessed using 10-fold cross validation, i.e. train the model on 90% of data and test on the
remaining 10% (Figure S1 and Table S1). Finally, we used the final model trained on all measured abundance
scores to predict all unmeasured variants.
We classified the full set of missense protein variants (measured and imputed) as wildtype-like,
hypomorphic, or truncation-like for fitness and abundance scores (Figure S2, Table S1). For fitness score, we
considered variants wildtype-like if they were within the 2.5 and 97.5 percentile of synonymous wildtype fitness
scores (Figure S2C-D). We considered variants truncation-like if their fitness scores were within the 2.5 and

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

97.5 percentile of nonsense variants at positions 1-350, excluding the regulatory tail because nonsense
mutations in the tail are not damaging. We considered variants hypomorphic for fitness score if they were
between the wildtype-like and truncation-like bounds.
We classified wildtype-like variants similarly for abundance score with a slight adjustment to the
distribution boundaries (Figure S2C-D). Because the abundance score distribution tails were larger than the
fitness score distribution tails, we defined the bounds as the 5 and 95 percentile of synonymous wildtype
distribution. We considered variants to be truncation-like for abundance score if they were within the 5 and 95
percentile of nonsense variants at positions 30-300, in order to exclude artifacts of variants near the protein
termini.
Wildtype PTEN nucleotide and corresponding amino acid sequence were obtained from GenBank
(NM_000314.6) and GenPept (NP_000305). PTEN partial crystal structure was obtained from PDB (1D5R).
PTEN Population Variants from GnomAD
Data from the controls-only subset was downloaded from gnomAD v2.115 on January 10, 2019 (Table S2). For
the cancer incidence analysis and the clinical outcomes odds ratio analyses, we included all controls-only
gnomAD nonsynonymous variants (e.g., missense, nonsense, and indel frameshift). For the pathogenic vs.
benign analysis, we considered only gnomAD missense variants with the exceptions of p.Arg173His and
p.Lys289Glu, which are classified as pathogenic or likely pathogenic in ClinVar; and p.Asp268Glu, which
occurs at a frequency greater than an order of magnitude over most other variants.
Cleveland Clinic PTEN Cohort
This study was performed in accordance with the IRB# 8458 protocol “Molecular Mechanisms Involved in
Cancer Predisposition” substudy PTEN, which has been approved by the Cleveland Clinic Institutional Review
Board for Human Subjects’ Protection, and conducted with informed consent and in accordance with the World
Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki. The CC cohort consists of 256 prospectively accrued individuals
with germline PTEN nonsynonymous variants (145 missense and 111 nonsense variants, Table 1 and Tables
S3-S4). Genotype information concerning each patient’s germline PTEN variant, demographic, and clinical
data were also included. Collection and validation of clinical phenotypes were performed by experienced
clinical personnel as detailed in a previous study.16 Demographic information includes the age at last follow-up,
sex, and age at diagnosis for various clinical phenotypes, including: macrocephaly, neurodevelopmental
pathologies including ASD and developmental delay (DD), and several different types of benign and malignant
neoplasia. Adult individuals in the cohort were given a CC score, which is a semi-quantitative estimation of the
probability of having a germline PTEN mutation based on clinical phenotypes. For example, a score of 15
indicates a 10% probability. The CC score also serves as a surrogate measure of burden of disease with larger

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

scores indicating increasing disease burden and/or younger ages of onset. However, the scoring is only
applicable/validated for the adult population (includes individuals 18 and older).16OFC z-scores were calculated
using published, age-indexed tables.17
Logistic Regression Modeling for Pathogenic PTEN Variation
To test the accuracy of models with all combinations of features (e.g., fitness scores, abundance scores, and
CADD scores), the optimal regularization parameters (L1 vs. L2 regularization and regularization strength) for
each feature combination were determined using the GridSearchCV function within scikit learn. The best
performing model as judged by area under the curve analysis used fitness scores, abundance scores, and
CADD scores, with a L1 regularization strength of 1/2.78.
Cancer Incidence and Survival Analysis
For fitness and abundance score analyses, we classified all individuals from the CC cohort and gnomAD into
wildtype-like missense, hypomorphic missense, truncation-like missense, or true-truncation (i.e. nonsense or
frameshifting) groups (Figure S2). For the combined molecular score analysis, we used the hypomorphic cutoff
to designate variants as fitness or abundance plus or minus (i.e., -1.11 for fitness score, 0.71 for abundance
score). We assumed the gnomAD individuals were cancer free. The observation period for each subject was
set from birth to age at last clinical follow-up/information. For 26 of the 164 gnomAD individuals, we could
unambiguously determine their age range by linking to data provided in the full gnomAD v2.1 variant call file.
Since these data were provided in five-year increments, we randomly selected a single year from this range for
each individual. For the rest of the gnomAD control cohort, we imputed age by using the whole dataset age
distribution that fits approximately a normal distribution with mean of 55 and standard deviation of 15. For each
individual, we assigned the mean of five ages (rounded to the nearest integer) randomly generated from this
distribution. We rounded to the nearest integer for consistency with the rest of the age data. Differences in
cancer incidence between the genotype groups were compared using the Kaplan-Meyer method and log-rank
test. Analyses were performed for overall cancer incidence and individuals were right-censored at age at
cancer or age at last follow-up. Significant group differences were then examined using pair-wise comparisons.
In order to detect potential differences in early onset cancer incidence, survival curves were further compared
at age 35 with right-censoring occurring at age of early onset (<35) cancer or age 35 otherwise.
Calculating Odds Ratios for Clinical Outcomes
Although all individuals with an identified germline, pathogenic PTEN variant are clinically classified as
belonging to the overarching classification of PHTS, we have developed clinical subgroupings with differing
presentations in order to enable genotype-phenotype analyses in this study. An individual was considered

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ASD/DD positive if they presented with ASD, DD, variable delay, or intellectual disability. An individual was
considered PHTS positive if they presented hamartomatous features including any of the following: benign or
malignant tumors, mucocutaneous lesions, arteriovenous malformation, lipomas, goiter, or uncommon skin
lesions. Individuals with the common skin findings of skin tags, café-au-lait marks, or penile freckling in
isolation, meaning without another hamartomatous feature, were not included in the PHTS group. Individuals
who displayed both the neurodevelopmental and hamartomatous features were placed in the ASD/DD & PHTS
grouping. Individuals with frameshifting and nonsense mutations were treated as true truncations. We used
IBM SPSS statistical software to perform logistic regression modeling on ASD/DD or PHTS outcomes, using
molecular phenotypes as exposures.
Results
Distribution of Missense Variation across the Primary and Crystal Structures of PTEN
In order to examine PTEN genotype-phenotype relationships, we prospectively accrued a cohort of individuals
with germline nonsynonymous variation in PTEN (Table 1). Previously, PHTS has been used as an umbrella
term specifically for classically defined PTEN-related disorders (e.g., Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-RileyRuvalcaba syndrome).18 Subsequently, as the phenotypic spectrum of PTEN mutations expanded, PHTS
became a descriptor for all clinical presentations associated with germline PTEN variation.2 In order to explore
potential differences between ASD/DD related phenotypes and those associated with hamartoma/cancer
phenotypes, we operationally grouped individuals with the classic hamartoma-related PTEN features as PHTS,
while individuals with largely neurodevelopmental clinical features were designated ASD/DD (Materials &
Methods). Individuals with a combination of neurodevelopmental and hamartoma-related features were
designated as a third group, ASD/DD & PHTS.

Table 1. CC cohort of individuals with germline nonsynonymous variation in PTEN
Missense

a

True Truncations

Phenotype

All
N (%)

% Male

All
N (%)

All

145 (100)

40.7

ASD/DD

23 (15.9)

ASD/DD &
PHTS
PHTS

Total

% Male

All
N (%)

% Male

% Mis.

111 (100)

49.5

256 (100)

44.5

56.6

78.3

6 (5.41)

100.0

29 (11.3)

82.8

79.3

32 (22.1)

68.8

24 (21.6)

75.0

56 (21.9)

71.4

57.1

90 (62.1)

21.1

80 (72.1)

38.8

170 (66.4)

29.4

52.9

a

One individual did not have qualifying symptoms for any phenotype group.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The cohort recapitulates the previously observed relative enrichment of ASD/DD phenotypes among
those with missense as opposed to nonsense variation (16% vs 5%, Table 1).11,19 As a comparison, we also
collated mutation data from control-only individuals in gnomAD, a database that aggregates sequencing
studies.15 These individuals were assumed to be unaffected by PTEN-related disorders. We categorized
missense variants by associated clinical group and then mapped variants to the primary/functional domain and
crystal structures of PTEN, including the variants catalogued in gnomAD (Figure 1A-B). The clinical missense
variants cluster most heavily in the dual-specificity phosphatase domain (residues 1-178), and are depleted in
the C2 domain & tail (residues 179-403), reflecting the importance of this protein domain to PTEN function
(Figure 1A). Comparing all clinical variants with gnomAD variants demonstrates an enrichment of gnomAD
# mutations:
1
4
8
12

gnomAD (n=66)

Polar

ASD/DD (n=24)

ASD/DD & PHTS (n=32)

Polar

C

Hydrophobic

Hydrophobic

A

C2 Domain

C2 Domain

phatase Domain

B

C2 Domain

Regulatory Tail

Regulatory Tail

Catalytic pocket

Catalytic pocket

α-helix
β-strand

β-strand

D

α-helix
β-strand

Charged

Polar

Catalytic pocket

Regulatory Tail

α-helix

Charged

Phosphatase Domain

Phosphatase Domain

Hydrophobic

Charged

PHTS (n=82)

Phosphatase Domain

C2 Domain

Regulatory Tail

α-helix

Phosphatase

β-strand

C2
Catalytic pocket

Figure 1. Overview of the datasets used in this study
(A) Diagram of PTEN primary protein structure with locations of PTEN missense variants found in the controls-only gnomAD
population or associated with various clinical presentations in the CC cohort. The major protein domains and secondary structure
assignments are indicated. Size of circle indicates number of different amino acid variants at that position.
(B) Diagram of PTEN 3D crystal structure with locations of PTEN missense variants found in the controls-only gnomAD population
or associated with various clinical presentations in the CC cohort. The C-terminal tail was not solved in the crystal structure and
therefore variants falling in this region are not shown. Color of spheres indicates same groups as shown in (A).
(C) Lipid phosphatase fitness scores are displayed as a heatmap, with blue corresponding to damaging variants (i.e. low lipid
phosphatase fitness or low abundance), gray corresponding to wildtype-like, and red corresponding to putative fitness or
abundance increasing variants (Materials & Methods). The distributions of all missense variants are shown as smoothed histograms
on the right.
(D) Cellular abundance scores displayed as in (C).

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

variants in the C2 domain & tail, as compared to the phosphatase domain (p=7.9x10-9, Fisher’s exact test,
Figure 1B). In contrast, and consistent with similar studies,6 the distributions of variants were similar across
clinical outcomes (ASD/DD, PHTS, or ASD/DD & PHTS, Figure 1A). In 3D space, gnomAD variants are
significantly more solvent exposed (i.e., exposed to the surface of the protein) than the group of all clinical
variants (medians of 87.4% vs 7.8%, p=1.28x10-18; Mann-Whitney U-test, Figure 1B). Variation at solvent
exposed positions is generally more tolerated because these variants are less likely to disrupt protein
structure.20
Visualization and Imputation of Molecular Phenotypes of PTEN
We hypothesized that variant level molecular phenotype data might uncover new genotype-phenotype
associations, which are more complex than simple clustering of clinical outcomes in primary or tertiary protein
sequence space. We aggregated molecular phenotype information derived from recent DMS studies on the
effect of thousands of variants on PTEN protein function, including inferred lipid phosphatase activity (i.e.,
fitness score) and steady-state protein stability (i.e., abundance score).8,12 Previously, we demonstrated that by
using a random forest-based machine learning modeling approach, fitness scores of variants withheld from
model training could be imputed with high accuracy. The model incorporated the position average effect of
variants missing from a nearly complete DMS dataset (86% saturation) with biophysical, biochemical, and
evolutionary data. Therefore, using the imputations from this model, we previously constructed a
comprehensive lipid phosphatase functional map of fitness scores (Figure 1C).
We reasoned that a similar strategy might be used, again with high accuracy, even for less complete DMS
datasets. We developed a similar modeling strategy for the protein abundance DMS dataset, which was at
~54% saturation. Cross validation showed the best performing model could accurately predict withheld
abundance scores with an accuracy similar to biologic replicates (Pearson r = 0.75, Figure S1). Therefore,
using this approach, we imputed abundance scores for all missing missense variants (Figure 1D and Table
S1). Combined, these complete datasets represent estimates of the effect of any given PTEN missense variant
on the lipid phosphatase activity and steady-state abundance of PTEN protein. All analyses presented here
used the combination of high confidence measured and imputed scores.
Fitness scores are modestly correlated with abundance scores (Pearson’s r = 0.43, Figure S2E),
suggesting some information overlap but that each assay is also capturing unique variant effects on protein
function. We used the distribution of programmed truncating (nonsense) and synonymous variants in these
assays to define truncation-like, hypomorphic, and wildtype-like missense variant categories (Materials and
Methods, Figure S2A-D). The missense variants in both datasets are bimodally distributed, with the majority of
variants having wildtype-like scores (Figures 1C-D and S2). We found that for both measures, variation in the

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

phosphatase domain was generally more damaging, i.e. truncation-like or hypomorphic, than variation in the
C2 domain or regulatory tail (fitness: 42% vs. 12%, abundance: 50% vs. 38%, Figure 1C-D).
Fitness and Abundance Scores Explain Quantitative Clinical Traits
In an effort to link genotype to quantitative clinical phenotypes, we evaluated whether fitness and abundance
scores of individuals’ PTEN missense variants could explain the degree of macrocephaly or phenotype burden
as assessed by CC score for individuals over 18 (Materials and Methods). Molecular phenotype scores were
evaluated numerically as well as using the defined functional categories (e.g., wildtype-like, hypomorphic, and
truncation-like). We found a logarithmic relationship between fitness score and head size measured by OFC,
with z-scores plateauing around the hypomorphic cutoff (Figure 2A, left). Accordingly, we found a significant
difference in OFC between the population of wildtype-like variants and truncation-like as well as hypomorphic
variants (p = 4.3x10-5 and 6x10-4, respectively, Mann-Whitney U-test), but no difference between hypomorphic
and truncation-like variant fitness scores (Figure 2B, left). We

also

observed

a

logarithmic

relationship

between OFC and abundance score (Figure 2A, right). Treating abundance as a categorical variable revealed
significant differences between wildtype-like and both truncation-like and hypomorphic variants (p = 0.02 and
0.01, respectively, Mann-Whitney U-test). Similar to the fitness score, there was no difference between the
distribution of truncation-like and hypomorphic variants (Figure 2B, right).

A

Only adults

C

Whole cohort

D

B
***

***

*

*

***

***

**

***

*

Figure 2. Relationships between molecular phenotype scores and quantitative clinical traits for missense variants
(A) Occipital frontal circumference (OFC, z-score) plotted as a function of continuous fitness score or abundance score for all
individuals with missense variants. Males are shown as orange, females are shown as maroon. Vertical dashed lines indicate the
hypomorphic and truncation-like cutoffs at -1.11 and -2.15, respectively. Horizontal dashed line indicates threshold for macrocephaly (zscore = 2.054). Solid lines indicate logarithmic curves fit to the data.
(B) Box plot of OFC z-scores for all individuals with missense variants with fitness or abundance scores in the wildtype-like,
hypomorphic, or truncation-like ranges.
(C) CC score for adults with missense variants as a function of continuous fitness or abundance scores. Analyses are restricted to
adults as CC score is not valid for individuals under 18. Vertical dashed lines indicate the hypomorphic and truncation-like cutoffs at 1.11 and -2.15, respectively. Solid lines indicate linear curves fit to the data.
(D) Box plot of CC scores for adults with missense variants with fitness or abundance scores in the wildtype-like, hypomorphic, or
truncation-like ranges. *p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In our analysis of phenotype burden, we found a significant linear relationship between missense
variant fitness score and CC score (p = 3.7x10-10), with fitness score explaining 37% of the variation in CC
score (Figure 2C, left). Similarly, treating fitness score as a categorical variable, we found that more damaging
groups of variants had distributions shifted toward higher (more severe) CC scores (Figure 2D, left). CC scores
for truncation-like variants were significantly higher than those of hypomorphic
variants (p = 2.5x10-4). Additionally, CC scores for hypomorphic variants were
in turn significantly higher than those of wildtype-like variants (p = 9.2x10-3).

A

Alternatively, for abundance scores, while a significant linear
relationship exists between CC score and abundance score (p = 3.2x10-4), it
explains only 14% of the variation in CC score (Figure 2G). Likewise, when
treating abundance score as a categorical variable, more modest trends were
observed compared to the trends for fitness score. The abundance scores for

B

truncation-like variants trend toward higher CC scores than hypomorphic
variants (p = 0.08), while hypomorphic variants are nominally higher than
wildtype-like (p = 0.045) variants. Truncation-like variants are significantly
different from wildtype-like variants (p = 6.7x10-4; Figure 2D). Combined, these
results underscore the potential for molecular phenotypes to partially explain

C

clinical outcomes.
Molecular Phenotype Data Accurately Distinguishes Likely Pathogenic
from Benign Variation
We next examined whether molecular phenotype data could be utilized to

D

identify pathogenic or likely pathogenic missense variation in PTEN. Thus, we
contrasted the CC cohort of known pathogenic PTEN variants to putatively
benign, population PTEN variants catalogued in the gnomAD control-only
individuals (Materials and Methods, Figure 3, Table S5). We found that
variants from the CC cohort were predicted to be significantly more damaging
by both fitness score (p = 6.5x10-13, Mann-Whitney U-test) and abundance
Figure 3. Molecular phenotypes discriminate clinical from gnomAD missense PTEN variation
These analyses are done at the variant level to prevent recurrent variants from biasing the results. Two known pathogenic variants
were removed from the gnomAD list (Materials & Methods).
(A) Box plots comparing fitness scores between variants found in the CC cohort versus gnomAD.
(B) Box plots comparing abundance scores between variants found in the CC cohort versus gnomAD.
(C) Box plots comparing CADD scores between variants found in the CC cohort versus gnomAD.
(D) Receiver operator characteristic curves for individual predictors, as well as the optimized multivariate logistic regression using
fitness, abundance, and CADD scores.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

score (p = 7.6x10-6, Figure 3A-B). As a comparison, CADD scores21,22 are also more damaging for the CC
cohort group (p = 6.5x10-8, Figure 3C). Of these three predictors, fitness scores demonstrate the highest area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC = 0.888, Figure 3D). While these predictors are
correlated, the relationships are modest (Spearman rho = 0.52-0.59, Figure S3A), suggesting that multivariate
models could yield improved performance. Therefore, we constructed logistic regression models using various
combinations of the molecular phenotype data and CADD scores to find the model that most accurately
discriminates the two groups (Figure S3B). We found the most accurate model utilized fitness, abundance, and
CADD scores to predict likely pathogenicity variants with AUC = 0.892 (Figure 3D). These findings highlight the
improvement in computational models of pathogenicity that can be gained from empirical molecular phenotype
data.
Molecular Phenotypes Identify Subgroups with Distinct Cancer Susceptibility
While it is known that PTEN mutations dramatically increase the lifetime risk of developing specific cancers, we
sought to understand whether molecular phenotypes could highlight functional classes of missense variants
with differences in cancer susceptibility (Materials and Methods). As a comparison group, we included
individuals with variants that are predicted to be truly truncating (e.g., nonsense and frameshifting). Survival
functions were first compared between all classes of missense fitness or abundance scores and the true
truncations, with pairwise comparisons of survival functions when significant differences were found (Figure
4A-B). In this analysis, cancer free status was considered as the survival criterion.
For fitness scores, survival functions were significantly different (p = 4.8x10-24, Log rank, Figure 4A and
Table S6). Pairwise comparisons showed that all of the reduced fitness score categories survival functions
were similar to each other and significantly different from the wildtype-like survival function (Table S6). Based
on the shape of the survival functions, we hypothesized that there may be a difference in early on-set risk.
Therefore, we conducted a subanalysis with right-censoring at age 35, which again showed significant overall
differences (p = 3.0x10-6, Log rank). Pair-wise comparisons showed that these differences were driven by
truncation-like and true truncations categories, each significantly deviated from wildtype-like variants (p =
9.0x10-6 and 2.8x10-7). The hypomorphic survival function appears to be intermediate between the groups.
However, across this age range the hypomorphic function did not significantly differ from the wildtype-like
function (p = 0.342), unlike the truncation-like and true truncation functions. Further supporting a potential
intermediate early risk, when compared to both truncation groups the survival function for hypomorphic
variants was suggestive of a differential cancer risk although the trend did not reach significance (p = 0.155
and 0.136, Figure 4A).
Variant classes defined by abundance scores also had significantly different survival functions (p =
2.1x10-18, Log rank, Figure 4B and Table S6). In contrast to the fitness scores, pairwise comparisons revealed

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Truncation-like
True Truncations

Years of Age

B
Cumulative Cancer Free

Wildtype-like
Hypomorphic

Abundance Score

C

Fitness Score

D
Cumulative Cancer Free

Cumulative Cancer Free

A

Fitness Score

Abundance Score

Wildtype-like
Hypomorphic
Truncation-like
True Truncations

Years of Age

Fitness (+), Abun(+)
Fitness (+), Abun(-)
Fitness (-), Abun(-)
Fitness (-), Abun(+)
True Truncations

Years of Age

Figure 4. Effects of molecular phenotype on cumulative cancer incidence
(A) Survival-like analysis of individuals with different fitness score classes of PTEN missense or true-truncation (e.g. nonsense,
frameshifting) variants. “Survival” here is defined as being cancer-free. Ticks represent right-censored individuals, i.e. the age at last
follow-up. n=204 wildtype-like; 35 hypomorphic; 68 truncation-like, 114 true truncations.
(B) Survival-like analysis of individuals with different abundance score classes of PTEN missense or true truncation (e.g. nonsense,
frameshifting) variants. “Survival” here is defined as being cancer-free. Ticks represent right-censored individuals, i.e. the age at last
follow-up. n=210 wildtype-like; 65 hypomorphic; 32 truncation-like, 114 true truncations.
(C) All CC cohort and gnomAD individuals plotted as a function of fitness and abundance scores. Dotted lines indicate wildtype-like
thresholds (-1.11 and 0.71 for fitness and abundance scores, respectively).
(D) Survival-like analysis for individuals with PTEN missense variants falling in fitness/abundance quadrants or true truncating
variants. “Survival” here is defined as being cancer-free. Ticks represent right-censored individuals, i.e. the age at last follow-up.
n=29 fitness(-), abundance(+); 74 fitness(-), abundance(-); 23 fitness(+), abundance(-); 181 fitness(+), abundance(+), and 114 true
truncations.

a step-wise relationship for abundance scores, with hypomorphic missense variants conferring greater lifetime
hazard than wildtype-like (p = 0.001), and both truncation-like missense and true truncations conferring greater
hazard than the hypomorphic abundance class (p = 2.0x10-11 and 6.0x10-14, Figure 4B). Right-censoring at age
35 identified significantly different survival functions for the abundance-defined variant classes as well (p =
8.0x10-6). Similar to the fitness score analysis, these differences were driven by truncation-like and true
truncations functions which were significantly different from wildtype-like between birth and age of 35 (p =
2.1x10-5 and 7.5x10-7, respectively). Again, these data were suggestive of the hypomorphic survival function
being intermediate between wildtype-like (p = 0.06) and the truncation groups (p = 0.152 and 0.193), but none
of the comparisons were significantly different.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We next leveraged the two-dimensional molecular phenotype data to separate missense variants into
four categories based on deficiencies in fitness score, abundance score, or both. For this analysis,
hypomorphic and truncation-like scoring variants were combined as the negative group for PTEN function for
each score in order to keep adequate group sizes. Compared to CC Cohort, gnomAD individuals are enriched
in the fitness positive, abundance positive quadrant (Figure 4C). The survival functions for these combined
molecular phenotype defined groups were significantly different (p = 2.6x10-24, Log rank). Pairwise
comparisons, showed variants retaining wildtype-like fitness (+) and abundance (+) have the lowest overall
hazard and have a survival function that is significantly different from all other groups (Table S6). Fitness
positive but abundant negative variants showed intermediate risk that was significantly different from both the
wildtype -like and true truncations (p = 0.004 and 0.048, respectively). The remaining two classes are both
fitness score deficient (abundance + or -) and are not significantly different from each other or the true
truncations. These data suggest that combining multiple molecular phenotypes provides additional insights into
cancer risk.
Molecular Phenotypes Identify Distinct Risk Profiles for ASD/DD and PHTS Subgroupings
Understanding the molecular differences between the variants that associate with ASD/DD versus PHTS
(especially cancer occurrence) outcomes is a critical goal for understanding PTEN pathobiology, which
ultimately guides clinical management. Consistent with our and others’ previous findings,7,8 fitness scores of
individuals in the ASD/DD group are less damaging than the PHTS positive groups (p = 5.5x10-3, 0.011, MannWhitney U, for ASD/DD vs ASD/DD & PHTS and ASD/DD vs PHTS, respectively, Figure 5A). However, there
is no difference in abundance or CADD scores between the clinical phenotype groups (Figure 5B and data not
shown).
Next, we tested whether the severity of variant molecular phenotype, as assessed by fitness or
abundance score, affected the odds of developing ASD/DD or PHTS symptoms (regardless of presence or
absence of the other qualifying symptoms). We included all members of the CC cohort as well as gnomAD
individuals (Materials & Methods). Using a logistic regression model, we calculated odds ratios (OR) for
ASD/DD and PHTS as a function of fitness or abundance scores. Wildtype-like variants were used as the
reference group. For both molecular phenotypes, more severe missense variants do not significantly increase
the odds of an individual developing ASD/DD (OR ranges = 3.9-6.1 and 4.2-7.8 for fitness and abundance,
respectively). The odds for true truncation variants are marginally decreased compared to the missense variant
classes, though this trend is not significant (Figure S4B). In contrast, for fitness and abundance scores, the
odds of an individual developing qualifying symptoms for a PHTS classification increase as mutation severity
increases in a stepwise manner, with stronger differences in risk observed for the abundance score (OR
ranges = 20.4-51.3 and 5.1-28.7 for fitness and abundance, respectively, Figure S4B).

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A
**

B

*

C

D
1000

Odds ratio

**

Odds ratio

**

*

**

*

**

*

*

1000

100
100

10
10

11

Fitness(-)
F+,+AF-,-AFitness Fitness(+)
Abun (-)
Abun (-)
Abundance -

+

Fitness(-) True Truncs.
F-, A+
trunc
Abun (+)

ASD/DD

Trunc.

+
-

Fitness(+)
F+, AAbun (-)

-

Fitness(-)
F-, AAbun (-)

+

Fitness(-) True Truncs.
F-, A+
trunc
Abun (+)

Trunc.

PHTS

Figure 5. Association of molecular phenotypes with specific clinical outcomes
(A) Box plots showing fitness scores of PTEN variants occurring in individuals in gnomAD or different clinical
categories.
(B) Box plots showing abundance scores of PTEN variants occurring in individuals in gnomAD or different
clinical categories.
(C) PTEN variants plotted according to fitness and abundance scores, colored by clinical group. Dashed lines
indicate hypomorphic cutoffs (-1.11 for fitness, 0.71 for abundance).
(D) Odds ratios for developing ASD/DD or PHTS symptoms for different variant classes. Odds ratios
represent the comparison of that class with variants in the fitness positive, abundance positive quadrant (top
right in C).
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. *p<0.05, **p<0.01.
We next tested whether two-dimensional molecular phenotype data would provide additional insights
into the risk for developing ASD/DD or PHTS symptoms (Figure 5D). While variants from the control individuals
from gnomAD clearly cluster in the fitness positive, abundance positive quadrant, the affected individuals
populate the other three quadrants. Interestingly, compared to the PHTS positive categories, the ASD/DD has

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

a larger fraction of individuals in the fitness positive, abundance positive (30% vs. 10% and 20% for ASD/DD
vs ASD/DD & PHTS and PHTS, respectively), and a smaller fraction in the putatively dominant negative fitness
compromised, abundance positive quadrant (5% versus 21% and 25% for ASD/DD vs ASD/DD & PHTS and
PHTS, respectively, Figure S4A).
Again, using a logistic regression approach, we generated odds ratios for the combined twodimensional molecular phenotypes. We again observed no major differences in the odds for developing
ASD/DD in any missense groups or the true truncation category (OR range = 5.4-12.4). In contrast, the odds
for developing PHTS are highly dependent on the variant grouping (OR range = 4.1-102.9). Missense variants
that maintain lipid phosphatase activity but are low abundance show the lowest odds for an individual
developing qualifying symptoms for PHTS classification (OR = 4.1, 95% CI = 1.5-10.7, Figure 5D). Missense
variants that were fitness and abundance negative showed a significantly different intermediate risk (OR =
27.6, 95% CI = 13.5- 56.5). Variants that have wildtype-like abundance but abrogated lipid phosphatase
activity (putative dominant negative variants) have the highest odds of an individual developing qualifying
symptoms for PHTS classification (OR = 102.9, 95% CI = 22.8- 464.0), though not significantly different from
variants in the fitness negative/abundance negative or true truncation categories (Figure 5D).
Discussion
Despite two decades of effort, we still lack a clear understanding of how PTEN genotype affects specific
clinical phenotypes. Recent advances in DNA synthesis and sequencing technologies allow a new
experimental paradigm in which the effects of thousands of variations on protein function can be empirically
measured in parallel. Two such experiments recently explored the effects of PTEN variation on lipid
phosphatase activity (fitness score) and steady state cellular abundance (abundance score).8,12 Using
imputation, we generated estimated functional scores for all possible PTEN missense variants. In order to
understand how molecular phenotype data relates to clinical outcomes, we integrated these data with clinical
information from the CC cohort of PTEN mutation-positive individuals. These analyses have validated the
clinical utility of comprehensive multi-dimensional functional scores and have uncovered unexpected insights
into the PTEN genotype-phenotype map.
Our analyses demonstrate that molecular phenotype scores are correlated with quantitative clinical
traits. Fitness and abundance scores showed a logarithmic relationship with the most penetrant PTEN
phenotype, macrocephaly (~95% of PTEN patients).23 In previous work, we designed an algorithm to
determine a patient’s a priori risk for having a germline PTEN mutation (CC score). CC score is also a
surrogate measure of an adult patient’s phenotypic burden accounting for age of onset.16 CC scores and
functional scores have a linear relationship with more severe phenotypic burden associating with worse

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

functional scores. We then demonstrated that molecular phenotype data can be used to model and thus
predict likely pathogenic variants with high accuracy, compared to completely in silico approaches.
While broadly predicting pathogenicity has value in a clinical setting and can help resolve PTEN
variants of uncertain significance (VUS), we were also interested in exploring if these molecular phenotypes
could provide additional insights into the diverse clinical outcomes associated with germline PTEN disruption.
Our analyses showed that molecular phenotypes can define subgroups of patients with common or unique
age-related cancer hazard. While putative true truncating variants, such as nonsense mutations, showed high
lifetime cancer risk, highly damaging missense variants as defined by the molecular phenotypes appear to be
at least as impactful. Moreover, our data from single molecular phenotypes show truncation-like and true
truncations survival functions separate from wildtype-like functions over an early-onset age range.
Hypomorphic functions are potentially intermediate over this early on-set range but not yet significantly
different from the wildtype-like functions. Combining molecular phenotype scores provides further granularity
for these cancer risks and identified variants that are lipid phosphatase active (fitness positive) but unstable
(abundance negative) as a significantly different intermediate class of cancer risk variants.
A growing number of studies have provided important insight into the question of genotypes driving
diverse phenotypic outcomes for carriers of germline PTEN variants. However, these studies have generally
been limited by small sample sizes. For instance, Spinelli et al. (2015) investigated the lipid phosphatase
activity and protein stability of seven ASD-associated and five PHTS-associated PTEN missense variants
using virally transfected U87MG cells. They found ASD-associated variants retained partial phosphatase
function but exhibited dramatically decreased stability, whereas PHTS-associated variants lost phosphatase
function but exhibited relatively better stability.7 These findings form the basis for the hypothesis formulated by
Leslie and Longy (2016), in which ASD/DD results from hypomorphic PTEN variants while traditional PHTS
(i.e. hamatomatous and malignant growth) results from more damaging variants.11 Our previous work using
fitness scores (i.e. inferred lipid phosphatase activity) and ASD/DD- or PHTS-associated variants from the
literature lent support to this hypothesis.8
Here, using the largest set of clinically annotated variants examined to date, we strengthen these
previous findings by showing that ASD/DD-associated PTEN variants, on average, retain hypomorphic lipid
phosphatase activity, while those associated with either ASD/DD and PHTS or PHTS alone are more
damaging. Moreover, the fraction of missense variants and the distribution of variants according to fitness and
abundance scores are more similar between the two PHTS associated groups, suggesting that they are in fact
molecularly similar. We made the surprising discovery, however, that risk for developing ASD/DD is not
dramatically altered across different variant loss-of-function categories, while the risk for PHTS can increase by
an order of magnitude. Thus, it appears that while all individuals with pathogenic PTEN variants are at
substantial risk for developing ASD/DD, the risk, and thus the subsequent penetrance, of PHTS symptoms (i.e.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

hamartomatous and malignant growth) is significantly greater for true truncations and truncation-like missense
variants. These differential risk profiles would then explain the lower fraction of true truncations in cohorts
recruited primarily based on an ASD/DD diagnosis.11,19
The biologic basis of these differential risk profiles remains unclear. Retaining any lipid phosphatase
activity of the variant allele, coupled with the second functional PTEN allele, may be sufficient to prevent the
formation of hamartomas in some cases. There are numerous PTEN functions that are not described by
molecular phenotypes included in this study. Lipid phosphatase independent functions may also modulate risk.
For example, recent studies have shown a potential relationship between PTEN localization and clinical
outcomes, where PTEN variants showing nuclear depletion associated with ASD/DD.24–27 Ideally, a
comprehensive analysis would include the effect of variation on PTEN’s protein phosphatase activity,
subcellular localization, nuclear function, and protein-protein interaction. New high-throughput assays may
make such datasets available in the near future.
Given that the majority of ASD/DD diagnoses are from children or young adults, an important open
question is what will their lifetime risk for neoplasia truly be? Longitudinal tracking to definitively assess
neoplasia/cancer risk in this cohort will improve the allocation of clinical resources and guide the precision
delivery of care. Our current data suggest that certain subsets of individuals with PTEN associated-ASD/DD
are likely to have higher cancer risk than other subsets. Longitudinal follow-up with these individuals or new
prospective recruitment efforts will be needed to answer this question definitively.
Supplemental Data
Supplemental Data includes four figures and six tables.
Declaration of Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
We thank A. C. Adey, D. M. Fowler, K. A. Matreyek, J. Zonana, G. Mandel, P. J. Stork, K. M. Wright, I. N.
Smith and M. Seyfi for helpful discussions. We thank Martha Atherton and the Atherton Foundation for their
support of the NARSAD awards. This work was supported, in part, by a NARSAD Young Investigator Grant
from the Brain and Behavior Research Foundation through the NARSAD-Atherton Foundation Young
Investigator Award (22935 to B. J. O.), a Sloan Research Fellowship in Neurosciences (Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation, FG-2015-65608 to B. J. O.), the Ambrose Monell Foundation (to C.E.), the Zacconi Program of
PTEN Research Excellence (to C.E.), and internal funds (C.E., B. J. O.). T. L. M received support from the
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Development (F31HD095571). T. L. M. is

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

an ARCS scholar (Achievement Rewards for College Scientists Foundation, Inc., Oregon Chapter) and B. J. O.
is a Klingenstein-Simons Fellow (Esther A. & Joseph Klingenstein Fund, Simons Foundation). C. E. is the
Sondra J. and Stephen R. Hardis Endowed Chair of Cancer Genomic Medicine at the Cleveland Clinic, and is
an ACS Clinical Research Professor.
Web Resources
CADD, https://cadd.gs.washington.edu/
ClinVar database, https://www.clinicalgenome.org/data-sharing/clinvar/
Consurf, http://consurfdb.tau.ac.il/
gnomAD database, https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/downloads/
OMIM, http://www.omim.org/
PolyPhen-2, http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/
Provean, http://provean.jcvi.org/
STRIDE, http://webclu.bio.wzw.tum.de/stride/
References
1. Yehia, L., and Eng, C. (2018). 65 YEARS OF THE DOUBLE HELIX: One gene, many endocrine and
metabolic syndromes: PTEN-opathies and precision medicine. Endocrine-Related Cancer 25, T121–T140.
2. Yehia, L., Ngeow, J., and Eng, C. (2019). PTEN-opathies: from biological insights to evidence-based
precision medicine. J Clin Invest 129, 452–464.
3. Liaw, D., Marsh, D.J., Li, J., Dahia, P.L., Wang, S.I., Zheng, Z., Bose, S., Call, K.M., Tsou, H.C., Peacocke,
M., et al. (1997). Germline mutations of the PTEN gene in Cowden disease, an inherited breast and thyroid
cancer syndrome. Nat. Genet. 16, 64–67.
4. Marsh, D.J., Dahia, P.L.M., Zheng, Z., Liaw, D., Parsons, R., Gorlin, R.J., and Eng, C. (1997). Germline
mutations in PTEN are present in Bannayan-Zonana syndrome. Nature Genetics 16, 333.
5. Butler, M., Dasouki, M., Zhou, X., Talebizadeh, Z., Brown, M., Takahashi, T., Miles, J., Wang, C., Stratton,
R., Pilarski, R., et al. (2005). Subset of individuals with autism spectrum disorders and extreme macrocephaly
associated with germline PTEN tumour suppressor gene mutations. J Med Genet 42, 318–321.
6. Smith, I.N., Thacker, S., Jaini, R., and Eng, C. (2019). Dynamics and structural stability effects of germline
PTEN mutations associated with cancer versus autism phenotypes. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 37, 1766–1782.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

7. Spinelli, L., Black, F.M., Berg, J.N., Eickholt, B.J., and Leslie, N.R. (2015). Functionally distinct groups of
inherited PTEN mutations in autism and tumour syndromes. J Med Genet 52, 128–134.
8. Mighell, T.L., Evans-Dutson, S., and O’Roak, B.J. (2018). A Saturation Mutagenesis Approach to
Understanding PTEN Lipid Phosphatase Activity and Genotype-Phenotype Relationships. Am J Hum Genet
102, 943–955.
9. Orloff, M.S., and Eng, C. (2008). Genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity in the PTEN hamartoma tumour
syndrome. Oncogene 27, 5387–5397.
10. Mester, J., and Eng, C. (2013). When Overgrowth Bumps Into Cancer: The PTEN-Opathies. American
Journal of Medical Genetics Part C: Seminars in Medical Genetics 163, 114–121.
11. Leslie, N.R., and Longy, M. (2016). Inherited PTEN mutations and the prediction of phenotype. Seminars in
Cell & Developmental Biology 52, 30–38.
12. Matreyek, K.A., Starita, L.M., Stephany, J.J., Martin, B., Chiasson, M.A., Gray, V.E., Kircher, M.,
Khechaduri, A., Dines, J.N., Hause, R.J., et al. (2018). Multiplex assessment of protein variant abundance by
massively parallel sequencing. Nature Genetics 50, 874.
13. Landrum, M.J., Lee, J.M., Riley, G.R., Jang, W., Rubinstein, W.S., Church, D.M., and Maglott, D.R. (2014).
ClinVar: public archive of relationships among sequence variation and human phenotype. Nucleic Acids Res
42, D980–D985.
14. Rodríguez-Escudero, I., Roelants, F.M., Thorner, J., Nombela, C., Molina, M., and Cid, V.J. (2005).
Reconstitution of the mammalian PI3K/PTEN/Akt pathway in yeast. Biochem. J. 390, 613–623.
15. Karczewski, K.J., Francioli, L.C., Tiao, G., Cummings, B.B., Alföldi, J., Wang, Q., Collins, R.L., Laricchia,
K.M., Ganna, A., Birnbaum, D.P., et al. (2019). Variation across 141,456 human exomes and genomes reveals
the spectrum of loss-of-function intolerance across human protein-coding genes. BioRxiv 531210.
16. Tan, M.-H., Mester, J., Peterson, C., Yang, Y., Chen, J.-L., Rybicki, L.A., Milas, K., Pederson, H., Remzi,
B., Orloff, M.S., et al. (2011). A Clinical Scoring System for Selection of Patients for PTEN Mutation Testing Is
Proposed on the Basis of a Prospective Study of 3042 Probands. Am J Hum Genet 88, 42–56.
17. Roche, A.F., Mukherjee, D., Guo, S.M., and Moore, W.M. (1987). Head circumference reference data: birth
to 18 years. Pediatrics 79, 706–712.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.19015297; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

18. Marsh, D.J., Kum, J.B., Lunetta, K.L., Bennett, M.J., Gorlin, R.J., Ahmed, S.F., Bodurtha, J., Crowe, C.,
Curtis, M.A., Dasouki, M., et al. (1999). PTEN mutation spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlations in
Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome suggest a single entity with Cowden syndrome. Hum. Mol. Genet. 8,
1461–1472.
19. Tan, M.-H., Mester, J.L., Ngeow, J., Rybicki, L.A., Orloff, M.S., and Eng, C. (2012). Lifetime Cancer Risks
in Individuals with Germline PTEN Mutations. Clin Cancer Res 18, 400–407.
20. Saunders C.T. and Baker D (2002). Evaluation of structural and evolutionary contributions to deleterious
mutation prediction. J Mol Biol. 322(4), 891-901.
21. Rentzsch, P., Witten, D., Cooper, G.M., Shendure, J., and Kircher, M. (2019). CADD: predicting the
deleteriousness of variants throughout the human genome. Nucleic Acids Res 47, D886–D894.
22. Kircher, M., Witten, D.M., Jain, P., O’Roak, B.J., Cooper, G.M., and Shendure, J. (2014). A general
framework for estimating the relative pathogenicity of human genetic variants. Nature Genetics 46, 310–315.
23. Mester, J.L., Tilot, A.K., Rybicki, L.A., Frazier, T.W., and Eng, C. (2011). Analysis of prevalence and
degree of macrocephaly in patients with germline PTEN mutations and of brain weight in Pten knock-in murine
model. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 19, 763–768.
24. Frazier, T.W., Embacher, R., Tilot, A.K., Koenig, K., Mester, J., and Eng, C. (2015). Molecular and
Phenotypic Abnormalities in Individuals with Germline Heterozygous PTEN Mutations and Autism. Mol
Psychiatry 20, 1132–1138.
25. Tilot, A.K., Bebek, G., Niazi, F., Altemus, J., Romigh, T., Frazier, T.W., and Eng, C. (2016). Neural
transcriptome of constitutional Pten dysfunction in mice and its relevance to human idiopathic Autism Spectrum
Disorder. Mol Psychiatry 21, 118–125.
26. Tilot, A.K., Gaugler, M.K., Yu, Q., Romigh, T., Yu, W., Miller, R.H., Frazier, T.W., and Eng, C. (2014).
Germline disruption of Pten localization causes enhanced sex-dependent social motivation and increased glial
production. Hum Mol Genet 23, 3212–3227.
27. Fricano-Kugler, C.J., Getz, S.A., Williams, M.R., Zurawel, A.A., DeSpenza, T., Frazel, P.W., Li, M.,
O’Malley, A.J., Moen, E.L., and Luikart, B.W. (2018). Nuclear Excluded Autism-Associated Phosphatase and
Tensin Homolog Mutations Dysregulate Neuronal Growth. Biol. Psychiatry 84, 265–277.

21

