medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.

The Effect of Altered Neural Inputs and Botulinum Neurotoxin
Chemical Denervation on the Passive Biomechanical Properties of
Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
Benjamin I Binder-Markey1,2,3,4, Wendy M Murray1,2,3,4,5, Julius P.A. Dewald1,2,3
2

1
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
Department of Physical Therapy and Human Movement Sciences, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
3
Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Science, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
4
Shirley Ryan AbilityLab, Chicago, IL
5
Research Service, Edward Hines Jr., VA Hospital, Hines, I

ABSTRACT
Background and Purpose: Following a hemiparetic stroke, prolonged altered motor neuronal
inputs may drive passive mechanical changes within muscle that further amplify the brain injury
induced motor impairments, reducing optimal recovery. However, due to confounding factors, i.e.
muscle hyperactivity and botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT) chemical denervation, there is no
consensus on how altered neural inputs following a stroke may affect the muscle’s passive
mechanical properties. Therefore, the goal of this study is to understand how passive mechanical
properties of muscles adapt to prolonged altered neural inputs by minimizing and controlling for
muscle hyperactivity and BoNT.
Methods: Passive torques about the wrist and metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints were quantified
in the paretic and non-paretic wrist/fingers of 34 individuals with chronic hemiparetic stroke.
Participants’ hand impairments ranged from severe to mild and included a group who received
BoNT injections. Torques were quantified with the subjects in a sleep or near-sleep state to
mitigate muscle hyperactivity and EMGs were continuously monitored to ensure no muscle
activity during data collection.
Results: Our findings indicate that the passive mechanics of wrist/fingers do not substantially
change following a hemiparetic stroke unless the individual previously received BoNT injections.
Substantial increases in passive flexion torques were observed in individuals who had received
BoNT which resulted in a decrease of up to 68 degrees in passive MCP range of motion in
extension.
Conclusions: To the best of our knowledge this study is the most thorough investigation of in vivo
passive elastic torques at the wrist and fingers in chronic hemiparetic stroke. The results indicate
increased stiffness observed clinically and in previous studies are likely a result of muscle
hyperactivity, or are the result of BoNT injections. Thus, loss of hand function post-stroke is
predominately due to motor impairments post stroke suggesting future studies and rehabilitation
techniques should focus on these deficits.

1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.

1

INTRODUCTION
Following a hemiparetic stroke, induced damage to the corticofugal motor (i.e., corticospinal

and corticobulbar) pathways results in an increased reliance on indirect contralesional
corticoreticulospinal pathways1-5. Increased reliance on these indirect pathways alters neural input
to spinal motor neurons and results in motor impairments such as weakness6-8, loss of independent
joint control9-13, motor neuron hyperactivity that manifests as hypertonicity (a persistent muscle
activity) and spasticity (i.e., hyperactive stretch reflexes)14-18. This altered motor neuronal drive,
over time, may change the mechanical structure of muscle, further amplifying brain injury induced
motor impairments. One particularly detrimental sequelae of secondary structural muscle
adaptations are that muscles can become increasingly stiff, making movement progressively more
difficult thus preventing individuals from achieving their optimal recovery potential.
Within current literature, there is not a clear consensus regarding how prolonged exposure to
the altered neural inputs that occur following a stroke affects muscle structure and its passive
mechanical properties. Previous studies that have quantified muscle adaptions following a stroke
have demonstrated decreased fascicle lengths19-21, often accompanied by increased joint torques
and stiffness7,19,20,22-26 providing evidence of muscle contractures and mechanical property changes
following a stroke. However, there is also conflicting evidence that passive mechanical properties
are not different between the paretic and non-paretic limbs of stroke survivors.22,27
A shortcoming within many of the previous studies is the inclusion of confounding factors that
could influence measurements of muscle properties, the most important factor being abnormal
muscle hyperactivity. Previous studies did not properly address abnormal muscle hypertonicity
resulting from motorneuron hyperactivity and associated stretch reflex hyperactivity (i.e.,
spasticity) during data collection. These studies either continuously moved the joint, lacked pre-

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
stretching of the muscles to attenuate hyperactive motoneurons28, or did not report EMGs or
monitoring muscle activity during data collection. These approaches all increase the likelihood of
the presence of muscle activity during data collection that can obfuscate the underlying
biomechanical changes, especially during “passive” or “relaxed” conditions. Abnormal
hyperactivity can have a significant effect on the “passive” resistance if not adequately considered
and controlled, leading to the variability within reported outcomes.
An additional confounding variable that these previous studies do not consider is the potential
long term side effects of botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT) that chemically denervates a muscle. BoNT
is commonly used following a stroke to treat severe muscle hypertonicity and spasticity. However,
BoNT within murine muscles causes structural changes of increased intramuscular connective
tissue and increasing mechanical stiffness in the short-term and long-term29-33. If the administration
of BoNT also increases intramuscular connective tissue within human muscle, it is critical to
understand these changes as distinct from the effects caused by the altered neural inputs that occur
following a stroke.
The goal of this study is to understand how passive mechanical properties of muscles adapt to
prolonged altered neural inputs, as a result of a stroke, by minimizing and controlling for muscle
hyperactivity and BoNT. We chose to study the muscles of the hand and wrist as they have the
longest lasting and most severe neural deficits and impairments following a stroke34-37. To evaluate
the effects over a broad gradation of altered neural inputs, we recruited individuals with severe to
mild hand impairments. Finally, because the hand and wrist muscles are a frequent site of BoNT
treatment, we explored the potential long-term effects of chemical denervation following BoNT
on these muscles by including a subset of stroke participants with a history of BoNT treatment.
Based on the findings of the previous literature and the clinical presentation of an increasingly stiff

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
flexed wrist and finger posture of many individuals following a stroke, the driving hypotheses for
this work are that: 1) passive torques of the paretic hand will be greater than the non-paretic hand,
2) changes in joint torques will be graded with the severity of the hand impairments and 3) limbs
with wrist and finger muscles that have been chemically denervated using BoNT will demonstrate
greater increases in passive joint torques than those that have not.

2

MATERIALS AND METHODS

2.1 Participants
An interdepartmental research database, the Clinical Neuroscience Research Registry from
Northwestern University and the Shirley Ryan AbilityLab (formerly Rehabilitation Institute of
Chicago), was used to pre-screen individuals with chronic hemiparetic stroke based on set
inclusion/exclusion criteria (Table 1) and the prior clinical assessment of upper-limb impairment
recorded in the registry; wrist and finger range of motion (ROM) was not a consideration in the
inclusion/exclusion of individuals. 38 individuals were enrolled in this study, 28 of the individuals
had never received BoNT injections (no-BoNT) and 10 individuals had previously received BoNT
injections in their forearms (BoNT-injected). All individuals who received BoNT injection had
injections within their forearm flexor muscles. Because one of these 10 individuals also had BoNT
injections in their forearm extensor muscles, this participant was subsequently excluded from the
analysis in order to standardize injection sites to the flexor group only. Additionally, due to the
inability to fully relax both their paretic and non-paretic arm muscles during data collection, the
data of three individuals (two in the BoNT-injected group and 1 in the non-BoNT group) were
ultimately excluded from the analysis. The remaining 34 study participants were stratified into 3
groups by hand impairment (severe (n=16; n = 7 of these from the BoNT group), moderate (n=9),

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
or mild (n=9)) using the Chedoke McMaster Stroke Assessment Hand Score (CMSA-HS) 38 (see
Table 2). CMSA-HS of 1-3 were considered severe impairments, 4-5 moderate impairments, and
6-7 mild impairments. The 7 BoNT-injected participants who were not otherwise excluded from
analysis all had severe hand impairments; their clinical scores were not significantly different from
those in the no-BoNT severe group in either the CMSA-HS or Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS)
(p=0.196 and p=0.158, respectively) (Table 2). The clinical tests of CMSA-HS and MAS reported
here were administered at the time of testing for this study by the same trained and licensed
physical therapist to ensure accuracy and consistency across all participants.
The study protocol was developed in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki and
approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Northwestern University. Participants gave
informed consent for participation using an approved form by the IRB at Northwestern University.
Clinically relevant subject demographics were gathered from all participants in a brief
questionnaire prior to data collection (Table 2).

2.2 Experimental Set-up
A custom built modified Wrist and Finger Torque Sensor (WFTS)39 was used to collect the
torques produced about the wrist and fingers. The WFTS allows the experimenter to position the
wrist and metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints separately, in discrete 15° increments, throughout
each joints range of motion while simultaneously collecting the torques about each joint. Within
the device the two distal finger joints for each finger were splinted, fixing the distal joints and
ensuring isolated wrist and MCP movements. Participants were seated in an upright position and
their hand secured to the WFTS (Figure 1). The participant’s arm was positioned comfortably at
their side so that the forearm was parallel to the ground and the hand vertical with the palm facing
medially; this position eliminates the effects of gravity in the flexion and extension directions at

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
the wrist and fingers (Figure 1). Muscle activity was monitored throughout the trials using surface
EMGs electrodes (16-channel Bagnoli EMG System, Delsys Inc., Boston, MA; 1000 x gain, 20450 Hz bandpass) placed over 4 muscles; Flexor Digitorium Superficialis, Flexor Carpi Ulnaris,
Extensor Digitorium Communis, and Extensor Carpi Radialis.

2.3 Muscle Hyperactivity Inhibition Protocol
Muscle hyperactivity was successfully reduced and quieted during data collection by having
the participants in a sleep or near-sleep state throughout the protocol. Decreasing the hyperactivity
of the muscles during this relaxed or near-sleep state is believed to be due to a reduced activation
of the reticulospinal tract, decreasing the spinal motoneurons excitability and muscle hyperactivity
allowing the muscle to be in a passive state40-42. This state was facilitated by creating a dark
relaxing atmosphere in which a video or music was played to occupy the participants and divert
their attention from the experiment.
Each session began with 10-15 minutes of stretching of the shoulder, elbow, wrist, and fingers
to position the participant in the device. Once in the device, an additional 10 minutes of stretching
of the wrist and fingers was performed. These stretches accommodated the individual to the device
as well as reduced motor neuron hyperactivity (Supplemental Figure 1).28 After the stretching
protocol, the wrist and fingers were allowed to move freely and rest at their equilibrium posture
by unlocking the restraints of the device. Baseline trials were collected at this equilibrium posture
to zero out the device and set the passive EMG baseline during three 15-second trials where no
evidence of EMG activity was present. This critical EMG baseline was used to ensure that the
muscles were passive with no detectable muscle activity throughout the remainder of the
experiment by using the methods described in section 2.5 below.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.

2.4 Experimental Procedure
The protocol was completed on two separate back-to-back days, if possible. The first day
consisted of data collection from the non-paretic hand and the second day consisted of data
collection from the paretic hand. Passive torques were collected throughout multiple combinations
of both the wrist and MCP joint postures. The wrist posture was randomly set in 15° increments
between 60° of flexion and 60° of extension, resulting in 9 wrist postures. At each of the randomly
set wrist postures the MCP joints were positioned throughout their range of motion, starting in full
extension moving to full flexion and back to full extension in static 15° increments. At each static
position of wrist and MCP posture the data was collected for 15 seconds and visually inspected for
evidence of muscle activity or torque deviations throughout the trial. If either were present the trial
was discarded and another trial at that position was collected. Torques were collected at static
postures in order to prevent muscle hyperactivity by eliminating the Ia afferent velocity dependent
component of the stretch reflex elicited during even slow continuous motions8 within the chronic
stroke population. MCP range of motion (ROM) was determined by the subject’s comfort level
and the device’s range of motion and recorded for each individual.

2.5 Data processing:
The raw torque and EMGs were collected and digitized at a sampling frequency of 1kHz. The
torque and rectified EMG data were then digitally filtered using a zero-phase infinite impulse
response 4th-order Butterworth low-pass filter with a 4Hz corner frequency.
The processed baseline trials were used to set the torque offset and EMG threshold. Torque
offset was set as the average torque during the three baseline trials. EMG threshold, "#$% , was
set as:
"#$% = '̅ )*+_-./0 + 3 ∙ 4)*+_-./0
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
where '̅ )*+_-./0 is the average over the three EMG baseline trials and 4)*+_-./0 is the average
standard deviation of the EMG over the three baseline trials.
For each static passive torque trial, the processed torque and EMG data were divided into 1second bins, a total of 15 bins per trial. In each bin the average torque and EMG value was
determined, if the average EMG signal from any muscle went above "#$% or if the torque deviated
more than 5% from the mode of the torques across the entire trial, the bin was discarded. The
average of the remaining bins for each trial were used to create the total torque versus wrist and
MCP posture data set for each subject.

2.6 Analysis of Data
To determine the effect of hand (paretic vs. non-paretic); a generalized linear-mixed model
analysis was completed in SPSS (v24.0 IBM Corp Armonk, NY). We analyzed the measured wrist
joint torque, MCP joint torque, and ROM of the MCP joints across all wrist angles of the
participants within each group (severe BoNT-injected, severe no-BoNT, moderate, and mild).
Across all the analyses, the dependent variable was either torque or ROM and data were analyzed
using four factors including subject, hand (paretic/non-paretic), MCP position, and wrist position.
Participants were set as a random intercept factor; all other factors were fixed factors. To test
differences in the paretic hands of the two severely impaired groups (BoNT-injected vs. no-BoNT),
linear-mixed model analyses were run using the same factors as before except with BoNTinjected/no-BoNT replacing paretic/non-paretic as the hand factor.
The effect size of the changes between the paretic and non-paretic hand at each impairment
level were found using the average difference between torques of the paretic and non-paretic
hands. The differences in torques were calculated by subtracting the torque of non-paretic from
the torque of paretic hand at each combination of wrist and MCP joint posture. The difference at

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
a posture was only calculated if a torque was present in both the paretic and non-paretic hand.
Averages and standard deviations of the differences were used in the effect size calculations.

3

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data set used within this analysis is available by request from the authors.

4

RESULTS

4.1 Measured Total Passive Torque about the Wrist and MCP joints
Across impairment levels there were no substantial increases in torque between the paretic and
non-paretic hand unless the individuals had received BoNT injections in their forearm muscles.
The effect sizes for the torque differences observed between hands in the BoNT-injected group
were large at both the wrist and MCP joints (Cohen’s d=1.95 and 1.65, respectively). The effect
sizes for the no-BoNT groups fell in the small to medium range (Cohen’s d=0.02 to 0.66) about
the wrist and MCP joints, respectively.
At the MCP joints, significant differences (p<0.05) in torques were observed between the
paretic and non-paretic limbs in every group. However, the only group where finger flexion torque
was substantially greater in the paretic hand was the BoNT-injected group, with the effect
increasing as the fingers and wrist were positioned in extended postures (Figure 2). The average
differences in MCP joint torque across the severely, moderately, and mildly impaired no-BoNT
groups were 8.1 Ncm, 5.0 Ncm, and 2.1 Ncm, respectively, whereas the average difference of
MCP joint torque of the BoNT-injected group was 19.3 Ncm.
At the wrist, significant differences (p<0.05) in torques were observed between the paretic and
non-paretic limbs in every group except the mildly impaired individuals. As with the MCP joint
torques, the only group where substantial increases in wrist flexion torque of the paretic hand was
observed was the BoNT-injected group (Figure 3). The average difference in wrist torques for the

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
severely, moderately, and mildly impaired no-BoNT groups were 0.5 Ncm, 6.7 Ncm, and 0.3 Ncm,
respectively, while the average difference of torques at the wrist for the BoNT-injected group was
32.2 Ncm.

4.2 Impact on Range of motion
The BoNT-injected group had a significantly reduced passive ROM in their paretic hand
as compared to their non-paretic hand (p< 0.001) with average decreases in extension across all
wrist angles of 33° and a loss of 68° at full wrist extension (Figure 4a). There were no differences
(p=0.360) in ROM of the no-BoNT group with comparable clinical impairment scores (Figure 4b).

5

DISCUSSION
The objective of this research was to understand how passive mechanical muscle properties

adapt after prolonged changes in neural input to the muscle, as the result of stroke, while
minimizing and controlling for muscle hyperactivity and potential long-term side-effects of
chemical denervation following BoNT injections. In doing so, we collected a vast set of data from
a cohort of chronic hemiparetic stroke individuals with mild to severe hand impairments.
Furthermore, we demonstrated striking effects that BoNT, and the resulting chemical denervation,
likely have on the muscle’s passive mechanical properties.
Our results indicate that prolonged altered neural motor input, as a result of a stroke, does
not increase the passive mechanical properties of paretic muscles. Among participants who had
never received BoNT injections, we only found small to medium effect sizes (Cohen’s d=0.02 to
0.66) at the wrist and MCP joint, respectively, for the average differences in torques between limbs
(Figures 2 and 3). Thus, contrary to our first and second hypotheses, we conclude that there are no
substantial increases in the passive torques in the paretic versus non-paretic wrist and finger joints
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
in chronic hemiparetic stroke participants with moderate to severe hand impairments in the absence
of BoNT injections.
Conversely, our results suggest BoNT injections likely have a negative effect on the
passive mechanics of muscle by increasing the muscle’s stiffness. Confirming our third hypothesis,
individuals who underwent BoNT-injection in the paretic forearm exhibited large increases of
wrist and MCP joint torques (32.2 Ncm and 19.3 Ncm, on average, respectively) in the paretic
limb. The effect size at the wrist was two orders of magnitude larger in the BoNT group than the
no-BoNT group (d=1.95 for the BoNT-injected group vs d = 0.02 for no-BoNT) and 2.5 times
larger at the MCP joint (d = 1.65 for the BoNT-injected group vs d = 0.66 for no-BoNT). Consistent
with the location of the BoNT injections in the wrist and finger flexors, these increases in passive
torques were observed as the fingers and wrist were extended, limb positions that stretch and stress
the extrinsic finger flexor and wrist flexor muscles (Figures 2 & 3).
The consequence of the increased flexion torques and muscle stiffness within the BoNTinjected group were decreases of up to 68 degrees in passive MCP range of motion, as quantified
within our device (Figure 4). However, this 68-degree decrease is likely an underestimation of
how much active range of motion these individuals would lose. In other studies, severely impaired
individuals have demonstrated finger extensor strength decreases of up to 90% 6-8. Therefore, these
individuals would be unable to generate the torques necessary to extend the fingers, causing larger
losses in active range of motion. Thus, increases in passive torques following BoNT injections
likely exacerbate neural deficits by severely limiting the ability to open and use the hand following
stroke, limiting the recovery potential of those individuals.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.

5.1 Discrepancies from previous published work
Discrepancy between our findings and previous findings of substantial increases of passive
joint torque and stiffness in the paretic limb following chronic stroke is likely due to differences
in the methodology used to collect data and steps taken to reduce the impact of the muscle
hyperactivity and separation of those who received BoNT. The previous studies reporting increases
in torque of the paretic upper extremity in chronic stroke individuals all utilized continuous motion
to collect the passive torques.7,24,25 This presents a problem because, even at low constant
velocities, hyperactive stretch reflexes can be elicited in the paretic muscle of chronic stroke
individuals.8 The effect of hyperactive stretch reflexes, even at a slow continuous velocity of 10
deg/s, can increase the torques of the paretic hand by at least 30%.8 Furthermore, many of the
previous upper extremity studies fail to mention whether stretching prior to data collection was
utilized to attenuate the stretch reflex.7,19,25 In the few studies where EMGs were collected and
monitored, it was not explicitly stated whether EMG was used to discard trials. In some cases, the
EMGs were used to decompose the contribution of active and passive torques within a dynamic
analytical model, dependent on acceleration, velocity, and position, using system identification
methods.7,25 This can be problematic since the underlying hyperactivity may not be considered
within these models and the positional component of the stretch reflex and hypertonicity may be
considered as part of the passive elastic torques, confounding the results.
The inconsistencies between our study and previous studies may underscore the importance
of ensuring that there is no muscle activity, even when a subject is in a “relaxed” state. Merely
asking patients to relax is likely not sufficient. Many of these individuals are unable to fully relax
due to hyperexcitability of their motoneurons and resulting muscle hypertonicity. Decreasing the
hypertonicity of the muscles may require significant reduction in reticulospinal tract activity by

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
having individuals be asleep or in a near-sleep state. By reducing reticulospinal tract activity the
spinal motoneurons decrease their excitability thus decreasing muscle hypertonicity and allowing
the muscle to be in as passive state.40-42 This is a critical step that future studies should consider
when attempting to quantify passive mechanical adaptations of muscles within any “spastic”
population.

5.2 Origin of increased torques within BoNT-injected muscles
The increased flexion torques and decreased ROM suggest that individuals who received
BoNT injections undergo long lasting muscular property changes. These biomechanical changes
within the muscles are likely an effect of the BoNT and not related to the neural impairments post
stroke. Across all the no-BoNT groups, independent of impairment level, we did not observe
substantial increases in passive torques about fingers or wrist (Figures 2b-d & 3b-d). We only
observe increases in passive torques in the BoNT-injected group (Figures 2a & 3a); these
individuals had comparable clinical impairment scores as the no-BoNT severe group (Figures 2b
& 3b) (see limitations section for an expanded discussion on this).
The source of the increased torque following BoNT injections likely originates from
increased collagen within the extra cellular matrix (ECM) and resulting increased muscle stiffness.
In murine models, increases in collagen content in the ECM is present 6 months following 2 BoNT
injections and potentially lasts for the lifespan of the animal.29,30,33 However, the underlying
mechanism of this increased collagen content is unknown. A potential mechanism by which this
increase in collagen occurs is that it is a consequence of the BoNT induced muscle paralysis. BoNT
chemically denervates a muscle, therefore parallels can be drawn between the effect of BoNT on
muscle and typical muscle denervation. Denervated muscle has been shown to demonstrate
increases in collagen content within a month after denervation.43-46 This time frame fits well within

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
the three-month timeframe of BoNT induced muscle paralysis, indicating that the muscle
adaptation may occur during this time of chemical denervation and may be irreversible. The
changes we observed in the BoNT-injected group were long-lasting; the average time since their
last BoNT injection was over four years prior to collection of the data.
Interestingly, in the individual who was excluded from the analysis because they had also
received BoNT injections within their extensor muscles of their paretic limb, we found increases
in passive extensor torque as the wrist and fingers were flexed (Supplemental Figure 2), stretching
the BoNT-injected extensor muscles. Increases in passive extension torque was not observed in
any other group. This further implicates BoNT as the likely cause of the increases in passive joint
torques since whether the flexors or the extensors were injected, the resulting increases in torque
corresponded with stretching the muscles at the location of the injection. Further studies into the
mechanism by which BoNT affects the muscle are necessary to enhance our understanding of the
long-term effects of BoNT on muscle structure and passive mechanics.

5.3 Strength of Experimental Methods Utilized in this Study
The strength of our study lies in the rigor used to ensure passive torque collection even in
individuals with hyperactive muscles. We found that having study participants in a relaxed sleep
or near-sleep state was an ideal condition to reduce muscle hyperactivity and promote muscles to
be truly passive. Additionally, to reduce the effects of the velocity Ia or length driven type Ia or II
afferent stretch reflexes, we collected the torques at static joint postures while closely monitoring
EMG signals. Any data that contained evidence of muscle activity was discarded at the time of
data collection and the EMG signals were again verified during the data processing protocol. To
ensure a truly passive EMG baseline reference, real-time unfiltered EMG data were analyzed and
if there was any evidence of muscle activity, even firing of a single motor unit, the baseline trial

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
was discarded and repeated. We only monitored the EMG from superficial muscles (FPS, FCU,
EDC, and ECR) and did not specifically monitor the muscles within the deep compartments of the
forearm. However, it is unlikely that these deeper muscles would be selectively and differentially
active from the superficial muscles. Thus, we do not believe that the deeper muscles were active
and contributing substantially to the torques recorded.

5.4 Study Limitations
A limitation to our study is that we are unable to tell how the difference or lack of difference
in torques are related to atrophy (loss of contractile material), adaptations of extra-cellular matrix
(ECM) structure of the muscle, tendon compliance, or any combination of these changes. We do
not believe atrophy would have a substantial affect because previous work has demonstrated
relatively little atrophy in the paretic muscles of the index finger.47 Additionally, we estimated
each subject’s forearm volume (by measuring forearm length, wrist circumference, and maximum
forearm circumference) and verified that there was no significant difference between arms using
paired t-tests (severe BoNT-inject p=0.245, severe no-BoNT p=0.244, moderate p=0.885, mild
p=0.604). To evaluate this further, future studies could use magnetic resonance imaging to further
quantify the muscle contractile tissue volume changes and normalize torque to contractile volume
for a more precise measurement. As for adaption in the ECM or tendon, because we made
measurements of joint properties, our results reflect the combined changes of all muscle-tendon
units that cross each joint. Our methods do not allow evaluation of whether the observed effects
are due to adapations in muscle architecture, ECM, or tendon in the paretic limb.
Another limitation to this study was that it was a cross-sectional study, evaluating changes
within individuals who previously received BoNT injections versus those who did not. It was not

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
a longitudinal, randomized, control study to determine whether BoNT increases muscle or joint
stiffness. We also were not able to correlate dosage and usage of BoNT to increases in torques; we
lacked access to the medical records of these individuals that would be needed for such an analysis.
Future studies should include the use of a longitudinal study and medical records to deduce any
causal or dosage dependent effects of BoNT on muscle stiffness.
Despite these limitations, we posit that the increases in torques we observed are due to
residual effects following BoNT use rather than underlying differences in impairments between
the groups. In support of this, clinical impairment scores of CMSA-H or MAS were not
significantly different (p=0.196 and p=0.158, respectively) between the BoNT-injected and the
severely impaired no-BoNT groups. The only demographic differences between the two groups
were time since stroke and age at the time of collection; although age at the time of their stroke
was not significantly different (p=0.618). The average time since stroke for no-BoNT individuals
was 17 years whereas the average time for BoNT-injected individuals was 10.7 years.
Interestingly, Botox was approved by the FDA for treatment of upper limb spasticity 7 years prior
to the collection of these data48 potentially accounting for the difference between the groups. The
likelihood that an individual would receive BoNT treatment may have depended on how long that
individual had been living with their impairments before BoNT became an approved clinical
treatment for upper limb spasticity. The difference in the average time since stroke in our two
severe impairment groups may be interpretable with the assumption that individuals who were
within 3-5 years of having their stroke would be more likely to try BoNT, a newly approved clinical
intervention, than those who had been living with their injury for 10 or more years at the time it
was approved. This potentially could have created a natural division within equally impaired
individuals as to who elected to receive BoNT versus those who did not. Thus, we argue that

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
underlying differences in impairments are not driving the increases in torques of the BoNTinjected group.

6

SUMMARY
To the best of our knowledge the current study is the most thorough investigation of in vivo

passive elastic torques at the hand in the chronic hemiparetic stroke population. Our findings
indicate that, after stroke, there are not substantial increases of passive torques about either the
wrist or the fingers unless an individual receives BoNT injections. Increased stiffness observed
clinically and in previous studies are likely a result of neural hyperactivity resulting from increased
monoaminergic neuromodulatory drive mediated via the reticulospinal tract,15,16 not from
mechanical changes of the muscles or other soft tissue structures of the hand, or are the result of
BoNT injections. Therefore the loss of hand function post-stroke is more likely due to weakness
from voluntary activation deficits6 and impaired control of the muscles of the hand11 following
disruptions of the corticofugal pathways.49,50 Future studies and rehabilitation techniques should
therefore focus on the neural deficits post stroke such as weakness and motoneuron hyperactivity
to achieve improved hand function. Additionally, future work should explore potential adverse
effects of BoNT to determine if the risks are worth the rewards of using this treatment to reduce
impairments post stroke and maximize an individual’s with hemiparetic stroke potential recovery.

7

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a Promotion of Doctoral StudieseLevel II Scholarship from the
Foundation for Physical Therapy, American Heart Associatione Pre-Doctoral Fellowship:
16PRE30970010, National Institutes of Health (T32EB009406) to J.P.A.D., and National
Institutes of Health Grant R01HD084009 to J.P.A.D. and W.M.M. (principal investigators).

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

Baker SN, Zaaimi B, Fisher KM, Edgley SA, Soteropoulos DS. Pathways mediating
functional recovery. Prog Brain Res. 2015;218:389-412.
Zaaimi B, Edgley SA, Soteropoulos DS, Baker SN. Changes in descending motor pathway
connectivity after corticospinal tract lesion in macaque monkey. Brain. 2012;135(Pt
7):2277-2289.
Ellis MD, Drogos J, Carmona C, Keller T, Dewald JP. Neck rotation modulates flexion
synergy torques, indicating an ipsilateral reticulospinal source for impairment in stroke.
J Neurophysiol. 2012;108(11):3096-3104.
McPherson JG, Chen A, Ellis MD, Yao J, Heckman CJ, Dewald JPA. Progressive
recruitment of contralesional cortico-reticulospinal pathways drives motor impairment
post stroke. J Physiol. 2018;596(7):1211-1225.
Karbasforoushan H, Cohen-Adad J, Dewald JPA. Brainstem and spinal cord MRI identifies
altered sensorimotor pathways post-stroke. Nat Commun. 2019;10(1):3524.
Hoffmann G, Conrad MO, Qiu D, Kamper DG. Contributions of voluntary activation
deficits to hand weakness after stroke. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2016;23(6):384-392.
Kamper DG, Fischer HC, Cruz EG, Rymer WZ. Weakness is the primary contributor to
finger impairment in chronic stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2006;87(9):1262-1269.
Kamper DG, Harvey RL, Suresh S, Rymer WZ. Relative contributions of neural
mechanisms versus muscle mechanics in promoting finger extension deficits following
stroke. Muscle Nerve. 2003;28(3):309-318.
Dewald JP, Pope PS, Given JD, Buchanan TS, Rymer WZ. Abnormal muscle coactivation
patterns during isometric torque generation at the elbow and shoulder in hemiparetic
subjects. Brain. 1995;118 ( Pt 2):495-510.
Dewald JP, Sheshadri V, Dawson ML, Beer RF. Upper-limb discoordination in hemiparetic
stroke: implications for neurorehabilitation. Top Stroke Rehabil. 2001;8(1):1-12.
Miller LC, Dewald JP. Involuntary paretic wrist/finger flexion forces and EMG increase
with shoulder abduction load in individuals with chronic stroke. Clin Neurophysiol.
2012;123(6):1216-1225.
Sukal TM, Ellis MD, Dewald JP. Shoulder abduction-induced reductions in reaching work
area following hemiparetic stroke: neuroscientific implications. Exp Brain Res.
2007;183(2):215-223.
Brunnstrom S. Movement therapy in hemiplegia: a neurophysiological approach. 1st ed.
New York,: Medical Dept.; 1970.
Kamper DG, Rymer WZ. Quantitative features of the stretch response of extrinsic finger
muscles in hemiparetic stroke. Muscle Nerve. 2000;23(6):954-961.
McPherson JG, Ellis MD, Heckman CJ, Dewald JP. Evidence for increased activation of
persistent inward currents in individuals with chronic hemiparetic stroke. J
Neurophysiol. 2008;100(6):3236-3243.
McPherson JG, Stienen AH, Drogos JM, Dewald JP. Modification of Spastic Stretch
Reflexes at the Elbow by Flexion Synergy Expression in Individuals With Chronic
Hemiparetic Stroke. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation. 2017.
Bhadane MY, Gao F, Francisco GE, Zhou P, Li S. Correlation of Resting Elbow Angle with
Spasticity in Chronic Stroke Survivors. Frontiers in neurology. 2015;6:183.

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

O'Dwyer NJ, Ada L, Neilson PD. Spasticity and muscle contracture following stroke.
Brain. 1996;119 ( Pt 5):1737-1749.
Gao F, Grant TH, Roth EJ, Zhang LQ. Changes in passive mechanical properties of the
gastrocnemius muscle at the muscle fascicle and joint levels in stroke survivors. Archives
of physical medicine and rehabilitation. 2009;90(5):819-826.
Kwah LK, Herbert RD, Harvey LA, et al. Passive mechanical properties of gastrocnemius
muscles of people with ankle contracture after stroke. Archives of physical medicine and
rehabilitation. 2012;93(7):1185-1190.
Nelson CM, Murray WM, Dewald JPA. Motor Impairment-Related Alterations in Biceps
and Triceps Brachii Fascicle Lengths in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke. Neurorehabil Neural
Repair. 2018;32(9):799-809.
Given JD, Dewald JP, Rymer WZ. Joint dependent passive stiffness in paretic and
contralateral limbs of spastic patients with hemiparetic stroke. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry. 1995;59(3):271-279.
Mirbagheri MM, Alibiglou L, Thajchayapong M, Rymer WZ. Muscle and reflex changes
with varying joint angle in hemiparetic stroke. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2008;5:6.
Eby S, Zhao H, Song P, et al. Quantitative Evaluation of Passive Muscle Stiffness in
Chronic Stroke. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2016;95(12):899-910.
de Gooijer-van de Groep KL, de Vlugt E, van der Krogt HJ, et al. Estimation of tissue
stiffness, reflex activity, optimal muscle length and slack length in stroke patients using
an electromyography driven antagonistic wrist model. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon).
2016;35:93-101.
Sinkjaer T, Magnussen I. Passive, intrinsic and reflex-mediated stiffness in the ankle
extensors of hemiparetic patients. Brain. 1994;117 ( Pt 2):355-363.
Freire B, Dias CP, Goulart NB, et al. Achilles tendon morphology, plantar flexors torque
and passive ankle stiffness in spastic hemiparetic stroke survivors. Clin Biomech (Bristol,
Avon). 2017;41:72-76.
Schmit BD, Dewald JP, Rymer WZ. Stretch reflex adaptation in elbow flexors during
repeated passive movements in unilateral brain-injured patients. Archives of physical
medicine and rehabilitation. 2000;81(3):269-278.
Minamoto VB, Suzuki KP, Bremner SN, Lieber RL, Ward SR. Dramatic changes in muscle
contractile and structural properties after 2 botulinum toxin injections. Muscle Nerve.
2015;52(4):649-657.
Ward SR, Minamoto VB, Suzuki KP, Hulst JB, Bremner SN, Lieber RL. Recovery of rat
muscle size but not function more than 1 year after a single botulinum toxin injection.
Muscle Nerve. 2017.
Ates F, Yucesoy CA. Effects of botulinum toxin type A on non-injected bi-articular muscle
include a narrower length range of force exertion and increased passive force. Muscle
Nerve. 2014;49(6):866-878.
Yucesoy CA, Ates F. BTX-A has notable effects contradicting some treatment aims in the
rat triceps surae compartment, which are not confined to the muscles injected. J
Biomech. 2018;66:78-85.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.

Thacker BE, Tomiya A, Hulst JB, et al. Passive mechanical properties and related proteins
change with botulinum neurotoxin A injection of normal skeletal muscle. J Orthop Res.
2012;30(3):497-502.
Lawrence ES, Coshall C, Dundas R, et al. Estimates of the prevalence of acute stroke
impairments and disability in a multiethnic population. Stroke. 2001;32(6):1279-1284.
Broeks JG, Lankhorst GJ, Rumping K, Prevo AJ. The long-term outcome of arm function
after stroke: results of a follow-up study. Disabil Rehabil. 1999;21(8):357-364.
Parker VM, Wade DT, Langton Hewer R. Loss of arm function after stroke:
measurement, frequency, and recovery. Int Rehabil Med. 1986;8(2):69-73.
Nakayama H, Jorgensen HS, Raaschou HO, Olsen TS. Recovery of upper extremity
function in stroke patients: the Copenhagen Stroke Study. Archives of physical medicine
and rehabilitation. 1994;75(4):394-398.
Gowland C, Stratford P, Ward M, et al. Measuring Physical Impairment and Disability
with the Chedoke-Mcmaster Stroke Assessment. Stroke. 1993;24(1):58-63.
Stienen A, Moulton TS, Miller LC, Dewald JPA. Wrist and Finger Torque Sensor for the
Quantification of Upper Limb Motor Impairments Following Brain Injury. Paper
presented at: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics2011; Zurich ,
Switzerland.
Fraigne JJ, Torontali ZA, Snow MB, Peever JH. REM Sleep at its Core - Circuits,
Neurotransmitters, and Pathophysiology. Frontiers in neurology. 2015;6:123.
Krenzer M, Anaclet C, Vetrivelan R, et al. Brainstem and spinal cord circuitry regulating
REM sleep and muscle atonia. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e24998.
Hodes R, Dement WC. Depression of Electrically Induced Reflexes ("H-Reflexes") in Man
during Low Voltage Eeg "Sleep". Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1964;17:617629.
Liu F, Tang W, Chen D, et al. Expression of TGF-beta1 and CTGF Is Associated with
Fibrosis of Denervated Sternocleidomastoid Muscles in Mice. Tohoku J Exp Med.
2016;238(1):49-56.
Russo TL, Peviani SM, Durigan JL, Salvini TF. Electrical stimulation increases matrix
metalloproteinase-2 gene expression but does not change its activity in denervated rat
muscle. Muscle Nerve. 2008;37(5):593-600.
Faturi FM, Franco RC, Gigo-Benato D, et al. Intermittent stretching induces fibrosis in
denervated rat muscle. Muscle Nerve. 2016;53(1):118-126.
Nikolaou S, Liangjun H, Tuttle LJ, et al. Contribution of denervated muscle to
contractures after neonatal brachial plexus injury: not just muscle fibrosis. Muscle
Nerve. 2014;49(3):398-404.
Triandafilou KM, Kamper DG. Investigation of hand muscle atrophy in stroke survivors.
Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2012;27(3):268-272.
Katz R. Approval Package for Application Number: BLA 103000/5189. In: FDA, 2010.
Kuypers HG. The Descending Pathways to the Spinal Cord, Their Anatomy and Function.
Prog Brain Res. 1964;11:178-202.
Lawrence DG, Kuypers HG. The functional organization of the motor system in the
monkey. I. The effects of bilateral pyramidal lesions. Brain. 1968;91(1):1-14.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.

Figure 1: Image of the experimental set up with a participant seated upright and their hand secured
within the custom built modified Wrist and Finger Torque Sensor (WFTS). The participant’s arm
was positioned comfortably at their side so that the forearm was parallel to the ground and the
hand vertical with the palm facing medially; in this position the effect of gravity is eliminated for
both the wrist and Metacarpophalangeal (MCP) torque sensors. To prevent movements of the distal
finger joints during testing, the two distal finger joints were splinted within the WFTS. Muscle
activity was monitored throughout the trials using surface EMGs electrodes placed over 4 muscles.
The electrodes for the Extensor Digitorium Communis and Extensor Carpi Radialis are visible on
the posterior side of the forearm. The electrodes for the Flexor Digitorium Superficialis and Flexor
Carpi Ulnaris are not visible on the anterior side of the forearm.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.

Figure 2: Metacarpophalangeal (MCP) torque data measured in the paretic (red) and non-paretic
(blue) limb over the MCP joints’ range of motion for the (a) BoNT-injected, and no-BoNT (b)
severely, (c) moderately, and (d) mildly impaired groups. The wrist joint was locked in -60 (top
row), -30, 0, and 60 degrees flexion (bottom row). Error bars indicate standard error. Negative
MCP angles indicate extension, positive indicate flexion; negative MCP torques indicate
extension; positive indicate flexion While significant differences (* denotes p<0.05) in torques
measured in paretic vs non-paretic limbs were observed in every group, the only group where
finger flexion torque was greater in the paretic hand was the BoNT-injected group, with the effect
increasing as the fingers were positioned in an extended posture. Data points are only displayed
when there is individual data for 3 or more participants at that specific posture.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.

Figure 3: Wrist torque data measured in the paretic (red) and non-paretic (blue) limb over the
wrist’s range of motion for the (a) BoNT-injected, and no-BoNT (b) severely, (c) moderately, and
(d) mildly impaired groups. MCP joints were locked in -60 (top row), 0, and 75 degrees flexion
(bottom row). Error bars indicate standard error. Negative wrist angles indicate extension, positive
indicate flexion; negative wrist torques indicate extension; positive indicate flexion. While
significant differences (* denotes p<0.05) in torques measured in paretic vs non-paretic limbs were
observed in every group except mildly impaired individuals, the only group where increases in
wrist flexion torque of the paretic hand were observed was the BoNT-injected group. Data points
are only displayed when there is individual data for 3 or more participants at that specific posture.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.

Figure 4: End of metacarpophalangeal (MCP) passive range of motion in extension throughout the
wrist’s ROM for the paretic (red) and non-paretic (blue) hands of the (a) BoNT-injected severe
group and (b) no-BoNT severe group. ROM was measured within in the experimental device, data
show the average across all participants in the group with standard error bars. The ROM of the
paretic hand of the BoNT-injected was significantly and substantially less than the non-paretic
hand. ROM of the BoNT-injected hand was also narrower than that observed for the paretic hand
of the no-BoNT group. The greatest decreases in MCP ROM occurred in extended wrist postures.
(* denotes p <0.001 between paretic v non-paretic hands within group)

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011312; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
Table 1: Table of Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria for Participants
Subject Inclusion Criteria
Stroke occurred at least one year prior to participation in the study
Paralysis confined to one side of the body
Ability to give informed consent
Subject Exclusion Criteria
Stroke occurred in the cerebellum or brainstem
Impairment or injury in the unimpaired limb
Severe atrophy of the impaired limb
Severe concurrent medical problems

26

Passive Biomechanical Properties of Hand and Wrist Muscles in Chronic Hemiparetic Stroke.
Table 2: Subject Demographics.
(CMHS – Chedoke McMaster Stroke Assessment Hand Score, MAS – Modified Ashworth Scale)

Impairment Level

Sex

BoNT-Injected Severe (n=7) 6-M, 1-F

Age in years
(SD)

Time Since
Stroke in
years (SD)

Age at
time of
stroke in
years (SD)

Paretic
Side

56.7 (8.3)

10.7 (5.3)

46.0 (5.1)

4-L,3-R

2.85 (0.38) 2.71 (0.48)

CMHS

MAS

No-BoNT Severe (n=9)

6-M, 3-F

60.28 (10.40)

17.1 (7.91)

43.2 (13.6)

5-L, 4-R

2.44 (0.73) 2.17 (0.87)

Moderate (n=9)

5-M, 4-F

64.3 (7.95)

13.2 (7.96)

51.1 (12.5)

6-L, 3-R

4.22 (0.44) 1.78 (0.94)

Mild (n=9)

5-M, 4-F

56.93 (12.18)

8.41 (3.71)

48.5 (9.8)

1-L, 8-R

6.44 (0.53) 0.28 (0.57)

27

Time Since
Last BoNT
Injection in
years (SD)
4.5 (2.8)

