medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Designing a text messaging program to increase adherence to medication for
the secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease
Authors
Uribe-Rodríguez, Ana*; Pontifical Bolivarian University Bucaramanga sectional,
Faculty of Psychology, anafernanda.uribe@upb.edu.co
*Corresponding author
Pérez-Rivero, Paula; Pontifical Bolivarian University Bucaramanga sectional,
Faculty of Psychology, paula.perez@upb.edu.co
Free, Caroline; London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Public Health
interventions Unit, caroline.free@lshtm.ac.uk
Perel, Pablo; LSHTM, EPH, Department of Non-communicable Disease
Epidemiology, pablo.perel@lshtm.ac.uk
Murray, Elizabeth; University College London, Research Department of Primary
Care and Population Health, elizabeth.murray@ucl.ac.uk
Serrano Díaz, Norma; Fundación Cardiovascular de Colombia, Direction of
Research, normaserrano@fcv.org
Horne, Robert; Director, Centre for Behavioural Medicine UCL School of
Pharmacy, University College London, r.horne@ucl.ac.uk
Atkins, Louise; University College London Research Department of Epidemiology
and Public Health, l.atkins@ucl.ac.uk
Casas, Juan Pablo; Massachusetts Veterans Epidemiology Research and
Information Center (MAVERIC), VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA, jpcasasromero@bwh.harvard.edu
Bermon Angarita, Anderson; Fundación Cardiovascular de Colombia, Research
Department, andersonbermon@fcv.org

Abstract
Background: Cardiovascular medication for secondary prevention has been
shown to be effective. However, cardiovascular patients have poor medication

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

adherence, the consequences of which include premature death, recurrence risk,
hospitalization, and high financial cost for the healthcare system. Behavioral
interventions based on text messaging technology are a promising strategy to
improving adherence in medications. In low-middle income settings there is no
high-quality evidence of a behavioral program delivered by SMS; hence we
describe the development, message content, and the program design of the
intervention for improving adherence to cardiovascular medication.
Methods: We used the model reported by Abroms and colleagues’ for developing
and evaluating text messages-based interventions. This model describes a
process in which the intervention created is based on theory and evidence, the
target audience is involved to ensure the intervention is engaging and useful, and
there is a focus on implementation from the outset.
Results: Our main result was the design of the program, which consisted of a
twelve-month structured intervention based on Transtheoretical Model of Behavior
Change. We wrote and validated clusters of texts messages targeting each stage
of the model. Each message went through an examination process including the
evaluation of former cardiovascular patients, experts and the team research
personnel. Another important result was an understanding of patients’ perceptions
of their experience of cardiovascular disease, barriers to accessing healthcare in
Colombia and the use of mobile technology for health.
Conclusions: An SMS intervention has the potential to be an acceptable and
effective way of improving adherence to medication in patients with cardiovascular

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

disease. This paper describes the development and content of one such
intervention.

Keywords
Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change
Cardiovascular diseases
Health Behavior
Medication Adherence
Text Messaging

Background
People with a history of cardiovascular events have a five times higher risk of new
events than people without no such history [1].Secondary prevention medications
(anti-platelet therapy, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers and lipid lowering therapy) are
effective in reducing the risk of death and myocardial infarction in patients with
coronary heart disease. Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials show that in
patients with existing coronary heart disease long term anti-platelet therapy
reduces major vascular events (MI, stroke or vascular mortality) by about a quarter
(OR 0.75 (95% CI 0.71-0.79); ACE inhibitors reduce cardiovascular mortality by
just under a fifth (RR 0.83, 95% CI 0.72 to 0.96); beta blockers reduce mortality by
almost a quarter (OR 0.77, 95% CI 0.69 to 0.85); and lipid lowering therapy
reduces coronary mortality by about a fifth (RR 0.79, 95% CI 0.75 to 0.83) [2].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

However, cardiovascular patients have poor medication adherence, the
consequences of which include premature death, increased risk of further
cardiovascular events, hospitalization, and high financial cost for the healthcare
system [3] [4] [5] [6] [7]. Therefore, strategies to improve medication adherence to
cardiovascular drugs must be a health priority [8] [6]. Since 2002, text messaging,
or short message service (SMS), has been part of m-health strategies to improve
health and change behavior [9]. Interventions using SMS have been shown to be
effective for smoking cessation, adherence to antiretroviral therapy [10], diabetes
self-management, weight loss, and physical activity [9]. As for cardiovascular
treatment, several randomized clinical trials (RCT) using text messages to improve
medical adherence in primary as well for secondary prevention have produced
promising, although not yet conclusive, results [11] [12]. Systematic reviews
conclude that existing RCTs have high risk of bias, so the evidence is uncertain,
and most were performed in high-income countries, so the evidence may not
generalize to low income countries [11].
The ongoing randomized clinical trial (RCT) “TXT2HEART COLOMBIA: Evaluation
of the Efficacy and Safety of Text Messages to Improve Adherence to
Cardiovascular Medications in Secondary Prevention” (https://clinicaltrials.gov),
involves an SMS-based intervention aimed at improving adherence to
cardiovascular medications amongst adults with history of arterial occlusive events
living in a metropolitan area of Colombia. This paper presents the design and
validation process of text messages developed for the RCT based on
Transtheoretical Model of Health Behavior Change (TTM) [13]. This model, also

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

known as the Stages of Change, integrates cognitive, behavioral, and motivational
factors at different times in the behavior modification process. It has been recently
applied to develop interventions that use SMS to change behavior related to
nutrition [14], physical exercise [15] [16] and hypertension [17]. The publication of
this phase of the study will contribute to filling gaps in the literature identified by
Adler et al [11] by describing the development, message content, and the program
design of the intervention. It also fulfils the requirement to publish detailed
descriptions of interventions to avoid research waste [18] and allow a growing
evidence base about which interventions work for what reason [19].
Method
Our methodological approach is described in Fig. 1. We used the model reported
by Abroms and colleagues’ [20] for developing and evaluating text messagesbased interventions. This model describes a process in which the intervention
created is based on theory and evidence, the target audience is involved to ensure
the intervention is engaging and useful, and there is a focus on implementation
from the outset. Each step will be described in this section.
Figure 1. Process for text message intervention design

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Literature research: the first step consisted in conducting literature research related
to the target audience and behaviour change theories. A successful health
program needs evidence-based strategies [21] [22] and must focus on
understanding the health behavior that characterizes the population [20]. Literature
research aimed to: 1) understand the factors associated with low adherence to
cardiovascular medication and 2) identify the leading models and appropriate
techniques for modifying health behaviors related to medication adherence. We
performed literature research from February 2015 to June 2016 in the following
database: Scopus, Ovid, Medline, Cochrane Library, EBSCO, Pub-Med, Science
Direct and Google Scholar. The keyword terms were: Medication adherence,
Medication adherence and cardiovascular Disease, Social support and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cardiovascular risk, Health models, and M-Health. We reviewed the following
behavior change models: The Theory of Reasoned Action [23], Social Learning
Theory [24], the Transtheoretical Model of Change [13], the Precede Model [25]
and the Behavior Change Wheel [26].
Objectives and techniques: As a result of this literature review, three main
objectives for the intervention were established based on the behavior change goal
and the theoretical aspects of the TTM: (1) raising awareness about medication
effectiveness, (2) promoting self-care, and (3) offering guidelines for behavioral
strategies to increase adherence (see Table 2). When the TTM was first
developed, Prochaska and DiClemente [13] proposed a relationship between the
perception of illness, or more appropriately the rise of awareness of illness, and the
intention to change behavior and the subsequent change.
Text message program design process: Our behavior change goal was to improve
medication adherence in secondary prevention for patients with history of occlusive
arterial disease. In the literature search we found several studies indicating the
importance of evaluating barriers that affect adherence to medications in
cardiovascular patients [5] [27] [28]. We carried out qualitative research to identify
barriers to adherence in our setting and compared our findings to the existing
literature.
We used focus group methodology to interview patients with a previous history of
cardiovascular events. Participant inclusion criteria were: male and female adults
(18 years and older), ownership of a mobile cell phone with an active line, ability to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

read text messages and to give informed consent, and at least a six-month history
of any of the following cardiovascular diagnoses: coronary artery disease (including
non-primary coronary revascularizations), ischemic stroke, and peripheral artery
disease or atherosclerotic aortic disease. These selection criteria mirrored the
eligibility criteria for the TXT2Heart trial. Recruitment focused on patients who had
an occlusive arterial disease event and been hospitalized at the Fundación
Cardiovascular FCV, which provided clinical evidence of the event as well easier
access to the patients. The inclusion criteria were narrowed to events occurring
between six months and five years prior to the study. Participants were randomly
selected from the FCV databases using SQL (Structured Query Language), with
specification of the date of the event (between July 2011 and July 2015), ICD 10
diagnosis, and medical procedure such as angioplasty, revascularization, and
other interventions for the cardiovascular diseases mentioned. After the patients
gave their consent, a trained physician reviewed the patients’ electronic clinical
histories to confirm the diagnoses and dates of the occlusive event.
Text Message Library: The text message designers worked as an interdisciplinary
team, which included an epidemiologist, a pharmacologist, a specialist nurse in
health and quality audits, and three psychologists. Each team member developed
messages according to the following recommendations: length up to 160
characters (including spaces), use of appropriate language, avoidance of
abbreviations and misspellings, and informal punctuation [20]. Most importantly, for
the messages content the team considerate the findings from the focus groups
(categories and subcategories) and TTM (Stages of Change). Once the messages

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

were written, the interdisciplinary team held several discussion meetings to
evaluate and classify each text message, considering aspects such as message
pertinence, intention, and clarity.
The messages were classified as viable, editable or as messages to be discarded.
Those identified as editable were rewritten, and some were also eliminated. Then,
the messages were organized using a matrix and classified according to the
categories and subcategories related to the barriers to adherence that were
identified in the literature and the focus groups. This helped to visualize how many
text messages corresponded to each category and subcategory, and to develop
new ones in order to have at least 12 messages in each category.
Expert validation: The text messages were submitted for evaluation by 13 experts.
The panel consisted of several different types of health professionals, including
psychologists (clinical, psychometric, and general), nutritionists, nurses
(practitioner, administrative, and researcher) and physicians (general practitioner,
cardiologist, interventional cardiologist, and with expertise in prevention and
health promotion). The experts were selected through convenience sampling and
the inclusion criteria were knowledge of the topic (cardiovascular disease for
physicians and behavior change for psychologists), research experience, and
test/trial validation expertise. These professionals were invited to participate
through a letter that explained the purpose of the validation. After accepting, they
received two documents: (1) instructions for validating the text messages, which
included descriptions of the categories, stages of the TTM, and aspects to be
evaluated (clarity, coherence, and relevance), and (2) an Excel template containing

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the text messages, the categories and subcategories, aspects to be evaluated, and
an additional space to record observations. The psychologists participating as
experts also evaluated the coherence between the SMS and the TTM of change.
All the judges evaluated the messages for clarity, coherence, and relevance on a
scale of 1 to 4, with 4 as the best score. An average score of 3.7 to 4 for the three
aspects and a Kendall's W of .85 or higher were indicators of strong agreement
among the judges.
Pretesting and revising the text messaging program: the third step included
feedback from prospective users about messages presented to them face to face,
international researchers’ opinions, and finally a test for the deliverability of
messages to cell phones. To obtain feedback form users, the participants from
previous focus groups were invited to attend a new focus group and to evaluate the
text messages. A total of 9 cardiovascular patients attended the meeting. The
focus group was facilitated by a psychologist and had four observers (one
physician, one nurse, and two psychologists). Participants were asked to evaluate
clarity, coherence (according to the categories), and the importance and relevance
of the messages. The final messages were presented to international experts in
the development of messaging interventions for comments. Lastly, a test was
conducted to assess the delivery of the text messages program using the
CommCare and Telerivet platforms. To this end, some of the text messages were
sent to the research team’s cell phones.
Results

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

This section describes the results from the different steps presented in the
Methods section.
Literature Search. The World Health Organization [29], listed five dimensions that
affect treatment adherence: social and economic factors; health care and systemsrelated factors; condition related factors; therapy related factors; and patient
related factors. The literature consistently shows that treatment adherence in
cardiovascular patients is poor [3] [4] [5] [6] [7]. Authors describe the nonadherence of cardiovascular medication as a global threat [6] and as the major
obstacle to the treatment success [3]. Poor adherence to medication appears to be
only minimally related to the class of drugs taken or their side effects [4]; however,
misinformation, lack of knowledge about, or awareness of, cardiovascular disease
is an important barrier to treatment adherence [30] [7] [31].The asymptomatic
nature of many cardiovascular diseases, as well, may be related to poor adherence
to prescribed medication [23] [5]. As expected, difficulties with insurance coverage
are associated with poorer cardiovascular health [32] while perceived social
support can be related to better adherence [5].
In Latin America a study identified that lack of awareness of guidelines and
knowledge about preventing cardiovascular disease, communication problems
within health teams and lack of motivation were barriers to treatment adherence.
Particularly in Colombia, studies with cardiovascular patients’ show that most
participants are at risk of non-adherence [33].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Focus groups: Forty cardiovascular outpatients were approached and invited to
the focus groups. Participants ranged in age from 25 to 80 years and most were
male. Data from participants were coded into the categories and subcategories
described in Table 1.
Table 1. Categories and subcategories.

Category

Concept

1. Disease

Patient opinions, ideas,

perception

feelings and experiences
related to the disease

Sub-category
1.1.

Patient’s Quotes

Experience with cardiovascular

“I feel my body is not the

disease

same […] although,

Impact of the disease (gains and

doctors and nurses seem

losses since diagnosis)

happy with my prognosis I

1.3.

Perceived severity of the disease

do not share their

1.4.

Self-care or behavioral mechanisms

enthusiasm”

1.2.

2. Medication

Patient behavior in terms of

2.1.

Knowledge of treatment

“…they gave me some pills

intake

medication intake according

2.2.

Importance and significance of taking

that I do not even know what

medication

they're for, I am no sure the

2.3.

Experiences with medication intake

medications even work

3.1.

With regard to physicians and medical

“Insurance is a disaster, they

team

give you the appointment when
they want…”

to the recommendations
given by a healthcare
provider.
3. Perception

Patient perception of the

of the health

provision of care given by

system

health professionals,

3.2.

With regard to health appointments

primarily appointment

3.3.

With regard to pharmacy

scheduling / control and

3.4.

With regard to access to medicines,

delivery of medications.

use of legal resources for provision of
medications and / or procedures

4. Supportive

Identifiable social

networks for

4.1.

Most important sources of support for

“You are alone in this, so it is

relationships surrounding

diagnosis and / or disease (family,

very difficult […], here, you

medical

the individual that allow him

NGOs, health workers, others)

are on your own”

treatment

or her to receive emotional

4.2.

Importance of support for self-care

support.

4.3.

Other support

5. Use and

The patient has an active

5.1.

Use of mobile phone

“well you can use your cell

appropriation

role in giving meaning to a

5.2.

Benefits of using mobile phone

phone to remember taking

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of technology*
Stage of

certain experience.
Objectives

5.3.

Mobile phone as a useful tool for
SMS
(Spanish)
treatment
(m-Health)

medications”
SMS

Objectives and Techniques: Three main objectives for the intervention were
established based on the behavior change goal and the theoretical aspects of the
TTM: (1) raising awareness about medication effectiveness, (2) promoting selfcare, and (3) offering guidelines for behavioral strategies to increase adherence
(see Table 2). When the TTM was first developed, Prochaska and DiClemente [13]
proposed a relationship between the perception of illness, or more appropriately
the rise of awareness of illness, and the intention to change behavior and the
subsequent change. During this course of action, people experience different
processes of change and progress through five stages: pre-contemplation,
contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance. These stages represent the
temporal dimension of behavior change [34] and a shift from intention to action.
The model includes at least ten processes of change (consciousness raising,
dramatic relief, environmental re-evaluation, social liberation, self-re-evaluation,
counter-conditioning, helping relationships, reinforcement management stimulus
control and self-liberation) that are actually cognitive and behavioral activities [34]
that facilitate moving through the stages (table 2).
Table 2. Stage of change, techniques and messages

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Change

Precontemplation

Contemplation

Raise

Un tratamiento farmacológico

An adequate pharmacological

awareness

adecuado le podría ayudar a prevenir

treatment could help prevent the

la aparición de nuevos eventos

appearance of new cardiovascular

cardiovasculares

events

Give

Recuerde que el evento

Remember that a cardiovascular event

information and

cardiovascular requiere control y

requires lifelong control and care.

promote

cuidados de por vida

personal
reevaluation
Preparation

Promote self-

La EPS es responsable de

The EPS1 is responsible for supplying

care

suministrarle los medicamentos. Exija

the medications. Claim your right.

su derecho

Action

Maintenance

Offer behavioral

Si presenta dificultades para recordar

If you have trouble remembering to

guidelines

la toma de medicamentos pídale a

take your medication, ask someone to

alguien que le ayude a recodarle

help you remember.

Offer behavioral

Procure no quedarse sin cobertura de

Make sure you do not lose your health

guidelines

salud, los profesionales en salud

coverage. Health professionals can

pueden darse información de

give you information about different

diferentes formas de vinculación

types of enrollment.

Program design: The intervention was designed for SMS to be delivered over 12
months, based on the stages of the TTM. In the first month, we expect many
patients to be in the pre-contemplation phase so messages will be sent daily and
aim to raise awareness of future cardiovascular risk. During the second month, the
SMS will be sent every other day (four messages per week) and then once per
1

EPS- Common name in Colombia for the different companies that manage health insurance

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

week during the remaining ten months. Thus between 80 and 90 SMS were
needed to complete the one-year intervention program. The CommCare platform
was selected as the mobile platform for collecting data and managing the
frequency and timing.
The SMS will be sent through Telerivet, an instant SMS platform for organizations
as a unidirectional messaging program. The program will not offer interaction with
the patients and the messages will not be tailored. If at any time the patients want
to withdrawal from the trial, they will have the option to reply with the word STOP.
The Abroms’ model recommends clearly identifying the source of the SMS and
associating it with the health program [20] . To follow this recommendation and to
make it easier for the participants to recognize the message as being part of the
study intervention, we designed a step in the randomized trial protocol for saving
the contact in the participant’s cell phone, with the name Proyecto Txt4/FCV (Txt4
Project/ FCV).
SMS Construction. A total of 415 messages were generated by the
interdisciplinary group. They classified 212 messages as viable, 116 messages as
editable messages and 87 messages to be discarded. The result of this stage was
a text message library of 343 SMS to be evaluated by the judges (see Figure 2).
The validation by experts resulted in a total of 133 messages that met the criteria
of agreement (at least an average of 3.7 for the three aspects and a Kendall's W of
.85 or higher among the judges).
Figure 2. Process to Construct Text Messages

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Pretesting
Of the 133 messages read by the 9 cardiovascular patients, 110 (83%) were rated
as clear, and 28 of those were scored as the most relevant to the patients.
Participants also commented on the wording and punctuation of the messages,
indicating that they were short and brief, with no technical terms. These 110
messages were presented to the international experts for final review and
recommendations. They also evaluated other factors, such as the sequence of the
SMS for future trials and the avoidance of repetitive information. A key
recommendation was to prioritize messages that referred to medication adherence.
Thus, 73 SMS were finally selected for use in the trial (see Table 3). This step also
included testing the program configuration. The SMS were successfully sent to and
received by the research team’s cell phones.
Table 3. Number of messages and distribution
Stage of Change
Category

PrePreparation

Contemplation

Action

Maintenance

contemplation
Disease perception

Total per category

2

2

3

2

3

12 (16%)

2

3

2

5

3

15 (21%)

Supportive networks

2

2

2

5

3

14 (19%)

Medication intake

7

5

7

7

6

32 (44%)

13

12

14

19

15

73

(18%)

(16%)

(19%)

(26%)

(21%)

(100%)

Health system
perception

General total:

Final Revision

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The research team made a final evaluation. During this revision, additional
messages were created to prepare the program for the randomized trial, especially
for the control group. One welcome message was developed and 12 messages for
the control group. These were related to recognition and gratitude for participation
in the study. Thus, 13 messages were added, but were not related to the
intervention for behavior change. Figure 2 summarizes the results of the process.

Discussion
The objective of this paper is to present the development of an intervention
program aimed to increase medication adherence in cardiovascular patients, using
technology and a behavior change model. The process was guided by a mixed
methods approach that included focus groups with patients, an interdisciplinary
team to create the text messages and expert validation. Beginning with the
literature search, each step was informed by the findings of the previous one.
Strengths of the approach described include the focus on sustainable behavior
change. Hence, the text messages were not reminders for medication intake or
appointments, but an intervention to increase awareness and commitment to
medication taking. The use of theory (TTM) to inform the content and delivery
schedule of the text messages is a strength of this program design, as
interventions based on theory have been shown to be more effective than those
not using theory (ref), The use of the TTM resulted in a conceptualization of
change as a process rather than a one-time event and resulted in a 12-month

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

intervention program with SMS reflecting movement through the stages of change.
While the participants are in the first’s stages, motivational and informative
interventions are relevant. Therefore, in the program design, the messages sent to
the cell phones during the beginning of the intervention, focused on these
areas. This action is common for text messaging programs during important
behavior change periods [20].As the participants move to subsequent stages, the
messages are related to decision making and assuming responsibility. In the action
stage, even though the frequency of SMS decreased, the stage has a greater
number of messages in comparison with the others, since it aims to develop the
adherence behavior. This variation in the frequency, especially decreasing the
number of SMS, has been shown to be more effective than a fixed frequency [35].
Another strength of the development strategy was that the SMS were written by an
interdisciplinary team of medical specialists and psychologists. This ensured the
intervention reflected both clinical knowledge about cardiovascular diseases and
the effect of medication and psychological knowledge about cognitive and
motivational aspects of behavior change. For example, the physicians developed
the messages related to knowledge of the disease, treatment, and the importance
of taking medication, while the psychologists offered guidelines about the
appropriate way to communicate the information through an SMS, in accordance
with the TTM.
The focus groups with cardiovascular patients at the beginning and at the end of
the process were important to identify the target population’s perceptions of
important barriers to medication adherence and user test the SMS for clarity,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

acceptability and probable impact in the target population [36]. Expert validation
provided additional quality assurance.
Limitations
Limitations to this research must be considered. Due to the specific study site,
sampling, and sample size, generalizability of the results to other settings in
Colombia or outside Colombia may be limited. The qualitative approach to data
collection provided insight into subjective perceptions about messaging text as a
strategy to increase adherence medication in cardiovascular diseases patients, but
assessment of actual receptivity and uptake messages program and impact on
healthy behaviors requires further evaluation. Finally, because of the changing
nature of mobile technology and user expectations in m-health devices, the specific
recommendations reported here about a text messaging program for secondary
prevention in cardiovascular diseases may have time-limited relevance.
Nonetheless, if proven effective the message content could easily be delivered via
a range of digital media such as an app or social media messaging.
Conclusion
We demonstrated the feasibility of developing unidirectional messaging
intervention targeting adherence to medication for secondary prevention of heart
disease. Considering the long-term condition of the cardiovascular disease, a SMS
intervention can be also contemplated as an accompanying experience using
technology. It can be useful as a tool to offer support for the patient, with the
conviction it comes from expert, as an incentive from the health system.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References

[1]

W. G. Members, E. Benjamin, M. Blaha, S. Chiuve, M. Cushman, S. Das and P. Muntner, "Heart
disease and stroke statistics-2017. Update: A report from the American Heart Association,"

Circulation, vol. 135, no. 10, pp. 146-603, 2017.
[2]

T. Ma, I. Wong, K. Man, Y. Chen, T. Crake, M. Ozkor, L. Ding, Z. Wang, L. Zhang and L. Wei,
"Effect of evidence-based therapy for secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease:
Systematic review and meta-analysis.,"

[3]

PLoS One, vol. 14, no. 1, 2019.

R. Chowdury, H. Khan, E. Heydon, A. Shroufi, S. Fahimi, C. Moore, B. Stricker, S. Mendis, A.
Hofman, J. Mant and O. Franco, "Adherence to cardiovascular therapy: a meta-analysis of
prevalence and clinical consequences.,"

European Heart Journal, vol. 34, no. 38, pp. 2940-

2948, 2013.

[4]

S. Naderi, J. Bestwick and D. Wald, "Adherence to drugs that prevent cardiovascular disease:
meta-analysis on 376,162 patients.,"

American Journal of Medicine, vol. 125, no. 9, pp. 882-

887, 2012.

[5]

I. Kronish and S. Ye, "Adherence to cardiovascular medications: lessons learned and future
directions.,"

[6]

Progress in cardiovascular diseases, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 590-600, 2013.

K. Kolandaivelu, B. Leiden, P. O'Gara and B. D., "Non-adherence to cardiovascular
medications,"

[7]

European Heart Journal, vol. 35, no. 46, pp. 3267-3276, 2014.

C. Smith, "Adherence to Medical Therapy and the Global Burden of Cardiovascular Disease.,"

Journal of the American College of Cardiology, vol. 67, no. 13, pp. 1516-1518, 2016.
[8]

A. Bowry, W. Shrank, J. Lee, M. Stedman and N. Choundry, "A systematic review of adherence
to cardiovascular medications in resource-limited settings.,"

Journal of General Internal

Medicine, vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 1479-1491, 2011.
[9]

A. Hall, H. Cole-Lewis and B. J., "Mobile text messaging for health: a systematic review of
reviews,"

Review of Public Health, vol. 36, pp. 393-415, 2015.

[10] C. Free, R. Knight, S. Robertson, R. Whittaker, P. Edwards, W. Zhou, A. Rodgers, J. Cairns, M.
Kenward and I. Roberts, "Smoking cessation support delivered via mobile phone text

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

messaging (txt2stop): a single-blind, randomised trial.,"

Lancet, vol. 378, pp. 49-55, 2011.

[11] A. Adler, N. Martin, J. Mariani, C. Trajer, O. Owolabi, C. Free, N. Serrano, J. Casas and P. Perel,
"Mobile phone text messaging to improve medication adherence in secondary prevention of
cardiovascular disease.,"

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, vol. 4, 2017.

[12] M. Palmer, S. Barnard, P. Perel and C. Free, "Mobile phone-based interventions for improving
adherence to medication prescribed for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in
adults.,"

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, vol. 6, 2018.

[13] J. Prochaska and C. DiClemente, "Transtheoretical therapy: Toward a more integrative model
of change.,"

Psychotherapy: Theory, Research & Practice, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 276-288, 1982.

[14] J. Lee, D. Lee, K. Kim, J. Shim, E. Sung and J. H. J. Kang, "Development of tailored nutrition
information messages based on the transtheoretical model for smartphone application of an
obesity prevention and management program for elementary-school students.,"

Nutrition

Research and Practice, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 247-256, 2017.
[15] R. de Vries, K. Truong, C. Zaga, J. Li and V. Evers, "A word of advice: how to tailor motivational
text messages based on behavior change theory to personality and gender,"

Personal and

Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 675-687, 2017.
[16] H. Han, K. Pette and H. Kohl, "Application of the transtheoretical model to sendentary
behaviors and its association with physical activity status,"

PLoS One, vol. 12, no. 4.

[17] F. Diez-Canseco, J. Zavala-Loayza, A. Beratarrechea, R. Kanter, M. Ramirez-Zea, A. Rubinstein,
H. Martinez and J. Miranda, "Design and Multi-Country Validation of Text Messages for an
mHealth Intervention for Primary Prevention of Progression to Hypertension in Latin
America,"

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, vol. 18, no. 3, 2015.

[18] P. Glasziou, D. Altman, P. Bossuyt, I. Boutron, M. Clarke, S. Julious, S. Michie, D. Moher and E.
Wager, "Reducing waste from incomplete or unusable reports of biomedical research,"

Lancet, vol. 18, pp. 267-276, 2014.
[19] T. Hoffman, P. Glasziou, I. Boutron, R. Milne, R. Perera, D. Moher, D. Altman, V. Barbour, H.
Macdonald, M. Johnston, S. Lamb, M. Dixo-Woods, P. McCulloch, J. Wyatt, A. Chan and S.
Michie, "Better reporting of interventions: template for intervention description and
replication (TIDieR) checklist and guide,"

BMJ, vol. 348, 2014.

[20] L. Abroms, R. Whittaker, C. Free and J. Van, "Developing and pretesting a text messaging
program health behavior: Recommend steps.,"
2015.

JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 1-11,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[21] T. Frieden, "Six components necessary for effective public health program implementation.,"

American Journal of Public Health, vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 17-22, 2014.
[22] World Health Organization, "The WHO strategy on research for health," 2012. [Online].
Available: http://www.who.int/phi/WHO_Strategy_on_research_for_health.pdf. [Accessed
2017].

[23] M. Fishbein and I. Aizen, Predicting and changing behavior: the reasoned action approach.,
New York: Psychology Press, 2010.

[24] A. Bandura, Social learning theory, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1977.

[25] L. Green, M. Kreuter, S. Deeds and K. Patridge, Health education planning: a diagnostic
approach, Palo Alto: Mayfield, 1980.

[26] S. Michie, M. Van Stralen and R. West, "The behavior change wheel: A new method for
characterizing and designing behavior change interventions.,"

Implementation Science, 2011.

[27] A. Najimi, F. Mostafavi, G. Sharifirad and P. Golshiri, "Barriers to medication adherence in
patients with hypertension: A qualitative study,"

J Educ Health Promot., vol. 7, no. 24, 2018.

[28] S. Gupta, J. Dhamija, I. Mohan and R. Gupta, "Qualitative Study of Barriers to Adherence to
Antihypertensive Medication among Rural Women in India,"

International Journal of

Hypertension, vol. 2019, 2019.
[29] World Health Organization , "Adherence to long-term therapies. Evidence for action,"
[Online]. Available:
http://www.who.int/chp/knowledge/publications/adherence_full_report.pdf?ua=1.

[30] N. Freemantle, "Beta Blockade after myocardial infarction: systematic review and meta
regression analysis.,"

BMJ, vol. 318, no. 7200, pp. 1730-1737, 1999.

[31] L. Liewer, D. Mains, K. Lykens and A. René, "Barriers to Women's Cardiovascular Risk
Knowledge.,"

Health Care Women International, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 23-38, 2008.

[32] M. McClurkin, L. Yingling, C. Ayers, R. Cooper-McCann and V. Suresh, "Health Insurance Status
as a Barrier to Ideal Cardiovascular Health for U.S. Adults: Data from the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES).,"

PLoS One, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 1-14, 2015.

[33] A. Rodríguez-Acelas and A. Gómez-Ochoa, "Factores influyentes en adherencia al tratamiento
en pacientes con riesgo cardiovascular,"
2010.

Avances en Enfermería, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 63-71,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[34] W. Velicer, O. Prochaska, J. Fava, J. Rossi, C. Redding, R. Laforg and M. Robbins, "Using the
Transtheoretical Model for Population- based Approaches to Health Promotion and Disease
Prevention.,"

Homeostasis in Health and Disease, vol. 40, pp. 174-195, 2000.

[35] K. Head, S. Noar and H. Grant, "Efficacy of text messaging-based interventions for health
promotion: a meta-analysis.,"

Social Sciences & Medicine, vol. 97, pp. 41-48, 2013.

[36] J. Redfern, J. Thiagalingam, S. Jan, R. Whittaker, M. Hackett, J. Mooney, L. De Keizer, G. Hillis
and C. Chow, "Development of a set of mobile phone text messages designed for prevention
of recurrent cardiovascular events.,"

European Journal of Preventive Cardiology , vol. 21, no.

4, pp. 492-499, 2012.

[37] A. Tambussi and S. Laspiur, "Barriers to prevention of cardiovascular disease in primary care
settings in Argentina.,"

Revista Panamericana de Salud Pública, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 259-266,

2013.

[38] K. Sharma, Y. Chavan, D. Khismatrao and R. Aras, "Male health clinic strategy in control of
STI/HIV: A program review.,"

Indian J Public Health, vol. 56, no. 3, 2012.

[39] S. Morgan and A. Lee, "Cost-related non-adherence to prescribed medicines among older
adults: a cross-sectional analysis of a survey in 11 developed countries.,"

BMJ Open , vol. 7,

2017.

[40] R. Laws, A. Waterbury, D. Hankerson-Dyson, Y. C, A. Williams, J. Schneider, J. Dickerson and
M. Vollmer, "Improving Adherence to Cardiovascular Therapies: An Economic Evaluation of a
Randomized Pragmatic Trial,"

Value in Health, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 176-184, 2016.

[41] H. Hsieh and S. S., "Three approaches to qualitative content analysis.,"

Qualitative Health

Research, vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 1277-1288, 2005.
[42] E. Herrera, "Adherencia al tratamiento en personas con hipertensión arterial.,"

Avances en

Enfermería, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 67-77, 2012.
[43] T. Frieded, "Six components neccesary for effective public health program implementation,"

American Journal of Public Health, vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 17-22, 2014.
[44] C. Free, G. Phillips, L. Gali, L. Watson, L. Felix, P. Edwards, V. Patel and H. A., "The
effectiveness of mobile-health technology-based health behavior change or disease
management interventions for health care consumers: a systematic review.,"

PLoS Med, vol.

10, no. 1, 2013.

[45] S. Elo, M. Kääriäinen, O. Kanste, T. Pölkki, K. Utriainen and H. Kyngäs, "Qualitative Content
Analysis: A Focus on Trustworthiness.,"

SAGE Open.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002683; this version posted July 26, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[46] C. Baigent, "Efficacy and safety of cholesterol-lowering treatment: prospective meta-analysis
of data from 90,056 participants in 14 randomised trials of statins.,"

Lancet., vol. 366, no.

9493, pp. 1267-1278, 2005.

[47] C. Baigent, "Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy for
prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients,"

BMJ, vol. 324, no.

71-86, 2002.

[48] M. Al-Mallah, "Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in coronary artery disease and
preserved left ventricular systolic function: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials.,"

J Am Coll Cardiol, vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 1576-1583, 2006.

[49] Pan American Health Organization, "Colombia: Cardiovascular diseases profile," [Online].
Available: https://www.paho.org/hq/dmdocuments/2014/COLOMBIA-CVD-PROFILE-2014.pdf.

