medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

An integrative machine learning approach to
discovering multi-level molecular mechanisms
of obesity using data from monozygotic twin
pairs
Milla Kibble1,2*, Suleiman A. Khan1, Muhammad Ammad-ud-din1, Sailalitha
Bollepalli1, Teemu Palviainen1, Jaakko Kaprio1,3, Kirsi H. Pietiläinen4 and
Miina Ollikainen1
1

Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom 3Department
of Public Health, University of Helsinki, Finland, 4Obesity Research Unit, Helsinki University Central
Hospital and University of Helsinki, Finland
*Corresponding Author: mmk60@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We combined clinical, cytokine, genomic, methylation and dietary data from 43 young adult monozygotic twin pairs (aged 22 – 36, 53% female), where 25 of the twin pairs were substantially weight
2
discordant (delta BMI > 3kg/ m ). These measurements were originally taken as part of the TwinFat
study, a substudy of The Finnish Twin Cohort study. These five large multivariate data sets (comprising 42, 71, 1587, 1605 and 63 variables, respectively) were jointly analysed using an integrative machine learning method called Group Factor Analysis (GFA) to offer new hypotheses into the multimolecular-level interactions associated with the development of obesity. New potential links between
cytokines and weight gain are identified, as well as associations between dietary, inflammatory and
epigenetic factors. This encouraging case study aims to enthuse the research community to boldly
attempt new machine learning approaches which have the potential to yield novel and unintuitive
hypotheses. The source code of the GFA method is publically available as the R package GFA.

1

Introduction

Worldwide, obesity has nearly tripled since 1975, according to the World
Health Organisation. In 2016, more than 1.9 billion adults were overweight, of whom over 650 million were obese (1). A raised Body Mass
Index (BMI), which is a common measure used to define obesity, is a
major risk factor for non-communicable diseases such as cardiovascular
diseases, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), chronic kidney disease,
musculoskeletal disorders (especially osteoarthritis) and certain cancers
(2-4). There is evidence that high BMI is really driving the unfavourable
changes in disease associated biomarkers (5). Recently, Romieu et al (6)
reviewed the evidence of the associations between energy balance and
obesity and concluded that the main driver of weight gain is energy
intake that exceeds its expenditure. So excessive energy intake which is
not compensated by energy expenditure leads to excess weight gain,
which over time can lead to a multitude of chronic health problems.
However, the weight gain trajectory is far from being this straightforward. Key players likely include genetics, epigenetics, type and quality
of diet, exercise and lifestyle, microbiome composition and hormonal
effects as well as medications and societal and psychological factors, all
interacting in such a complex manner that often researchers can focus on
only one or two of these features at a time (7). For example, there are
studies highlighting the heritability of obesity (8; 9), estimates of which
range between 40 and 70%. Indeed monozygotic (MZ) twins are very

rarely BMI discordant, i.e. differ significantly in weight. The first genetic
locus to show robust association with BMI and obesity risk, namely
FTO, was discovered via a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in
2007 (10; 11) and since then over 500 genetic loci have been found,
amongst other things providing strong support for a role of the central
nervous system in obesity susceptibility (8). It is now clear that most
cases of obesity are polygenic and multifactorial and the full picture of
how genetic and other factors jointly influence at a molecular level
individual preferences for and responses to diet and physical activity
remains largely beyond our comprehension.
With the advent of large and diverse data sets coupled with innovative
computational tools which can look at these data sets in combination,
this Holy Grail may be getting a step closer. Here we present one example of Big Data being combined with machine learning in an innovative
way to infer a multilayer picture of the mechanisms behind obesity.
What we present is not a finished answer, but an encouraging case study
which aims to enthuse the research community to boldly attempt new
machine learning approaches which have the potential to yield novel and
unintuitive hypotheses.
In this paper, we combine genetic, methylation, clinical, cytokine, dietary and lifestyle data from MZ twin pairs, many of whom are discordant
for obesity – a rare data set - which is then input into a machine learning
tool never before used on twin data to elucidate interactions at multiple
molecular levels in the development of obesity. The outcome results
encouragingly highlight many known associations as well as suggesting

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
M.Kibble et al.

novel links that could offer new hypotheses of molecular mechanisms.
We start with a brief background to twin studies to highlight the novelty
of our method in this domain. We then describe the method in accessible
terms for an interdisciplinary audience and only then proceed to the key
results on obesity. Finally, we offer our thoughts on future possibilities
of such an approach.

1.1 Twin studies
So-called classical twin methods have focused on estimating the heritability of different phenotypes by comparing occurrences of the phenotype in those monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs where at
least one twin exhibits the phenotype of interest. The basic premise is
that if genetics influences a particular phenotype, then the occurrence of
that phenotype for both twins will be more common within MZ twin
pairs, who share their whole genomic sequence, than DZ twin pairs, who
share roughly 50% of their segregating genes akin to non-twin siblings
(12). Such heritability studies using large twin repositories cover the
whole range of complex phenotypes (13; 14) including obesity (8) and
many obesity-related phenotypes. For example, by looking at 1,126 twin
pairs, Goodrich et al (15) identified heritable bacterial taxa of the gut
microbiome. The most heritable taxa was the family Christensenellaceae
(phylum Firmicutes) which is enriched in lean individuals and has been
shown to limit adiposity gain when given as faecal transplants to mice
deficient in the taxa, suggesting that heritable microbes could influence
adiposity.
Another popular twin design is the so-called co-twin control method
whereby within-pair comparisons of trait discordant MZ twin pairs are
used to identify factors associated with the trait, against a background of
equivalent age, sex and genotype (which are perfectly matched for the
twins) and in part also ruling out the influence of environment (which is
partially matched, and termed as shared environment) (16). The first
such studies helped prove the effect of smoking on lung cancer (17).
Illustrative examples relevant to obesity would be the recent study in
BMI-discordant MZ twin pairs revealing sub-types of obesity based on
both clinical traits and gene expression in subcutaneous adipose tissue
(18), as well as that based on DNA methylation in leucocytes (19). Such
studies usually employ classical machine learning approaches such as
linear mixed-effects models.
For a thorough exposition of twin studies, the reader is referred to the
review article of van Dongen et al. (13). In the current article, we also
look at MZ twin pairs discordant for obesity and in particular use machine learning methods to search for associations in any differences
between the heavier and leaner individuals in such pairs. Such associations including dietary and lifestyle data could give hints as to behavioural mechanisms for the twins differing in BMI despite sharing the
same genotype, whereas associations involving the other types of data
could highlight consequences and/or causes of obesity which are genotype independent. To our knowledge, machine learning techniques of the
form proposed here have not previously been applied as part of twin
studies.

1.2 Machine learning
Machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI) have been applied in the
field of medicine for over a decade and, with the now routine collection
of large data sets in all research fields and the affordability of computing
power, the number of application areas is rising sharply. Although to a
lesser extent than in the drug discovery sector, machine learning is also

being used in innovative ways in the area of disease prevention (see the
discussion in (20)) and it is here that our current contribution sits.
Machine learning refers to mathematical algorithms that have been
coded into computer programs. Their function is to look at the data set of
interest and “learn” patterns in that data and possibly also predict data
values not available to the researcher. Most algorithms achieve this by
having an underlying mathematical model to describe the type of data
defined by a set of unknown parameters and then calculating the parameters that best fit the particular data set. Camacho et al. have recently
written a very clear introduction to machine learning in biological applications (21), including definitions of the most commonly used terms and
examples of recent developments.
Here we use an advanced machine learning method called Group Factor
Analysis (GFA); see the Methods section. It takes as its input multiple
data sets (or matrices), where each matrix has samples in its rows and
variables in its columns. The idea is to have variables of a similar type in
each matrix and in the current work we have five matrices, one each for
clinical, cytokine, genotype, methylation and dietary data.
Our samples correspond to twin pairs and the values in the matrices
correspond to the difference in measurement of the variable for the twins
in the pair (we always subtract the value for the leaner twin from the
value for the heavier twin). GFA then learns associations between variables within data sets and between data sets, finding associations of the
form “heavier twins who consume a lot more of nutrient x than their
leaner twin, tend to have higher levels of cytokine y than their leaner
twin and greater methylation at CpG sites z and w”.
The output of GFA can be viewed via so-called component diagrams.
Each component diagram has up to five small heatmaps picturing the
associations discovered within or between the five data sets; see Figure
1. Many such associations may be found, and hence many component
diagrams. In the next section, we illustrate several components and the
associations within them, some of which are known while others may
offer novel insights into the molecular mechanisms of obesity.
Such novel approaches that integrate multiple sources of information
provide an invaluable way to discover connections at multiple molecular
levels from vast amounts of data (22-24) or to predict outcomes, as in the
landmark study of Zeevi and colleagues where blood parameters, dietary
habits, anthropometrics, physical activity, and gut microbiota were used
to predict personalized postprandial glycaemic response to real-life
meals (25). So far GFA has only been taken up by the computer science
community to develop the methodology further (26; 27) and, although in
the literature there have been small case studies, few real applications
have been previously published. These have, to our knowledge, focused
on the problem of elucidating the mechanisms of action of small molecules and so the samples within the matrices have corresponded to
experimental and structural information about small molecules (28).
Fig. 1. Pipeline for the GFA analysis on MZ twin pairs: (1) Clinical,
cytokine, genomic, methylation and dietary data were collected from
43 young adult monozygotic twin pairs, where 25 of the twin pairs
were substantially weight discordant (delta BMI > 3kg/m2). For
each twin pair and each variable, the value for the leaner twin was
subtracted from the value for the heavier twin. This resulted in five
large data matrices comprising 42, 71, 1587, 1605 and 63 variables,
respectively. (2) All five large data matrices were input into the
Group Factor Analysis (GFA) computational tool, giving rise to 38
so-called component diagrams (three of which are shown in this
figure). Each component diagram has up to five small heatmaps
picturing the associations discovered within or between the five data
sets. The magnified component is the Immunometabolism Component, also in Figure 2.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Integrative machine learning approach applied to obesity

2

Results

2.1 Machine learning meets twin studies
In our analysis, samples refer to twin pairs and the data for each twin
pair corresponds to difference values for each of the variables (i.e. the
value of the variable for the heavier twin minus the value for the leaner
twin of each pair). The aim of the analysis is to identify drivers or consequences of change in weight, which are difficult to distinguish by this
study design. The genetic data suggests (see the end of this section) that
in fact most of the 43 twin pairs in our data have a genetic predisposition
to obesity. Hence the analysis has the potential to elucidate why some
individuals are faring better than others, despite their genetic burden.
This could be invaluable knowledge for informing prevention strategies.
The output of GFA applied here is 38 sets of associations between
variables within and between the different data sets. As mentioned
above, each such set of associations between variables is called a component and can be visualised as up to five adjacent heatmaps corresponding to the five data sets, showing how the relevant variables in each data
set are associated with each other.
With the analysis producing 38 components, it is not possible here to go
through all components in detail. Instead, we pick six interesting examples, choosing to include some accompanying component diagrams in
the supplementary files rather than in the main body of text. We stress
that many components highlight known associations, thus adding to the
credibility of this approach, and we point these out for those components
discussed.
In what we have called the Immunometabolism Component (Figure
2), the GFA method has picked up associations between two of the five
data sets, namely the clinical data and the cytokine data. These results
are completely data driven and the associations of the clinical variables
with obesity are all well-known (29; 30). For the twins that differ most
within pair with respect to adiposity (weight, waist, fat percentage and
intra-abdominal fat) as well as LDL cholesterol (seen at the top of the
figure in red), the heavier twin tends to have much lower insulin sensitivity (depicted by the Matsuda index (31)), less physical activity (sport and
total indices from the Baecke questionnaire (32)), HDL and adiponectin
(shown by the blue colour). What may yield novel insights are the links
with the cytokine data. For the twin pairs with the above profile, the
heavier twin tends to have elevated values of the cytokines TRANCE,
CCL4, IL18R1, CCL3 and FGF21. It has been known since the early
2000s that many immune mediators are abnormally produced or regulated in obesity, contributing to altered metabolic status (33).
For example, the method clearly picks up fibroblast growth factor 21
(FGF21), a hormone that is known to have elevated levels in insulinresistant morbidities such as obesity and T2DM (34). Elevated FGF21
levels in these diseases are suspected to be signs of FGF21 resistance
(35), similar to the concept of insulin resistance. FGF21 is a peptide
hormone secreted by multiple tissues, most notably the liver. Indeed, we
have previously shown that high values of FGF21 (measured by the
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ELISA) are associated with high
liver fat (36). Elevated levels also correlate with liver fat content in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (37). Significantly increased FGF21 levels in
circulation have been detected in patients with muscle-manifesting
mitochondrial diseases, in which case most of the circulating FGF21
arises from the muscle (38). Interestingly, a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of FGF21 – the rs838133 variant – has been identified as a
genetic mechanism responsible for the sweet tooth behavioural pheno-

type, a trait associated with cravings for sweets and high sugar consumption (39; 40).
The other four cytokines included in this component also have some
previous links to obesity, highlighting the potential of the method to
offer both known and novel hypotheses on the mechanisms of
immunometabolism. TRANCE (RANKL) has been proposed to link
Metabolic Syndrome and osteoporosis (41). The CC chemokine family
members CCL3 and CCL4 have both tens of publications where obesity
is mentioned, but with debate on the mechanisms involved and function
(42). Finally, although there is not much reference to IL18R1 and obesity, its ligand, IL18, has in several studies been associated with obesity,
insulin resistance, hypertension and dyslipidemia (see (43) and the
references therein).
Fig. 2. The Immunometabolism Component. The method has picked
up associations between clinical data and cytokine data. The twin
pairs seem to be ordered roughly by fat percentage (fatp) discordance, with the most discordant pairs at the top of the picture also
having high negative HDL and adiponectin difference. Since we are
mostly working with difference values, the BMI column will
throughout the analyses be completely red, since the BMI for the
heavier twin minus the BMI for the leaner twin will always be by
design a positive value. Likewise, through all of the components
certain other variables highly correlated with BMI are completely
red, such as weight, subcutaneous fat, liver fat and fat percentage,
and variables inversely correlated with BMI will be blue, such as
adiponectin. Full description of the clinical variables: adiponectin:
fasting plasma adiponectin concentration, fatp: percentage body fat,
hdl: fasting plasma high density lipoprotein concentration, iafat:
intra-abdominal fat volume, ldl: fasting plasma low density lipoprotein concentration, matsuda: Matsuda index, sport: sport index,
total: total physical activity index, waist: waist circumference,
weight: body weight.
A second component, the HDL Component, has also picked up the
clinical and cytokine data sets, but this time the twin pairs seem to be
ordered roughly by HDL discordance rather than weight discordance,
with the twin pairs at the top of the heatmap picture (Supplementary
Figure S1) being those for whom the heavier twin has lower levels of
HDL compared to the leaner twin. This associates with the heavier twin
having higher levels of cytokines CCL11, UPA, FGF19, TRANCE and
SCF, again offering some potentially novel associations. Not much is
known about these cytokines in relation to obesity or HDL, apart from
for FGF19 which, like its related hormone FGF21 mentioned earlier, is
being investigated as a pharmacological target for obesity (44). In contrast to FGF21 however, metabolic diseases exhibit reduced serum
FGF19 levels (45). The simultaneous increase in serum FGF21 levels is
likely a compensatory response to reduced FGF19 levels, and the two
proteins concertedly maintain metabolic homeostasis (46). It is interesting then that here levels of FGF19 are increased when weight gain is
accompanied by a large reduction in HDL levels. It is also interesting to
note that though fat percentage difference is present in this component,
its values are not exactly correlated with HDL difference.
Next we consider a component where within twin pair differences in
clinical variables have been associated with methylation differences. In
the Leisure Time Physical Activity Component, leisure time physical
activity (32) seems to be associated with methylation changes independently of BMI difference (Figure 3). When the heavier twin partakes
in less leisure activity, they also have higher levels of methylation at
CpG sites on SLC11A1, MAP7, CEBPE and ESR1 and lower levels of
methylation at AHRR, ZAP70, GPR15, ELMSAN1 and GOLIM4. We
observe that for most substantially weight discordant pairs, the twin with

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
M.Kibble et al.

greater leisure time activity is leaner, and we have shown elsewhere that
the more active twin, even in MZ pairs, remains leaner (47-49).
It is highly challenging to link nutrient and immune responses, let alone
combining this with epigenetic alterations. Here we offer a contribution
in this area. We highlight the results from three components all of which
picked up associations with dietary variables.
Fig. 3. The Leisure Time Physical Activity Component. As can be
seen in Table 1, the maximum within pair difference in the leisure
time activity index is 1.25, which can be considered large (these
index values usually have mean 3 and a range of 3.25). Full description of the clinical variables: bpdiastolic: diastolic blood pressure,
bmi: body mass index, crp: C-reactive protein, FLI: Fatty Liver
Index, height: height, hr0: heart rate, leisure: leisure time index,
ogluk0: fasting plasma glucose concentration, scfat: subcutaneous
fat volume, total: total physical activity index.
In the Epigenetic Component (Figure 4), we see associations between
the dietary, methylation and cytokine data. When there is a clear lower
consumption in the heavier twin of sucrose, vitamin D, water, fluoride
and riboflavine, then there is a lower methylation of CpGs at AHRR,
INPP5D, E2F3, VMP1 and RARA and higher values of cytokines
4EBP1, CCL19, ENRAGE, GDNF and HGF. Although crude, this gives
a glimpse into the ability of the method to highlight possible connections
between these three data levels, where difference in diet is not influenced
by genetics and differences in consumption are associated with differences in molecular features. All of the above genes have been linked to
cytokines (mainly ILs) and inflammation in the literature and also all
have associated studies on miRNAs, but it is difficult to draw any conclusions without further experiments. For the cytokines, the fit to the
literature is difficult to decipher: 4EBP1 has been shown to have a
protective effect in obesity in male mice (50), ENRAGE has been shown
to be positively correlated with visceral fat adiposity (51), and elevated
HGF levels induced by a high fat diet have been shown to have a protective role against obesity and insulin resistance (52). GDNF family members have also been implicated in obesity (53).
Fig. 4. The Epigenetic Component. Full description of the dietary
variables: CU: Copper, FAT: Fat, F18D2CN6: Fatty acid 18:2-n6,
FD: Fluoride, NA: Sodium, RIBF: Riboflavine, SUCS: Sucrose,
VITD: Vitamin D, VITK: Vitamin K, WATER: Water.
We find further links between diet and methylation in the Sucrose
Component (Supplementary Figure S2). For the twin pairs at the top
of the picture, the heavier twin consumes more sucrose and has increased
methylation in CpGs at CD3E, SDF4, FAM53B and AHRR (a different
AHRR CpG site to that in the epigenetics component) and decreased
methylation in CpGs at LY6G6F, C1orf127, IRX1, PPIAP3 and
MARCH11. These individuals also consumed more carotene, vitamin C,
sugar, copper and less vitamin D, molybdenum, selenium, lactose and
N3 polyunsaturated fatty acids than the leaner twin in the pair. There is
an apparent contradiction here between high levels of sugar and, for
example, vitamin C, but it is possible that this sugar is being consumed
from fruit.
It is particularly interesting that AHRR appears for a third time in our
analysis. The methylation of this gene is commonly associated with
smoking (54-56), and we do mildly see this AHRR - smoking association
in one of our components (results not shown; the task of finding associations with smoking is hindered by the difficulty in coding into the method differences in past and current smoking status between the twins).
However, there are some previous links also between AHRR and weight,
for example in a study showing that offspring DNA methylation of

AHRR is associated with maternal BMI and birth weight (57). Since two
of our GFA components associate AHRR methylation with sucrose
intake, we could hypothesize that sugar may also contribute to the methylation seen at AHRR; nutritional stimuli have been shown to contribute
to AHRR expression (58). There is a well-established link between
AHRR/AHR and inflammation, and dietary flavonoids and indolens,
tryptophan and arachidonic acid (59-61).
In the Starch Component (Supplementary Figure S3), we have weak
links between diet and clinical variables and cytokines, but do retrieve
known links between lower starch consumption and lower levels of
adiponectin (62). We see clearly that individuals within twin pairs who
tend to eat more starch, also tend to eat more fatty acid 18:3-n3, polyunsaturated fatty acids, fluoride and carbohydrate. This may indicate use of
starchy vegetables, and an overall healthier fat consumption as well. This
is the only component including the gender variable, and even here the
association looks quite weak. It would have been interesting to see some
associations which only occurred in males or females, but we did not
observe this in the current study.
Finally, the component diagrams can offer insights into the individuals in
the analysis which can help inform the hypotheses drawn. With regards
to the varying genetic load of the twin pairs, all appear to be susceptible
to weight gain. Supplementary Figure S4 shows five genes for which
almost all of the twins have at least one risk allele, as well as interestingly another five genes associated with obesity for which hardly any of the
twins have a risk allele. However, Supplementary Figure S5 shows that
the twin pairs divide into roughly two sets based on their genetic burden
at five SNPs at three genes, including FTO. Polygenic Risk Scores (PRS)
for obesity have been available for some time (63), with recent efforts
producing a good prediction of those individuals at a high risk for obesity (64). In this work, we decided to retain SNP level information in order
to facilitate the elucidation of molecular interactions at the genetic and
other levels. However, in future work inclusion of a suitably weighted
continuous PRS value could potentially distinguish differing mechanisms at high versus low PRS for obesity.

2.2 Results summary
The method has found many known clinical characteristics of obesity in
a data-driven manner. Beyond this validation of the method, more encouraging are the suggested links between key obesity related features
and mechanisms of immunometabolism. It is well known that obesity is
associated with changes in the production of hormones, adipokines and
cytokines (33; 65-67). A review of the growth of the field of
immunometabolism and latest developments is given in two recent
papers by Hotamisligil (33; 65). The work here also addresses a key
question stated by Hotamisligil as to whether mechanisms can be identified that integrate nutrient and immune responses (65).
Although in the current work we are only observing associations, and so
cannot claim anything regarding causality, the associations can suggest
hypotheses to investigate, such as that sucrose or other dietary factors
and inflammation affect methylation at AHRR. This could ultimately also
add to efforts to develop better biomarkers of nutritional intake. We saw
in the Immunometabolism Component that obesity and known related
clinical variables associated with elevated levels of cytokines TRANCE,
CCL4, IL18R1, CCL3 and FGF21, for which known links to obesity
were discussed. In the HDL component, HDL was associated with
cytokines CCL11, UPA, FGF19, TRANCE and SCF. The Leisure Time
Physical Activity Component, we see that when the heavier twin partakes in less leisure time physical activity, they also have higher levels of
methylation at CpG sites on SLC11A1, MAP7, CEBPE and ESR1 and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Integrative machine learning approach applied to obesity

lower levels of methylation at AHRR, ZAP70, GPR15, ELMSAN1 and
GOLIM4.
Three further components focused on links between nutrient intake,
immune response and methylation. We see in the Epigenetic Component
that when there is a clear lower consumption in the heavier twin of
sucrose, vitamin D, water, fluoride and riboflavine, then there is a lower
methylation of CpGs at AHRR, INPP5D, E2F3, VMP1 and RARA and
higher values of cytokines 4EBP1, CCL19, ENRAGE, GDNF and HGF.
In the Sucrose Component we see that when the heavier twin consumes
more sucrose, carotene, vitamin C, sugar, copper and less vitamin D,
molybdenum, selenium, lactose and N3 polyunsaturated fatty acids than
the leaner twin in the pair, then they have increased methylation in CpGs
at CD3E, SDF4, FAM53B and AHRR and decreased methylation in
CpGs at LY6G6F, C1orf127, IRX1, PPIAP3 and MARCH11. Finally, the
Starch Component highlights the known association between lower
starch consumption and lower levels of adiponectin.
Given the design of our analysis, looking at difference values within MZ
twin pairs genetically predisposed to weight gain but where some individuals are faring better than others, the associations found have the
potential to give hints as to why some twins of a pair differ in BMI
despite their shared genetic burden. This could be invaluable knowledge
for informing prevention strategies.

3

Discussion

What we have presented here is a relatively small scale example of the
application of GFA on data from 43 MZ twin pairs. We acknowledge
that this twin data is quite unique and so wish to stress that the method
presented can also offer insights from non-twin data where samples are
simply the measurements from individuals. In this case, the insights
would be of a different form, for example “individuals of a certain
genotype at given SNPs have increased consumption of x,y and z and an
increase in cytokines a,b and c and decreased methylation at CpGs l, m
and n”. Of course, beyond showing which variables tend to co-occur, it
is difficult to know whether or how these are obesity-related without an
association to the clinical variables. Hence, in this case, components
including clinical variables are the most useful.
In terms of machine learning methodologies, there are two interesting
future directions to explore. First, it will be interesting to explore multitensor factorizations such as (68) to analyse the twin-pair data sets.
Tensor factorizations capture multi-way structures in the data and may
reveal previously unseen patterns. In addition, it would be interesting to
explore the possibility of non-linear dependencies across the data sets
with kernelized matrix factorization-based approaches (69). As a further
direction, machine learning innovations that allow exploring new usecases could be explored. For example, innovations that make it easy to
handle massively high-dimensional data sets such as (70) could enhance
the applicability of GFA further. In addition, it could be useful to incorporate prior-biological knowledge for example in the form of pathways
or functionally linked networks to supplement the model’s learning
process.
There is a huge temptation to throw all possible types of data at methods
such as GFA to see what novel associations can be found. We next
discuss what other types of data we could include, when available.
It has previously been shown that a wide range of unfavourable alterations in the serum metabolome are associated with abdominal obesity,
insulin resistance and low-grade inflammation (71) and so this would be
very useful to include in future analyses. Also adding transcriptomics

profiles could add clues to how genotype, DNA methylation and gene
expression inter-relate (72).
There is growing evidence that the gut microbiome plays vital roles in
health and disease (73) (74) and in particular that gut microbiota contribute to the regulation of adiposity and are a mediator of dietary impact on
the host metabolic status, although some contradictory evidence also
exists (75). Sonnenburg and Bäckhed (76) have recently reviewed evidence of how the gut microbiota can alter extraction of energy from
food, generation of metabolic products, such as short-chain fatty acids,
and storage of calories. Despite the likely complexity of processes
involved, the broad picture seems to suggest that obesity is associated
with a reduced diversity of gut microbiota (77), which would mirror the
findings from macroecology suggesting that biodiversity within an
ecosystem can serve as a measure of stability and robustness (78). It has
also been suggested that host genetics may influence the presence of
certain microbiota (15). If microbiome data were available, it would be
useful to include in the GFA analysis as an additional variable indicative
of the level of microbiome diversity or even a whole matrix containing
microbiome or microbial taxa level data. It may also be advisable to
include all putative genetic determinants of gut microbiota in the analysis. These involve genes related to diet, metabolism, olfaction and immunity (15). The number of studies into the effect of the microbiome on
health is steadily increasing (79) with new methods emerging to measure
its composition (80) and so we envisage many opportunities for incorporating such data into the methods in the future.
With dietary data, it is known that the unreliability of food questionnaires poses a major challenge. However, there have been recent advances in measuring dietary intake via a urine test (81) or using biomarkers in
the blood (82). Such metabolic profiles could be input into the method to
offer more reliable links between diet and obesity. The latest nutrition
research should be considered and the breadth and resolution of dietary
information adjusted accordingly in light of promising new associations.
Also the role of artificial sweeteners, probiotics and emulsifiers could be
evaluated if estimates of these levels were included in the data collection
(73; 83-85). Finally, as some dietary compounds have been shown to
influence the epigenome, inflammation and microbiota (86-89), it could
be enlightening to include estimated levels of such compounds, eg
resveratrol and quercetin, and some of their putative molecular targets,
such as HDACs and NFkappaB, into the data (28) to begin to elucidate a
more unified picture of the influence of diet.
There is evidence for an interplay between the stress system and obesity,
with increased long-term cortisol levels, as measured in scalp hair, being
strongly related to abdominal obesity (90). Hence adding a hair cortisol
concentration measure to the variables could potentially discern stress
related obesity mechanisms. Also including traditional predictors of
obesity, such as parental obesity status and presence of childhood obesity, or the polygenic risk score for obesity as discussed above, might also
help to distinguish different classes of obesity and their mechanisms.
It is known that genotype has a large effect on methylation and there are
resources available to advise which methylation sites are influenced by
the genome and which might be affected by disease relevant environmental exposures (91). In the current analysis, we decided to limit the
number of SNPs and CpGs and so did not incorporate mQTL information, which would include the cis and trans effects in the analysis
(72). Instead, had there been genotype-methylation associations highlighted, we planned to look up mQTL information at a later stage to help
gain functional insights. In future studies, however, the mQTL genes and
SNPs could also be included to see whether known associations appear
and what other variables they are associated with.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
M.Kibble et al.

4

Conclusions

It is now well established that machine learning coupled with good
quality data is held as key to future discoveries and advances in almost
every imaginable field, with investments in this area a cornerstone of the
research and innovation strategies of many companies and governmental
funding bodies alike. The current work contributes to efforts to bring
machine learning to the field of disease prevention and in particular to
obesity research.
In terms of impact of such research, discovering molecular mechanisms
of disease can of course guide towards drug discovery directly. Also
discovery of individual risk factors can hope to aid in disease prevention
through behavioural change, although it is unclear whether informing
people of genotype-based disease risk changes behaviour (92; 93),
especially for those who are genetically highly susceptible to food rich
environments. But at a societal level there is hope. If researchers can find
incontrovertible evidence that the epidemic of obesity cannot be reversed
by individual willpower alone due to the nature of the molecular mechanisms involved, then it must turn to the governments to create the environment necessary to affect the change. The interactions between the
environment and the individual in the development of obesity have been
acknowledged and described via a full obesity system map by the UK
government in its landmark Foresight report on obesity over a decade
ago (7) and there have been calls to ‘dust off’ the report and embrace
even further its recommendations to adopt a ‘whole systems approach’ to
tackling obesity (94). The more understanding there is of the complex
molecular mechanisms involved, the greater the evidence to advocate
and inform a societal effort to enable a change at an individual level.

5

otherwise. Smoking.Current.diff is the value of Smoking.Current for the
heavier twin minus that for the leaner twin (hence if the current smoking
status for both twins is the same, Smoking.Current.diff will be zero).
Age, Gender, Year and Liverfat Discordance were common to both twins
and are input directly into the data.
We have calculated liver fat scores (LFS), and liver fat percentage
prediction (98), and fatty liver index (FLI) (99), even though we actually
have liver fat values measured by magnetic resonance imaging technique. The idea behind this was to see what these scores are associated
with. However, we did not observe any interesting associations with liver
fat or its related scores.
We also include information on physical activity (leisure time, work,
sport and total physical activity indices from the Baecke questionnaire
(32)), since higher physical activity level is known to be associated with
lower adiposity and better metabolic health, independent of genetics
(100).
Most of the twins in the study were metabolically healthy, and did not
differ significantly for LDL, Homa index or insulin levels within pairs.
Table 1 Clinical characteristics of the 43 twin pairs in our study

5.3 Cytokines
Included in the analysis were 71 cytokines from the Proseek Multiplex
Inflammation I panel (Olink Bioscience, Uppsala, Sweden). For statistical comparison, proteins with missing data frequencies above 25% were
excluded, leaving 71 proteins out of the original 92 for analysis. Protein
levels are presented as normalised protein expression [NPX] values
following an inter-plate control normalisation procedure.

Methods

The data from this study has been deposited in the THL Biobank and
applications to access the data can be addressed to the Biobank
(https://thl.fi/en/web/thl-biobank).

5.1 Finnish Twin Cohort
TwinFat, which is a substudy of The Finnish Twin Cohort study (FTC)
(95), is designed to study obesity using an MZ co-twin control design
(96; 97). The twin pairs in TwinFat were selected from two populationbased twin cohorts, FinnTwin16 and FinnTwin12, comprising ten full
birth cohorts of Finnish twins. Twins were included in the current study
based on the availability of data for both members of a pair. All twins
were free of somatic and psychiatric diseases and with a stable weight
for at least three months prior to the current study. Venous blood samples were drawn in the morning after an overnight fast. Zygosity was
confirmed by genotyping. All twins provided written informed consent.
The protocols of the FTC TwinFat data collections were approved by the
Ethics Committee of the Helsinki University Central Hospital.

5.2 Clinical data
Included in the analysis were 43 clinical variables. Some categorical
variables (e.g. gender) are common to both twins and others (e.g. smoking status) may or may not be. For variables such as gender which are
common to both twins, we include in the matrix the information from
either twin (rather than difference values, which would always be zero).
Gender was labelled as 0=male, 1=female. Hence in the component
diagrams, red represents the female twins. Twenty twin pairs were male
and 23 were female. Smoking status was recorded as never, former or
current. Hence Smoking.Current is 1 if the twin currently smokes and 0

5.4 Genotype information
Chip genotyping was done using Illumina Human610-Quad v1.0 B,
Human670-QuadCustom v1.0 A and Illumina HumanCoreExome (12
v1.0 B, 12 v1.1 A, 24 v1.0 A, 24 v1.1 A) arrays. The algorithm for
genotype calling was Illumina’s GenCall for all HumanCoreExome chip
genotypes and Illuminus for 610k & 670k chip genotypes. Genotype
quality control was done in two batches (batch1: 610k+670k chip and
batch2: HumanCoreExome chip genotypes), removing variants with call
rate below 97,5% (batch1) or 95% (batch2), removing samples with call
rate below 98% (batch1) or 95% (batch2), removing variants with minor
allele frequency below 1% and Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium p-value
lower than 1e-06. Also samples from both batches with heterozygosity
test method-of-moments F coefficient estimate value below 0.03 or
higher than 0.05 were removed along with the samples which failed sex
check or were among the MDS principal component analysis outliers.
The total amount of genotyped autosomal variants after QC were 475637
(batch1) and 221814 (batch2). We then performed pre-phasing using
Eagle v2.3 (101) and imputation with Minimac3 v2.0.1 using University
of Michigan Imputation Server (102). Genotypes of both batches were
imputed to 1000 Genomes Phase III reference panel (103).
Included in the analysis were 1587 SNPs and, as both twins in a pair
have the same genotype, we use the information from either twin (rather
than the difference values). Monozygotic twins with large BMI discordance are extremely rare. When there is discordance, it usually arises
around age 16-20 but many BMI discordant pairs do not continue to be
discordant when followed over time (5). This emphasizes the importance
of genetic influences on weight regulation. Therefore, it is important to
find the triggers to obesity and mechanisms involved for those that have
a genetic predisposition.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Integrative machine learning approach applied to obesity

To focus our analysis on the most important findings, we chose to include in the analyses SNPs associated with obesity and obesity related
traits. An additional motivation for this choice is that, as we found in
previous work (28), it is difficult to draw meaningful or actionable
hypotheses from genes for which nothing is known. The main article
used to choose the SNPs for this analysis was the GWAS meta-analysis
of Locke et al (8). We also used SNPs retrieved from searches for BMI,
liver disease, metabolic syndrome and diabetes from the NHGRI-EBI
GWAS Catalog (104) as well as the SNPs from the paper of Turcot et al
(105) on rare variants associated with BMI (Supplementary Table 1;
the number in between dollar signs refers to the source from which the
SNP was chosen, and is also included in the component diagrams). SNPs
that are present in more than 38 pairs were removed as these are unlikely
to be linked with the differences in the pairs and would only bias the
model towards a different "locally" optimal solution. For each SNP, we
assigned the values of no risk allele 0, one risk allele 1, and two risk
alleles 2.

5.5 Methylation information
Methylation is one of the most stable epigenetic processes, but, on one
hand, some regions are more reactive than others and, on the other hand,
some marks are really stable through the lifespan, for example some of
the sites associated with smoking. Twin studies have shown that DNA
methylation profiles are more divergent in older twins than infant twins,
and although stochasticity may have a role in this phenomenon, these
findings also add support to the influence of environmental factors to the
epigenome (106).
Several epigenome-wide association studies have now been conducted
and have identified a panel of gene loci where methylation levels significantly differ in obese and lean individuals. We include in our analysis
DNA methylation data measured on Illumina’s Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. DNA methylation measured as beta
values (ranging from 0 to 1) was preprocessed using the R package
methylumi (107) and normalized by beta-mixture quantile normalization
(BMIQ) (108) after which the ComBat function in the R package SVA
(109) was used to correct for potential batch effects. DNA methylation
values of a set of pre-selected 1605 CpGs were input into the GFA
method. CpG sites were selected from the recent meta-analysis of Wahl
et al. (110). They show that BMI is associated with widespread changes
in DNA methylation and genetic association analyses demonstrate that
the alterations in DNA methylation are predominantly the consequence
of adiposity, rather than the cause. We also include CpGs associated with
elevated liver fat (19), CpGs whose methylation has been previously
shown to differ in the adipose tissue of BMI-discordant MZ twin pairs
(111), smoking-associated CpGs (112), and CpG sites that have been
associated with weight loss (113) (Supplementary Table 2).

5.6 Dietary data
Included in the analysis were 63 dietary variables (Supplementary
Table 3). Total energy and macronutrient intake were assessed with 3day food records. Subjects were given clear oral and written instructions
by a registered dietician on how to keep the food record (two working
days and one non-working day) and they were encouraged to keep their
usual eating patterns and to estimate the amounts of all foods and drinks
using household measures. The conversion of data from the records into
nutrient values was performed by a dietician using the program DIET32,
which incorporates the national Finnish database for food composition

(Fineli R). The nutritional composition of new ready-prepared meals that
were not included in the DIET32 program was obtained from the manufacturers. Daily energy intake is expressed in kilocalories (kcal) and
macronutrient intakes are expressed as percentages of total energy
intake. Results are presented as the mean ± SD of the 3 days (114).
Information on habitual diet was estimated using a qualitative foodfrequency questionnaire (FFQ) incorporating 52 food and non-alcoholic
beverage items that are common in the Finnish diet (115).

5.7 Group Factor Analysis
Group Factor Analysis (GFA) is formulated as a method to identify
statistical dependencies between multiple data sets. The method learns a
joint integrated model of the datasets with matched samples (i.e. having
a common set of samples), to extract meaningful and interpretable
information (26; 116; 117). GFA has been successfully used for identifying structural properties predictive of drug responses (23), crossorganism toxicogenomics (118) as well as highly accurate drug response
predictions (27).
Specifically, GFA takes a set of matrices X(m), where m = 1…M, and
identifies patterns of statistical dependencies across all of them. The
model learns these statistical dependencies in a data-driven fashion
automatically identifying the type and amount of dependencies. Therefore, GFA learns a low-dimensional space Z (of K components) that
represent the variation patterns across all data sets. A component can be
active in one or more data sets, meaning that it captures the relationships
between those particular data sets. This is achieved by modelling the
total variation of all of the datasets while inducing structured sparsity.
This characteristic allows GFA to automatically identify dependency
patterns that are shared across any subset of the data sets, in a truly datadriven fashion.
Formally, GFA is defined in a Bayesian formulation for data sets

    ೘ , where m = 1… M, having N matched samples and Dm
dimensions, as a product of the Gaussian latent variables      and
projection weights     ೘   :

  ~

  z , ∑ ,
 ~ 0, 

w 
~ ,
,

0,  
    1  , 
,
, ~  !!" # 
# ~ $%% , & 

 
~ '%((%% , & 
,
Here, ∑  is a diagonal noise covariance matrix. GFA induces compo
nent-wise sparsity on the projections ):, using a Beta-Bernoulli distri
bution. As a result, the projection weights ):, for a component k are
active for the one or more data sets (m), capturing dependencies specific
to one data set or shared between data sets.
The R package GFA version 1.0.3 (119), is used to model the five data
sets, dietary, clinical, genomic, methylation and cytokine. In the genomic data, SNPs with values in three or less samples and more than 38
(43-5) samples were removed as outliers. In the clinical data set, the
categorical variable smoking [never, former, current] was one-hot encoded to form binary representation. Additionally, all variables with
more than 50% of values missing were left out of the matrices. As a
result, for the N=43 twin pair samples, the clinical data contained D1 =

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
M.Kibble et al.

42 variables, cytokine D2 = 71, genotype D3 = 1587, methylation D4 =
1605 and dietary D5= 63. All data sets except genotype were scaled to
unit variance.
The model, implemented using Gibbs sampling, was run with K = 40
components which was deemed large enough due to the presence of
empty of components, as recommended by Virtanen et. al. (116). In
order to model the large amount of noise in the data, we used an informative noise prior with a priori noise variation set to 1/3 (26). Finally,
a total of 2000 sampling iterations were run, with the first 90% corresponding to burnin while the last 10% representing the posterior.
GFA found 38 components to model the five data sets. Components
active in two or more data sets, such as clinical and cytokine, represent
variation common to the two data sets. Components specific to a data set,
for example genotype, represent variation patterns that are consistent
within the genotype but not correlated with other data sets. Both types of
components represent interesting relationships in our case and are examined in this study.

Supplementary Files
Supplementary Figure S1: The HDL Component As can be seen in
Table 1, the largest within pair difference in HDL is 0.97, where a difference of more than 0.5 is usually considered to be large. Full description
of the clinical variables: bpsystolic: systolic blood pressure, col: fasting
plasma total cholesterol, fatp: percentage body fat, hdl: fasting plasma
high density lipoprotein concentration, homa: HOMA index, iafat: intraabdominal fat volume,
liver.fat: liver fat percentage,
liver.fat.%.prediction: liver fat percentage prediction, matsuda: Matsuda
index, smoking.current: current smoker.
Supplementary Figure S2: The Sucrose Component Full description
of the dietary variables: CU: Copper, CAROT: Carotene, FAPUN3: N3
polyunsaturated fatty acids, LACS: Lactose, MO: Molybdenum, SE:
Selenium, SUGAR: Sugar, SUCS: Sucrose, VITC: Vitamin C, VITD:
Vitamin D.
Supplementary Figure S3: The Starch Component Full description of
the dietary variables: CHO: Carbohydrate, CU: Copper, FAPU: Polyunsaturated fatty acids, FD: Fluoride, F18D3N3: Fatty acid 18:3-n3,
RETOL: Retinol, r44m: Fresh vegetables, STARCH: Starch, THIA:
Thiamine, VITA: Vitamin A. Full description of the clinical variables:
adiponectin: fasting plasma adiponectin concentration, diabetes: presence of diabetes, ffmkg: fat free mass, gender: sex, gt: fasting plasma
gamma glutamyl transferase concentration, liver.fat: liver fat percentage,
matsuda: Matsuda index, ogluk0: fasting plasma glucose concentration,
smoking.never: smoking never, tg: fasting plasma triglycerides.
Supplementary Figure S4: Genotype Component 1 Blue means that
the twins in the pair (who share the same genotype) carry no disease
allele at the particular SNP, white means that they carry one disease
allele and red that they carry two copies of the disease allele.
Supplementary Figure S5: Genotype Component 2 The twin pairs
seem to divide roughly into two groups with the twin pairs at the bottom
of the figure almost all having either one or two copies of the disease
allele (white or red) in the SNPs in the left hand column and the twin
pairs at the top of the figure mostly not carrying a disease allele in these
SNPs (blue). There was no clear way to distinguish these two groups for
example in terms of the level of BMI discordance.
Supplementary Table 1: Table of SNPs used in the analysis and the
sources from which they were chosen To focus our analysis on the
most important findings, we chose to include in the analyses SNPs
associated with obesity and obesity related traits. An additional motivation for this choice is that, as we found in previous work (28), it is diffi-

cult to draw meaningful or actionable hypotheses from genes for which
nothing is known. The main article used to choose the SNPs for this
analysis was the GWAS meta-analysis of Locke et al (8). We also used
SNPs retrieved from searches for BMI, liver disease, metabolic syndrome and diabetes from the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog (104) as well
as the SNPs from the paper of Turcot et al (105) on rare variants associated with BMI. The number in between dollar signs links to the source
from which each SNP was chosen, and is also included in the component
diagrams.
Supplementary Table 2: Table of CpGs used in the analysis and the
sources from which they were chosen CpG sites were selected from the
recent meta-analysis of Wahl et al. (110). They show that BMI is associated with widespread changes in DNA methylation and genetic association analyses demonstrate that the alterations in DNA methylation are
predominantly the consequence of adiposity, rather than the cause. We
also include CpGs associated with elevated liver fat (19), CpGs whose
methylation has been previously shown to differ in the adipose tissue of
BMI-discordant MZ twin pairs (111), smoking-associated CpGs (112),
and CpG sites that have been associated with weight loss (113). The
number in between dollar signs links to the source from which each CpG
was chosen, and is also included in the component diagrams.
Supplementary Table 3: Table of the 63 dietary variables used in the
analysis

Acknowledgements
MK would like to thank Leonie Bogl for very interesting and useful
discussions on the dietary data in the TwinFat study; JK has been supported by the Academy of Finland (grants 308248 & 312073). Funding
sources for KHP are the Academy of Finland (grants 272376, 266286,
314383, 315035), Finnish Medical Foundation, Finnish Diabetes Research Foundation, Novo Nordisk Foundation, Gyllenberg Foundation,
Sigrid Juselius Foundation, Helsinki University Hospital Research
Funds, Government Research Funds and University of Helsinki. MO has
been supported by the Academy of Finland (grant 297908), Sigrid
Juselius Foundation, and University of Helsinki. The funders had no role
in planning study design, data collection, and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the article.

References
1. Obesity
and
overweight.
sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight

http://www.who.int/news-room/fact-

2. Font-Burgada J, Sun B, Karin M. 2016. Obesity and Cancer: The Oil that Feeds
the Flame. Cell Metabolism 23:48-62
3. Afshin A, Forouzanfar MH, Reitsma MB, Sur P, Estep K, et al. 2017. Health
Effects of Overweight and Obesity in 195 Countries over 25 Years. New England Journal of Medicine 377:13-27
4. Ng M, Fleming T, Robinson M, Thomson B, Graetz N, et al. 2014. Global,
regional, and national prevalence of overweight and obesity in children and
adults during 1980-2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet (London, England) 384:766-81
5. van Dongen J, Willemsen G, Heijmans BT, Neuteboom J, Kluft C, et al. 2015.
Longitudinal weight differences, gene expression and blood biomarkers in
BMI-discordant identical twins. International Journal of Obesity (2005)
39:899-909
6. Romieu I, Dossus L, Barquera S, Blottière HM, Franks PW, et al. 2017. Energy
balance and obesity: what are the main drivers? Cancer causes & control: CCC
28:247-58

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Integrative machine learning approach applied to obesity

7. 2007. Foresight Tackling Obesities: Future Choices—Building the Obesity
System Map https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/tackling-obesitiesfuture-choices

30. Considine RV, Sinha MK, Heiman ML, Kriauciunas A, Stephens TW, et al.
1996. Serum immunoreactive-leptin concentrations in normal-weight and obese
humans. The New England Journal of Medicine 334:292-5

8. Locke AE, Kahali B, Berndt SI, Justice AE, Pers TH, et al. 2015. Genetic
studies of body mass index yield new insights for obesity biology. Nature
518:197-206

31. Matsuda M, DeFronzo RA. 1999. Insulin sensitivity indices obtained from oral
glucose tolerance testing: comparison with the euglycemic insulin clamp. Diabetes Care 22:1462-70

9. Wainschtein P, Jain DP, Yengo L, Zheng Z, Cupples LA, et al. 2019. Recovery
of trait heritability from whole genome sequence data. bioRxiv:588020

32. Baecke JA, Burema J, Frijters JE. 1982. A short questionnaire for the measurement of habitual physical activity in epidemiological studies. Am J Clin
Nutr 36:936-42

10. Frayling TM, Timpson NJ, Weedon MN, Zeggini E, Freathy RM, et al. 2007.
A common variant in the FTO gene is associated with body mass index and
predisposes to childhood and adult obesity. Science (New York, N.Y.)
316:889-94
11. Scuteri A, Sanna S, Chen W-M, Uda M, Albai G, et al. 2007. Genome-wide
association scan shows genetic variants in the FTO gene are associated with
obesity-related traits. PLoS genetics 3:e115
12. Falconer DS. 1960. Introduction to quantitative genetics. Edinburgh: Oliver
and Boyd. 365 pp.

33. Hotamisligil GS. 2017. Foundations of Immunometabolism and Implications
for Metabolic Health and Disease. Immunity 47:406-20
34. Cheng X, Zhu B, Jiang F, Fan H. 2011. Serum FGF-21 levels in type 2 diabetic
patients. Endocrine research 36:142-8
35. Kralisch S, Fasshauer M. 2011. Fibroblast growth factor 21: effects on carbohydrate and lipid metabolism in health and disease. Current opinion in clinical
nutrition and metabolic care 14:354-9

13. Dongen Jv, Slagboom PE, Draisma HHM, Martin NG, Boomsma DI. 2012.
The continuing value of twin studies in the omics era. Nature Reviews Genetics
13:640-53

36. Tyynismaa H, Raivio T, Hakkarainen A, Ortega-Alonso A, Lundbom N, et al.
2011. Liver fat but not other adiposity measures influence circulating FGF21
levels in healthy young adult twins. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and
Metabolism 96:351

14. Polderman TJC, Benyamin B, Leeuw CAd, Sullivan PF, Bochoven Av, et al.
2015. Meta-analysis of the heritability of human traits based on fifty years of
twin studies. Nature Genetics 47:702-9

37. Yan H, Xia M, Chang X, Xu Q, Bian H, et al. 2011. Circulating fibroblast
growth factor 21 levels are closely associated with hepatic fat content: a crosssectional study. PloS one 6:e24895-e

15. Goodrich JK, Davenport ER, Beaumont M, Jackson MA, Knight R, et al. 2016.
Genetic Determinants of the Gut Microbiome in UK Twins. Cell Host & Microbe 19:731-43

38. Suomalainen A, Elo JM, Pietilainen KH, Hakonen AH, Sevastianova K, et al.
2011. FGF-21 as a biomarker for muscle-manifesting mitochondrial respiratory
chain deficiencies: a diagnostic study. The Lancet. Neurology 10:806-18

16. Gesell A. 1942. THE METHOD OF CO-TWIN CONTROL. Science 95:446-8

39. Frayling TM, Beaumont RN, Jones SE, Yaghootkar H, Tuke MA, et al. 2018.
A Common Allele in FGF21 Associated with Sugar Intake Is Associated with
Body Shape, Lower Total Body-Fat Percentage, and Higher Blood Pressure.
Cell reports 23:327-36

17. Kaprio J, Koskenvuo M. 1990. Cigarette smoking as a cause of lung cancer and
coronary heart disease. A study of smoking-discordant twin pairs. Acta
Geneticae Medicae Et Gemellologiae 39:25-34
18. Muniandy M, Heinonen S, Yki-Järvinen H, Hakkarainen A, Lundbom J, et al.
2017. Gene expression profile of subcutaneous adipose tissue in BMIdiscordant monozygotic twin pairs unravels molecular and clinical changes associated with sub-types of obesity. International Journal of Obesity (2005)
41:1176-84

40. Greenhill C. 2017. Liver: FGF21 - the cause of having a 'sweet tooth'? Nature
reviews. Endocrinology 13:378

19. Ollikainen M, Ismail K, Gervin K, Kyllönen A, Hakkarainen A, et al. 2015.
Genome-wide blood DNA methylation alterations at regulatory elements and
heterochromatic regions in monozygotic twins discordant for obesity and liver
fat. Clinical Epigenetics 7:39

42. Chang T-T, Chen J-W. 2016. Emerging role of chemokine CC motif ligand 4
related mechanisms in diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease: friends or
foes? Cardiovascular diabetology 15:117

20. Kibble M, Saarinen N, Tang J, Wennerberg K, Mäkelä S, Aittokallio T. 2015.
Network pharmacology applications to map the unexplored target space and
therapeutic potential of natural products. Natural Product Reports 32:1249-66
21. Camacho DM, Collins JJ, Collins KM, Powers RK, Costello JC. 2018. NextGeneration Machine Learning for Biological Networks. Cell 173:1581-92
22. Gusev A, Ko A, Shi H, Bhatia G, Chung W, et al. 2016. Integrative approaches
for large-scale transcriptome-wide association studies. Nature Genetics 48:24552
23. Mancuso N, Shi H, Goddard P, Kichaev G, Gusev A, Pasaniuc B. 2017.
Integrating Gene Expression with Summary Association Statistics to Identify
Genes Associated with 30 Complex Traits. American Journal of Human Genetics 100:473-87
24. Piening BD, Zhou W, Contrepois K, Röst H, Gu Urban GJ, et al. 2018. Integrative Personal Omics Profiles during Periods of Weight Gain and Loss. Cell
Systems 6:170.e8
25. Zeevi D, Korem T, Zmora N, Israeli D, Rothschild D, et al. 2015. Personalized
Nutrition by Prediction of Glycemic Responses. Cell 163:1079-94
26. Khan SA, Virtanen S, Kallioniemi OP, Wennerberg K, Poso A, Kaski S. 2014.
Identification of structural features in chemicals associated with cancer drug
response: a systematic data-driven analysis. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England)
30:497
27. Bunte K, Leppäaho E, Saarinen I, Kaski S. 2016. Sparse group factor analysis
for biclustering of multiple data sources. Bioinformatics 32:2457-63
28. Kibble M, Khan SA, Saarinen N, Iorio F, Saez-Rodriguez J, et al. 2016.
Transcriptional response networks for elucidating mechanisms of action of
multitargeted agents. Drug Discovery Today 21:1063-75
29. Antuna-Puente B, Feve B, Fellahi S, Bastard JP. 2008. Adipokines: the missing
link between insulin resistance and obesity. Diabetes & Metabolism 34:2-11

41. Sok Kuan W, Kok-Yong C, Farihah Hj S, Fairus A, Soelaiman I-N. 2016. The
Relationship between Metabolic Syndrome and Osteoporosis: A Review. p.
347. Basel: MDPI AG

43. Trøseid M, Seljeflot I, Arnesen H. 2010. The role of interleukin-18 in the
metabolic syndrome. Cardiovascular Diabetology 9:11
44. Lan T, Morgan DA, Rahmouni K, Sonoda J, Fu X, et al. 2017. FGF19, FGF21,
and an FGFR1/β-Klotho-Activating Antibody Act on the Nervous System to
Regulate Body Weight and Glycemia. Cell Metabolism 26:709-18.e3
45. Babaknejad N, Nayeri H, Hemmati R, Bahrami S, Esmaillzadeh A. 2018. An
Overview of FGF19 and FGF21: The Therapeutic Role in the Treatment of the
Metabolic Disorders and Obesity. Hormone and metabolic research = Hormonund Stoffwechselforschung = Hormones et metabolisme 50:441-52
46. Zhang F, Yu L, Lin X, Cheng P, He L, et al. 2015. Minireview: Roles of
Fibroblast Growth Factors 19 and 21 in Metabolic Regulation and Chronic
Diseases. Molecular endocrinology (Baltimore, Md.) 29:1400-13
47. Rottensteiner M, Pietilainen KH, Kaprio J, Kujala UM. 2014. Persistence or
change in leisure-time physical activity habits and waist gain during early
adulthood: a twin-study. Obesity (Silver Spring, Md.) 22:2061-70
48. Leskinen T, Sipila S, Alen M, Cheng S, Pietilainen KH, et al. 2009. Leisuretime physical activity and high-risk fat: a longitudinal population-based twin
study. Int J Obes (Lond) 33:1211-8
49. Pietilainen KH, Kaprio J, Borg P, Plasqui G, Yki-Jarvinen H, et al. 2008.
Physical inactivity and obesity: a vicious circle. Obesity (Silver Spring, Md.)
16:409-14
50. Tsai SY, Rodriguez AA, Dastidar SG, Del Greco E, Carr KL, et al. 2016.
Increased 4E-BP1 Expression Protects against Diet-Induced Obesity and Insulin Resistance in Male Mice. Cell reports 16:1903-14
51. Yamaoka M, Maeda N, Nakamura S, Mori T, Inoue K, et al. 2013. Gene
expression levels of S100 protein family in blood cells are associated with insulin resistance and inflammation (Peripheral blood S100 mRNAs and metabolic
syndrome). Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 433:450-5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
M.Kibble et al.

52. Muratsu J, Iwabayashi M, Sanada F, Taniyama Y, Otsu R, et al. 2017. Hepatocyte Growth Factor Prevented High-Fat Diet-Induced Obesity and Improved
Insulin Resistance in Mice. Scientific Reports 7:130

74. Jackson MA, Verdi S, Maxan M-E, Shin CM, Zierer J, et al. 2018. Gut
microbiota associations with common diseases and prescription medications in
a population-based cohort. Nature Communications 9:2655

53. Tsai VWW, Husaini Y, Sainsbury A, Brown DA, Breit SN. 2018. The MIC1/GDF15-GFRAL Pathway in Energy Homeostasis: Implications for Obesity,
Cachexia, and Other Associated Diseases. Cell Metab 28:353-68

75. Reijnders D, Goossens Gijs H, Hermes Gerben DA, Neis Evelien PJG, van der
Beek Christina M, et al. 2016. Effects of Gut Microbiota Manipulation by Antibiotics on Host Metabolism in Obese Humans: A Randomized Double-Blind
Placebo-Controlled Trial. Cell Metabolism 24:63-74

54. Joehanes R, Just AC, Marioni RE, Pilling LC, Reynolds LM, et al. 2016.
Epigenetic Signatures of Cigarette Smoking. Circulation. Cardiovascular genetics 9:436-47

76. Sonnenburg JL, Bäckhed F. 2016. Diet-microbiota interactions as moderators
of human metabolism. Nature 535:56-64

55. Philibert RA, Beach SR, Brody GH. 2012. Demethylation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor as a biomarker for nascent smokers. Epigenetics 7:13318

77. Menni C, Jackson MA, Pallister T, Steves CJ, Spector TD, Valdes AM. 2017.
Gut microbiome diversity and high-fibre intake are related to lower long-term
weight gain. International Journal of Obesity (2005) 41:1099-105

56. Prince C, Hammerton G, Taylor AE, Anderson EL, Timpson NJ, et al. 2018.
Investigating the impact of cigarette smoking behaviours on DNA methylation
patterns in adolescence. Human Molecular Genetics:ddy316-ddy

78. Cardinale BJ, Duffy JE, Gonzalez A, Hooper DU, Perrings C, et al. 2012.
Biodiversity loss and its impact on humanity. Nature 486:59-67

57. Burris HH, Baccarelli AA, Byun H-M, Cantoral A, Just AC, et al. 2015.
Offspring DNA methylation of the aryl-hydrocarbon receptor repressor gene is
associated with maternal BMI, gestational age, and birth weight. Epigenetics
10:913-21
58. Brandstätter O, Schanz O, Vorac J, König J, Mori T, et al. 2016. Balancing
intestinal and systemic inflammation through cell type-specific expression of
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor. Scientific Reports 6:26091
59. Quilley J. 2010. Oxidative stress and inflammation in the endothelial dysfunction of obesity: a role for nuclear factor kappa B? Journal of hypertension
28:2010-1
60. Baba T, Mimura J, Gradin K, Kuroiwa A, Watanabe T, et al. 2001. Structure
and expression of the Ah receptor repressor gene. The Journal of biological
chemistry 276:33101-10
61. McMillan BJ, Bradfield CA. 2007. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor is activated
by modified low-density lipoprotein. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 104:1412-7
62. Koh GY, Derscheid R, Fuller KNZ, Valentine RJ, Leow SE, et al. 2016.
Circulating adiponectin concentrations are increased by dietary resistant starch
and correlate with serum 25-hydroxycholecalciferol concentrations and kidney
function in Zucker diabetic fatty rats. Nutrition research (New York, N.Y.)
36:311-9

79. Hadrich D. 2018. Microbiome Research Is Becoming the Key to Better Understanding Health and Nutrition. Frontiers in genetics 9:212
80. Zierer J, Jackson MA, Kastenmüller G, Mangino M, Long T, et al. 2018. The
fecal metabolome as a functional readout of the gut microbiome. Nature Genetics 50:790-5
81. Garcia-Perez IP, Posma JMP, Gibson RB, Chambers ESP, Hansen THMD, et
al. 2017. Objective assessment of dietary patterns by use of metabolic
phenotyping: a randomised, controlled, crossover trial. Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology, The 5:184-95
82. Rebholz CM, Lichtenstein AH, Zheng Z, Appel LJ, Coresh J. 2018. Serum
untargeted metabolomic profile of the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) dietary pattern. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
83. Viennois E, Chassaing B. 2018. First victim, later aggressor: How the intestinal
microbiota drives the pro-inflammatory effects of dietary emulsifiers? Gut Microbes:1-4
84. Nettleton JE, Reimer RA, Shearer J. 2016. Reshaping the gut microbiota:
Impact of low calorie sweeteners and the link to insulin resistance? Physiology
& behavior 164:488-93
85. Himmelman C, Rodriguez-Palacios A, Harding A, Lam M, Menghini P, et al.
2018. The Artificial Sweetener Splenda Promotes Gut Proteobacteria,
Dysbiosis, and Myeloperoxidase Reactivity in Crohn’s Disease–Like Ileitis.
Inflammatory Bowel Diseases 24:1005-20

63. Loos RJF, Janssens ACJW. 2017. Predicting Polygenic Obesity Using Genetic
Information. Cell Metabolism 25:535-43

86. Feil R, Fraga MF. 2012. Epigenetics and the environment: emerging patterns
and implications. Nature Reviews. Genetics 13:97-109

64. Khera AV, Chaffin M, Wade KH, Zahid S, Brancale J, et al. 2019. Polygenic
Prediction of Weight and Obesity Trajectories from Birth to Adulthood. Cell
177:587-96.e9

87. Moreno-Indias I, Sanchez-Alcoholado L, Perez-Martinez P, Andres-Lacueva C,
Cardona F, et al. 2016. Red wine polyphenols modulate fecal microbiota and
reduce markers of the metabolic syndrome in obese patients. Food & function
7:1775-87

65. Hotamisligil GS. 2017. Inflammation, metaflammation and immunometabolic
disorders. Nature 542:177-85
66. Weisberg SP, McCann D, Desai M, Rosenbaum M, Leibel RL, Ferrante AW.
2003. Obesity is associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue.
The Journal of Clinical Investigation 112:1796-808
67. Xu H, Barnes GT, Yang Q, Tan G, Yang D, et al. 2003. Chronic inflammation
in fat plays a crucial role in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance. The Journal of Clinical Investigation 112:1821-30
68. Khan SA, Leppäaho E, Kaski S. 2016. Bayesian multi-tensor factorization.
Machine Learning 105:233-53
69. Ammad-Ud-Din M, Khan SA, Malani D, Murumagi A, Kallioniemi O, et al.
2016. Drug response prediction by inferring pathway-response associations
with kernelized Bayesian matrix factorization. Bioinformatics 32:i455-i63
70. Ammad-Ud-Din M, Khan SA, Wennerberg K, Aittokallio T. 2017. Systematic
identification of feature combinations for predicting drug response with Bayesian multi-view multi-task linear regression. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England)
33:i368
71. Bogl LH, Kaye SM, Rämö JT, Kangas AJ, Soininen P, et al. 2016. Abdominal
obesity and circulating metabolites: A twin study approach. Metabolism: Clinical and Experimental 65:111-21
72. Jones MJ, Fejes AP, Kobor MS. 2013. DNA methylation, genotype and gene
expression: who is driving and who is along for the ride? Genome Biology
14:126
73. Valdes AM, Walter J, Segal E, Spector TD. 2018. Role of the gut microbiota in
nutrition and health. BMJ 361:k2179

88. Etxeberria U, Arias N, Boque N, Macarulla MT, Portillo MP, et al. 2015.
Reshaping faecal gut microbiota composition by the intake of trans-resveratrol
and quercetin in high-fat sucrose diet-fed rats. The Journal of nutritional biochemistry 26:651-60
89. Grosso G. 2018. Effects of Polyphenol-Rich Foods on Human Health. Nutrients 10
90. van der Valk ES, Savas M, van Rossum EFC. 2018. Stress and Obesity: Are
There More Susceptible Individuals? Current Obesity Reports 7:193-203
91. van Dongen J, Nivard MG, Willemsen G, Hottenga J-J, Helmer Q, et al. 2016.
Genetic and environmental influences interact with age and sex in shaping the
human methylome. Nature Communications 7:11115
92. Hollands GJ, French DP, Griffin SJ, Prevost AT, Sutton S, et al. 2016. The
impact of communicating genetic risks of disease on risk-reducing health behaviour: systematic review with meta-analysis. BMJ (Clinical research ed.)
352:i1102
93. Nichols JAA, Grob P, Kite W, Williams P, de Lusignan S. 2017. Using a
genetic/clinical risk score to stop smoking (GeTSS): randomised controlled trial. BMC research notes 10:507
94. Jebb
S.
2017.
Dusting
off
Foresight’s
obesity
report.
https://foresightprojects.blog.gov.uk/2017/10/04/dusting-off-foresights-obesityreport/
95. Kaprio J. 2013. The Finnish Twin Cohort Study: an update. Twin research and
human genetics : the official journal of the International Society for Twin Studies 16:157-62

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Integrative machine learning approach applied to obesity

96. Heinonen S, Buzkova J, Muniandy M, Kaksonen R, Ollikainen M, et al. 2015.
Impaired Mitochondrial Biogenesis in Adipose Tissue in Acquired Obesity.
Diabetes 64:3135-45
97. Naukkarinen J, Heinonen S, Hakkarainen A, Lundbom J, Vuolteenaho K, et al.
2014. Characterising metabolically healthy obesity in weight-discordant
monozygotic twins. Diabetologia 57:167-76
98. Kotronen A, Peltonen M, Hakkarainen A, Sevastianova K, Bergholm R, et al.
2009. Prediction of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and liver fat using metabolic and genetic factors. Gastroenterology 137:865-72
99. Bedogni G, Bellentani S, Miglioli L, Masutti F, Passalacqua M, et al. 2006.
The Fatty Liver Index: a simple and accurate predictor of hepatic steatosis in
the general population. BMC gastroenterology 6:33
100.Berntzen B, Jukarainen S, Kataja M, Hakkarainen A, Lundbom J, et al. 2018.
Physical activity, cardiorespiratory fitness, and metabolic outcomes in
monozygotic twin pairs discordant for body mass index. Scandinavian Journal
of Medicine & Science in Sports 28:1048-55
101.Loh PR, Danecek P, Palamara PF, Fuchsberger C, Y AR, et al. 2016. Reference-based phasing using the Haplotype Reference Consortium panel. Nat
Genet 48:1443-8
102.Das S, Forer L, Schonherr S, Sidore C, Locke AE, et al. 2016. Next-generation
genotype imputation service and methods. Nat Genet 48:1284-7
103.Auton A, Brooks LD, Durbin RM, Garrison EP, Kang HM, et al. 2015. A
global reference for human genetic variation. Nature 526:68-74
104.MacArthur J, Bowler E, Cerezo M, Gil L, Hall P, et al. 2017. The new
NHGRI-EBI Catalog of published genome-wide association studies (GWAS
Catalog). Nucleic acids research 45:D901
105.Turcot V, Lu Y, Highland HM, Schurmann C, Justice AE, et al. 2018. Proteinaltering variants associated with body mass index implicate pathways that control energy intake and expenditure in obesity. Nature Genetics 50:26-41
106.Fraga MF, Ballestar E, Paz MF, Ropero S, Setien F, et al. 2005. Epigenetic
differences arise during the lifetime of monozygotic twins. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102:10604-9
107.Davis S DP, Bilke S, Triche, Jr. T, Bootwalla M. 2018. methylumi: Handle
Illumina methylation data. R package version 2.28.0.
108.Teschendorff AE, Marabita F, Lechner M, Bartlett T, Tegner J, et al. 2013. A
beta-mixture quantile normalization method for correcting probe design bias in
Illumina Infinium 450 k DNA methylation data. Bioinformatics 29:189-96
109.Johnson WE, Li C, Rabinovic A. 2007. Adjusting batch effects in microarray
expression data using empirical Bayes methods. Biostatistics (Oxford, England) 8:118-27
110.Wahl S, Drong A, Lehne B, Loh M, Scott WR, et al. 2017. Epigenome-wide
association study of body mass index, and the adverse outcomes of adiposity.
Nature 541:81-6
111.Pietiläinen KH, Ismail K, Järvinen E, Heinonen S, Tummers M, et al. 2016.
DNA methylation and gene expression patterns in adipose tissue differ significantly within young adult monozygotic BMI-discordant twin pairs. International Journal of Obesity (2005) 40:654-61
112.Gao X, Jia M, Zhang Y, Breitling LP, Brenner H. 2015. DNA methylation
changes of whole blood cells in response to active smoking exposure in adults:
a systematic review of DNA methylation studies. Clinical Epigenetics 7:113
113.Bollepalli S, Kaye S, Heinonen S, Kaprio J, Rissanen A, et al. 2018. Subcutaneous adipose tissue gene expression and DNA methylation respond to both
short- and long-term weight loss. International Journal of Obesity (2005)
42:412-23
114.Bogl LH, Maranghi M, Rissanen A, Kaprio J, Taskinen MR, Pietilainen KH.
2011. Dietary omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid intake is related to a protective high-density lipoprotein subspecies profile independent of genetic effects:
a monozygotic twin pair study. Atherosclerosis 219:880-6
115.Bogl LH, Pietilainen KH, Rissanen A, Kangas AJ, Soininen P, et al. 2013.
Association between habitual dietary intake and lipoprotein subclass profile in
healthy young adults. Nutrition, metabolism, and cardiovascular diseases :
NMCD 23:1071-8
116.Seppo Virtanen AK, Suleiman A. Khan, Samuel Kaski. 2012. Bayesian Group
Factor Analysis. Proc. AISTATS. J. Mach.Learn. Res. W&CP 22:1269–77
117.Arto Klami SV, Eemeli Leppäaho, and Samuel Kaski,. 2015. Group Factor
Analysis. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND
LEARNING SYSTEMS 26:2136-47

118.Tommi Suvitaival JAP, Seppo Virtanen, Samuel Kaski. To Appear. Crossorganism toxicogenomics with group factor analysis. Systems Biomedicine
119.Eemeli Leppäaho SV, Muhammad Ammad-ud-din, Suleiman A Khan, Tommi
Suvitaival, Inka Saarinen, Samuel Kaski. 2017-08-04. GFA: Group Factor
Analysis
Version
1.0.3.
https://cran.rproject.org/web/packages/GFA/index.html

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.19.19015347; this version posted December 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

twin pair 1

1

clinical

genomic

cytokine

methylation

dietary

2 GFA
Color Key
and Histogram

Color Key
and Histogram

Component 25 Orig

Component 23 Orig

Count

400
0

0

0

Count

Count

400 800

400 800

Component 36 Orig

800

1400

Color Key
and Histogram

−3

3

−2

−1

0

1

2

−3

3

Value

Cytokine

Genotype

Methylation

−2

−1

0
Value

Dietary

1

2

3
Clinical

Cytokine

Genotype

Methylation

Dietary
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
FD_diff

CU_diff

FAT_diff

X49_diff

pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair

35
5
28
15
27
37
24
1
7
3
13
22
19
2
32
33
29
31
43
39
34
36
8
21
41
18
11
10
9
6
16
23
14
26
42
38
30
4
40
12
20
17
25

VITK_diff

RIBF_diff

VITD_diff

SUCS_diff

WATER_diff

F18D2CN6_diff

cg08628635.E2F3.$5$_diff

cg24174557.VMP1.$1$_diff

cg13274938.RARA.$1$_diff

cg22044342.P2RX1.$5$_diff

cg15323828.TMEM63A.$1$_diff

cg05575921.AHRR.$7$_diff

cg03432176.CD302.$5$_diff

cg22666015.INPP5D.$5$_diff

cg13869484.SLC2A5.$5$_diff

cg24441810.TMEM177.$5$_diff

hgf_diff

cst5_diff

gdnf_diff

il12b_diff

ccl19_diff

st1a1_diff

il18r1_diff

4ebp1_diff

20
39
42
35
3
40
13
6
19
29
36
25
33
32
34
11
2
23
27
22
38
41
31
28
7
10
15
8
16
17
43
30
12
26
5
24
21
1
18
37
4
9
14
cxcl10_diff

pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair

enrage_diff

cg18098839.GOLIM4.$1$_diff

cg04386400.NA.$5$_diff

cg07059469.ESR1.$5$_diff

cg26814100.MAP7.$5$_diff

cg14817490.AHRR.$7$_diff

cg12332902.ZAP70.$4$_diff

cg19859270.GPR15.$7$_diff

cg15377871.CEBPE.$5$_diff

cg10919522.ELMSAN1.$1$_diff

twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin

10
22
29
33
4
7
35
14
18
34
3
1
2
8
23
5
24
43
26
19
11
40
21
38
37
30
15
9
20
12
42
28
41
13
17
25
39
31
27
16
6
32
36

cg00634542.SLC11A1.$1$_diff

il7_diff

ccl3_diff

ccl4_diff

pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair

fgf21_diff

il18r1_diff

trance_diff

ldl_diff

nt3_diff

opg_diff

dner_diff

cxcl1_diff

hdl_diff

fatp_diff

iafat_diff

total_diff

waist_diff

weight_diff

sport_diff

matsuda_diff

twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
adiponectin_diff

Clinical

Dietary

ogluk0_diff

Methylation

crp_diff

Genotype

hr0_diff

Cytokine

FLI_diff

Clinical

bmi_diff

2

total_diff

1

scfat_diff

0
Value

leisure_diff

−1

bpdiastolic_diff

−2

height_diff

−3

Individual components
Cytokine

Clinical
twin pair 10
twin pair 22
twin pair 29
twin pair 33
twin pair 4
twin pair 7
twin pair 35
twin pair 14
twin pair 18
twin pair 34
twin pair 3
twin pair 1
twin pair 2
twin pair 8
twin pair 23
twin pair 5
twin pair 24
twin pair 43
twin pair 26
twin pair 19
twin pair 11
twin pair 40
twin pair 21
twin pair 38
twin pair 37
twin pair 30
twin pair 15
twin pair 9
twin pair 20
twin pair 12
twin pair 42
twin pair 28
twin pair 41
twin pair 13
twin pair 17
twin pair 25
twin pair 39
twin pair 31
twin pair 27
twin pair 16
twin pair 6
twin pair 32
twin pair 36

Immunometabolism
Component
showing associations
between clinical
and cytokine data.

twin pair 1

iafat_diff
weight_diff
fatp_diff
ldl_diff
waist_diff
adiponectin_diff
hdl_diff
total_diff
sport_diff
matsuda_diff

fgf21_diff
ccl3_diff
il18r1_diff
ccl4_diff
trance_diff
il7_diff
nt3_diff
dner_diff
cxcl1_diff
opg_diff

Cytokine

Clinical
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin

Key

iafat_diff
weight_diff
fatp_diff
ldl_diff
waist_diff
adiponectin_diff
hdl_diff
total_diff
sport_diff
matsuda_diff

fgf21_diff
ccl3_diff
il18r1_diff
ccl4_diff
trance_diff
il7_diff
nt3_diff
dner_diff
cxcl1_diff
opg_diff

−3

−3

0

0

3

Key

3

pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair

1
2
2
3
4
7
3
1
1
3
3
1
2
8
2
5
2
4
2
1
1
4
2
3
3
3
1
9
2
1
4
2
4
1
1
2
3
3
2
1
6
3
3

Methylation

Clinical
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin

Key

ogluk0_diff
leisure_diff
bpdiastolic_diff
total_diff
bmi_diff
scfat_diff
hr0_diff
FLI_diff
crp_diff
height_diff

cg18098839.GOLIM4.$1$_diff
cg10919522.ELMSAN1.$1$_diff
cg19859270.GPR15.$7$_diff
cg12332902.ZAP70.$4$_diff
cg14817490.AHRR.$7$_diff
cg07059469.ESR1.$5$_diff
cg15377871.CEBPE.$5$_diff
cg26814100.MAP7.$5$_diff
cg04386400.NA.$5$_diff
cg00634542.SLC11A1.$1$_diff

−3

−3

0

0

3

Key

3

pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair

2
3
4
3
3
4
1
6
1
2
3
2
3
3
3
1
2
2
2
2
3
4
3
2
7
1
1
8
1
1
4
3
1
2
5
2
2
1
1
3
4
9
1

35
5
28
15
27
37
24
1
7
3
13
22
19
2
32
33
29
31
43
39
34
36
8
21
41
18
11
10
9
6
16
23
14
26
42
38
30
4
40
12
20
17
25
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
pair
Dietary

Methylation

Cytokine

twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin
twin

Key

hgf_diff
gdnf_diff
enrage_diff
ccl19_diff
4ebp1_diff
il12b_diff
cst5_diff
st1a1_diff
cxcl10_diff
il18r1_diff

cg15323828.TMEM63A.$1$_diff
cg22044342.P2RX1.$5$_diff
cg03432176.CD302.$5$_diff
cg24441810.TMEM177.$5$_diff
cg13869484.SLC2A5.$5$_diff
cg13274938.RARA.$1$_diff
cg24174557.VMP1.$1$_diff
cg08628635.E2F3.$5$_diff
cg22666015.INPP5D.$5$_diff
cg05575921.AHRR.$7$_diff

−3

0

3

Key

−3

VITK_diff
NA_diff
CU_diff
F18D2CN6_diff
FAT_diff
RIBF_diff
FD_diff
WATER_diff
VITD_diff
SUCS_diff

0

3

Key

−3

0

3

variable
adiponectin
age
alat
asat
bmi
bpdiastolic
bpsystolic
crp
diabetes
fatkg
fatp
ffmkg
FLI
gender
gluk0
gt
hdl
height
homa
hr0
iafat
igt
insu0
col
ldl
leisure
leptin
LFS
liver fat
liver.fat.%.prediction
liverfat.disc
matsuda
scfat
smoking.current
smoking.former
smoking.never
sport
tg
total
waist
weight
work
year

full description
Fasting plasma adiponectin concentration
Age at sampling
Fasting plasma alanine aminotransferase
Fasting plasma aspartate aminotransferase
Body mass index
Diastolic blood pressure
Systolic blood pressure
C-reactive protein
Presence of diabetes
Fat mass
Percentage body fat
Fat free mass
Fatty Liver Index [Bedogni et al, 2006]
Sex
Fasting plasma glucose concentration
Fasting plasma gamma glutamyl transferase concentration
Fasting plasma high density lipoprotein concentration
Height
HOMA index
Heart rate
Intra-abdominal fat volume
Impaired glucose tolerance
Fasting plasma insulin concentration
Fasting plasma total cholesterol
Fasting plasma low density lipoprotein concentration
Leisure time index [Baecke et al, 1982]
Fasting plasma leptin concentration
Liver fat score [Kotronen et al, 2009]
Liver fat percentage
Liver fat percentage prediction [Kotronen et al, 2009]
Discordant for liver fat
Matsuda index [Matsuda et al, 1999]
Subcutaneous fat volume
Current smoker
Former smoker
Smoking never
Sport index
Fasting plasma triglycerides
Total physical activity index
Waist circumference
Body weight
Work physical activity index
Study year

unit
ng/ml
year
U/l
U/l
kg/m2
mmHg
mmHg
mg/l
0=No, 1=Yes
kg
%
kg
Male=0, Female=1
mmol/l
U/l
mmol/l
cm
beats/min
cm3
mU/l
mmol/l
mmol/l
pg/ml
%
0=No, 1=Yes
cm3
0=No, 1=Yes
0=No, 1=Yes
0=No, 1=Yes
mmol/l
cm
kg

min
max
range
mean
variance
1236.55 9576.3 8339.75 3172.58
22.78
36.1
13.32
30.62
10
103
93
28.93
14
63
49
26.69
19.68
48.58
28.9
27.5
48
96
48
72.22
96
158
62
125.11
1.33 132.76
131.43
19.62
0
2
2
0.02
7.73
69.71
61.98
27.53
10.3
56.3
46
33.52
31.67
73.08
41.41
50.83
0.03
51.54
51.51
3.85
0
1
1
0.53
4
9.8
5.8
5.27
10
195
185
28.69
0.52
3.04
2.52
1.46
152
196.5
44.5
171.26
0.35
7.94
7.59
1.47
44
110
66
70.94
95
5878
5783 1170.69
0
1
1
0.15
1.4
28.8
27.4
6.23
2.7
6.9
4.2
4.52
0.98
5.1
4.12
2.71
1.5
4
2.5
2.81
467.58 77640 77172.42 19330.95
-3.71
3.41
7.12
-1.67
0.14
24.25
24.11
2.94
0.65
13.93
13.28
2.82
0
1
1
0.48
0.84
22.71
21.87
8.64
1072.56 11734.1 10661.54 4208.71
0
1
1
0.31
0
1
1
0.3
0
1
1
0.38
1
5
4
2.73
0.37
4.37
4
1.1
4.62
11.62
7
8.28
65.2
123
57.8
89.76
48.7
127.8
79.1
80.87
1.5
4.88
3.38
2.74
2006
2013
7 2009.51

min_within_pair_difference max_within_pair_difference
2361015.58
60
5644.57
15.7 NA
NA
281.95
0
62
67.28
0
34
28.82
0.06
10.22
90.53
0
22
193.81
0
34
668.13
0
72
0.05
0
2
145.13
0.08
22.77
96.29
0.1
19.2
111.81
0.01
9.76
94.78
0
44.09
0.25 NA
NA
0.49
0
4.2
1066.63
0
107
0.21
0
0.97
102.11
0
6
1.36
0
6
124.15
0
66
1023096.35
23.11
2186.49
0.13
0
1
19.27
0
21.3
0.76
0
2.7
0.67
0
2.8
0.34
0
1.25
362561870.3
510
38361.3
1.58
0.04
4.01
21.09
0.01
15.38
5.74
0.02
10.41
0.26 NA
NA
25.28
0.06
17.78
4351562.18
31.8
3809
0.22
0
1
0.21
0
1
0.24
0
1
1.06
0
3
0.43
0
2.2
2.59
0.12
3.75
166.33
0.1
32
300.13
0.6
29.1
0.68
0
2
5.05 NA
NA

