medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Reliability and validity of the UK Biobank cognitive tests
Chloe Fawns-Ritchie1,2, Ian J Deary1,2*

1

Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK, EH8
9JZ

2

Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK, EH8 9JZ

*Corresponding author:
Ian J Deary
Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh
7 George Square
Edinburgh
EH8 9JZ
Scotland
UK
Telephone: +44 131 650 3452
i.deary@ed.ac.uk

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
UK Biobank is a health resource with data from over 500,000 adults. The participants have been
assessed on cognitive function since baseline. The cognitive tests in UK Biobank are brief and bespoke,
and are administered without supervision on a touchscreen computer. Psychometric information on
the tests is limited. The present study examined their concurrent validity and short-term test-retest
reliability. A sample of 160 participants (mean age=62.59, SD=10.24) completed the UK Biobank
cognitive assessment and a range of well-validated cognitive tests (‘reference tests’). Fifty-two
participants returned 4 weeks later to repeat the UK Biobank tests. Correlations were calculated
between UK Biobank tests and the reference tests. Four-week test-retest correlations were calculated
for UK Biobank tests. UK Biobank cognitive tests showed a range of correlations with their respective
reference tests, i.e. those tests that are thought to assess the same underlying cognitive ability (mean
Pearson r=0.53, range=0.22 to 0.83, p≤.005). Four-week test-retest reliability of the UK Biobank tests
were moderate-to-high (mean Pearson r=0.55, range=0.40 to 0.89, p≤.003). Despite the brief, nonstandard nature of the UK Biobank cognitive tests, some showed substantial concurrent validity and
test-retest reliability. These psychometric results provide currently-lacking information on the validity
of the UK Biobank cognitive tests.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
UK Biobank is a large prospective cohort study that was designed to investigate the health of middleaged and older adults residing in the UK (https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/)1. At baseline (2006-2010),
over half a million participants aged 40 to 70 years attended a UK Biobank clinic and completed a
touchscreen questionnaire which collected information on early life factors, family history of disease,
lifestyle, and health. A cognitive assessment was administered as part of this fully-automated
touchscreen questionnaire. Physical measurements were taken, and blood, saliva and urine samples
were collected in order to genotype participants and to assess biomarkers of disease1. Most
participants also agreed to have their data linked to health records. Subsamples of UK Biobank
participants have undergone repeat testing. One of the repeat studies involved 20,000 participants
returning between 2009 and 2013 to complete the baseline assessment again. Currently, UK Biobank
are conducting an imaging study (started in 2014) in which 100,000 participants are being asked to
complete the baseline assessment again and undergo brain and body scanning. In addition to these
clinic-based studies, subsamples have completed web-based assessments, including web-based
cognitive testing. More information on the data collected at each assessment is reported elsewhere1.
The very large sample size and the breadth of information collected in UK Biobank, and the fact these
data are available to researchers worldwide, makes this dataset a valuable resource for carrying out
research into health and disease in ageing. At the time of writing, 1,463 research groups have applied
to use the UK Biobank data (http://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/approved-research/), and 762 research
reports have been published using these data (https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/published-papers/).
Cognitive function has been assessed in UK Biobank since baseline. The original UK Biobank cognitive
assessment was very brief (approximately 5 minutes). At baseline, almost all participants completed
the Pairs Memory test, a test of visual memory, and the Reaction Time test, a measure of processing
speed. Subsamples also completed tests of working memory (Numeric Memory test), prospective
memory (Prospective Memory), and verbal and numerical reasoning (Fluid Intelligence)1. This test
battery, excluding Numeric Memory, was then administered again at the repeat study that tested
20,000 people. Subsequently, more detailed measures of cognitive function assessing cognitive
domains known to decline with increasing age2 were introduced at the imaging study. The new tests
included tests of verbal declarative memory, executive function, and non-verbal reasoning. To
estimate prior cognitive functioning, a measure of vocabulary was also included, which tends to
remain relatively stable across the age range assessed in UK Biobank2. More information on the
cognitive tests and domains assessed at each UK Biobank assessment are reported in Supplementary
Table S1. The cognitive data, alongside the health, lifestyle, biomarker, genetic, and body and brain
imaging data available in UK Biobank, provide materials for investigating the predictors and
consequences of normal and pathological cognitive decline.
Cognitive functions are typically assessed under standardised conditions by a trained psychological
tester, which may be seen as the gold standard method of cognitive assessment. Probably owing to
the size of the UK Biobank sample, and the magnitude of other data being collected, the method of
cognitive data collection was made efficient via a fully-automated touchscreen assessment. Moreover,
the cognitive tests used in UK Biobank were brief measures, and were administered unsupervised1.
Some of the UK Biobank cognitive tests were specifically designed for use in UK Biobank, whereas
others were adapted versions of commonly-used tests which have been modified for use at the fullyautomated touchscreen assessment.
Before the UK Biobank cognitive tests can be used with confidence to investigate healthy and
pathological age-related cognitive changes, the psychometric properties of these tests should be
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

investigated in more detail. One study3 examined the stability (test-retest reliability) of original UK
Biobank tests over a four year interval between the baseline study and repeat study. It found that
Fluid Intelligence (correlation between baseline and repeat r = 0.65) and Reaction Time (r = 0.54)
showed substantial stability3. However, the test-retest reliability of Pairs Matching was low (r = 0.19)3.
The first aim of the present study was to examine the concurrent validity of the enhanced UK Biobank
cognitive tests that are being administered to UK Biobank participants at the imaging study. An
independent sample of participants who had not taken part in UK Biobank was recruited. They were
administered the enhanced UK Biobank cognitive assessment. In addition, they were administered a
battery of well-validated, standard cognitive tests; hereinafter we will call these ‘reference tests’. The
concurrent validity of the UK Biobank tests was investigated by correlating scores on the UK Biobank
tests with scores on the reference tests. For each of the UK Biobank tests, we chose a reference test
that we judged was assessing the same underlying cognitive domain. We predicted that the
correlations between UK Biobank tests and reference tests that assessed a similar cognitive domain
should show higher correlations than those between UK Biobank tests and reference tests that
assessed different cognitive domains.
The second aim of the present study investigated whether a component of general cognitive ability (g)
was present in the correlations among the unsupervised UK Biobank tests, and whether any such g
component correlated highly with a measure of general cognitive ability created using the reference
tests administered by a trained tester under standardised conditions. One of the most replicated
findings in psychological research is that performance on tests of cognitive function are positively
correlated4-7. Principal component analysis (PCA) is often used to create a general measure of
cognitive ability by combining scores on a wide range of cognitive tests into one composite general
ability score. This composite score, which is created by saving scores based on the first unrotated
principal component, typically accounts for about 40% of the variance in a wide range of different
cognitive tests8,9. Lyall et al.3 investigated whether a general cognitive ability component could be
extracted from the UK Biobank cognitive tests administered at baseline. In a PCA model including
Reaction Time, Pairs Matching, Fluid Intelligence, and Numeric Memory, the first unrotated principal
component accounted for 40% of the variance and the individual test scores all loaded at ≥ 0.49 on
this component3. The enhanced UK Biobank cognitive assessment includes all baseline tests as well as
more detailed tests introduced at the web-based and imaging studies (Supplementary Table S1). The
present study expanded the work carried out by Lyall et al.3 and examined the covariance structure of
the enhanced UK Biobank cognitive tests. Measures of general cognitive ability, created using
completely different sets of tests of cognitive function have been found to correlate highly (r ≥ 0.77) in
one study6 and almost perfectly (r ≥ 0.99) in another5. The present study predicted that the correlation
between a g component created using the UK Biobank tests and a g component created using the
reference tests would be high (e.g., r > 0.7).
The third aim of this study was to characterise the test-retest stability of all UK Biobank cognitive tests.
Scores on reliable cognitive tests should be relatively stable over a short interval. Typical test-retest
intervals are usually between 2-4 weeks. Lyall et al.3 tested the stability of the original UK Biobank
tests over a 4 year interval. The test-retest interval in Lyall et al.3 was much longer than typical testretest intervals, and could have included ageing effects, and, therefore, this might not be a useful
indicator of the shorter-term stability of these tests. No one has examined the test-retest reliability of
the newer UK Biobank tests.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods
Participants
Participants were identified through the University of Edinburgh Volunteer Panel and Join Dementia
Research (https://www.joindementiaresearch.nihr.ac.uk/home?login). Both are databases of
volunteers who are interested in taking part in research. Potential participants who were aged 40 to
80 years old—similar to the age range used in UK Biobank—and who were able to travel to the
Psychology Department at the University of Edinburgh, were contacted and invited to take part in this
study. UK Biobank participants and people with a diagnosis of dementia or mild cognitive impairment
were not eligible for this study. A total of 160 participants were recruited. Informed content was
obtained for all participants. This study received ethical approval from the University of Edinburgh
Psychology Research Ethics Committee (reference number 2-1718/3). The methods reported in this
study are in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations.
Materials
UK Biobank cognitive test battery
UK Biobank provided a stand-alone version of the UK Biobank cognitive test battery that was
administered at the UK Biobank imaging study. To make the testing session as similar as possible to
the UK Biobank clinic study sessions, the present study used the same touch screen monitor and
computer setup as that which is used at the UK Biobank clinics’ imaging sessions. The UK Biobank
cognitive assessment was designed to be fully-automated and the tests were administered
unsupervised. There are UK Biobank staff in the clinic but participants are expected to sit and work
through the assessment independently. Therefore, in the present study, participants were given brief
oral instructions that they were going to complete some tasks on the computer on their own, and that
they were to follow the instructions on the screen. One author (CF-R) was present in the room while
participants completed the UK Biobank tests, but participants were left to work through the tests on
their own. The tests administered as part of the UK Biobank cognitive assessment are listed in Table 1
and a detailed description of each test’s contents, administration, and scoring is provided in the
Supplementary Methods.
General tests
Brief screening tests of cognitive impairment, such as the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination III
(ACE-III)10, and measures of subjective memory complaints are often applied in studies of normal and
pathological ageing. A cognitive screening test and a subjective memory questionnaire (see Table 1)
were included in the current study to investigate the correlations between the UK Biobank cognitive
tests and frequently-used measures of global cognitive function. Detailed descriptions of these tests
are provided in the Supplementary Methods.
Reference tests
To be able to test the concurrent validity of each UK Biobank test, a battery of standard
neuropsychological tests was administered. For each UK Biobank test, we selected one or more wellvalidated, standard cognitive test that resembles the UK Biobank test in terms of the underlying
cognitive domain thought to be assessed, and in the actual content of the task ( ‘reference tests’). The
reference tests were all administered under standardised conditions, one-to-one, face-to-face, by a
trained tester, strictly following the administration instructions. We note the degree of similarity
between each of the UK Biobank tests and the chosen reference tests varies. Whereas some of the
reference tests use the same items as the UK Biobank tests, others are different versions of the same
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

test, and others still are different tests that are thought to assess the same underlying cognitive ability.
To be clear, some reference tests are better ‘matches’ for the UK Biobank tests than others, which
should temper expectations about the respective UK Biobank-reference tests’ associations. The
reference tests chosen for each UK Biobank test are shown in Table 1. A detailed description of each of
the reference tests’ contents, administration, and scoring is provided in the Supplementary Methods.
No reference test was chosen for the UKB Fluid IQ test because no test was identified by the authors
as a suitable comparator.
Demographic and health questionnaire
Information on age, sex, and education was collected. Participant’s age was calculated from their date
of birth. To measure education, participants were asked, “How many years of full-time education have
you completed?”. General health was assessed by asking participants, “In general, would you say your
health is excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor”, and “Compared to one year ago, how you would
rate your health in general now?”. Participants selected from the following answers: Much better now
than one year ago; somewhat better now than one year ago; about the same; somewhat worse now
than one year ago; much worse now than one year ago.
UK Biobank cognitive assessment questionnaire
The UK Biobank cognitive test battery was designed to be administered unsupervised, and, although
there were staff members working in the UK Biobank clinic during test administration, participants
were expected to work through the cognitive assessment independently without a tester observing.
Because no tester was there to help participants understand the test instructions, the onscreen
instructions for each test must be clear. To assess this, after completing the UK Biobank cognitive
assessment participants were asked, “Did you generally find that the instructions for all the tasks were
clear?”. Participants answered either yes or no. Next, participants were shown screenshots of each UK
Biobank cognitive test and were asked “Were the instructions for this test clear?”. Participants
answered either yes or no.
The UKB Numeric Memory task was designed to assess backward digit span, which involves
participants remembering a sequence of digits and then mentally reversing them in their mind.
However, for this task, all the numbers in the to-be-remembered sequence were presented on the
screen at once. This meant that some individuals were able to get the correct answer by reading the
number sequence from right-to-left and not reversing the digits in their mind. These individuals are
actually performing a forward digit span, which is an easier task. To identify the number of
participants who completed this task forwards or backwards, participants were asked how they
completed this task. The possible options were: read from left-to-right and reversed the digits in your
mind; read from right-to-left and did not need to reverse digits in your mind; a mixture of both;
something different.
Procedure
The study visit for each participant in the present study took place in the Psychology Department at
the University of Edinburgh. All assessments were administered by the same psychology-graduate
tester (CF-R) in a quiet room, one-to-one, free of distractions. After reading the information sheet and
signing the consent form, participants were administered the demographic and health questionnaire,
and then the self-rated memory questionnaire. The testing session took approximately 2.5 to 3 hours
to complete. The test order was counter-balanced. Individuals with even participant ID numbers
completed the UK Biobank tests before completing the M-ACE and reference tests. Individuals with
odd participant ID numbers completed the M-ACE and reference tests first and then completed the UK
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Biobank tests. The UK Biobank questionnaire was administered immediately after completing the UK
Biobank cognitive assessment. Approximately half-way through the session, participants were given a
short break. The test order for participants with odd and even ID numbers is shown in Supplementary
Table S2.
Participants who indicated on the consent form that they would be willing to return for a second study
visit, and who were able to arrange an appointment four weeks (± 1 week) after the first assessment,
returned and completed the UK Biobank cognitive assessment again. Individuals who agreed to return
for a second visit were administered the UK Biobank questionnaire after completing the UK Biobank
tests for a second time.
Statistical analyses
To examine the association between UK Biobank cognitive tests, general tests, and reference tests
with basic demographic characteristics, correlations were calculated between all cognitive tests and
age, sex, years of education, and self-reported general health. For all correlational analyses reported in
this paper, both Pearson r and Spearman rho correlations were calculated. Point-biserial correlations
were calculated for correlations with sex and UKB Prospective Memory, as these are binary variables.
Concurrent validities of the UK Biobank tests were calculated by correlating the UK Biobank cognitive
tests with the general test and reference tests. Partial correlations, adjusting for age, were also
calculated to determine whether the sizes of the associations between UK Biobank cognitive tests and
the general and reference tests remained after controlling for age. The correlation between scores on
WMS-IV Designs I and II was high (r = 0.65, p < .001); therefore, a total score was created by summing
the scores on Designs I and Designs II (WMS-IV Designs Total; max score = 240). Similarly, the
correlation between WMS-IV VPA I and II was high (r = 0.89, p < .001); therefore, a total VPA score was
created by summing the scores on VPA I and VPA II (WMS-IV VPA Total; maximum score = 70).
To investigate whether a measure of general cognitive ability created using UK Biobank cognitive tests
was highly correlated with a measure of general cognitive ability created using some of the wellvalidated reference tests, three measures of general cognitive ability were created using the following
combinations of tests: 1) all UK Biobank tests included in the enhanced assessment administered at
the imaging study; 2) the UK Biobank baseline tests; and 3) a selection of the reference tests. These
measures of general cognitive ability were created by entering cognitive tests scores into a PCA,
checking the eigenvalues and scree plots, and saving the scores on the first unrotated principal
component. Before cognitive test scores were entered into the PCA, test distributions (Supplementary
Fig. S1) were inspected and, where possible, scores with non-normal distributions were transformed.
The specific transformations performed are described below. To reduce the influence of any outliers,
tests scores were winsorized to 3 SD.
General cognitive ability – using 11 reference tests. Scores on the following reference tests were
entered into a PCA: TMT part B (log-transformed), SDMT, WMS-IV Designs Total, WAIS-IV Digit Span
Total (created by summing scores on WAIS-IV Digit Span Forward and Digit Span Backward), D-KEFS
Tower Test, DLRT Choice RT (log-transformed), NIH Toolbox Picture Vocabulary, NART (scores were
reverted and log-transformed), PPVT (scores were reverted and log-transformed), WMS-IV VPA Total,
and COGNITO Matrices score. Eigenvalues and scree plot (Supplementary Fig. S2) indicated two
components. These two components accounted for 56% of the variance in the 11 reference cognitive
tests. Test loadings (unrotated and rotated using oblique rotation) are shown in Supplementary Table
S3. Scores on the first unrotated principal component, which accounted for 35% of the total variance,
were saved and used as a measure of general cognitive ability (g:reference-11).

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

General cognitive ability – using 11 UK Biobank cognitive tests. Scores on the following tests were
entered into a PCA: UKB Pairs Memory (log (x+1) transformed), UKB RT (log-transformed), UKB
Prospective Memory, UKB Fluid IQ, UKB Numeric Memory, UKB TMT part B (log transformed), UKB
Symbol Digit, UKB Picture Vocabulary, UK Paired Associate Learning, UKB Tower Test, and UKB
Matrices. Eigenvalues and scree plot (Supplementary Fig. S3) indicated two components. These two
components accounted for 46% of the variance in the 11 UK Biobank cognitive tests. Test loadings
(unrotated and rotated using oblique rotation) are shown in Supplementary Table S4. Scores on the
first unrotated principal component, which accounted for 34% of the total variance, were saved and
used as a measure of general cognitive ability (g:UKB-11).
General cognitive ability – using 5 UK Biobank cognitive tests. Scores on the following tests were
entered into a PCA: UKB Pairs Memory (log (x+1) transformed), UKB RT (log-transformed), UKB
Prospective Memory, UKB Fluid IQ, and UKB Numeric Memory. Eigenvalues and scree plot
(Supplementary Fig. S4) indicated one component. This component accounted for 38% of the total
variance in the 5 tests. The test loadings are reported in Supplementary Table S5. Scores on this
unrotated principal component were saved and used as a measure of general cognitive ability (g:UKB5).
Correlations between the three measures of general cognitive ability were calculated. The correlations
and age-adjusted correlations between g:reference-11 and each of the UK Biobank cognitive tests
were calculated. We also calculated the correlations and age-adjusted correlations between g:UKB-11
and g:UKB-5 with each of the general and reference tests.
To investigate whether participants thought the instructions for the UK Biobank cognitive tests were
clear, the number and percentage of participants who answered ‘no’ to “Did you generally find that
the instructions for all the tasks were clear?” was calculated. Next, the number and percentage of
participants who reported ‘no’ when asked whether the instructions for each individual UK Biobank
test were clear was calculated.
The number and percentage of participants who reported carrying out a forward digit span, a
backward digit span, a mixture of both, or something else when completing UKB Numeric Memory
was calculated. Between-group analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine whether mean
performance on the UKB Numeric Memory test differed by technique reported.
To measure the short-term stability of the UK Biobank tests, Pearson and Spearman test-retest
correlations were calculated between scores on the UK Biobank tests at Time 1 and Time 2.

Results
Participant characteristics are reported in Supplementary Table S6. A total of 160 participants (mean
age = 62.59, SD = 10.24) completed the full assessment at Time 1. Of these, 52 participants (mean age
= 61.69, SD = 9.70) returned and repeated the UK Biobank tests at Time 2. The mean time to repeat
was 28.88 days (SD = 2.02, range = 26 to 36). The sample used here were relatively highly educated
(mean years of full-time education = 16.19, SD = 2.73), and most reported their health to be very good
(n = 85; 53.1%) or excellent (n = 36, 22.5%). Extended descriptive statistics (n, mean, SD and range) for
each of the cognitive tests administered in this study are reported in Supplementary Table S7.
For all correlations reported throughout this report, both Pearson correlations and Spearman rankorder correlations were calculated. These correlations tended to be very similar, therefore only the
Pearson correlations are reported in the main text. Spearman correlations are reported in the
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

supplementary materials. All correlations carried out for this study, and their exact p-values, are
reported in Supplementary Table S8 (Pearson correlations) and Supplementary Table S9 (Spearman
rank-order correlations).
Correlations between cognitive test scores and demographic and health variables: The Pearson
correlations between each of the UK Biobank tests and age is shown in Table 2. Note that, UKB RT,
UKB TMT part A and UKB TMT part B are measuring response times. On these tests, higher scores
indicate that the participants took longer to complete the tests and therefore higher scores reflect
poorer performance. The score for UKB Pairs Matching is the number of errors made matching all of
the cards and, therefore, a higher score on this test also reflects poorer performance. For all other UK
Biobank tests, higher scores indicate better performance. All UK Biobank tests correlated significantly
with age. In all but one, older individuals performed more poorly on these tests (absolute r = 0.16 to
0.60, p ≤ .040). The exception was UKB Picture Vocabulary where older participants performed better
than younger participants on this test (r = 0.18, p = .022). The strongest age associations were seen for
tests measuring processing speed. Older adults tended to have lower scores on UKB Symbol Digit (r = 0.60, p < .001), and were slower on UKB TMT part A (r = 0.58, p < .001), and UKB TMT part B (r = 0.57,
p < .001). UKB Pairs Matching, UKB Tower test, and UKB Matrices also had absolute correlations of >
0.3 (p < .001) with age.
The Pearson and Spearman rank-order correlations between all cognitive tests and age, sex, years of
education, and general health are shown in Supplementary Tables S10 and S11. Male participants had
lower scores than female participants on UKB PAL (r = -0.28, p < .001), but higher scores on the UKB
Tower Test (r = 0.19, p = .018) and UKB Matrices (r = 0.17, p = .034). Individuals with more years of
education were quicker on UKB TMT parts A (r = -0.18, p = .024) and B (r = -0.21, p = .007), and scored
higher on UKB Picture Vocabulary (r = 0.29, p < .001) and UKB Matrices (r = 0.32, p < .001). None of the
UK Biobank tests were associated with general health.
Associations with general tests
The Pearson correlations between the UK Biobank tests and the general tests are reported in Table 2.
The Spearman rank-order correlations are reported in Supplementary Table S12. Reporting poorer
self-rated memory was associated with more errors on UKB Pairs Matching (r = 0.18, p = .022), being
less likely to correctly touch the orange circle in UKB Prospective Memory (r = -0.18, p = .026), having
lower scores on UKB Fluid IQ (r = -0.17, p = .033) and UKB Symbol Digit (r = -0.24, p = .002), and being
slower on UKB TMT part A (r = 0.31, p < .001).
Except for UKB RT, higher scores on the M-ACE were associated with better performance on all UK
Biobank cognitive tests, with absolute effect sizes of 0.2 or higher. The M-ACE was most strongly
correlated with performance on UKB PAL (r = 0.47, p < .001). UK Picture Vocabulary (r = 0.38, p < .001)
also correlated moderately with the M-ACE.
Associations with reference tests
The Pearson correlations between the UK Biobank cognitive tests and the reference tests are reported
in Table 2. The Spearman rank-order correlations are reported in Supplementary Table S12. The
correlations highlighted in bold in Table 2 (and Supplementary Table S12) reflect the correlations
between the UK Biobank test and the chosen reference test which was judged to be assessing the
same cognitive capability or domain. In going through each UK Biobank cognitive test’s results below
we first describe the correlation with the respective reference test(s), and then we highlight some
correlations with ‘non-reference’ tests that have absolute effect sizes greater than about 0.3.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

UKB Pairs Matching: More errors on UKB Pairs Matching was associated with higher scores on WMS-IV
Designs Total—the reference test for UKB Pairs Matching (r = -0.33, p < .001). UKB Pairs Matching test
was also moderately associated with D-KEFS Tower Test (r = -0.40, p < .001) and COGNITO Matrices (r
= -0.38, p < .001). D-KEFS Tower Test and COGNITO Matrices are both visuospatial reasoning tests. The
correlations between UKB Pairs Matching with D-KEFS Tower Test and COGNITO Matrices suggests this
test may be measuring reasoning and executive function, as well as visual memory.
UKB RT: The DLRT Simple and Choice RT were chosen as reference tests for UKB RT. Slower response
on UKB RT was associated with slower DLRT Simple RT (r = 0.52, p < .001) and DLRT Choice RT (r = 0.43,
p < .001). The SDMT, another measure of processing speed, also correlated moderately with the UKB
RT such that individuals who had quicker responses on UKB RT scored higher, and were therefore
quicker, on the SDMT (r = -0.35, p < .001).
UKB Prospective Memory: There was a small, positive correlation between UKB Prospective Memory
and the chosen reference test, the RMBM Appointments (r = 0.22, p = .005). All other reference tests,
except NART and DLRT Simple RT, had stronger correlations with UKB Prospective Memory than that
reported between UKB Prospective Memory and RMBM Appointments. Correctly answering the UKB
Prospective Memory test on the first attempt was most strongly associated with higher scores on
COGNTIO Matrices (r = 0.41, p < .001) and WMS-IV VPA Total (r = 0.36, p < .001).
UKB Fluid IQ: A number of the general and reference tests correlated positively at r > 0.30 with UKB
Fluid IQ, including M-ACE, PPVT, NIH Toolbox Picture Vocabulary, WMS-IV Designs Total, WAIS-IV Digit
Span Forwards, Backwards, and Sequence, SDMT, TMT part B, and COGNITO Matrices. The strongest
correlations were for WAIS-IV Digit Span Backwards (r = 0.43, p < .001), WAIS-IV Digit Span Sequence (r
= 0.46, p < .001), and COGNITO Matrices (r = 0.38, p < .001), which are tests designed to assess
working memory and reasoning, i.e. cognitive domains which are thought to be fluid abilities.
UKB Numeric Memory: This test correlated positively with the chosen reference test—WAIS-IV Digit
Span. The correlations for WAIS-IV Digit Span Forwards, Backwards and Sequence were 0.43, 0.51, and
0.42, respectively (for all, p < .001). UKB Numeric Memory also correlated moderately with TMT part
B, such that individuals who scored higher on UKB Numeric Memory were quicker on TMT part B (r = 0.48, p < .001). UKB Numeric Memory also had correlations > 0.3 with M-ACE, WMS-IV Designs Total,
WMS-IV VPA Total, SDMT, DLRT Simple RT, and COGNITO Matrices.
UKB TMT part A: UKB TMT part A correlated positively with TMT part A (r = 0.44, p < .001)—the
chosen reference test—and TMT part B (r = 0.46, p < .001). UKB TMT A also correlated highly with the
SDMT, another measure of processing speed, such that individuals who scored higher on the SDMT
were quicker on UKB TMT A (r = -0.47, p < .001).
UKB TMT part B: UKB TMT part B was strongly and positively correlated with the paper-and-pencil
version of the TMT part B (the reference test; r = 0.66, p < .001), and also with TMT part A (r = 0.50, p <
.001). Being quicker on UKB TMT part B was also highly correlated with being quicker on DLRT Choice
RT (r = 0.54, p < .001) and having higher scores on SDMT (r = -0.54, p < .001); both are tests of
processing speed. Both TMT parts A and B had several other moderately strong correlations with other
tests.
UKB Symbol Digit: Higher scores on UKB Symbol Digit were correlated at r = 0.64 (p < .001) with higher
scores on the SDMT, the reference test for UKB Symbol Digit. Better performance on this test also
correlated at > 0.5 with being quicker at TMT part A (r = -0.52, p < .001) and part B (r = -0.56, p < .001),
both of which have a speed component. There were also correlations > 0.4 with WMS-IV Designs
Total, DLRT Choice RT, D-KEFS Tower Test, and COGNITO Matrices.
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

UKB Picture Vocabulary: UKB Picture Vocabulary correlated highly with its three reference tests: 0.83
with the NIH Toolbox Picture Vocabulary, 0.75 with the NART, and 0.74 with PPVT (for all, p < .001).
Higher scores on UKB Picture Vocabulary were associated with higher scores on the M-ACE (r = 0.38, p
< .001) and WMS-IV VPA Total score (r = 0.32, p < .001). These tests have verbal contents.
UKB PAL: UKB PAL was positively correlated with the WMS-IV VPA Total, the reference test for UKB
PAL (r = 0.47, p < .001). There was also a moderate positive correlation between the UKB PAL and MACE (r = 0.47, p < .001), which includes a verbal memory component (e.g., remembering a name and
address). UKB PAL had correlations > 0.3 with NART, NIH Picture Vocabulary, WMS-IV Designs Total,
and TMT part B.
UKB Tower Test: UKB Tower Test correlated positively with its reference test, the D-KEFS Tower Test (r
= 0.40, p < .001). Better performance on the UKB Tower Test was associated with better performance
on SDMT (r = 0.49, p < .001), TMT part B (r = -0.45, p < .001), and WMS-IV Designs Total (r = 0.45, p <
.001). The correlation with SDMT may reflect the fact that the UKB Tower Test was a timed test—
participants were tasked with completing as many Tower trials as possible in 3 minutes—and may
therefore be measuring processing speed as well as executive function. The WMS-IV Designs is a
measure of visuospatial memory. The UKB Tower Test requires participants to mentally move the
hoops on the pegs in their mind, therefore it is likely to also be measuring visuospatial abilities. UKB
Tower Test also correlated at > 0.3 with WAIS-IV Digit Span Sequence, DLRT Choice RT, TMT part A,
and COGNITO Matrices.
UKB Matrices: This test correlated positively at r = 0.57 (p < .001) with the original version of this test;
the COGNITO Matrices. Performance on this test also correlated moderately and positively with SDMT
(r = 0.42, p < .001), WMS-IV Designs Total (r = 0.43, p < .001), WAIS-IV Digit Span Sequence (r = 0.03, p
< .001), DLRT Choice RT (r = -0.36, p < .001), TMT part B (r = -0.38, p < .001), and D-KEFS Tower Test (r
= 0.36, p < .001); these are tests that were designed to assess cognitive domains thought to be fluid.
Partial correlations adjusting for age
The age-adjusted correlations between the UK Biobank tests and the general and reference tests are
reported in Supplementary Table S13 (Pearson correlations) and Supplementary Table S14 (Spearman
correlations). After controlling for age, none of the correlations between self-rated memory and the
UK Biobank tests were significant. The exception was the correlation between self-rated memory and
UKB TMT part A, which remained significant, though reduced in size (r = 0.31; age-adjusted r = 0.17).
All correlations between M-ACE and the UK Biobank tests were smaller—though most remained
significant—when adjusting for age, except for the correlation between M-ACE and UKB Picture
Vocabulary, which became stronger (r = 0.38; age-adjusted r = 0.43). The correlations between UKB
Tower Test (r = 0.20; age-adjusted r = 0.12) and UKB Matrices (r = 0.22; age-adjusted r = 0.14) with the
M-ACE were no longer significant when adjusting for age.
Generally, the age-adjusted correlations between the UK Biobank tests and the reference tests tended
to be smaller than the raw correlations, though the difference between the raw correlations and the
age-adjusted correlations was small. The largest differences were seen for the correlations between
the following UK Biobank tests with their respective reference tests: UKB TMT part B (r = 0.66; ageadjusted r = 0.55), UKB Symbol Digit (r = 0.64; age-adjusted r = 0.45), UKB Pairs Matching (r = -0.33;
age-adjusted r = -0.19), and UKB TMT part A (r = 0.44; age-adjusted r = 0.24). For all other correlations
between UK Biobank cognitive tests and the reference tests, the change in the strength of the
correlation between the raw correlations and the age-adjusted correlations was ≤ 0.07.
Measures of general cognitive ability
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The correlation between a measure of general cognitive ability created using 11 well-validated
reference tests (g:reference-11) and 11 UK Biobank tests (g:UKB-11) was r = 0.83 (p < .001; ageadjusted r = 0.79, p < .001). The correlation between g:reference-11 and a measure of general ability
created using the five UK Biobank baseline tests (g:UKB-5) was r = 0.74 (p < .001; age-adjusted r = 0.69,
p < .001).
Sensitivity analysis: The UKB Picture Vocabulary and UKB Matrices tests shared items with the NIH
Toolbox Picture Vocabulary and the COGNITO Matrices tests. To check whether the high correlation
found between g:reference-11 and g:UKB-11 was because of this overlap in items, another measure of
general cognitive ability was created using the same tests as in g:reference-11, but excluding scores on
the COGNITO Matrices and NIH Toolbox Picture Vocabulary (g:reference-9). The results of a PCA using
9 reference tests are reported in the Supplementary materials (scree plot of the eigenvalues is shown
in Supplementary Fig. S5; the results of the PCA are reported in Supplementary Table S15). The
correlations between g:reference-9 and g:UKB-11 (r = 0.85, p < .001; age-adjusted r = 0.78, p < .001)
and between g:reference-9 and g:UKB-5 (r = 0.73, p < .001; age-adjusted r = 0.67, p < .001) were
similar in size to that found when using g:reference-11.
Correlations between g:reference-11 and UK Biobank tests: Correlations and age-adjusted correlations
between g:reference-11 and each of the UK Biobank tests are reported in Supplementary Table S16
(Pearson correlations) and Supplementary Table S17 (Spearman rank-order correlations). All UK
Biobank cognitive tests correlated with this measure of general cognitive ability, such that higher
scores on g:reference-11 were associated with better performance on the UK Biobank cognitive tests
(p < .001). UKB RT had the lowest correlation with g:reference-11 (r = -0.29, p <.001), whereas UKB
TMT part B had the strongest correlation (r = -0.62, p < .001). Other UK Biobank tests which correlated
positively with general cognitive ability at > 0.5 were UKB Fluid IQ (r = 0.55, p < .001), UKB Numeric
memory (r = 0.55, p < .001), UKB Symbol Digit (r = 0.54, p < .001), UKB Tower Test (r = 0.52, p < .001)
and UKB Matrices (r = 0.58, p < .001). This makes the important point that, although each individual
test is often associated with a specific cognitive domain, all of the tests are loaded, to different
extents, on general cognitive ability.
The age-adjusted Pearson correlations between g:reference-11 and UK Biobank tests (Supplementary
Table S16) tended to be weaker than the raw correlations, except for the correlation between
g:reference-11 and UKB Picture Vocabulary, which became stronger (raw r = 0.43, p < .001; ageadjusted r = 0.58, p <.001).
Correlations between g:UKB-11 and g:UKB-5 with the general and reference tests: The correlations and
age-adjusted correlations between general cognitive ability created using the UK Biobank tests (g:UKB11 and g:UKB-5) and the general tests and reference tests are shown in Supplementary Tables S18
(Pearson correlations) and S19 (Spearman rank-order correlations). Higher scores on g:UKB-11 were
associated with better performance on all the general and reference tests, except for self-rated
memory and the NART which were not significantly associated with g:UKB-11. Higher g:UKB-11 score
was most strongly related to better performance on SDMT (r = 0.68, p < .001), TMT part B (r = -0.64, p
< .001), and WMS-IV Designs Total (r = 0.63, p < .001), suggesting that the general cognitive ability
measure created using all UK Biobank tests is influenced by speed of processing.
When adjusting for age, some of the associations between g:UKB-11 and the reference tests reduced
in strength (e.g., the correlation with tests of speed, executive function, and reasoning), whereas
others became stronger (e.g., correlations with vocabulary tests, RMBM Appointments, and WAIS-IV
Digit Span). However, when adjusting for age, all test except self-rated memory were associated with
g:UKB-11 such that a better g:UKB-11 score was associated with better test scores on the general and
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

reference tests. Whereas there was no association between g:UKB-11 and the NART when calculating
raw correlations (r = 0.10, p > .05), there was a moderate and positive association between g:UKB-11
and the NART when adjusting for age (age-adjusted r = 0.35, p < .001).
Higher scores on g:UKB-5 were also associated with better performance on the general and reference
tests, except the NART, which was not associated with g:UKB-5. Again, the association between
g:UKB-5 and the NART became significant when adjusting for age (r = 0.31, p < .001). Generally, the
correlations seen between g:UKB-5 and the reference tests were lower than those seen between
g:UKB-11 and the reference tests.
UK Biobank questionnaire
Clear test instructions: The number and percentage of participants who thought the UK Biobank tests
were unclear is reported in Supplementary Table S20. A total of 8 (5.5%) participants reported that
they thought the UK Biobank test instructions in general were unclear. Nearly one quarter of
participants (n = 35, 24.1%) reported that they thought the instructions for the UKB Tower Test were
not clear. Participants generally thought the instructions for UKB RT, UKB Picture Vocabulary and UKB
Matrices were clear. Only 3 (2.1%), 2 (1.4%), and 1 (0.7%) participants, respectively, reported that the
instructions for these tests were not clear.
UKB Numeric Memory technique: Of the 141 individuals who were asked about the technique used to
complete the Numeric memory test, only 20 (14.2%) participants reported that they performed the
UKB Numeric Memory test as a backward digit span (e.g., read from left-to-right and reversed the
digits in their mind). Most (n = 102; 72.3%) performed a forward digit span (e.g., read from right-toleft and did not reverse the digits in their mind). The remaining participants (n = 19; 13.5%) reported
using a mixture of both techniques. Participants who did a backward digit span (mean = 6.70, SD =
1.08) had a slightly lower mean score on UKB Numeric Memory than those who did a forward digit
span (mean = 6.92, SD = 1.24) or those who did a mixture of both (mean = 7.11, SD = 1.25). However, a
between-group ANOVA revealed that UKB Numeric Memory scores did not differ by technique used (F
(2, 136) = 0.518, p = .602).
Test-retest reliability
Table 3 reports the means and SDs for all of the UK Biobank tests at Time 1 and Time 2 in a subsample
of participants (n = 52) who completed the UK Biobank tests for a second time after a mean interval of
28.88 days (SD = 2.02). Generally, mean scores were higher at Time 2 than at Time 1; however, mean
performance was significantly better at Time 2 compared to Time 1 only for UKB RT (t(51) = 3.22, p =
.002), UKB Fluid IQ (t(50) = 2.26, p = 0.03), and UKB Symbol Digit (t(51) = 3.37, p = .001). The effect size
for the difference between mean score at Time 1 and Time 2 ranged from negligible (Cohen’s d = 0.00)
to moderate (Cohen’s d = 0.47). UKB Fluid IQ (Cohen’s d = 0.32), UKB RT (Cohen’s d = 0.45) and UKB
Symbol Digit (Cohen’s d = 0.47) may be the most prone to repeat testing effects.
The test-retest reliabilities (Pearson and Spearman rank-order correlations) for each UK Biobank test
are reported in Table 3. This table also contains some of the test-retest correlations reported
elsewhere for some of the reference tests. UKB Pairs Matching had the lowest Pearson test-retest
correlation (r12 = 0.41, p = .003). Test-retest reliability was high for UKB Picture Vocabulary (r12 = 0.89,
p < .001) and UKB TMT B (r12 = 0.78, p < .001). Test-retest correlations for all other UK Biobank tests
were moderate-to-high (r12 = 0.43 to 0.61). The test-retest reliability found here for the UK Biobank
tests tended to be lower than those reported elsewhere for the reference tests. For example, the testretest reliability for WMS-IV VPA I and VPA II was r12 = 0.79 and r12 = 0.81, respectively11, whereas the
test-retest correlation for UKB PAL was r12 = 0.45. The SDMT has been reported to have a test-retest
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

reliability of 0.80 over a 30 day test-retest interval12, whereas the test-retest reliability here for UKB
Symbol Digit was found to be r12 = 0.58. Whereas the test-retest reliability reported here for the UKB
Tower Test was relatively low (r12 = 0.43), this test-retest correlation was in line with that previously
reported for the D-KEFS Tower Test (r12 = 0.4413).

Discussion
Using a sample of 160 middle-aged and older adults this study investigated the concurrent validity and
test-retest reliability of the UK Biobank cognitive tests. This study had three main findings: 1)
generally, the UK Biobank tests correlated moderately-to-strongly with well-validated, standard tests
designed to assess the same cognitive domain; 2) a measure of general cognitive ability can be created
using all of the UK Biobank tests, as well as using only the five UK Biobank baseline tests, and these
measures of general cognitive ability are highly correlated with a measure of general cognitive ability
created using a battery of standard cognitive measures; 3) most of the UK Biobank tests showed
moderate-to-high test-retest reliability, but these tended to be lower than those reported elsewhere
for the reference tests.
Concurrent validity
Prior to discussing this part of the study’s results, we acknowledge that most tests load strongly on the
general cognitive component. Therefore, we are aware that, when we write about tests correlating
because they both assess the same ‘cognitive domain’ or ‘underlying cognitive ability’—especially with
respect to UK Biobank tests versus their reference tests—it might also be in part or in whole because
they both assess general cognitive ability (g). It is an error not to acknowledge this, as Schmidt14
discusses in detail. However, mindful of the fact that there is variance beyond g accounted for at the
level of cognitive domains and specific abilities9, and the fact that readers will wish to know how the
largely-undocumented UK Biobank tests relate to better-validated tests, we think the references we
make to domains and specific abilities are appropriate.
Despite the brief, and non-standard nature of the UK Biobank cognitive assessment, the UK Biobank
tests tended to correlate moderately-to-strongly with well-validated cognitive tests that were
designed to assess the same cognitive domain or specific ability. Thus, the UK Biobank cognitive tests
mostly showed modest to good concurrent validity. The UK Biobank Picture Vocabulary test showed
especially good concurrent validity. This test correlated very highly (r = 0.83) with the original version
of this test—the NIH Toolbox Picture Vocabulary test—and also with another picture vocabulary test,
the PPVT (r = 0.74). In a validation study of the NIH Toolbox15, the correlation between the NIH
Toolbox Picture Vocabulary test and the PPVT was r = 0.78, which is very similar to the correlation
found here between the UK Biobank version of this test and the PPVT (r = 0.74). In addition, the UKB
Picture Vocabulary test was also found to correlate highly (r = 0.75) with the NART, which is often used
as an estimate of crystallised cognitive ability16,17. The results from this study suggest that the UK
Biobank Picture Vocabulary is a valid measure of crystallised ability and may be used as an estimate of
premorbid cognitive functioning.
Other tests with good concurrent validity are the UKB TMT part B and UKB Symbol Digit tests, which
both correlated at greater than 0.6 with the original, paper-and-pencil versions of these tests12,18. The
UKB RT score, which is created from a mean of only 4 trials, correlated at 0.52 with DLRT Simple RT
and at 0.43 with DLRT Choice RT, which are more detailed tests of reaction time created from a mean
of 20 trials and 40 trials, respectively19.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A previous study using UK Biobank baseline data20 found that scores on the UKB Fluid IQ test showed
mean values that remained relatively stable between the ages of 40 and 60 years and therefore did
not show the age-related decline across the adult lifespan that is the hallmark of fluid ability2.
Hagenaars et al.20 suggested that, because of the relative stability in middle-age, UKB Fluid IQ may in
fact be measuring a more crystallised ability. In the present study, we did not include a reference test
for UKB Fluid IQ because we were unable to identify an appropriately similar test. However, we found
that UKB Fluid IQ was negatively correlated with age and that it correlated most strongly (r ≥ 0.38)
with tests of working memory (WAIS-IV Digit Span), and non-verbal reasoning (COGNTO Matrices)—
tests thought to assess more fluid abilities2. Therefore, this test may be more fluid than was suggested
by Hagenaars et al.20, although it did also have moderate correlations with the three standard
vocabulary tests.
The UKB PAL test exhibited negative skew (Supplementary Fig. S1) suggesting that most participants
find this test quite easy. Despite the negative skew, scores on the UKB PAL test were found to
correlate moderately with the M-ACE (r = 0.47), a brief assessment of global cognitive functioning that
is designed to identify individuals who may have possible cognitive impairment21. The UKB PAL test
may be a useful test to identify individuals in UK Biobank who may have a possible cognitive
impairment.
General cognitive ability
Previous research has found that measures of general cognitive ability (g) created using entirely
different sets of cognitive tests correlate very strongly5,6. In the present study, we compared whether
measures of general cognitive ability created using the brief, bespoke UK Biobank tests that were
administered unsupervised correlated strongly with a measure of general cognitive ability created
using well-validated tests administered under standardised conditions. The correlations between
general cognitive ability created using well-validated tests and general cognitive ability created using
the UK Biobank tests were high (r = 0.83 for a measure created using all 11 UK Biobank tests; r = 0.74
for the 5 baseline UK Biobank tests). These correlations were lower than those reported in one study5
that found that three measures of general cognitive ability created using three entirely different
cognitive test batteries correlated nearly perfectly (r ≥ 0.99). However, the correlations found here are
in line with another study6 that compared five different measures of general cognitive ability and
found that they correlated at r ≥ 0.77. This suggests that, despite the brief and non-standard nature of
the UK Biobank cognitive assessment, a measure of general cognitive ability can be created using
these tests. UKB TMT part B, UKB Matrices, UKB Numeric Memory, and UKB Fluid IQ all correlated at ≥
0.55 with the general measure of cognitive ability created using the standardised tests, suggesting
these UK Biobank tests load strongly on general cognitive ability.
Reliability
Test-retest correlations for UKB Picture Vocabulary (r12 = 0.89) and UKB Trail Making Test part B (r12 =
0.78) were high, and comparable to those reported for other, well-validated, measures of picture
vocabulary (NIH Toolbox Picture Vocabulary intraclass correlation = 0.81; 95% CI 0.73 to 0.8715; and
PPVT r12 = 0.9422) and for the original paper-and-pencil version of the TMT part B (r12 = 0.8923).
Therefore, the UK Biobank Picture Vocabulary test and TMT part B show good stability. Good shortterm stability of cognitive tests is especially important when examining longitudinal change. Low
stability means that any differences in scores over time may not be due to real change in test
performance, but due to error of measurement. Generally, the test-retest reliability for the UK
Biobank tests was substantial; however, they tended to be lower than those reported for the
reference tests, suggesting that the UK Biobank tests are less stable across time than well-validated
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

tests administered under standardised conditions. The relative brevity of some of the UK Biobank tests
might contribute to the lower reliability. However, UKB Matrices uses the same 15 items as COGNITO
Matrices, and both are administered via a computer and yet the test-retest correlation for UKB
Matrices was r12 = 0.44, whereas the test-retest correlation reported for the COGNTIO Matrices test
was higher, at r12 = 0.7024. It is not clear why the UK Biobank tests have lower test-retest reliability
than other measures of cognitive function.
UKB Pairs Matching had the lowest test-retest reliability (r12 = 0.41). However, the test-retest reliability
reported in this study for UKB Pairs Matching was substantially larger than has previously been
reported for this test using UK Biobank data3,20. Lyall et al.3 calculated the correlation between
performance on the UKB Pairs Matching test at baseline and at the repeat study approximately four
years later and reported a test-retest reliability of r12 = 0.193. The lower test-retest reliability reported
in Lyall et al.3 might be because they used a test-retest interval of over 4 years, which is much longer
than the conventional 2-4 week test-retest interval. Lyall et al.3 reported relatively similar test-retest
correlations for UKB RT (Lyall et al. r12 = 0.543; present study r12 = 0. 55) and UKB Fluid IQ (Lyall et al. r12
= 0.653; present study r12 = 0.61) to that reported this study, despite the different test-retest intervals.
Other psychometric considerations in some UK Biobank cognitive tests
The UKB Numeric Memory test was designed as a backwards digit span task to assess working
memory—the ability to temporarily store information in short-term memory long enough to
manipulate it17. Backward digit span tasks require individuals to both remember a sequence of
numbers and mentally reverse these numbers in their mind, and this differs from a forward digit span
task where participants are only required to remember a sequence of digits17. Despite the fact that the
UKB Numeric Memory test was designed to assess backward digit span, we found that only 14.2% of
the sample tested in the current study reported performing a backward digit span. All other
participants reported that they either carried out a forward digit span (72.3%), or they used a mixture
of both techniques (13.5%). This means that, for the majority of participants, this test is not assessing
the type of mental performance that it was intended to assess.
This study also found that nearly one-quarter of participants reported that they thought the test
instructions for the UKB Tower Test were unclear. Given that the UK Biobank tests are administered
unsupervised, and participants are expected to sit at a computer in a UK Biobank clinic and work
through these tests independently, it is important that the test instructions are clear and the
participant knows exactly what to do before starting the test proper. The UKB Tower Test had several
pages of instructions. The length of the test instructions might be an important contributor to why
participants reported that the test instructions for UKB Tower Test were unclear. Other UK Biobank
tests with lengthy instructions, including UKB Symbol Digit (9.7%) and UKB TMT (8.3%) also had higher
percentages of participants reporting that the test instructions for these tests were not clear, whereas
test with relatively short instructions, such as UKB Matrices (0.7%) and UKB Picture Vocabulary (1.4%)
tended to have very few participants reporting that they thought the instructions were not clear. All of
these tests, however, had practice examples which will have allowed participants to see what is
involved before starting the task proper, even if they did not fully understand the test instructions
before starting the practice trials.
Advantages and limitations
The main advantage of this study is that the fully-automated UK Biobank cognitive assessment was
compared to a large number of well-validated, standard cognitive tests that were administered under
standardised conditions. This meant that the brief and non-standard UK Biobank cognitive tests were
16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

compared to what many would consider to be the ‘gold standard’ measures of cognitive ability. For
the current study, UK Biobank programmed a stand-alone version of the UK Biobank cognitive
assessment that is currently being administered at the UK Biobank imaging study. UK Biobank also
provided us with a UK Biobank button-box to be used for the UKB RT test and with details about the
computing equipment used at the UK Biobank clinic assessments which enabled us to very closely
mimic the UK Biobank clinic cognitive assessment.
However, there are some limitations to the current study. The sample size is relatively small, especially
for the test-retest sample. The testing conditions in the current study were not identical to the testing
conditions used during the UK Biobank clinic assessments. In the current study, participants were
assessed individually in a quiet room, free of distraction. The UK Biobank assessment centre could be
busy and sometimes noisy (CF-R and IJD both spent a day at one UK Biobank testing centre during
people’s imaging visits). Therefore, in the current study, the UK Biobank tests were administered in a
more usual and standardised psychological testing environment. It is not clear whether the reliability
and validity reported in the current study would differ if the UK Biobank tests had been administered
in a busy and sometimes noisy environment that was seen when the authors visited the UK Biobank
testing centre. In addition to the cognitive assessment administered at the UK Biobank assessment
centre, UK Biobank have also collected cognitive data using a web-based assessment. For the webbased assessment, participants are sent a link, via email, and were to complete the cognitive tests at
home. The testing conditions of the web-based assessment, therefore, were even less controlled than
at the UK Biobank assessment centre. We do not know whether the results of the current study would
generalise to the UK Biobank web-based assessment.
Conclusions
This study examined the concurrent validity and test-retest reliability of the enhanced UK Biobank
cognitive assessment that is currently being administered to UK Biobank participants attending the UK
Biobank imaging study. The UK Biobank cognitive tests are administered using a fully-automated
touch-screen assessment, and participants complete these tests unsupervised. The tests in UK Biobank
tend to be short. They were created specifically for UK Biobank, or were adapted for use in a fullyautomated assessment. The present study found that they showed a range of concurrent validity
coefficients with well-validated, standard tests of cognitive ability, and they tended to have moderateto-good test-retest reliability. UK Biobank is one of the largest and most detailed health resources
available worldwide. This paper provides currently-lacking information on the psychometric properties
of the UK Biobank cognitive tests.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Data availability statement
The dataset generated during the current study are available from the authors on reasonable request.

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

Sudlow, C. et al. UK biobank: an open access resource for identifying the causes of a wide
range of complex diseases of middle and old age. PLoS Medicine 12, e1001779, (2015).
Salthouse, T. A. Selective review of cognitive aging. Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society 16, 754-760, (2010).
Lyall, D. M. et al. Cognitive Test Scores in UK Biobank: Data Reduction in 480,416 Participants
and Longitudinal Stability in 20,346 Participants. PLoS One 11, e0154222, (2016).
Spearman, C. " General Intelligence," objectively determined and measured. Am J Psychol 15,
201-292, (1904).
Johnson, W., Bouchard Jr, T. J., Krueger, R. F., McGue, M. & Gottesman, I. I. Just one g:
Consistent results from three test batteries. Intelligence 32, 95-107, (2004).
Johnson, W., te Nijenhuis, J. & Bouchard Jr, T. J. Still just 1 g: Consistent results from five test
batteries. Intelligence 36, 81-95, (2008).
Carroll, J. B. Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor-Analytic Studies. (Cambridge
University Press, 1993).
Deary, I. J., Harris, S. E. & Hill, W. D. What genome-wide association studies reveal about the
association between intelligence and physical health, illness, and mortality. Curr Opin Psychol
27, 6-12, (2019).
Deary, I. J. Intelligence. Current Biology 23, R673-676, (2013).
Hsieh, S., Schubert, S., Hoon, C., Mioshi, E. & Hodges, J. R. Validation of the Addenbrooke's
Cognitive Examination III in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer's disease. Dement Geriatr
Cogn Disord 36, 242-250, (2013).
Wechsler, D. WMS-IV Technical and Interpretive Manual (Pearson, 2009).
Smith, A. Symbol Digit Modalities Test: Manual. (Western Psychological Services, 1973).
Delis, D. C., Kaplan, E. & Kramer, J. H. D-KEFS Technical Manual. (Pearson, 2001).
Schmidt, F. L. Beyond questionable research methods: The role of omitted relevant research in
the credibility of research. Arch Sci Psychol 5, 32, (2017).
Weintraub, S. et al. Cognition assessment using the NIH Toolbox. Neurology 80, S54-64,
(2013).
Lara, J. et al. A proposed panel of biomarkers of healthy ageing. BMC Medicine 13, 222, (2015).
Mathers, J. C. et al. Guidelines for biomarkers of healthy ageing. (Medical Research Council.,
2015).
Reitan, R. M. & Wolfson, D. The Halstead-Reitan Neuropsychological Test Battery.
(Neuropsychology Press, 1985).
Deary, I. J., Liewald, D. & Nissan, J. A free, easy-to-use, computer-based simple and four-choice
reaction time programme: the Deary-Liewald reaction time task. Behav Res Methods 43, 258268, (2011).
Hagenaars, S. P. et al. Shared genetic aetiology between cognitive functions and physical and
mental health in UK Biobank (N=112 151) and 24 GWAS consortia. Mol Psychiatry 21, 16241632, (2016).
Hsieh, S. et al. The Mini-Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination: a new assessment tool for
dementia. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 39, 1-11, (2015).
Dunn, L. M. & Dunn, D. M. Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, Fourth Edition: Manual.
(Pearson, 2007).
Dikmen, S. S., Heaton, R. K., Grant, I. & Temkin, N. R. Test-retest reliability and practice effects
of expanded Halstead-Reitan Neuropsychological Test Battery. Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society 5, 346-356, (1999).
Ritchie, K. et al. COGNITO: Computerised Assessment of Information Processing. J Psychol
Psychother 4:2, 1000136, (2014).
Wechsler, D. WMS-IV Administration and Scoring Manual. (Pearson, 2010).
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

Wilson, B. A. et al. The Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test - Extended Version. (Thames
Valley Test Company, 1999).
Wechsler, D. WAIS-IV Administration and Scoring Manual. (Pearson, 2010).
Nelson, H. E. & Willison, J. National Adult Reading Test (NART). (Nfer-Nelson Windsor, 1991).
Delis, D. C., Kaplan, E. & Kramer, J. H. Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS)
Examiner's Manual. (The Psychological Corporation, 2001).
Roth, M., Huppert, F. A., Tym, E. & Mountjoy, C. Q. CAMDEX-R: The Cambridge Examination
for Mental Disorders of the Elderly. (Cambridge University Press, 1998).
Cooper, C. Test the Nation: The IQ Book. (BBC Books, 2003).
Hampshire, A., MacDonald, A. & Owen, A. M. Hypoconnectivity and hyperfrontality in retired
American football players. Sci Rep 3, 2972, (2013).
Wechsler, D. WAIS-IV Technical and Interpretive Manual. (Pearson, 2008).

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002204; this version posted July 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acknowledgements
We thank the participants of the present study. We thank UK Biobank for providing us with a standalone version of the UK Biobank cognitive assessment, a UK Biobank button-box, and advice on UK
Biobank computer equipment. We especially thank Alan Young, Keith Anderson and other members of
the NDPH Core Programming and Testing teams for producing a stand-alone version of the UK Biobank
cognitive tests. We thank Michelle Miranthi for her assistance with the data entry. We thank John
Gallacher, Marcus Richards, and our late colleague John Starr, who were members of Work Package 10
of Dementias Platform UK (DPUK) alongside IJD and CF-R.
Join Dementia Research was used to identify potential participants for this study. Join Dementia
Research is funded by the Department of Health and delivered by the National Institute for Health
Research in partnership with Alzheimer Scotland, Alzheimer's Research UK and Alzheimer's Society.
This work was supported by the University of Edinburgh Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive
Epidemiology, part of the cross council Lifelong Health and Wellbeing Initiative, funded by the
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), and Medical Research Council (MRC)
(grant number MR/K026992/1). CF-R and IJD were supported by DPUK, funded through the MRC
(MR/L023784/2).

Author Contributions
CF-R and IJD contributed to the conception and design of this project. C-FR collected the data. CF-R
analysed the data, supervised by IJD. CF-R and IJD wrote and approved the manuscript.

Additional Information
Competing Interests: IJD is a participant in UK Biobank. IJD declares no other potential conflict of
interest. CF-R declares no potential conflict of interest.

21

Table 1. UK Biobank cognitive tests, general cognitive tests, and reference cognitive tests administered in the current study
Cognitive domain
Visual declarative
memory
Processing speed
Prospective memory
Verbal and numerical
reasoning
Working Memory
Executive function
Processing speed
Crystallised ability

Verbal declarative
memory
Executive function
Non-verbal reasoning

UK Biobank tests
Test name
Abbreviation
Pairs Matching Test
UKB Pairs Matching

General and reference tests
Reference test and source
Wechsler Memory Scale IV Designs I and Designs II25

Reaction Time Test

UKB RT

Prospective Memory
Test
Fluid Intelligence Test

UKB Prospective
Memory
UKB Fluid IQ

Deary-Liewald Reaction Time Test Simple Reaction Time and
Choice Reaction Time19
Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test - Extended Version
Appointments26
-

Numeric Memory Test

UKB Numeric Memory

Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale IV Digit Span Forwards,
Backwards and Sequence27

Trail Making Test parts A
and Ba
Symbol Digit
Substitution Test
Picture Vocabularyb

UKB TMT part A
UKB TMT part B
UKB Symbol Digit

Trail Making Test parts A and B18

UKB Picture
Vocabulary

Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, Fourth Edition22
National Adult Reading Test28
NIH Toolbox Picture Vocabulary Test15

Paired Associate
UKB PAL
Learning Testc
Tower Rearranging Testd UKB Tower Test
Matrix Pattern
UKB Matrices
Completione
Subjective memory
Global cognitive function a
Adapted version of the Halstead-Reitan Trail Making Test18
b
Adapted version of the NIH Toolbox Picture Vocabulary Test15
c
Adapted version of the Test the Nation Paired Associate Learning Test31
d
Adapted version of the one-touch Tower of London Test32
e
Adapted version of the COGNITO Matrices test24

Symbol Digit Modalities Test12

Abbreviation
WMS-IV Designs I
WMS-IV Designs II
DLRT Simple RT
DLRT Choice RT
RMBM Appointments
WAIS-IV Digit Span Forwards
WAIS-IV Digit Span Backwards
WAIS-IV Digit Span Sequence
TMT part A
TMT part B
SDMT

Wechsler Memory Scale IV Verbal Paired Associates I and
Verbal Paired Associates II25
Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System Tower Test29
COGNITO Matrices24

PPVT
NART
NIH Toolbox Picture
Vocabulary
WMS-IV VPA I
WMS-IV VPA II
D-KEFS Tower Test
COGNITO Matrices

Self-rated memory questions30
Mini Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination21

Self-rated memory
M-ACE

22

Table 2. Pearson correlations between UK Biobank tests with age, general tests, and reference tests (n = 154-160)
UKB Pairs
matching
Age
General tests
Self-rated
memory
M-ACE

0.339***

0.181*

UKB Prosp
Memory

UKB Fluid
IQ

UKB Numeric
Memory

0.253**

-0.268**

-0.229**

-0.207**

0.144

-0.157

UKB RT

UKB TMT
part A
0.575***

0.307***

UKB TMT
part B

UKB Symbol
Digit

UKB Picture
Vocabulary

UKB PAL

UKB Tower
Test

UKB
Matrices

0.565***

-0.598***

0.181*

-0.163*

-0.454***

-0.474***

0.110

-0.239**

-0.043

-0.106

-0.097

-0.061

0.200*

0.218**

-0.176*

-0.169*

-0.305***

-0.041

0.270**

0.351***

0.338***

-0.252**

-0.285***

PPVT

-0.113

-0.147

0.267**

0.362***

0.169*

-0.045

NART
NIH TB Picture
Vocabulary
RMBM
Appointments
WMS-IV Designs
Total
WMS-IV VPA
Total
WAIS-IV Digit
Span Forwards
WAIS-IV Digit
Span Backwards
WAIS-IV Digit
Span Sequence
SDMT

-0.010

0.015

0.102

0.291***

0.148

0.007

-0.101

-0.044

0.231**

0.346***

0.135

-0.073

-0.136

0.224**

0.179*

-0.331***

-0.243**

0.341***

-0.296***

-0.033

-0.066

DLRT Simple RT
DLRT Choice RT

0.254**

0.376***

0.468***

-0.124

0.008

0.744***

0.256**

0.094

0.264**

-0.028

-0.133

0.748***

0.316***

-0.053

0.119

-0.037

-0.021

-0.057

0.826***

0.326***

0.061

0.183*

0.123

-0.085

-0.176*

0.100

0.119

0.229**

0.148

0.087

0.303***

0.307***

-0.387***

-0.497***

0.484***

0.006

0.342***

0.448***

0.432***

0.363***

0.211**

0.328***

-0.210**

-0.341***

0.210**

0.316***

0.470***

0.185*

0.275***

-0.067

0.234**

0.369***

0.434***

-0.213**

-0.220**

0.165*

0.146

0.047

0.267**

0.187*

-0.118

-0.048

0.265**

0.430***

0.510***

-0.223**

-0.221**

0.177*

0.287***

0.196*

0.234**

0.222**

-0.122

-0.080

0.297***

0.460***

0.417***

-0.268**

-0.392***

0.300***

0.204*

0.298***

0.381***

0.304***

-0.268**

-0.353***

0.255**

0.369***

0.357***

-0.465***

-0.540***

0.636***

0.243**

0.493***

0.424***

0.090

0.521***

-0.189*

-0.253**

-0.324***

0.218**

0.213**

-0.249**

0.014

-0.161*

-0.196*

-0.230**

0.122

0.431***

-0.334***

-0.289***

-0.283***

0.425***

0.514***

-0.470***

-0.041

-0.203*

-0.339***

-0.360***

TMT part A

0.214**

0.225**

-0.226**

-0.155

-0.266**

0.439***

0.499***

-0.519***

-0.121

-0.387***

-0.232**

TMT part B
D-KEFS Tower
Test
COGNITO
Matrices

0.277***

0.248**

-0.306***

-0.303***

-0.481***

0.461***

0.663***

-0.558***

-0.042

-0.345***

-0.451***

-0.383***

Reference tests

-0.001

0.218**

-0.398***

-0.116

0.302***

0.275***

0.241**

-0.280***

-0.372***

0.409***

0.052

0.245**

0.402***

0.360***

-0.380***

-0.149

0.408***

0.383***

0.380***

-0.354***

-0.364***

0.414***

0.248**

0.256**

0.371***

0.574***

23

Correlations shown in bold show the correlations between the UK Biobank tests and the chosen reference test.
UKB, UK Biobank; RT, Reaction Time; Prosp Memory, Prospective Memory; Fluid IQ, Fluid Intelligence; TMT, Trail Making Test; PAL, Paired Associate Learning; MACE, Mini Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination; PPVT, Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test – Fourth Edition; NART, National Adult Reading Test; NIH TB Picture
Vocabulary, NIH Toolbox Picture Vocabulary; RMBM, Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test – Extended Version; WMS-IV, Wechsler Memory Scale – Fourth
Edition; VPA, Verbal Paired Associates; WAIS-IV, Wechsler Adults Intelligence Test – Fourth Edition; SDMT, Symbol Digit Modalities Test; DLRT, Deary-Liewald
Reaction Time Test; RT, Reaction Time; D-KEFS, Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System.
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

24

Table 3. Test-retesta reliability for the UK Biobank cognitive tests (n = 52) and comparable reference tests
UK Biobank tests
UKB Pairs Matching

Time 1
Mean
SD
3.08
2.63

Time 2
Mean SD
2.79
2.07

p
0.427

UKB Reaction time

627.04

98.37

588.87

77.50

0.002

UKB Prospective
Memory
UKB Fluid IQb
UKB Numeric
Memory
UKB TMT part A
UKB TMT part B
UKB Symbol Digit
UKB Picture
Vocabulary

37

71.2%

48

92.3%

-

6.80
7.00

2.05
1.24

7.39
7.00

246.85
475.52
18.85
8.94

90.59
137.51
5.63
1.59

231.98
466.42
21.12
9.08

UKB PAL

7.87

2.22

8.33

Cohen’s d
0.11
0.45
41 (78.8%)c

0.550***

0.585***

0.453**

0.453**

Reference tests
Reference test
Reference test r12
WMS-IV Designs Id
0.73
d
WMS-IV Designs II
0.72
DLRT Simple RTe
0.64
DLRT Choice RTe
0.83
-

Pearson r12
0.409**

Spearman rho12
0.348*

2.14
1.17

0.028
1.000

0.32
0.00

0.607***
0.501***

0.560***
0.517***

WAIS-IV Digit Spanf

0.82

72.22
151.98
4.91
1.55

0.211
0.506
0.001
0.166

0.18
0.09
0.47
0.19

0.478***
0.775***
0.583***
0.887***

0.502***
0.861***
0.603***
0.828***

2.20

0.158

0.20

0.450**

0.542***

TMT part Ag
TMT part Bg
SDMTh
NIH TB Picture
Vocabularyi
PPVTj
WMS-IV VPA Id
WMS-IV VPA IId
D-KEFS Tower testk
COGNITO Matricesl

0.79
0.89
0.80
ICC = 0.81 (95% CI
0.73 to 0.87)
0.94
0.79
0.81
0.44
0.70

UKB Tower Test
10.48
3.36
11.10
3.07
0.202
0.18
0.434**
0.410**
UKB Matrices
9.02
1.79
9.40
1.84
0.153
0.20
0.445**
0.442**
a
Test-retest interval = 28.88 (SD = 2.02) days.
b
n = 51
c
For UKB Prospective memory, the value is n (percentage) agreement for whether participants gave the same response (i.e., correct or incorrect on first
attempt) at Time 1 and Time 2.
d
Test-retest interval mean = 23 days (range 14 to 84 days), n = 24411.
e
Period-free reliability. Participants completed the DLRT Simple RT and DLRT Choice RT twice immediately one after the other, n = 2019.
f
Test-retest interval mean = 22 days (range 8 to 82 days), n = 29833.
g
Test-retest interval mean = 11 months, n = 38423.
h
Test-retest interval mean = 29.40 days, n = 8012.
i
Test-retest interval range 7 to 21 days, n = 8915.

25

j

Test-retest interval mean = 30.1 days (range 14 to 48 days), n = 6722.
k
Test-retest interval mean = 25 days (range 9 to 74 days), n = 10113.
l
Test-retest interval range 2 to 3 weeks, n = 78 24.
p, p-value from a paired-samples t-test comparing scores at Time 1 and Time 2; r12, Pearson correlation between test scores at Time 1 and Time 2; rho12,
Spearman rank-order correlation between test scores at Time 1 and Time 2; UKB, UK Biobank; Fluid IQ, Fluid Intelligence; TMT, Trail Making Test; PAL,
Paired Associate Learning; Matrices, Matrix Pattern Test; WMS-IV, Wechsler Memory Scale – Fourth Edition; DLRT, Deary-Liewald Reaction Time Test; RT,
Reaction Time; WAIS-IV, Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale – Fourth Edition; SDMT, Symbol Digit Modalities Test; NIH TB Picture Vocabulary, NIH Toolbox
Picture Vocabulary Test; PPVT, Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test – Fourth Edition; VPA, Verbal Paired Associates; D-KEFS, Delis-Kaplan Executive Function
System; ICC, Intraclass correlation.
*p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

26

