medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Unsupervised clustering of missense variants in the HNF1A gene using
multidimensional functional data aids clinical interpretation
Sara Althari*, D.Phil, Laeya A. Najmi*, Ph.D., Amanda J. Bennett, Ph.D., Ingvild Aukrust, Ph.D., Jana
K. Rundle Ph.D., Kevin Colclough, B.Sc., Janne Molnes, Ph.D., Alba Kaci, M.S., Sameena Nawaz, MSc.,
Timme van der Lugt^, M.Sc., Neelam Hassanali, D.Phil., Prof. Anders Molven, Ph.D., Prof. Sian Ellard,
Ph.D., Prof. Mark I. McCarthy§, D.M., Prof. Lise Bjørkhaug, Ph.D., Prof. Pål Rasmus Njølstad#, D.M.,
Prof. Anna L. Gloyn#, D. Phil.
From the Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, University of Oxford (SA, AB,
JKR, SN, NH, MIM, ALG); the Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford (MIM,
ALG); the Oxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Churchill Hospital (MIM, ALG) – all in Oxford,
UK; the KG Jebsen Centre for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen
(LAN, IA, JM, AK, AM, PRN); the Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital
(LAN, IA); the Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen (LAN); the Department of Medicine,
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
(LAN); the Hormone Laboratory, Haukeland University Hospital (TVDL); the Department of Paediatrics
and Adolescents, Haukeland University Hospital (AK, JM, PRN); the Department of Clinical Medicine,
University of Bergen (AM); and the Department of Pathology, Haukeland University Hospital (AM) - all
in Bergen, Norway; the University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, UK (KC, SE); University of Exeter,
UK; and the Department of Safety, Chemistry, and Biomedical Laboratory Sciences, Western Norway
University of Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway (LB).
*Althari and Najmi contributed equally to this article.
#Njølstad and Gloyn contributed equally to this article.
^Current address: Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Maastricht University, Maastricht,
Netherlands
§Current address: Human Genetics, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, USA
Corresponding author and person to whom reprint requests should be addressed: Professor Pål R.
Njølstad, D.M., KG Jebsen Centre for Diabetes Research, University of Bergen, Hospital for Children
and Adolescents, Haukeland University Hospital, Haukelandsbakken 15, NO-5021 Bergen, Norway or
pal.njolstad@uib.no

Keywords: Bioinformatics, diabetes, genetics, protein function, rare variants

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Summary
Background Exome sequencing in diabetes presents a diagnostic challenge as
depending on frequency, functional impact and genomic and environmental contexts,
HNF1A variants can cause Maturity-onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY), increase
type 2 diabetes risk, or be benign. A correct diagnosis matters as it informs on
treatment, progression, and family risk. We describe a multi-dimensional functional
dataset of 73 HNF1A missense variants identified in exomes of 12,940 individuals. Our
aim was to develop an analytical framework for stratifying variants along the HNF1A
phenotypic continuum to facilitate diagnostic interpretation.
Methods HNF1A variant function was determined by 4 different molecular assays.
Structure of the multi-dimensional dataset was explored using principal component
analysis, k-means, and hierarchical clustering. Weights for tissue-specific isoform
expression and functional domain were integrated. Functionally annotated variant
subgroups were used to re-evaluate genetic diagnoses in national MODY diagnostic
registries.
Findings HNF1A variants demonstrated a range of behaviours across the assays. The
structure of the multi-parametric data was shaped primarily by transactivation. Using
unsupervised learning methods, we obtained high-resolution functional clusters of the
variants which separated known causal MODY variants from benign and type 2
diabetes risk variants and led to reclassification of 4% and 9% of HNF1A variants
identified in the UK and Norway MODY diagnostic registries, respectively.
Interpretation Our proof-of-principle analyses facilitated informative stratification of
HNF1A variants along the continuum, allowing improved evaluation of clinical
significance, management and precision medicine in diabetes clinics. Transcriptional
activity appears a superior readout supporting pursuit of transactivation-centric
experimental designs for high-throughput functional screens.
Funding Wellcome Trust, National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Oxford
Biomedical Research Centre (BRC), European Research Council, Norwegian Research
Council, Stiftelsen Kristian Gerhard Jebsen, Western Norway Regional Health
Authority, Novo Nordisk Fonden, Royal Norwegian Diabetes Foundation.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Research in context
Evidence before the study
Molecular characterisation pipelines for studying the function of transcription factors
consist primarily of in vitro cellular assays which interrogate transcriptional activity,
protein abundance, localisation of the transcription factor to the nucleus, and binding to
relevant DNA recognition sequences. The experimental techniques used to explore
these mechanisms in vitro vary in robustness and reliability. There exist a wide variety
of reported functional consequences of HNF1A variants in the literature, a gene causing
the most common form of Maturity-onset Diabetes of the Young (HNF1A-MODY).
The standard approach for analysing multi-tiered functional datasets has been to
evaluate each functional parameter independently. Data from functional characterisation
efforts of the HNF-1A protein encoded by the HNF1A gene, support that the degree of
HNF-1A disruption tends to correlate positively with phenotypic severity: MODYcausing protein-altering variants impair HNF-1A transcriptional activity more severely
(≤30% vs. wild-type) than HNF1A variants associated with increased risk for
developing type 2 diabetes in population-specific contexts (40-60% vs. wild-type). Rare
variants which demonstrated intermediate function (between MODY-casual and wildtype) in transactivation and nuclear localisation assays were shown to be associated
with a 6-fold increase in type 2 diabetes predisposition.
Added value of this study
We have developed a proof-of-principle analytical framework for robust and unbiased
variant stratification using multi-dimensional functional follow-up data from a large
number of exome-identified missense variants in HNF1A. Through our analytical
approach we were able to perform a comprehensive assessment of molecular function
by utilising data from as many mechanistic dimensions as possible, avoiding arbitrarily
determined cut-offs based on 1D functional data. Our method facilitated informative
spatial organization of variants along the HNF1A molecular-phenotypic spectrum and
an exploration of the contributions of each in vitro molecular mechanism on meaningful
functional, and therefore clinical, stratification. Further, we were able to perform
sensitive mapping of variant effects on molecular function with phenotypic outcome
using clinical and genetic data from national MODY diagnostic registries of UK and
Norway. This effort allowed us to annotate functional clusters with clinical knowledge
and identify discordant classifications between functional genotype and clinical
phenotype.
Implications of all the available evidence
Our novel approach towards analysing large functional datasets enables sensitive
variant-phenotype mapping and multi-layered variant annotation. It also assists in
prioritisation of functional elements and signatures for Multiplexed Assays of Variant
Effects (MAVEs) whilst they largely remain limited to a single functional readout.
Indeed, comprehensively annotated HNF1A variant clusters can aid in the interpretation
and clinical classification of variants, and can also be utilised to calibrate supervised
variant classification models built with high-throughput-derived experimental data.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Precision medicine increasingly relies on an accurate interpretation of the consequence
of genetic variation. Large-scale multi-ethnic genetic sequencing studies have
challenged our understanding of the relationship between coding variants in Mendelian
disease genes, including those involved in monogenic forms of diabetes such as
HNF1A. Until relatively recently the consensus has been that heterozygous highly
penetrant loss-of-function alleles in HNF1A give rise to a clinically distinct diabetes
subtype, characterised by an early age of onset (typically <25 years), dominant
inheritance, sensitivity to sulphonylureas, non-obesity and termed HNF1A-Maturityonset Diabetes of the Young, (HNF1A-MODY).1 Whilst this genotype-phenotype
correlation is true for a subset of HNF1A variant carriers, it represents one end of a
broad spectrum of HNF1A variant effects.2-4
Genome-wide association and next-generation sequencing studies of randomly
ascertained individuals have challenged binary assumptions and overinflated
pathogenicity estimates regarding variants in HNF1A (and other Mendelian disease
genes) and identified common coding variants of low effect associated with increased
risk of type 2 diabetes.5,6-8 Whole exome sequencing studies in populations of Mexican
American ancestry have revealed a low frequency missense variant (p.E508K) in
HNF1A associated with a five-fold increase in type 2 diabetes prevalence.3 These
complex genomic insights warrant a more nuanced understanding of the phenotypic
manifestation of HNF1A gene variants: some alleles are sufficient for early-onset
sulfonylurea-responsive diabetes (‘HNF1A-MODY’) in some people, some modify
susceptibility for developing complex multifactorial hyperglycemia later in life (type 2
diabetes), and most alleles will likely manifest as benign and neutral.
A correct diabetes diagnosis is important because HNF1A is a clinically actionable gene
where accurate variant interpretation has tangible impact on diabetes progression and
treatment, and implications for family members. Individuals with rare, deleterious
HNF1A alleles and young-onset diabetes (typically <25 years) are sensitive to treatment
with oral sulfonylureas, and can often avoid insulin injections until late in life.9-10
The ubiquity of genetic sequencing means that more novel and incidentally detected
variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUS) will be identified in individuals with
less extreme phenotypes.11 The challenge today is in the ability to map HNF1A
sequence-function relationships at high fidelity, using clinical and molecular
characterisation and analytical pipelines with sensitivity to capture the subtleties along
the pathophysiological continuum. Rigorous functional follow-up of rare sequenceidentified alleles in HNF1A is crucial to making correct assignments of pathogenicity.
Indeed, functional data are considered a strong line of evidence for accurate clinical
diagnostic classification of variants.12 Furthermore, it has been shown that diabetes
severity in HNF1A variant carriers is influenced by allele position in the gene: the
transactivation domain is more tolerant to genetic variation and variants in the latter
exons8-10 are only present in hepatocyte-dominant isoforms and would thus not likely
translate to a strong beta-cell phenotype.13-14
To understand the relationship between HNF1A sequence variation, molecular
dysfunction and clinical phenotype, we characterised the functional impact of a total of

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

73 HNF1A missense variants detected in the exomes of 12,940 multi-ethnic type 2
diabetes cases and controls using standard functional assays. Our primary objective was
to develop an analytical approach that would enable a) an unbiased and comprehensive
evaluation of HNF1A variant behaviour based on multiple molecular mechanisms, and
b) sensitive mapping of multi-dimensional in vitro function to HNF1A glycaemic
phenotypes in vivo. We hypothesised that severity of molecular dysfunction in vitro
(wild-type/wild-type-like, moderate/intermediate impact, loss-of-function/deleterious)
would correlate positively with the severity of clinical phenotype (benign, increased
type 2 diabetes risk, young-onset sulfonylurea-responsive hyperglycaemia).

Methods
The study was approved by the regional ethical committee in Bergen (#2009/2079). We
investigated the function of all rare (MAF <0.5%) and low frequency (0.5%<MAF<5%)
as well as 3 common (MAF >5%) HNF1A nonsynonymous missense variants (n=73)
identified in an exome sequencing study of 12,940 type 2 diabetes cases and controls
from 5 different ancestry groups15 (appendix figure 1; appendix table 1). Collectively,
the variants did not enrich for a type 2 diabetes phenotype under any of the several
variant filters used (MAF <0.1%, conserved and predicted damaging [PolyPhen: SKAT
p=0.30, BURDEN p=0.37]).15

Bioinformatic prediction
The following 4 in silico tools were used to evaluate the pathogenicity of the alleles:
SIFT16, PolyPhen-217, MutationTaster18, Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion
(CADD).19 A CADD cut-off score of 15 was used (>15, pathogenic).

Functional characterisation
The individual effects of the 73 HNF1A missense variants were functionally
investigated by 2 research teams at the Universities of Oxford (UK) and Bergen
(Norway) using 4 different molecular assays (see detailed description of assays below).
Using 2 laboratories allowed us to evaluate the robustness of the functional studies.
Each laboratory assessed a unique set of exome-detected variants (n>30), a shared
subset of exome-detected variants (n=5), shared type 2 diabetes risk variants (n=2) as
well as shared HNF1A-MODY reference variants (positive controls, n=6) (appendix
figure 2). The positive controls were selected on the basis of previously reported
functional data supporting pathogenicity, clinical evidence for causality (sulfonyurea
sensitivity in multiple carriers) and/or genetic (co-segregation) evidence to support their
role pathogenesis (appendix table 2). Plasmid and HNF-1A variant constructs,
transactivation assays, HNF-1A protein abundance, subcellular localization, and DNA
binding are detailed in the appendix.

Dataset preparation for clustering analysis
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The functional datasets were prepared for PCA and clustering analysis by harmonising
the number of variables across tested variants. DNA binding ability was only
interrogated for a small subset of variants, therefore EMSA data were excluded.
Functional data were available in 3 different formats: raw instrument data, data
normalised to internal assay controls (renilla luciferase for TA assay, beta-tubulin/actin
for protein abundance assay, and nuclear:cytosolic ratio of raw protein abundance reads
for nuclear localisation) expressed as biological replicates, and fully processed summary
data normalised to wild-type values. The most statistically suitable input format for
PCA and unsupervised clustering is functional data normalised to internal assay controls
(semi-processed) as intra-assay measurements are harmonised (vs. raw instrument data)
and the organic structure of the data is retained and uninfluenced by assumptions (vs.
wild-type normalised data). Further, this format yielded the most robust clustering
trends based on distribution quality in multivariate space and known and expected
sequence-function relationships. Scores for tissue-specific expression of HNF1A
isoforms (implications for clinical phenotypic manifestation) and functional domain
(varied levels of mutation tolerance) were assigned to each variant (appendix table 3).
For stratification of HNF1A variants with unsupervised learning methods, see appendix
figure 3 and appendix methods.

Variant-phenotype mapping
We surveyed the UK MODY Diagnostic Registry (Royal Devon and Exeter NHS
Foundation Trust, Exeter, UK) and the Norwegian MODY Registry (Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway) for functionally annotated HNF1A missense
variants. A total of 162 and 53 HNF1A missense variants were documented in the UK
and Norwegian diagnostic registries, respectively. Appendix Tables 4 and 5 show the
list of clinical features that were available from the database for alleles which
overlapped with the Oxford-Bergen dataset (not all features available for each variant).
Sequence variants in the Norwegian MODY Registry were classified prior to the
incorporation of the ACMG/AMP guidelines12, as described20 using a 5-tier score
system.21 Sequence variants in the Exeter MODY Registry had been classified using the
ACGS guidelines from 2013 (https://www.acgs.uk.com/quality/best-practiceguidelines/), a 5-tier system used in the UK prior to the advent of the ExAC database
and publication of the ACMG/AMP guidelines.12 Original clinical reports of carriers
were accessed for additional details - particularly where clinical features were sparse such as extra-pancreatic features, vascular complications, additional family history data,
and whether, for example, other MODY genes were next-generation sequenced as part
of a MODY gene panel.22 The classification system adopted by each centre was used for
reclassification of variants from its database.

Role of the funding source
The funders of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data
interpretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding author had full access to all

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for
publication.

Results
In silico & in vitro functional characterisation of variants
To resolve HNF1A genotype-phenotype complexity we sought to evaluate the function
of 73 HNF1A missense alleles detected in the exomes of ~13K multi-ethnic type 2
diabetes cases and controls. The majority of HNF1A variants were identified in both
type 2 diabetes cases and controls, and for the few observed exclusively in type 2
diabetes cases, they were identified with a frequency of either 1 or 2 cases per variant
(appendix table 1). Consensus across multiple in silico tools for predicting
pathogenicity was observed in only 38 of the 73 variants (53%) (appendix table 1).
Based on CADD scores (suggested pathogenicity cut-off >15), ~70% of the missense
variants would be bioinformatically classified as disease-causing (i.e. sufficient to cause
MODY).19
The 73 HNF1A variants were divided between the 2 centres (Oxford and Bergen), and
individually evaluated in terms of functional effect using a common pipeline including
assays measuring variant effect on HNF-1A transcriptional activity, subcellular
localization, protein expression level, and DNA binding ability (appendix figure 1). The
Oxford laboratory investigated variants predominantly of South-East Asian aetiology,
while the Bergen laboratory studied variants mainly of Caucasian aetiology.
The variants demonstrated a wide range of functional effects from benign to damaging
across assays and laboratories with highest variability in transactivation assessments,
particularly through regulation of the rat albumin promoter in HeLa cells (activity range
30-110% in Bergen data [appendix figure 4A; 52-114%, Oxford data, appendix figure
5A]). Transcriptional activity was consistently higher for variants using HNF4A P2
promoter in INS-1 cells (vs. rat albumin promoter in HeLa cells) (activity range 40-90%
Bergen data, 77-158 Oxford data), and most likely due to interference of endogenous
HNF-1A in INS-1 cells (2-4 fold higher basal promoter activity, appendix figures 4B
and 5B). In assessments of protein abundance, >85% of all variants displayed adequate
HNF-1A protein levels (>60%, appendix figures 4C and 5C). Similarly, in nuclear
translocation assays, most variants were predominantly detected in the nucleus (level
>60%), the exception being 5 variants from the Bergen dataset (p.A276D, p.S487N,
p.S604R, p.T441K, p.R131Q) (appendix figure 4D) and 5 from the Oxford dataset
(p.N62S, p.L518F, p.S535R, p.T537M, p.R583Q) displaying <50% level. The subsets
of variants investigated by EMSA demonstrated overall normal DNA binding ability
(~95% of variants >60%), with the exception of one variant from the Bergen dataset
(p.R131Q <50%) and 5 from the Oxford dataset (p.N62S, p.R114C, p.T156M,
p.A161T, p.S535R; <50%) (appendix figures 4E and 5E).

Multi-dimensional data analysis

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

We performed unsupervised stratification of the HNF1A variants using the multidimensional in vitro functional data (semi-processed data normalised to internal
technical controls in each assay) supplemented with scores for isoform expression and
functional domain, with the aim of mapping molecular dysfunction to clinical
phenotype. Each of the 2 datasets were analysed independently to minimise the
interference of inter-laboratory variability with true biological signal. We used principal
component analysis to facilitate informative dissection and visualisation of multiparametric functional data. Eigendecomposition of the data matrices revealed
transcriptional activity as the greatest contributor to data variance and structure (figure
1). To enable variant subgroup discovery for function-phenotype mapping, data were
partitioned using a) k-means clustering in PC space (figure 2) and b) hierarchical
clustering using data coordinates from the total number of informative principal
components for each dataset (figure 3). The analysis yielded variant clusters neatly
organised along the spectrum of HNF1A molecular dysfunction ranging from
neutral/benign to intermediate to damaging. As such, we broadly annotated the known
HNF1A in vivo spectrum, from benign to type 2 diabetes risk-modifying to HNF1AMODY (inherited early-onset hyperglycaemia, likely to be sulfonylurea-responsive
based on MODY registry data), onto the principal components plots and dendrograms
based on the spatial distribution of the variants along the in vitro data-derived functional
spectrum, from wild-type/wild-type-like to intermediate to damaging (figures 2 and 3).

Clinical interpretation of HNF1A variants
To assess the medical diagnostic utility of multi-tiered HNF1A sequence-function
annotations, we examined their mapability to HNF1A clinical phenotype using clinical
data from overlapping HNF1A missense variants in the UK and Norway MODY
diagnostic registries (appendix tables 4 and 5).
Of the 31 total overlapping variants between our functional effort and the UK registry,
19 were classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic and 15 as VUS/likely benign. Three
of the 31 variants (p.G606S, p.H469Y, p.P291S) were present under both
pathogenic/likely pathogenic (where they were considered the MODY-causal variant in
the cases) and VUS/likely benign (cases of co-occurrence with a pathogenic variant in
HNF1A or another MODY gene) classifications. All 15 missense variants categorised as
VUS/likely benign in the UK database demonstrated benign clustering patterns in our
analysis (i.e. did not form subgroups with variants which exhibited impaired function).
However, for 10 of the 19 variants categorised as pathogenic/likely pathogenic in the
UK clinical database (p.A161T, p.A174V, p.G47R, p.G606S, p.H469Y, p.M412T,
p.N62S, P291S, p.R131Q, p.T10M), patterns of in vitro functional clustering patterns
did not match clinical diagnostic variant interpretation. The variants either co-occupied
clusters with known type 2 diabetes risk modifiers (some moderately impacted in
functional assays) or with wild-type/neutral variants. Discordance between functional
genotype and clinical variant interpretation prompted a thorough reassessment of variant
pathogenicity.
The missense variant p.N62S (GnomAD allele count n=33) was consistently dissimilar
to dysfunctional variants in dendrograms and k-means derived clusters from both

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Bergen and Oxford datasets (figures 2 and 3). In the UK MODY registry, it was
identified in an obese individual who was diagnosed with diabetes at age 36 years
(appendix table 6). The patient suffered from microvascular complications (nephropathy
and retinopathy) (appendix table 6). These features are neither inconsistent with
HNF1A-MODY nor a type 2 diabetes phenotype (which might be familial considering
the number of affected individuals in the carrier’s pedigree). HNF1A was the only
MODY gene sequenced in this individual as genetic testing was performed before the
advent of the targeted MODY gene exome sequencing panel which is the current
diagnostic procedure. Alone, p.N62S allele frequency values are sufficient to
confidently re-categorise the variant as VUS/likely benign in the context of MODY
(figure 4).
The variants p.A174V and p.P291S, characterised by both laboratories, were more
difficult to interpret. In the Oxford dataset, these variants formed a separate outlying kmeans-derived cluster (figure 2A). They also occupied an independent subgroup in
hierarchical clustering which branches high on the height scale away from the larger
cluster defined by wild-type and other neutral variants (figure 3A). Atypically high
luciferase renilla values (internal luciferase reporter gene assay control used for
normalisation) were reported for these variants as well as for p.S535R, which have
resulted in a potentially exaggerated reduction in transactivation values for these
variants upon normalisation to the internal assay reference in the Oxford dataset
(appendix figure 5). In the Bergen dataset, these variants also consistently lie in the type
2 diabetes risk modifier zone (not pathogenic for MODY) (appendix figures 2B and
3B). Not only are the activity profiles of p.A174V and p.P291S dissimilar to those of
pathogenic MODY variants, they also occur at a much higher frequency in the general
population (figure 4). In terms of clinical profiles, p.A174V was detected in an
individual with diet-controlled diabetes, which was diagnosed at age 25 years (appendix
table 6). The p.P291S variant was detected in an overweight individual who was
diagnosed with diabetes at age 42 years when it was classified as likely
pathogenic/pathogenic (appendix table 6). In another unrelated individual, p.P291S was
co-expressed with p.G31D and both were annotated as VUS/likely benign in the
diagnostic database.
The clinical diagnostic classifications of p.G606S and p.A161T did not match clustering
patterns in multivariate space (figures 2A and 3A). The variants did not impact HNF-1A
function in the in vitro assays tested. The frequency associated with these variants
(n=12 alleles in gnomAD and n=2 in the Exeter diagnostic clinic) are inconsistent with
those of rare MODY-causing variants. The p.G606S variant has also been found in a
single case of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (on diazoxide treatment) in the UK
registry and in this case was classified as VUS/likely benign.
In clustering analysis, p.H469Y occupied either the same or highly similar (adjacent)
subgroups as wild-type (L27 and I27) (figure 3B). The clinical features of the variant
carrier described in appendix table 6 are consistent with severe young-onset familial
diabetes however, the allele high frequency in gnomAD is 32. Another variant in
HNF1A, p.G207D (not present in gnomAD), was, however, detected in the same
individual. It was identified in 3 other cases (including co-occurrence with p.H469Y)
and was classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic each time it was identified in the UK

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

MODY Registry. Thus, it is likely that p.G207D is the MODY-causal variant and that
p.H469Y is either benign or potentially type 2 diabetes risk-modifying.
Despite alignment between clustering pattern and clinical diagnostic interpretation
(figures 2A and 3A), p.D526N was reclassified from pathogenic/likely pathogenic to
VUS/likely benign. In transactivation assays HNF1A-p.D526N was the most impaired
of all tested exome-identified variants in the Oxford dataset (~50% in HeLa and ~80%
in INS-1 cells; MODY reference variants exhibited transactivation range of 20-40% in
HeLa cells and 30-50% in INS-1 cells in Oxford, with the exception of p.R203H and
p.A116V which yielded transactivation values of 40 and ~60% in HeLa, and ~50 and
~100% in INS-1 assays, respectively). The variant is observed only 5 times in gnomAD,
which suggests it might not be causal for MODY (figure 4). The clinical profile of the
p.D526N carrier did not appear to be consistent with HNF1A-MODY, besides presence
of diabetes in 3 generations of the carrier’s family. The variant carrier had BMI 32.4
kg/m2, diagnosed with diabetes at age 33 years. Other clinical features included
dyslipidaemia, polycystic ovary syndrome, insulin resistance, and hypertension. The
variant was also found in a patient in the Norwegian MODY registry. This patient,
diagnosed at 19 years of age, had normal BMI and C-peptide levels. Type 1 diabetes
autoantibody status and type 1 diabetes risk score were not known. The carrier was
treated with metformin. His mother and the mother's brother also have diabetes (treated
with diet and insulin, respectively). Moreover, the patient was diagnosed with Crohn's
disease. Altogether, this suggests that the carriers might have a combination of type 2
diabetes and HNF1A-MODY, which is not uncommon, or a phenotype representing a
possible continuum of diabetes sub-phenotypes from MODY to type 2 diabetes.5
Further, the variant is expressed in the hepatocyte-dominant isoform and is thus unlikely
to manifest in a strong beta-cell phenotype despite its poor functionality.
Of the 19 HNF1A missense variants that overlapped with the Norwegian MODY
Registry, 18 were classified as benign (class 1), likely benign (class 2), or VUS (class
3), and 1 (p.A276D) as likely pathogenic (class 4). The variant p.A276D consistently
demonstrated impaired HNF-1A function in in vitro assays and clustered with the
MODY reference variants in the unsupervised clustering analyses, supporting the
clinical interpretation of this variant as pathogenic (figures 2B and 3B). It was also
classified as likely pathogenic/pathogenic in the UK MODY registry (figure 4A). All
variants classified as benign/likely benign/VUS (class 1-3) in the Norwegian registry
clustered in the benign or intermediate type 2 diabetes risk modifier zones, with the
exception of 4 variants (p.T354M,p.T441K, p.H582R, p.A586T), which demonstrated
variable trends across clustering methods (figures 2B and 3B).
In k-means clustering along principal component 1 and principal component 2 , these
variants co-occupy a hard cluster with MODY reference variants and variants which
exhibited damaging in vitro function. This is not entirely unexpected for HNF1Ap.T441K which displayed reduced activity (~50% on both promoters in INS-1 and
HeLa cells) and with reduced (<40%) nuclear localization. Although, in hierarchical
clustering, where (dis)similarity between variants was determined using principal
component scores from all principal components contributing to >85% of overall
variance, the trends were more consistent with clinical features and classification;
p.T441K and p.T345M are in the type 2 diabetes risk modifier space of the in vivo

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

continuum, hierarchically distanced from the subcluster defined by the majority of
MODY reference variants and pathogenic damaging variants p.A276D and p.P379T.
The clinical phenotypic data of the p.T354M variant carriers seems more consistent
with type 1 diabetes, and in the p.T441K variant carrier, another variant in HNF1A
(p.G292Rfs) was considered the pathogenic MODY variant (appendix table 7).
Moreover, the population frequency values of p.T441K (gnomAD allele count n=18)
and p.T354M (gnomAD allele count n=7) are slightly higher than expected for rare
disease-causing variants (figure 4). As for p.H582R (gnomAD allele count n=14) and
p.A586T (gnomAD allele count n=20), in hierarchical clustering, these variants form a
subgroup defined by liver isoform variants which demonstrated suboptimal function in
one or more in vitro assays. Much like p.D526N, these variants are likely to be strong
type 2 diabetes risk modifiers. The p.H582R variant carrier was diagnosed with diabetes
age 11 years, she had a BMI of 29 at referral one year later, and C-peptide was
measured to 1000 pmol/l (appendix table 7). The p.A586T variant carrier was diagnosed
at age 11, C-peptide positive (78 pmol/l), GAD, IA2, ZnT8 negative, with no known
family history of diabetes, and treated with insulin (appendix table 7).
Based on this comprehensive variant re-assessment effort, we changed the classification
of 7 out of 31 variants shared with the UK MODY diagnostic database (p.A161T,
p.A174V, p.G606S, p.H469Y, p.N62S, P291S, p.D526N) from likely pathogenic to
VUS/likely benign (figure 4A) and all 5 variants categorised as VUS (class 3) or
VUS/likely benign (class 3-) in the Norway MODY registry (p.Y322C, p.T354M,
p.T441K, p.D526N, and p.H582R) to likely benign (class 2) (figure 4B). This represents
~23% and ~26% of total HNF1A missense variants in the UK and Norway MODY
registries, respectively, that overlap with the functionally interrogated HNF1A missense
variants detected in the exomes of ~13K multi-ethnic type 2 diabetes cases and controls.

Discussion
In this study, we investigated the functional impact of 73 missense variants in HNF1A,
detected by exome sequencing of a multi-ethnic type 2 diabetes case-control cohort
from 4 different mechanistic angles (appendix figures 1 and 2). We present a novel
approach for the analysis of multi-parametric functional data which, in the context of
HNF1A, has enabled i) a holistic assessment of variant behaviour by combining as
many mechanistic dimensions as possible, ii) unbiased stratification along the spectrum
of glycaemic phenotypes ranging from neutral/benign effects, to modification of
multifactorial polygenic diabetes risk, to deleterious and causal for early-onset
sulfonylurea-responsive diabetes, iii) an assessment of the relative contributions of each
functional parameter to molecular variability, and iv) rigorous phenotype mapping and a
thorough re-evaluation of the clinical classifications of overlapping variants in 2
national MODY diagnostic registries
Revisiting clinical variant classifications using HNF1A functional clusters led to the
reclassification of ~4% (7/162) and ~9% (5/53) of all HNF1A missense variants in the
UK and Norwegian MODY diagnostic registries, respectively. Decisions on variant
reclassification were primarily motivated by the juxtaposition of allele frequency values

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in the general population (based on gnomAD allele counts) against their frequency in
the MODY diagnostic registries (highest frequency values belonged to bona fide lossof-function alleles used as MODY reference controls in this study) (figures 4A and B).
Information from other layers of variant annotation such as in vitro function (in the
tested assays), clinical features, family history, ethnicity, in silico prediction all helped
to support reclassification decisions.
Dissection of the individual principal components revealed transactivation to be the
primary contributor to the spatial distribution of multi-parametric data. This suggests
that it might be a superior functional readout and potentially more informative than
other molecular assays for assessing HNF1A variant pathogenicity, and in line with our
previous experience on various functional assays of HNF1A variants.2 Since
transactivation is a relatively all-encompassing measure of transcription factor protein
function, we assumed defects in transcriptional activity would capture defects in its
biochemical prerequisites (protein expression, nuclear transport, DNA binding). While
this may have been the case for the majority of functionally interrogated HNF1A
variants, p.R203H and p.A116V highlight the limitations of this assumption. For these
variants, severely impaired DNA binding ability was not adequately captured by
transactivation. This might explain clustering of p.A116V and p.R203H in the
intermediate zones amongst type diabetes risk modifiers, away from MODY reference
alleles, in both k-means and hierarchical clustering for both centers.
We were able to mitigate error associated with handling data from 2 centers with
methodological differences by benchmarking several HNF-1A variants (benign, type 2
diabetes risk, and MODY) in both laboratories. Discrepancies between the 2 centers
with respect to shared variants can be explained in part by variability in technical
protocols between laboratories and the handling of samples by various individuals over
the course of the study. The relative clustering position of the shared variants is
impacted by the function trends observed in each dataset; whilst the majority of Oxford
variants behaved wild-type-like, the Bergen dataset was more complex as variants
demonstrated a wider range of effects. For instance, for an intermediate variant and a
known type 2 diabetes risk modifier such as p.E508K, the dissimilarity to MODY
reference alleles is more pronounced in the Bergen dataset where there are more data
points between moderately impaired and damaging function.
While important, informative and powerful first lines of evidence, functional
annotations should not to be treated as superior or stand-alone determinants of variant
pathogenicity, which they have not in this study. Indeed, the same variant in a MODY
gene can give rise to a spectrum of clinical phenotypes and exhibit variable penetrance
depending on genomic (regulatory variants in cis or trans, or haplotype epistasis) and
environmental (epigenomic) context which are difficult to capture in functional
assessments.23-28 It is also entirely possible that some of the noise in functional-clinical
mapping is a reflection of the heterogeneity in the clinical phenotypic manifestation of
HNF1A variants.5 Another aspect to consider is the expected variation in clinical
practice between the two centers in the UK and Norway to which diabetes patients have
been referred. It would thus be naive to attempt to draw conclusions regarding variant
effects in vivo from, for example, a single registry observation. The reality of
phenotypic variant manifestation is often complex, context-dependent, non-linear, and

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

spectrum-based. Developing a contextual and thorough understanding of variant
behaviour from diverse functional, clinical, biochemical and demographic datasets is
necessary to facilitate highly accurate interpretation.
The p.D526N variant in HNF1A is a perfect example which illustrates the need for
nuanced evaluations of variant effects despite the availability of multiple layers of
functional annotation from various cell systems. The variant was clinically classified as
pathogenic/likely pathogenic and exhibited impaired in vitro functional activity (shared
a cluster with known MODY-causal variants). Its impact on molecular function would
be consistent with biomarker profiles (hsCRP and glycans) suggestive of HNF1AMODY. Yet, re-evaluation of the clinical features of variant carriers in UK and Norway
diabetes registries, and the fact that it is present only in the longest HNF1A transcript
isoform expressed predominantly in liver, suggest that it is more likely to be a
contributing factor to common multifactorial diabetes rather than a primary driver of
early-onset sulfonylurea-responsive familial hyperglycaemia. Integration of isoform
weights into the unsupervised clustering model helped separate bona fide loss-offunction MODY variants from functional variants expressed in exons 8-10 at the lowest
level of hierarchical clustering.
The recent advent of Multiplexed Assays of Variant Effects (MAVEs) has made it
possible to interrogate the function of every possible sequence perturbation in a single
experimental system.28 Successful and productive implementation of these technologies
requires overcoming the technical and analytical complexities associated with scaling
up, which represent the most significant barrier in the face of closing the chasm between
variant resolution and variant interpretation. A meticulously designed MAVE for
HNF1A would enable functional annotation of all possible missense variants (>12,000)
in a single assay. A high-performance variant classifier built using MAVE-based data
can then be used to generate an exhaustive catalogue of variant effects which
researchers and clinicians can consult upon sequence-identification of an HNF1A
variant.
In conclusion, we have developed a novel analytical framework for robust and unbiased
variant stratification using multi-dimensional functional follow-up data from the largest
number of exome-identified missense variants in HNF1A ever studied. This allowed us
to annotate functional clusters with clinical knowledge and identify discordant
classifications between functional genotype and clinical phenotype. We believe our
pipeline is an important proof-of-principle technical contribution on the path towards
more reliable, scalable, and comprehensive mapping of sequence-function relationships:
a significant factor in making well-informed initial judgements of allele pathogenicity
on the context of individual phenotypic presentations.
Contributors
SA, LB, PRN, and ALG were responsible for the concept and design of the study. SA,
LAN, JKR, AJB, KC, IA, AM, SE, MIM, LB, PRN, and ALG were involved in,
protocol development, data collection, data interpretation, and critically revising the
report. NH, SN, AK, TVDL, and JM were involved in data collection, data

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

interpretation, and critically revising the report. All authors reviewed and approved the
manuscript for submission.

Declaration of Interests
The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the NHS, the NIHR, or the Department of Health. McCarthy has served on advisory
panels for Pfizer, NovoNordisk and Zoe Global, received honoraria from Merck, Pfizer,
NovoNordisk and Eli Lilly, and research funding from Abbvie, Astra Zeneca,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Janssen, Merck, NovoNordisk, Pfizer, Roche, Sanofi
Aventis, Servier and Takeda. As of June 2019, MMcC is an employee of Genentech,
and a holder of Roche stock. Dr. Gloyn reports grants from Wellcome Trust, grants
from NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, grants from Horizon 2020, grants
from NIDDK , grants from MRC , during the conduct of the study; personal fees from
NovoNordisk, personal fees from Merck , outside the submitted work; .

Acknowledgements
ALG is a Wellcome Senior Fellow in Basic Biomedical Science. SE and MIM are
Wellcome Senior Investigators. This work was funded in Oxford by the Wellcome
(095101 [ALG], 200837 [ALG], 098381 [MIM], 106130 [ALG, MIM], 203141 (ALG,
MIM], 203141 [MIM]), Medical Research Council (MR/L020149/1) [MIM, ALG],
European Union Horizon 2020 Programme (T2D Systems) [ALG], and NIH (U01DK105535; U01-DK085545) [MIM, ALG]. The research was funded by the National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Oxford Biomedical Research Centre
(BRC) [ALG, MIM]. This work was funded in Bergen by grants from the European
Research Council (#293574 [PRN]), the Norwegian Research Council (#240413/F20
[PRN]), Stiftelsen Kristian Gerhard Jebsen [PRN], the Novo Nordisk Fonden [PRN],
the Western Norway Health Authorities, (#911745 [PRN]), and the University of
Bergen [IA, LN, PRN].
References
1.
Murphy R, Ellard S, Hattersley AT. Clinical implications of a molecular genetic
classification of monogenic beta-cell diabetes. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2008;4(4):20013.
2.
Najmi LA, Aukrust I, Flannick J, Molnes J, Burtt N, Molven A, et al. Functional
Investigations of HNF1A Identify Rare Variants as Risk Factors for Type 2 Diabetes in the
General Population. Diabetes. 2017;66(2):335-46.
3.
Consortium STD, Estrada K, Aukrust I, Bjorkhaug L, Burtt NP, Mercader JM, et al.
Association of a low-frequency variant in HNF1A with type 2 diabetes in a Latino population.
JAMA. 2014;311(22):2305-14.
4.
Balamurugan K, Bjorkhaug L, Mahajan S, Kanthimathi S, Njolstad PR, Srinivasan N, et
al. Structure-function studies of HNF1A (MODY3) gene mutations in South Indian patients
with monogenic diabetes. Clin Genet. 2016;90(6):486-95.
5.
Flannick J, Florez JC. Type 2 diabetes: genetic data sharing to advance complex disease
research. Nat Rev Genet. 2016;17(9):535-49.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6.
Flannick J, Beer NL, Bick AG, Agarwala V, Molnes J, Gupta N, et al. Assessing the
phenotypic effects in the general population of rare variants in genes for a dominant Mendelian
form of diabetes. Nat Genet. 2013;45(11):1380-5.
7.
Gaulton KJ, Ferreira T, Lee Y, Raimondo A, Magi R, Reschen ME, et al. Genetic fine
mapping and genomic annotation defines causal mechanisms at type 2 diabetes susceptibility
loci. Nat Genet. 2015;47(12):1415-25.
8.
Sagen JV, Bjorkhaug L, Haukanes BI, Grevle L, Molnes J, Nedrebo BG, et al. The
HNF1A mutant Ala180Val: Clinical challenges in determining causality of a rare HNF1A
variant in familial diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2017;133:142-9.
9.
Pearson ER, Starkey BJ, Powell RJ, Gribble FM, Clark PM, Hattersley AT. Genetic
cause of hyperglycaemia and response to treatment in diabetes. Lancet. 2003;362(9392):127581.
10.
Shepherd MH, Shields BM, Hudson M, Pearson ER, Hyde C, Ellard S, et al. A UK
nationwide prospective study of treatment change in MODY: genetic subtype and clinical
characteristics predict optimal glycaemic control after discontinuing insulin and metformin.
Diabetologia. 2018;61(12):2520-7.
11.
Cooper GM. Parlez-vous VUS? Genome Res. 2015;25(10):1423-6.
12.
Richards S, Aziz N, Bale S, Bick D, Das S, Gastier-Foster J, et al. Standards and
guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a joint consensus recommendation of the
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular
Pathology. Genet Med. 2015;17(5):405-24.
13.
Harries LW, Ellard S, Stride A, Morgan NG, Hattersley AT. Isomers of the TCF1 gene
encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha show differential expression in the pancreas and
define the relationship between mutation position and clinical phenotype in monogenic diabetes.
Hum Mol Genet. 2006;15(14):2216-24.
14.
Bellanne-Chantelot C, Carette C, Riveline JP, Valero R, Gautier JF, Larger E, et al. The
type and the position of HNF1A mutation modulate age at diagnosis of diabetes in patients with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-3. Diabetes. 2008;57(2):503-8.
15.
Fuchsberger C, Flannick J, Teslovich TM, Mahajan A, Agarwala V, Gaulton KJ, et al.
The genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes. Nature. 2016;536(7614):41-7.
16.
Kumar P, Henikoff S, Ng PC. Predicting the effects of coding non-synonymous variants
on protein function using the SIFT algorithm. Nat Protoc. 2009;4(7):1073-81.
17.
Adzhubei I, Jordan DM, Sunyaev SR. Predicting functional effect of human missense
mutations using PolyPhen-2. Curr Protoc Hum Genet. 2013;Chapter 7:Unit7 20.
18.
Schwarz JM, Rodelsperger C, Schuelke M, Seelow D. MutationTaster evaluates
disease-causing potential of sequence alterations. Nat Methods. 2010;7(8):575-6.
19.
Kircher M, Witten DM, Jain P, O'Roak BJ, Cooper GM, Shendure J. A general
framework for estimating the relative pathogenicity of human genetic variants. Nat Genet.
2014;46(3):310-5.
20.
Johansson BB, Irgens HU, Molnes J, Sztromwasser P, Aukrust I, Juliusson PB, et al.
Targeted next-generation sequencing reveals MODY in up to 6.5% of antibody-negative
diabetes cases listed in the Norwegian Childhood Diabetes Registry. Diabetologia.
2017;60(4):625-35.
21.
Plon SE, Eccles DM, Easton D, Foulkes WD, Genuardi M, Greenblatt MS, et al.
Sequence variant classification and reporting: recommendations for improving the interpretation
of cancer susceptibility genetic test results. Hum Mutat. 2008;29(11):1282-91.
22.
McDonald TJ, Ellard S. Maturity onset diabetes of the young: identification and
diagnosis. Ann Clin Biochem. 2013;50(Pt 5):403-15.
23.
Montgomery SB, Lappalainen T, Gutierrez-Arcelus M, Dermitzakis ET. Rare and
common regulatory variation in population-scale sequenced human genomes. PLoS Genet.
2011;7(7):e1002144.
24.
Castel SE, Cervera A, Mohammadi P, Aguet F, Reverter F, Wolman A, et al. Modified
penetrance of coding variants by cis-regulatory variation contributes to disease risk. Nat Genet.
2018;50(9):1327-34.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

25.
Manning KS, Cooper TA. The roles of RNA processing in translating genotype to
phenotype. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2017;18(2):102-14.
26.
Nickels S, Truong T, Hein R, Stevens K, Buck K, Behrens S, et al. Evidence of geneenvironment interactions between common breast cancer susceptibility loci and established
environmental risk factors. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(3):e1003284.
27.
Locke JM, Saint-Martin C, Laver TW, Patel KA, Wood AR, Sharp SA, et al. The
Common HNF1A Variant I27L Is a Modifier of Age at Diabetes Diagnosis in Individuals With
HNF1A-MODY. Diabetes. 2018;67(9):1903-7.
28.
Starita LM, Ahituv N, Dunham MJ, Kitzman JO, Roth FP, Seelig G, et al. Variant
Interpretation: Functional Assays to the Rescue. Am J Hum Genet. 2017;101(3):315-25.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure legends
Figure 1 Eigendecomposition of principal components explaining >85% of
variance. (A) Oxford dataset (B) Bergen dataset. TA INS1_P2 and TA HeLa_ALB are
transcriptional activity data from INS-1 cells using HNF4A P2 promoter and from HeLa
cells using rat albumin promoter, respectively. PE = protein expression; nuc loc =
nuclear localisation data.
Figure 2 K-means clustering. HNF1A missense alleles characterised at Oxford (A) and
Bergen (B) in principal component (PC) space.
Figure 3 Hierarchical clustering analysis. HNF1A missense alleles characterised at
Oxford (A) and Bergen (B). WARD minimum variance method was used and analysis
performed using orthogonally transformed functional data from PC1-PC4 (>85%
explained variance) from Oxford dataset and PC1-PC5 (>85% explained variance) form
Bergen dataset. To optimise visualisation of the functionphenotype gradient, some
branches were rotated.
Figure 4 Distribution of functionally annotated HNF1A missense alleles. As a
function of frequency in the (A) UK MODY diagnostic registry and (B) Norway
MODY diagnostic registry on the x axis and reported frequency in the genome
aggregation database (gnomAD) on the y axis. Alleles are coloured on the basis of the
(re)classification scheme on the top right. (C) Frequency of functionally characterised
exome-detected HNF1A missense alleles in gnomAD. The red and orange dashed lines
mark known ultra-rare, MODY pathogenic (allele count ≤2, AF < 0.0008%) and low
frequency type 2 diabetes predisposing allele frequencies (allele count ≤ 121, AF
<0.04%) respectively.

17

A

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
B a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
It is made available under

Figure 1 Eigendecomposition of principal components explaining >85% of variance (A) Oxford dataset (B) Bergen dataset. TA
INS1_P2 and TA HeLa_ALB are transcriptional activity data from INS-1 cells using HNF4A P2 promoter and from HeLa cells using rat
albumin promoter, respectively. PE = protein expression; nuc loc = nuclear localisation data.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A.

neutral

intermediate
damaging

B.

neutral

neutral

intermediate
damaging

Figure 2 K-means clustering of HNF1A missense alleles characterised at Oxford (A) and Bergen (B) in principal component (PC) space.

A.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

neutral

intermediate

damaging

neutral

intermediate

damaging

B.

Figure 3 Hierarchical clustering analysis. HNF1A missense alleles characterised at Oxford (A) and Bergen (B). WARD minimum
variance method was used and analysis performed using orthogonally transformed functional data from PC1-PC4 (>85% explained
variance) from Oxford dataset and PC1-PC5 (>85% explained variance) form Bergen dataset. To optimise visualisation of the functionphenotype gradient, some branches were rotated.

A.

B.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19010900; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

C.

Figure 4 Distribution of functionally annotated HNF1A missense alleles. Using function of frequency in the (A) UK MODY diagnostic
registry and (B) Norway MODY diagnostic registry on the x axis and reported frequency in the genome aggregation database (gnomAD) on the y
axis. Alleles are coloured on the basis of the (re)classification scheme on the top right. (C) Frequency of functionally characterised exomedetected HNF1A missense alleles in gnomAD. The red and orange dashed lines mark known ultra-rare, MODY pathogenic (allele count ≤ 2, AF <
0.0008%) and low frequency type 2 diabetes predisposing allele frequencies (allele count ≤ 121, AF <0.04%) respectively.

