medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Bringing Proportional Recovery into Proportion: Bayesian Hierarchical Modelling of PostStroke Motor Performance

Anna K. Bonkhoff1,2,3*, Thomas Hope4, Danilo Bzdok5,6,7, Adrian G. Guggisberg8, Rachel L.
Hawe9, Sean P. Dukelow9, Anne K. Rehme1, Gereon R. Fink1,2, Christian Grefkes1,2, and Howard
Bowman10, 11

1

Department of Neurology, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany

2

Cognitive Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-3), Research Centre Juelich, Juelich,

Germany
3

Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK

4

Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, UK

5

Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms (MILA), Montreal, Canada

6

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada

7

Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, RWTH Aachen University, 52072 Aachen,

Germany
8

Clinical Neuroscience, University of Geneva, Medical School, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland

9

Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada

10

School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, UK

11

School of Computing, University of Kent, UK

* corresponding author:
Anna K. Bonkhoff
annabonkhoff@gmail.com
Department of Neurology, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Accurate predictions of motor performance after stroke are of cardinal importance for the patient,
clinician, and health care system. More than ten years ago, the proportional recovery rule was
introduced by promising just that: high-fidelity predictions of recovery following stroke based only
on the initially lost motor performance, at least for a specific fraction of patients. However,
emerging evidence suggests that this recovery rule is subject to various confounds and may apply
less universally than assumed by many.
We systematically revisited stroke outcome predictions by casting the data in a less confounded
form and employing more integrative and flexible hierarchical Bayesian models. We jointly
analyzed n=385 post-stroke trajectories from six separate studies – the currently largest overall
dataset of upper limb motor recovery. We addressed confounding ceiling effects by introducing a
subset approach and ensured correct model estimation through synthetic data simulations. Finally,
we used model comparisons to assess the underlying nature of recovery within our empirical
recovery data.
The first model comparison, relying on the conventional fraction of patients called fitters, pointed
to a combination of constant and proportional to lost function recovery. Proportional to lost here
describes the original notion of proportionality, indicating greater recovery in case of a more
pronounced initial deficit. This combination explained only 32% of the variance in recovery, which
is in stark contrast to previous reports of >80%. When instead analyzing the complete spectrum of
subjects, model comparison selected a composite of constant and proportional to spared function
recovery, implying a more significant improvement in case of more preserved function. Explained
variance was at 53%.
Therefore, our data suggest that motor recovery post-stroke may exhibit some characteristics of
proportionality. However, the levels of explanatory value were substantially reduced compared to
what has previously been reported. This finding motivates future research moving beyond solely
behavior scores to explain stroke recovery and establish robust single-subject predictions.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Keywords
Motor outcome post-stroke, Proportional recovery, Bayesian hierarchical models, Probabilistic
modeling, Bayesian model comparison, learning from data

Abbreviations
CeC – Compression enhanced coupling
FM – Fugl Meyer
PPC – Posterior predictive check

Introduction
The science of recovery post-stroke has moved from comprehensive yet mainly anecdotal
descriptions of patients’ trajectories (Newman, 1972; G. Broeks, et al., 1999) to increasingly larger
studies aiming to create robust prediction models for individual outcome. Initial impairment status
crystallized as one of the most predictive features, providing the foundation of the proportional
recovery rule (Prabhakaran et al., 2008). According to this rule, the majority of stroke patients,
considered fitters to the rule, recover about 70% of the initially lost function1 within the first few
months after the initial event. Fitters and non-fitters to this proportional (to lost function) recovery
rule have been defined in several ways in previous studies. For example, by choosing a discrete
initial cut-off score, clustering initial and follow-up scores, or utilizing measures of corticospinal
tract integrity. The proportional recovery rule, developed initially for Fugl Meyer assessment
scores of the upper limb (Kundert et al., 2019), has since been extended to various functional
domains. Numerous studies on recovery post-stroke claim to confirm proportional (to lost
function) recovery of the upper limb (Zarahn et al., 2011; Byblow et al., 2015), the lower limb
(Smith et al., 2017), language (Marchi et al., 2017), and neglect (Winters et al., 2017).
Collectively, these studies consistently report high values of explained variance in cumulatively
more than 500 participants, even as high as 94% (Winters et al., 2015).

1

We use the word “function” to indicate behavioural performance, e.g. of basic motor abilities on a scale such as the
Fugl Meyer.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Very recently, doubt has been placed on these effect size estimates (Hawe et al., 2019a; Hope et
al., 2019). The concerns relate to the problem of mathematical coupling, when correlating an initial
score and amount of change (Lord, 1956; Hayes, 1988; Chiolero et al., 2013). In case of this
correlation, confounding effects arise due to one variable, e.g., change, directly or indirectly
carrying information on the other one, e.g., the initial score. However, our concerns go beyond this
basic observation by identifying a particularly severe coupling confound. This coupling confound
may occur when the second (end) time-point is considerably less variable than the initial time
point, leading to a small variability ratio. Such marked reductions of variability can result from
ceiling effects at the second time-point, as frequently observed in stroke recovery data, based on
the Fugl Meyer assessment (Gladstone et al., 2002).
Importantly, the severity of confounds due to small variability ratios is considerable (Figure 1).
As illustrated, the degenerate regime implies that the make-up of Initial and End, i.e., the numbers
that comprise them, are irrelevant, and indeed, the relationship between Initial and End is
irrelevant. Thus, testing proportional (to lost function) recovery when the variability ratio is very
small is tautological – overwhelming evidence for it will, without question, be found. Because it
is central to our argument, we name the degeneracy induced by a small variability ratio and the
impact of concentration of data towards the ceiling Compression enhanced Coupling.
Once having identified this Compression enhanced Coupling confound, it is essential to consider
whether it can be circumvented to enable an accurate assessment of the proportional recovery
question. The latter is what we aimed to do in this article. Our logic was as follows.
1) The nature of recovery post-stroke cannot be meaningfully evaluated when there is a
substantial ceiling effect at the second time-point (causing a small variability ratio).
2) By reducing data at ceiling, without incurring any new confounds, we can increase the
variability ratio and lift the data set out of the degenerate regime, c.f. black annotations in
Figure 1.
3) In a final step, we may then fit various de-confounded recovery models and perform
model comparisons to assess the underlying mechanisms of stroke recovery.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1. The confounded nature of proportional to lost function recovery assessments when the variability ratio
is small and the resolution of confounds with ground truth simulations. Left (red text): The key correlation used
to quantify proportional to lost function recovery, r(X,(Y-X)), effectively reduces to correlating X with –X when the
variability at time-point one is substantially greater than at time-point two. Middle (surface plot): Full
characterization of change correlations. Critically, the degenerate regime (region in red dashes) is almost entirely flat.
Thus, when the variability of Y is substantially less than the variability of X, the correlation between X and Y-X
degenerates to being very close to -1 in all cases. As a result, overwhelming, but spurious, evidence for recovery
proportional to lost function cannot fail but to be found.
The logic of synthetic data simulations is also shown (black text, arrows, and symbols). The black cross
marks data generated from a ground truth model with known properties and initially without ceiling enforced. The
position the cross marks has r(X,Y-X) and r(X,Y) as strong positive correlations and similar variabilities for X and Y
(i.e., variability ratio around one, its log around zero). This, then, is synthetic data consistent with a proportional to
spared pattern of recovery, similar, for example, to panel [B] of Figure 2. We then simulate the effect of ceiling,
thereby, reducing the variability ratio, which, in turn, causes the data to exhibit a proportional to lost pattern, i.e.,
r(X,Y-X) becomes negative, and it moves in the surface plot (see black dashed arrow) towards the degenerate region;
see black star. In particular, we will be able to show that by discarding data, we can return the synthetic data, via
dotted black arrow, to ground truth position, i.e., black cross. Figure modified from (Hope et al., 2019). Right:
Depiction of subset approach. All data sets are collapsed together for visualization purposes and presented as change
across the two time-points (as per bottom row of Figure 2). We consider two subsets in this paper: FM-initial 10-45
(Fitters only) and FM-initial 0-45 (Fitters & Non-fitters). In both cases, the range from FM-initial 45-66 is excluded,
in order to remove the ceiling. Data in this upper range is, therefore, shown in lighter colour.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In the present study, we revisited data at ceiling by creating subsets, i.e., we excluded a (varying)
range of stroke participants with the highest scores at the Initial time-point. This procedure also
reduced the ceiling effect at the second End time-point (Figure 1). Critically, we validated this
subset procedure in synthetic data experiments (Gelman and Hill, 2006). That is, we generated
data with known ground truth and simulated three candidate explanations of recovery post-stroke
(Figure 2): a) proportional to lost function; b) proportional to spared function; and c) constant
recovery. Proportional to lost function is the familiar pattern, where a more profound initial deficit
implies a more significant recovery. Proportional to spared function is the opposite pattern and
encapsulates the notion that the more preserved the function at time-point one, the greater the
potential for an individual to recover. Constant recovery formalizes the idea that initial severity
has no impact on recovery, which is the same size, whatever the initial functional deficit.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. Various representations of the three forms of recovery we explore: Proportional to lost function (left
column), proportional to spared function (middle column), and constant recovery (right column).
Performance is inspired by the Fugl Meyer (FM) assessment of the upper limb, where 66 is the maximum value,
providing a ceiling. However, the depictions here show the “true” underlying recovery pattern that one would obtain
if there was no ceiling (thus, we extended the scales beyond the maximum). Top row panels (A, B & C) depict
proportional to lost, proportional to spared function, and constant recovery to varying amounts (i.e., 10% proportional
recovery, 20% proportional recovery etc.) under the typical change formulations. The horizontal axis presents initial
FM scores, i.e., X, while the vertical axis stands for the change, i.e., Y-X. Middle row panels (D, E & F) depict the
same linear relationships, but re-expressed as classical standard-form regressions, by merely moving the X variable to
the right-hand side of the equation, and then, rearranging. In contrast to the top row, the vertical axis here represents
the raw end score Y. Either formulation can be fit to the same data, resulting in corresponding intercepts and slopes,
i.e., they can be transformed from one formulation to the other according to the relationships in supplementary
materials section 1. Notably, the resulting variances explained would not typically be the same, since only the change
formulation exhibits mathematical coupling; for a relevant discussion, see section Equality of Variances in
Supplementary Appendix A of (Hope et al., 2019). Bottom row panels (G, H & I) depict one pattern of data that could
arise from each of the recovery patterns. Each line in each plot indicates a single patient’s recovery trajectory, from
the initial score (X), left side, to end score (Y), right side of the plot. For each pattern of recovery, the slope or intercept
used to generate the data is shown; no noise term was included. These slopes or intercept reflect the linear relationship
shown as a red line in the corresponding two panels above. The key correlations, r(X,Y-X) and r(X,Y), that hold are
also shown, along with the relationship between standard deviations of X and Y.

Subsequently, we aimed to assess recovery patterns in empirical stroke data. Therefore, we
aggregated a substantial body of data, i.e., 385 individual post-stroke recoveries, across a range of
representative studies focused on upper limb deficits measured as Fugl Meyer scores (Buch et al.,
2016; Byblow et al., 2015; Feng et al., 2015; Guggisberg et al., 2017; Winters et al., 2015; Zarahn
et al., 2011). We employed state-of-the-art hierarchical Bayesian models, enabling us to
incorporate data from these various sources while accounting for inter-study variability and
explicitly modeling the full probability landscape. Crucially, these models also permitted
conducting overall model comparisons. We considered the three change models mentioned before
and shown in Figure 2 – proportional to lost, proportional to spared, and constant recovery. We
also included classical standard-form linear regression, the most general of the models, which
determined whether linear relationships outside our three candidate models explained the data any
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

better. Lastly, we evaluated how well each of these models explained inter-individual differences
in recovery.
The core objective of this paper was to respond to the confounded nature of assessments of
behavioral recovery from stroke, particularly from upper-limb deficits. We did so by discarding
data to unconfound the fitting problem. We then invoked Bayesian models to answer the
substantive scientific question: what biological mechanisms best explain the data on recovery of
upper-limb performance after stroke and with what effect size?

Material & Methods
Participants and clinical data
The analyses of post-stroke upper limb function were based on a sample of 385 acute stroke
participants originating from six different studies on stroke recovery (Buch et al., 2016; Byblow
et al., 2015; Feng et al., 2015; Guggisberg et al., 2017; Zarahn et al. 2011). Details on data
acquisition are given in the supplementary material. In brief, we used anonymized data available
from Zarahn et al. (2011) and Guggisberg et al. (2017) and combined it with secondary data from
(Hawe et al., 2019a). Therefore, we had individual-level information on Fugl Meyer (FM) scores
assessing upper limb motor performance in the acute as well as chronic stage (three to six months
after the event; Nakayama et al., 1994). A minimum score of 0 implies no preserved and 66
maximal motor performance (Fugl-Meyer et al., 1975). In line with previous research (Feng et al.,
2015), we split the stroke subject samples into fitters and non-fitters to the classic proportional
recovery rule (Prabhakaran et al., 2008) based on their initial scores (Non-Fitters: FM-Initial≤10
points, Fitters: FM-Initial>10 points). The first set of analyses were focused exclusively on fitters,
and subsequent analyses highlighted findings on the entire sample, i.e., fitters and non-fitters. As
all of the data has been published previously, ethics approvals had been granted for all individual
primary studies.

Bayesian hierarchical modelling of motor stroke outcome
A hierarchical Bayesian framework was employed to allow for the balanced incorporation of data
from various sources and facilitate model comparisons. More precisely, we built Bayesian
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

multilevel (hierarchical) linear regression models with varying intercepts and slopes (Gelman,
2006). Therefore, each of the six considered studies was characterized by estimated full probability
distributions of intercept and slope parameters – rather than simple best-fit, maximum likelihood
parameter estimates as usually employed in recovery studies. Retaining study-specific information
in this statistical way was an essential step to address potential differences between studies. These
differences are conceivable due to independent data collection, involving study sites in different
countries, and likely minor variations in therapy regimens. Nonetheless, given that each of the
included studies considered similar measures at similar time points from broadly similar
participants, information was also pooled across the various studies and a set of hyperparameters,
i.e., across-study intercept and slope, was derived (Bzdok et al., 2019). Thus, intercepts and slopes
had two levels that carefully captured across-study versus individual variation in the eligible stroke
studies.
The outcome variables that we sought to predict were either the raw FM-end score or Change (i.e.,
FM-end – FM-initial). We thus created a likelihood function for the outcome and linked it to the
priors of our predictor variables, i.e., either the unaltered FM-initial score or Potential (FMmaximum – FM-initial), through one of five different models:
The (classical) standard-form regression model: FM-end = b.FM-initial + a (with intercept a
and slope b)
The change model: Change = Potential.B + A, with Change = FM-end – FM-initial and Potential
= FM-maximum – FM-initial, with FM-maximum = 66.
The change model was more precisely framed in three different ways expressing various
conceivable recovery models, which we highlighted in the Introduction (see panels [A,B,C] of
Figure 2): The classical proportional to lost function recovery model: Change = Potential.B,
a proportional to spared function recovery model: Change = FM-initial.B (which takes the raw
initial score), and a constant recovery model: Change = A. Once fitted, we determined whether
the obtained models were truly proportional to lost, spared, or constant recovery by assessing the
parameter settings, where 0 ≤ 𝐵 < 1 for the proportional to lost or spared function recovery and
where 0 ≤ 𝐴 < 𝑀𝑎𝑥 ∧ 𝑀𝑎𝑥 = 66 for the constant recovery model.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A critical step in any Bayesian analysis is the specification of prior beliefs. We attenuated the
effects of priors and simultaneously increased the influence of the actual data by choosing simple,
weakly informative Gaussian priors (i.e., with large standard deviations) for all of the (hyper)parameters and half-Cauchy priors for corresponding variance terms.
The full Bayesian model is specified below: Dependencies between variables are indicated with
arrows, observed variables are in grey boxes, and the distributional definition of variables are
shown on the right. M denotes the number of studies analyzed and N(i) the number of subjects in
each study.

Inference: The analytical derivation of posterior distributions is either computationally very
expensive and challenging or not possible, as it requires the integration over thousands of unknown
parameters. We thus deployed a recent Monte Carlo Markov Chain algorithm, the No U-Turn
Sampler (NUTS), that does not compute the posterior distribution directly, yet draws samples from
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

it in a stochastic way (Hoffman & Gelman, 2014, setting: draws=2000, n_init=1000; for quality
assurance and to check for convergence: initially 4 chains, then 1 chain for final analyses).
Marginal posteriors are given as mean and 95%-credible intervals. Posterior predictive checks
were run to analyze the model performance, i.e., we predicted FM-end or Change scores based on
parameter drawings from the posterior. In this way, we could assess whether data originating from
our fitted hierarchical model resembled data from the true underlying distribution. We compare
predicted means to the actual sample means and finally compute R-squared values as a measure
of explained variance.

Synthetic data simulation experiments
Before performing Bayesian model comparisons, we first conducted data simulations (Gelman &
Hill, 2006, Chapter 8, p. 155) and synthetically generated data based on ground truth model. This
procedure enabled us to better understand and validate statistical procedures. Thus, these
simulations enabled us to test strategies to ensure correct model estimation despite the effects of
noise and ceiling. The ceiling effect is most similar to having right-censored data, i.e., just knowing
that individual data points are at a maximum value, which they, however, may exceed by an
unknown amount.
We proceeded in the following way: We selected constant, proportional to lost, and proportional
to spared function recovery as “true” models. These models were re-arranged to obtain the
standard-form classical regression, directly linking X and Y, and enabling us to generate Y-values
from those of X (c.f. supplementary materials section 1 for details and corresponding proofs of
these transformations). To consider different degrees of recovery, we assessed these in 10% steps
from 10–90% of the proportional recoveries and in steps of 5 from 5–50 points for constant
recovery. We then entered the empirical FM-initial scores of all fitters (n=243) in one of the “true”
models, added noise, and enforced ceiling (for details on these procedures, c.f. supplementary
materials section 4). The final and critical step then was to fit a new linear regression model to
the simulated data and compare the estimated parameters for intercept and slope to the given “true”
parameters to answer whether it was still possible to estimate the “true” model after alterations by
noise and ceiling. Therefore, we assessed the probability that the “correct” (ground truth)
parameter values fell in the confidence intervals of the parameter values inferred by the fitting
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

process and evaluated the percentage meeting 68% and 95% confidence intervals (Gelman & Hill,
2006). Also, we tracked the ratio of the standard deviations FM-end/FM-initial, Pearson
correlations of FM-initial & FM-end, as well as FM-initial & Change and the number of simulated
subjects at absolute ceiling, i.e., at an FM of 66 (maximum score). We are referring to “absolute”
ceiling as further subjects might present with confounded scores that are compressed toward
ceiling, yet not at FM-end=66.
Aiming to reduce ceiling and thus its confounding effect, we implemented a subset approach by
limiting the data simulations to specific FM-initial ranges, i.e., subset 1) FM-initial 10–60, 2) FMinitial 10–50, 3) FM-initial 10–45, and 4) FM-initial 10–40, and evaluated its effect on subsequent
model estimation. This enabled us to assess in synthetic data, which subset approach gave us the
best trade-off between retrieval of correct model and parameter settings, and size of the remaining
data. In each of the described scenarios, simulations were repeated 1000 times.

Final model comparisons
Fitters only
We initially focused on the fitters (FM-initial>10) portion of the data. Relying on the simulation
results, we constructed Bayesian hierarchical models for the standard-form regression, the
proportional to lost function, and proportional to spared function as well as the constant recovery
models in the subset FM-initial 10–45 and conducted a Bayesian model comparison. We focused
on this subset, as it represented an optimal compromise between mitigating ceiling effects and
retaining as many subjects in the analysis as possible. Results for the subsets FM-initial 10–40 and
FM-initial 10–50 are provided in supplementary materials.
Despite our dataset being as voluminous as currently possible, a potential limitation is that, for
some of the studies included, we relied upon values extracted from published figures. This process
missed 68 subjects because multiple points sat on top of one another in scatter plots. To account
for these missing values and determine an upper bound of the R-squared for the winning model in
our model comparison, we repeatedly (1000 times) took 68 random draws from the available FMinitial distribution. We discarded values not in the range 10–45 and placed the remaining values
on the predicted linear fit (i.e., assuming perfect prediction by the standard-form model). By these
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

means, we obtained an average R-squared value, which can be considered an upper bound when
correcting for missing values.
Fitters and non-fitters
In the final analyses, we jointly investigated data on fitters (FM-initial>10, n=243) and non-fitters
(FM-initial≤10, n=142) by fitting the four competing models outlined before. Once again, we ran
analyses with a decreased upper limit for FM-initial scores to prevent confounding by ceiling (FMinitial cut-off: 45).

Statistical analyses
The main analyses were conducted in a Bayesian hierarchical framework. The central inferential
question is a model comparison. Specifically, we determined the models best describing the data
based on their Leave-One-Out-Cross-Validation (LOOCV) (Vehtari et al., 2017), with LOOCV
being a critical out-of-sample test of model fit – indicating whether our findings are likely to hold
up in future studies. Model comparisons based on the widely applicable information criterion
(WAIC) are also given in supplementary materials. The WAIC represents a principled means of
weighing goodness-of-fit against model complexity (i.e., number of effective parameters)
(Watanabe, 2013). Additionally, we report R-squared values, the standard measure of the
effectiveness of models at explaining within-sample variability.

Data availability
The recovery data as well as jupyter notebooks (python 3.7, primarily software package pymc3,
(Salvatier et al., 2016)) employed in this study are available from the authors on reasonable
request.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results
Descriptive statistics
Individual studies, as well as the joint distributions of Initial and End FM scores, median values,
and quartiles, are illustrated in Figure 3. Further characteristics, such as size, mean age, and sex
of each study are summarized in Table 1.

Figure 3. Initial and follow-up upper limb motor performance, individually for each of the six studies included
and aggregated across studies. A. Raincloud plots of the initial (time point 1) and follow-up (time point 2) Fugl
Meyer (FM) assessment scores. These measured the upper limb impairment post-stroke of all fitters, i.e., those with
FM-initial > 10. Each of the six studies included is displayed separately and uniquely color-coded. The upper row
within each study’s plot visualizes the distribution of scores. The second row summarizes the same data in a boxplot
(i.e., median, upper and lower quartiles, whiskers extending to the entire range of data, outliers indicated as separate
dots). Lastly, the third row displays raw individual data points. While initial FM score distributions are more
homogeneous across the entire range (i.e., more uniform), distributions at the second time point are narrower and – to
varying degrees – more pronounced at the upper end of the FM assessment scale, i.e., skewed. Of note, Feng et al.
(2015) only considered stroke subjects with initial FM scores lower than 60. Guggisberg et al. (2017) included more
subjects with lower initial scores and scheduled the second assessment sooner on average, which likely underlies the
more widespread and less skewed distribution of FM-end scores. The code for raincloud plots relies on (Allen et al.,
2019). B. Entirety of aggregated individual FM assessment scores of all stroke subjects defined as fitters (FMinitial > 10). Scores are jittered on the vertical axis for visualization only. Left: FM-initial vs. FM-end, clearly
depicting the increased density for follow-up scores close to and at ceiling, i.e., FM-end = 66. Right: FM-initial vs
Change (FM-end – FM-initial). Included studies are color-coded as before, c.f. legend.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1. Descriptive statistics of each of the six studies included.

Bayesian posterior distributions for stroke recovery prediction
The hierarchical standard-form regression and change models built on the entirety of fitters could
be well estimated, as indicated by the convergence of four independently sampled (Monte Carlo
Markov) chains for the posterior estimates of model parameters. Additionally, the predicted
posterior mean was evenly distributed around the actual sample mean, indicating that the model
can reproduce patterns occurring in the real data (c.f. Supplementary Figure 2). Figure 4
illustrates the marginal posteriors for the across-study and study-specific intercept and slope
parameters, arising from one final chain. Furthermore, Figure 5 highlights the joint posterior
densities for intercept and slope parameters. A striking finding for both models was the dispersion
of the individual studies’ intercepts and slopes: For the change model, the across-study mean for
the slope was 0.64, thus specifying a proportional recovery of 64% for all six studies combined.
However, the individual posterior means for slopes fell in the range between 54% (Guggisberg et
al., 2017) and 70% (Feng et al., 2015). The six slopes also followed two general patterns, with
three studies featuring lower and three studies higher proportional recovery amounts. As expected,
the explained variance of the change model markedly surpassed that of the standard-form
regression model (Predictive posterior check (PPC): R-squared: 70.8% vs. 42.7%), demonstrating
the problematic inflation due to mathematical coupling highlighted in Hawe et al. (2019a) and
Hope et al. (2019). Also, this dispersion of effect sizes coincided with a small ratio of standard
deviations FM-end/FM-initial, totaling 0.57, which, at least partially, resulted from the number of

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

subjects reaching absolute ceiling at follow-up: 37 (15.2%). In sum, these are the canonical
properties of Compression Enhanced Coupling.

Figure 4. Bayesian hierarchical model: Marginal posteriors of intercepts and slopes. A. Standard-form
regression model. Follow-up FM scores are estimated according to FM-end = b.FM-initial + a. Across-study intercept
(“mu_a”) and slope (“mu_b”) are depicted in the upper two rows. The bottom two rows visualize the lower level of
the hierarchy: Varying intercepts (“a”) and slopes (“b”), individually per included study (c.f. legend for study-specific
color coding). B. “Classic” proportional to lost function change model. The outcome measure of interest here is the
change between the initial and end FM scores, estimated based on Change = B.Potential + A with Change = FM-end
– FM-initial and Potential = 66 – FM-initial. Marginal posteriors of individual slopes show a marked variability,
ranging from 54% to 70% of proportional recovery. This might indicate a generally high inter-study variability. The
inflation of explained variance due to mathematical coupling and Ceiling enhanced Coupling is demonstrated by an
R-squared value of 70.8% for the change model that exceeds the one from the standard-form regression model by
28%. Please note that unlike our presentations of proportional to lost function elsewhere, we include an intercept here
to maximize fit, although, as can be seen, fitting generates an intercept very close to zero.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5. Model estimated within- and between-study differences in motor recovery based on the standardform regression model. A. Aggregated motor studies: We here display the joint distribution between the acrossstudy intercept – which can be described as the average motor outcome for an FM-initial score of zero – and the
across-study slope – equivalently framed as performance gain dependent on FM-initial. Therefore, the plot illustrates
the joint posterior densities for the included hyperparameters, with the marginal posterior for the intercept ranging
from 37.0 to 47.4 and from 0.28 to 0.44 for slopes (95% credibility intervals). B. Individual motor studies: The
figure pictures the joint density for combinations of intercepts and slopes that are plausible, given the visited data of
the six included studies. It particularly highlights the relationship between sample size and width of credibility
intervals, as larger studies present with narrower intervals. C.f. legend for study-specific color-coding.

Synthetic data simulation experiments
Leveraging synthetic data simulations in the sample of fitters (Gelman and Hill, 2006) facilitated
the detailed study of confounding effects of noise and ceiling as well as hypothetical conclusions
when assuming three conceivable ground truth models: proportional to lost function, proportional
to spared function, as well as constant recovery.
Detailed descriptions, as well as tables of the data simulations, are given in supplementary
materials section 7. In sum, the inclusion of noise did not impede the correct model and parameter
estimation, as indicated by met confidence intervals; that is >68% and >95% of the estimated
parameters were in the 68%- and 95%-confidence intervals of the true model. This situation
changed markedly with the introduction of a ceiling: correct model and parameter estimation
17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

deteriorated in parallel to the increase of subjects at absolute ceiling and with growing amounts of
recovery (e.g., going from 10% of proportional recovery to 20%). The highest numbers of subjects
at ceiling (n=110) arose for a constant recovery of 50 points. We could observe the effects of
Compression enhanced Coupling since tracked Pearson correlations of FM-initial & Change
increasingly surpassed those of FM-initial & FM-end after enforcing ceiling.
Crucially, any of the conceivable ground truth models introduced here closely resembled a
proportional-to-lost-function recovery model once a ceiling was enforced, thus mirroring the
scenario encountered with the FM score which has a finite maximum score of 66 (Gladstone et al.,
2002). Hence, when considering all fitters and disregarding any potential ceiling effects, there was
only one possible conclusion: Data would follow a proportional to lost function recovery
regardless of the real mechanism driving recovery (Figure 6).

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6. Synthetic data simulations of proportional to lost function (left column), proportional to spared function
(middle column), and constant recovery (right column). A. Space of ground truth models. Illustrations of
idealized recovery profiles (i.e., without random noise and any ceiling enforced) for standard-form formulations from
10% to 90% of proportional, and 5 to 50 points of constant recovery. The dashed lines indicate maximum Fugl Meyer
scores of 66. While no subject would exceed the maximum in an idealized proportional to lost function scenario (note:
this could be altered by noise), proportional to spared function and constant recovery naturally cause a substantial
number of subjects at absolute ceiling (FM-end = 66).
B. Trajectories of Pearson correlation between FM-initial (X) & FM-end (Y) and FM-initial (X) & Change (YX). Thick purple lines picture the course of r(X,Y) before and thin purple lines the course of r(X,Y) after enforcing
ceiling for increasing amounts of recovery. Respective courses for r(X, Y-X) are depicted in green (before) and yellow
(after ceiling). Proportional to lost function recovery: Starting at almost the maximum of one, the correlation between
FM-initial & FM-end decreases the higher the amount of proportional recovery, while the correlation for FM-initial
& Change becomes more negative and finally exceeds the one of FM-initial & FM-end in absolute terms,

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

demonstrating the effect of mathematical coupling. Ceiling exhibits a minor amplification of this effect only.
Proportional to spared function recovery: Without any ceiling, correlations of FM-initial & FM-end, as well as FMinitial & Change, are close to 1. The latter changes dramatically after enforcing ceiling: The correlations of FM-initial
& Change are now decreasing monotonically, becoming negative in sign and reminiscent of proportional to lost
function. Constant recovery: The correlation between FM-initial & FM-end is close to 1, while FM-initial and Change
are not correlated. After ceiling is enforced, patterns closely resemble the ones for proportional to lost function: The
correlation of FM-initial & FM-end decreases monotonically, yet stays positive, the one between FM-initial & Change
decreases and becomes almost negative one for high levels of constant recovery. C. Trajectories of ratios σ(FMend)/σ(FM-initial). Thick lines in turquoise color mark trajectories before, thin lines in turquoise trajectories after
enforcing ceiling. Proportional to lost function recovery: Ratios of standard deviations are decreasing from approx. 1
to 0.2, ceiling exhibits only minor effects. Proportional to spared function recovery: Trajectories differ markedly
depending upon ceiling: Ratios are greater than one and increase before ceiling and decrease to values smaller than
one after ceiling is enforced. Constant recovery: Once again, the presence of a ceiling substantially alters the
trajectories of standard deviation ratios: While they remain close to 1 before enforcing ceiling, they show a steep
decrease after enforcing ceiling.
Importantly, whenever the variability ratio, expressed as σ( FM-end)/σ(FM-initial) in the bottom row C, decreases,
the correlation between FM-initial & Change in the middle row B also decreases. This is consistent with Compression
enhanced Coupling. It also implies that data enters the degenerate regime of figure 1, and any underlying model will
“look like” proportional to lost function recovery.

However, estimation performance gradually improved again, when running the simulations in
subsets of fitters, i.e., considering only those below a certain cut-off of initial scores. The most
stringent subset of FM-initial 10–40 performed the best in terms of estimating the true intercepts
and slopes for all of the conceived models. However, in order to choose an appropriate subset
range for intended consecutive model comparisons, we tried to find the optimal balance of
reducing possible confounds, while also retaining as many subjects in the analysis as possible. The
subset FM-initial 10–50 was only capable of recovering proportional-to-spared-function up to a
proportion of 30% and 15 points of constant recovery, which we did not judge to be sufficient. On
the other hand, we could only keep three studies (92 subjects out of 385 in all the studies, i.e.,
24%) in the case of the subset FM-initial 10–40, which seems an inefficient use of hard-won
empirical data and reduction to too few patients. Therefore, we established a further subset FMinitial 10–45 to combine the advantages of both subsets, FM-initial 10–50 and 10–40. Based on
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the subset FM-initial 10–45, we were able to estimate the entire range of proportional-to-lostfunction; up to 40% of proportional to spared function, and up to 20 points of constant recovery.
Besides, we were able to recover the true “space” of the generating model for all proportional to
spared function models, c.f. section 5 of supplementary material. This was done using recovery
data from 118 subjects originating from four studies (out of 385, therefore 31%). Hence, we
decided to focus upon the subset FM-initial 10–45 for model comparisons on the human data
(results for FM-initial 10–50 and 10–40 are presented in supplementary materials).

Final model comparisons (on human data)
Fitters in the subset of FM-initial 10 – 45
The studies by Zarahn et al. (2011) and Buch et al. (2016) were excluded from these analyses since
they had fewer than ten subjects in the range of FM-initial 10–45, which would lead to a substantial
deterioration in accuracy when sampling from the posterior. Relying on the remaining 118 subjects
(out of 385, 31%; 6 subjects were at absolute ceiling, 5.1%; variability ratio was 1.12), we
successfully sampled posteriors for the (unconstrained) standard-form regression model, and
change-form versions of proportional to lost function, proportional to spared function, and
constant-recovery models. Resulting distributions for the marginal posteriors are displayed in
Figure 7.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 7. Alleviating confounds by ceiling effects and mathematical coupling: Bayesian hierarchical models in
the subset of FM-initial 10-45.
Marginal posteriors for parameters of proportional to lost function recovery (A), proportional to spared function
recovery (B), constant recovery (C), and (Unconstrained) Standard-form regression (D).
E. Final Bayesian model comparison using leave-one-out-cross-validation (LOOCV). Empty circles represent the
LOOCV-score, black error bars the corresponding standard error. The filled black circles mark the models’ in-sample
deviances, grey triangles the difference to the top-ranked model as well as the associated standard error. Lastly, the
lowest (i.e., best) LOOCV-value is indicated by the vertical dashed grey line.
The standard-form regression model provides the best out-of-sample performance and is ranked first in the model
comparison, closely followed by the proportional to lost function recovery model. Therefore, considering fitters only,
recovery post-stroke seemed to follow a pattern resembling a mixture of constant and proportional to lost function
recovery. However, the explained variance was low at 31.5% (standard-form regression) and 21.3% (proportional to
lost function recovery).

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The mean of the across-study slope-parameter in the proportional to lost function model equaled
0.65 (95% credibility interval 0.39–0.90), thus indicating an across-cohort recovery of a little less
than 70%. In contrast to the model on the entire dataset, the explained variance came to just 21.3%.
Notably, this value was lower than the explained variance based on the (unconstrained) standardform regression model (PPC: R-squared: 31.5%). Across studies, subjects had a marginal posterior
constant recovery of 26 points, ranging from 25 for Byblow et al. (2015) and Guggisberg et al.
(2017) to 30 points for Winters et al. (2015). The explained variance amounted to only 5.8%.
Explained variance dropped even further in case of proportional to spared function (PPC: Rsquared: -0.153, slope=0.85), with the negative value signaling the unsuitability of this model.
Since these fittings put us on the fringe of correct parameter retrieval for constant recovery and
proportional to spared, we provide further justification for our conclusions in the supplementary
materials section 9.
As the reported R-squared values are only comparable to a certain extent, since a model’s inherent
degrees of freedom (i.e., flexibility) are not quantified in this measure, we performed a Bayesian
model comparison based upon leave-one-out-cross-validated deviance values. The standard-form
regression model, as well as the proportional to lost change model, had the lowest deviance and
were thus top-ranked. The standard-form regression model gave a fit that can be seen as a
combination of constant and proportional to lost function recovery and could thus be viewed as
liberal as proportional to lost, c.f. Supplementary Materials. The constant recovery model
followed these two models. Proportional to spared function performed the worst. Nonoverlapping confidence intervals for the differences in deviance increased confidence in the two
winning models (c.f. Figure 7, E; c.f. Supplementary Figure 3 for WAIC-based results). Results
for the additional subsets FM-initial 10–40 and 10–50 are broadly comparable to the subset FMinitial 10–45 (Supplementary Figures 4 & 5).
When adjusting for missing values in our dataset in additional analysis, we determined the upper
bound of the R-squared value for the winning, standard-form regression model to be 44.7%.

Fitters & Non-Fitters in the subset of FM-initial 0 – 45
Merging non-fitters and fitters increased the total sample size to 385 subjects, out of which 39
reached maximum values of 66 at follow-up (10.1%). Further characteristics, such as the ratio of
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

standard deviations, are given in Table 1. Once again, we employed our mitigating ceiling effect
approach and only considered subjects with FM-initial scores lower than 45, restricting our
analysis to 270 subjects (out of 385, 70%; eight at absolute ceiling at follow-up, 3.0%). Posteriors
of the various models’ parameters could be sampled reliably, as indicated by converging chains.
Evaluating the standard-form regression model first: All of the individual slopes’ marginal
posterior distributions had a mean in between 1.17 and 1.34, yet included 1 in their credibility
intervals (across-cohort slope: 1.24; 95% credibility interval 0.99 – 1.52, c.f. Figure 8, D).
Therefore, they indicated a mixture of constant and proportional to spared function recovery
(PPC: R-squared: 52.8%), which could be related to the liberal proportional to spared discussed in
the Supplementary Material, section 1. Two of the change models, i.e., proportional to lostfunction and proportional to spared function, provided a very poor (negative) in-sample explained
variance (PPC: R-squared: - 0.13 and – 0.51 for proportional to lost and proportional to spared
function recovery, respectively, c.f. Figure 8, A & B). Only the constant recovery model could
capture some positive variance (PPC: R-squared: 7.4%, c.f. Figure 8, C). The final model
comparison revealed the (unconstrained) standard-form regression model, indicating a mixture of
constant and proportional-to-spared-function recovery, and constant recovery as the winning
models (c.f. Figure 8, E).

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 8. Joint hierarchical Bayesian analysis of fitters and non-fitters for FM-initial 0-45. A – D. Recovery
models: proportional to lost function recovery (A), proportional to spared function recovery (B), constant
recovery (C), and (Unconstrained) Standard-form regression (D). Marginal posterior distributions are presented on
the left-hand side for A – C and in the upper part of D. Distribution of initial against follow up scores in conjunction
with an overlay of sampled fits are added on the right-hand sides for A – C and in the lower part of D (thick black
line: mean, grey lines: 2000 sampled marginal posterior parameter constellations)
E. Final model comparison. Based on leave-one-out-cross-validation, model comparison elected the standard-form
regression model, indicating a mixture of constant and proportional to spared function recovery. Pure constant
recovery was the best follow-up model.

Discussion
Current analyses of proportional recovery after stroke are subject to various confounds. We here
proposed a subset approach to minimize the key confound, Compression enhanced Coupling,
which we validated in synthetic data experiments. We furthermore employed hierarchical
Bayesian models to analyze the largest, compiled dataset of upper limb recovery post-stroke
(n=385) and evaluate various conceivable patterns of stroke recovery in overall model
comparisons.
In case of those patients considered fitters to the proportional recovery rule (FM-initial>10), model
comparison pointed in the direction of either proportional to lost function, with a recovery
proportion of 65% (i.e., slope of regression), or a combination of constant and proportional to lost
function recovery as the underlying relationships. These findings were, therefore, generally in line
with previous assumptions of proportional to lost function recovery post-stroke (Prabhakaran et
al., 2008). However, and critically, the pure proportional to lost function recovery model could
only explain 21% of the variance in recovery, a value drastically reduced in comparison to earlier
studies, reporting up to 94% (Winters et al., 2015). Given the likely confounds by Compression
enhanced Coupling in these earlier studies, the current estimate of explained variance may be
considered more accurate, especially as it did not surpass the one for the classical standard-form
regression – which we determined to be 32%. As the standard-form regression directly linked
initial and follow-up FM scores, it is important to note that this model was not prone to the
confounds due to coupling.
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Of note, these conclusions substantially depended on the exclusion of non-fitters: a completely
different picture arose when analyzing the entire spectrum of subjects, i.e., fitters (FM-Initial>10)
and non-fitters (FM-Initial≤10) combined. The model comparison led to the election of a
composite of constant and proportional to spared function recovery as the winning model2; the
explained variance was 53%. In contrast to proportional to lost function, proportional to spared
function recovery suggests that patients with greater preservation of function have a higher
capacity to improve, which could have important implications for the conceptualization of
recovery trajectories.
Eventually, the pressing questions are: Are we in need of more studies jointly analyzing fitters and
non-fitters, particularly given the higher explained variance for the whole sample? Are 32% or
even 53% explained variance sufficient to justify a recovery rule that may guide individual
predictions in a future of precision neurology?
Clinical importance and prediction of recovery post-stroke
Overestimation of the proportional recovery rule becomes particularly problematic when it impacts
clinical practice, e.g., prompts the assumption of a spontaneous recovery process that exclusively
depends on initial motor performance. In particular, such a conclusion may limit the allocation of
valuable therapy sessions to some stroke subjects and generate a negative prior expectation
towards tailored therapies (Byblow et al., 2015; Hawe et al., 2019b). Putting its suitability for
single-participant prediction aside, Byblow and Stinear (2019) and Kundert et al. (2019) recently
underscored the proportional recovery rule’s purpose for explaining the recovery process in stroke
populations in general. From this perspective, it may be that proportional to lost function recovery
explains fitters’ trajectories better than other change models, but because of the level of explained
variance, this does not make it, as such, a good explanation. Indeed, it is undoubtedly the case that
a group-level effect size for a theory can be so small, that the theory has little explanatory value.
Additionally, in either case, one should always strive to obtain estimates as un-confounded and
accurate as possible.

2

For further clarification: This composite involved applying the model across the entire range of subjects, fitters &
non-fitters. Here, we are not considering fitting of different models to different portions of the data.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Because of the increase in the explained variance of motor recovery when jointly considering
fitters and non-fitters – from 32% to 53% – we may also need to rethink conventional analysis
approaches and increasingly shift the focus on severely affected subjects by including non-fitters
more often. This might be particularly important in view of substantial amounts of severely
affected patients, e.g., 37% of non-fitters in our study and generally increasing numbers of patients
with severe arm impairments (Hayward et al., 2017). Nevertheless, even 53% of explained
variance leaves many unaccounted sources of variation in stroke recovery. This, for example, is
evident in the visible heterogeneity of recoveries for patients with comparable initial scores; see
the scatter plots in Figure 3. In this respect, our finding of higher explained variance when
estimating parameters for fitters and non-fitters combined does not stand against the observation
that there are grossly different recovery patterns, that may necessitate differing therapeutic
(rehabilitative) approaches for variably impaired patient subgroups.
Likert-like scales and ceiling effects
It is also essential to be aware of a particular score’s characteristics. The FM score is a Likert-like
scale, thus a summary of multiple Likert-like items, comprising ordinal data (Likert, 1932). It is
this combination of multiple items that renders parametric statistical approaches – that we applied
here – feasible (Norman, 2010; Harpe, 2015). Positively, reported test-retest and inter-rater
reliabilities for FM scores are r>0.95 over repeated measurements (Gladstone et al., 2002).
However, as previously emphasized, the FM assessment is highly susceptible to ceiling effects
(Gladstone et al., 2002). We here further dissected these ceiling effects and highlighted the
induction of Compression enhanced Coupling with change formulation models, that link initial
scores and recovery (Lord, 1956; Hawe et al., 2019a; Hope et al., 2019). Amongst our total sample
size of 385 subjects, 39 (10.1%) reached maximum scores at follow-up, and many more were likely
compressed towards, but not at ceiling. Our synthetic data experiments showed that this degree of
ceiling effect was sufficient to impede correct conclusions: Independent of the simulated ground
truth mechanism, we would always discover proportional to lost function recovery.
We here relied upon the logic of subsets to decrease confounding effects by ceiling. That is, we
focused on lower ranges of initial motor performance scores, which are less likely to lead to
maximum follow-up motor performance scores. The relationships identified in the ceiling-reduced
27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

subsets could then be extended to the entire sample, as generalization was ensured by the assumed
constant relationship between initial and follow-up scores. Such an assumption of constancy is
inherent to linear regression models applied here. Importantly, our synthetic data experiments
additionally demonstrated that we did not incur any new confounds, which would affect
conclusions when defining subsets on initial scores. Altogether, we ensured more trustworthy
model estimations by these means.
Bayesian hierarchical models
Potentially insufficient numbers of subjects could endanger successful subset analyses relying on
the data of just one study. This circumstance may be particularly so, as it may not be feasible to
increase the size of individual studies, as high-quality data acquisition is time-consuming and
costly. Here, the subset approach was only rendered possible due to our Bayesian hierarchical
framework that facilitated the fusion of multiple datasets with individual-level data (Gelman and
Hill, 2006). In this way, we could maximize the number of included subjects while retaining as
much information on each study’s characteristics as possible and modeling uncertainty explicitly
(McElreath, 2018). This combination of merging studies and preserving individual features was
particularly appealing since it addressed both similarities and dissimilarities between individual
studies, i.e., similar scores from similar patients at similar timepoints on the one hand and yet study
sites and likely minor variations in therapies on the other hand. Also, our Bayesian hierarchical
models were capable of effectively handling diverging sample sizes in the six studies considered
(McElreath, 2018). Lastly, as anticipated in (Hope et al., 2019), they allowed for the evaluation of
various generative models on the nature of recovery – proportional to lost function, proportional
to spared function, and constant recovery – through model comparisons.
Limitations and future directions
We decreased distorting ceiling effects by limiting analyses to subsets of initial scores. However,
we acknowledge that there are drawbacks to this approach, such as the exclusion of substantial
portions of the entire sample. Also, it does not represent definitive handling of the ceiling problem.
The FM assessment is based on several single items (e.g. patient is able/partially able/unable to
move his/her hand from the ipsilateral ear to the contralateral knee), which potentially results in
multiple sub-ceilings. These may remain present even in case of discarding data at the scale’s
28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

maximum. Therefore, one viable strategy to circumvent these kinds of ceiling effects could be the
increased use of continuous assessment scores, measuring, e.g., muscle forces, movement speeds
or other kinematic parameters. Another strategy could be the construction of more elaborate
scoring systems that allow for the detection of even very subtle variation, especially at the top of
the scale. Nevertheless, motor performance may be maximally recovered and effectively
indistinguishable from a healthy pre-stroke level in some cases. As a result, some natural ceiling
would occur and require special attention, primarily concerning statistical proceedings. Future
research may thus utilize our subset analysis or further approaches for censored data, such as
(frequentist) Tobit models (Tobin, 1958) and Bayesian counterparts (Gelman and Hill, 2006).
Furthermore, we did not consider the possibility of any non-linearities of the FM scale, i.e., to
differentiate between a ten-point gain from 0 to 10 and a ten point gain from 50 to 60. After all,
the genuine underlying relationship of recovery may not be linear and might thus not be detectable
by the linear regression models we, and the majority of the field, have so far focused on. Therefore,
our results encourage research into other model types, for example, non-linear models, such as
decision tree-like algorithms (Stinear et al., 2012). Additionally, we may need to refocus on a
variety and multivariate combination of indicators of stroke recovery, such as behavioral,
physiological, and imaging biomarkers, which have already shown promise (Stinear, 2017; Ward,
2017; Findlater et al., 2019).
Our study highlights the opportunity for novel insights to be gleaned by Bayesian hierarchical
modeling, as it facilitates model comparisons and the creation of large datasets, thereby increasing
the generalizability of attained inferences. Therefore, they are likely to become common in stroke
research, as well as in other clinical fields. Indeed, the strategies outlined here may inspire and
guide future studies, raise awareness of the better handling of ceiling and change models, as well
as the pernicious nature of compression enhanced coupling; especially, as these effects may
frequently occur in biomedical data.
In this present study, we relied on an already large number of 385 subjects. Nonetheless, we are
still in need of larger stroke recovery datasets that additionally capture a multitude of stroke
symptoms, such as motor symptoms of upper and lower limbs, aphasia, neglect and hemianopia.
In particular, the field needs to take advantage of collaborative data collection and move beyond
behavioral scores for both predictor and outcome variables. In this way, a range of potential
explanatory and predictive variables could be incorporated to reliably increase explained variance
29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and accuracy of out-of-sample prediction of stroke recovery - in case of fitters and also non-fitters
(Grefkes and Fink, 2016; Boyd et al., 2017; Bernhardt et al., 2017).
Conclusion
Our probabilistic generative analyses of post-stroke motor performance in a sample of 385 stroke
participants revealed only weak signs of proportional to lost function recovery for those defined
to be fitters to the proportional recovery rule. Variance in recovery could be explained by up to
32% only, more than 50% less than previously reported. Additionally, a combination of constant
and proportional to spared function emerged as a likely relationship for the recovery of the entirety
of stroke subjects – at a higher explained variance of 53%. Importantly, these estimates were
obtained after de-confounding effects of mathematical coupling and ceiling (Hawe et al., 2019a;
Hope et al., 2019). In summary, these lower levels of explained variance may motivate research
moving beyond behavioral measures and the consideration of combinations of various biomarkers,
such as demographical, clinical, imaging, and physiological ones. Ultimately, our findings may
also pave the way for more frequent use of Bayesian hierarchical analyses to distill conclusions
resting upon merged clinical datasets, efficiently ensuring reliable generalization performance and
modelling of uncertainty.

Acknowledgements
We thank Michael Moutoussis for valuable observations and discussions.

Funding
AKB’s clinician scientist position is supported by the dean's office, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Cologne. GRF gratefully acknowledges support by the Marga and Walter Boll
foundation.

Competing interests
None.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Allen M, Poggiali D, Whitaker K, Marshall TR, Kievit RA. Raincloud plots: a multi-platform
tool for robust data visualization. Wellcome Open Research 2019; 4
Bernhardt J, Hayward KS, Kwakkel G, Ward NS, Wolf SL, Borschmann K, et al. Agreed
definitions and a shared vision for new standards in stroke recovery research: The Stroke
Recovery and Rehabilitation Roundtable taskforce. International Journal of Stroke 2017; 12:
444–450.
Boyd LA, Hayward KS, Ward NS, Stinear CM, Rosso C, Fisher RJ, et al. Biomarkers of stroke
recovery: consensus-based core recommendations from the stroke recovery and rehabilitation
roundtable. International Journal of Stroke 2017; 12: 480–493.
Buch ER, Rizk S, Nicolo P, Cohen LG, Schnider A, Guggisberg AG. Predicting motor
improvement after stroke with clinical assessment and diffusion tensor imaging. Neurology
2016; 86: 1924–1925.
Byblow WD, Stinear CM. Letter by Byblow and Stinear Regarding Article" Taking Proportional
Out of Stroke Recovery". Stroke 2019: STROKEAHA118024595–STROKEAHA118024595.
Byblow WD, Stinear CM, Barber PA, Petoe MA, Ackerley SJ. Proportional recovery after stroke
depends on corticomotor integrity: Proportional Recovery After Stroke. Annals of Neurology
2015; 78: 848–859.
Bzdok D, Floris DL, Marquand AF. Analyzing Brain Circuits in Population Neuroscience: A
Case to Be a Bayesian. arXiv preprint arXiv:190902527 2019
Chiolero A, Paradis GP, Rich BD, Hanley JP. Assessing the relationship between the baseline
value of a continuous variable and subsequent change over time. Frontiers in public health 2013;
1: 29.
Cronbach LJ, Furby L. How we should measure ‘change’: Or should we? Psychological Bulletin
1970; 74: 68–80.
Feng W, Wang J, Chhatbar PY, Doughty C, Landsittel D, Lioutas V-A, et al. Corticospinal tract
lesion load: An imaging biomarker for stroke motor outcomes: CST Lesion Load Predicts Stroke
Motor Outcomes. Annals of Neurology 2015; 78: 860–870.
Findlater SE, Hawe RL, Mazerolle EL, Al Sultan AS, Cassidy JM, Scott SH, et al. Comparing
CST Lesion Metrics as Biomarkers for Recovery of Motor and Proprioceptive Impairments After
Stroke. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 2019: 1545968319868714.
Fugl-Meyer AR, Jääskö L, Leyman I, Olsson S, Steglind S. The post-stroke hemiplegic patient.
1. a method for evaluation of physical performance. Scandinavian journal of rehabilitation
medicine 1975; 7: 13–31.
31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

G. Broeks, J, Lankhorst, GJ, Rumping, K, Prevo AJH. The long-term outcome of arm function
after stroke: results of a follow-up study. Disability and Rehabilitation 1999; 21: 357–364.
Gelman A. Multilevel (Hierarchical) Modeling: What It Can and Cannot Do. Technometrics
2006; 48: 432–435.
Gelman A, Hill J. Data analysis using regression and multilevel/hierarchical models. Cambridge
university press; 2006
Gladstone DJ, Danells CJ, Black SE. The Fugl-Meyer assessment of motor recovery after stroke:
a critical review of its measurement properties. Neurorehabilitation and neural repair 2002; 16:
232–240.
Grefkes C, Fink GR. Noninvasive brain stimulation after stroke: it is time for large randomized
controlled trials! Current Opinion in Neurology 2016; 29: 714–720.
Guggisberg AG, Nicolo P, Cohen LG, Schnider A, Buch ER. Longitudinal structural and
functional differences between proportional and poor motor recovery after stroke.
Neurorehabilitation and neural repair 2017; 31: 1029–1041.
Harpe SE. How to analyze Likert and other rating scale data. Currents in Pharmacy Teaching and
Learning 2015; 7: 836–850.
Hawe RL, Scott SH, Dukelow SP. Taking Proportional Out of Stroke Recovery. Stroke 2019; 50:
204–211.
Hawe RL, Scott SH, Dukelow SP. Response by Hawe et al to Letter Regarding Article," Taking
Proportional Out of Stroke Recovery". Stroke 2019: STROKEAHA119024794–
STROKEAHA119024794.
Hayes RJ. Methods for assessing whether change depends on initial value. Statistics in Medicine
1988; 7: 915–927.
Hayward KS, Schmidt J, Lohse KR, Peters S, Bernhardt J, Lannin NA, et al. Are we armed with
the right data? Pooled individual data review of biomarkers in people with severe upper limb
impairment after stroke. NeuroImage: Clinical 2017; 13: 310–319.
Hoffman MD, Gelman A. The No-U-Turn sampler: adaptively setting path lengths in
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. Journal of Machine Learning Research 2014; 15: 1593–1623.
Hope TM, Friston K, Price CJ, Leff AP, Rotshtein P, Bowman H. Recovery after stroke: not so
proportional after all? Oxford University Press; 2018
Hope TMH, Friston K, Price CJ, Leff AP, Rotshtein P, Bowman H. Recovery after stroke: not so
proportional after all? [Internet]. bioRxiv 2018[cited 2019 Jan 29] Available from:
http://biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/306514

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Kundert R, Goldsmith J, Veerbeek JM, Krakauer JW, Luft AR. What the Proportional Recovery
Rule Is (and Is Not): Methodological and Statistical Considerations. Neurorehabilitation and
neural repair 2019: 1545968319872996.
Likert R. A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of psychology 1932
Lord FM. THE MEASUREMENT OF GROWTH. ETS Research Bulletin Series 1956; 1956: i–
22.
Marchi NA, Ptak R, Di Pietro M, Schnider A, Guggisberg AG. Principles of proportional
recovery after stroke generalize to neglect and aphasia. European journal of neurology 2017; 24:
1084–1087.
McElreath R. Statistical rethinking: A Bayesian course with examples in R and Stan. Chapman
and Hall/CRC; 2018
Nakayama H, Jørgensen HS, Raaschou HO, Olsen TS. The influence of age on stroke outcome.
The Copenhagen Stroke Study. Stroke 1994; 25: 808–813.
Newman M. The process of recovery: After hemiplegia. Stroke 1972; 3: 702–710.
Norman G. Likert scales, levels of measurement and the “laws” of statistics. Advances in health
sciences education 2010; 15: 625–632.
Prabhakaran S, Zarahn E, Riley C, Speizer A, Chong JY, Lazar RM, et al. Inter-individual
Variability in the Capacity for Motor Recovery After Ischemic Stroke. Neurorehabilitation and
Neural Repair 2008; 22: 64–71.
Salvatier J, Wiecki TV, Fonnesbeck C. Probabilistic programming in Python using PyMC3.
PeerJ Computer Science 2016; 2: e55.
Smith M-C, Byblow WD, Barber PA, Stinear CM. Proportional recovery from lower limb motor
impairment after stroke. Stroke 2017; 48: 1400–1403.
Stinear CM. Prediction of motor recovery after stroke: advances in biomarkers. The Lancet
Neurology 2017; 16: 826–836.
Stinear CM, Barber PA, Petoe M, Anwar S, Byblow WD. The PREP algorithm predicts potential
for upper limb recovery after stroke. Brain 2012; 135: 2527–2535.
Tobin J. Estimation of relationships for limited dependent variables. Econometrica: journal of the
Econometric Society 1958: 24–36.
Vehtari A, Gelman A, Gabry J. Practical Bayesian model evaluation using leave-one-out crossvalidation and WAIC. Statistics and Computing 2017; 27: 1413–1432.
Ward NS. Restoring brain function after stroke—bridging the gap between animals and humans.
Nature Reviews Neurology 2017; 13: 244.
33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Watanabe S. A widely applicable Bayesian information criterion. Journal of Machine Learning
Research 2013; 14: 867–897.
Winters C, Van Wegen EE, Daffertshofer A, Kwakkel G. Generalizability of the maximum
proportional recovery rule to visuospatial neglect early poststroke. Neurorehabilitation and
neural repair 2017; 31: 334–342.
Winters C, van Wegen EEH, Daffertshofer A, Kwakkel G. Generalizability of the Proportional
Recovery Model for the Upper Extremity After an Ischemic Stroke. Neurorehabilitation and
Neural Repair 2015; 29: 614–622.
Zarahn E, Alon L, Ryan SL, Lazar RM, Vry M-S, Weiller C, et al. Prediction of Motor Recovery
Using Initial Impairment and fMRI 48 h Poststroke. Cerebral Cortex 2011; 21: 2712–2721.

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental materials
1 Transformation of change equations (c.f. Introduction Section of Main Body)
We show that all the change equations can be re-expressed as simple direct linear regression,
what we call standard-form regression, bringing them all into the same model framework.
This mathematical formulation is inspired by the Fugl-Meyer (FM) scale for assessing upper
limb deficits post-stroke (Prabhakaran et al., 2008). Specifically, 𝑋 ∈ ℝ1,345 denotes
performance scores at time point 1 (i.e., FM-initial in the main body of the paper), 𝑌 ∈ ℝ1,345
denotes performance at time point 2 (i.e., FM-end), and 𝑀𝑎𝑥 ∈ ℝ7 is the top of the scale, which
corresponds to “normal” performance on the scale (66 in the FM scale).
We begin by defining the basic change equations, so-called because the dependent variable is the
change from time-point 1 to time-point 2 (i.e., recovery). For simplicity of presentation, we do
not include noise terms, but these could be added in the usual way.
Definitions
1) Classic proportional to lost function is defined as,
(𝑌 − 𝑋) = 𝐵. (𝑀𝑎𝑥 − 𝑋)
where 𝐵 ∈ ℝ ∧ 0 ≤ 𝐵 < 1.
2) Proportional to spared function is defined as,
(𝑌 − 𝑋) = 𝐵. 𝑋
where 𝐵 ∈ ℝ ∧ 0 ≤ 𝐵 < 1.
3) Constant is defined as,
(𝑌 − 𝑋) = 𝐴
where 𝐴 ∈ ℝ ∧ 0 ≤ 𝐴 < 𝑀𝑎𝑥.

∎

These three change formulae generate different patterns in all but one case, which is when 𝐵 =
𝐴 = 0, the boundary condition in which 𝑌 = 𝑋 and there is no recovery.
The standard-form linear regression equation, which directly relates 𝑌 and 𝑋, rather than through
change, is defined as,
𝑌 = 𝑏. 𝑋 + 𝑎
where 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ ℝ. We use lower case to distinguish coefficient and intercept when associated with
standard-form regression and upper case when associated with the change formulations.
We now show that each change formulation can be rearranged into a standard-form regression.
35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Proposition 1 (Proportional to Lost)
Given that 0 ≤ 𝐵 < 1,
(𝑌 − 𝑋) = 𝐵. (𝑀𝑎𝑥 − 𝑋) ⟺ 𝑌 = 𝑏. 𝑋 + 𝑎 ∧ 𝑎 = (1 − 𝑏). 𝑀𝑎𝑥 ∧ 𝐵 = 1 − 𝑏
Proof
Assume 0 ≤ 𝐵 < 1, then we can reason as follows,
(𝑌 − 𝑋) = 𝐵. (𝑀𝑎𝑥 − 𝑋) ⟺ 𝑌 = 𝐵. 𝑀𝑎𝑥 − 𝐵. 𝑋 + 𝑋 ⟺ 𝑌 = (1 − 𝐵). 𝑋 + 𝐵. 𝑀𝑎𝑥
but now, if we let 𝑏 = 1 − 𝐵 and 𝑎 = 𝐵. 𝑀𝑎𝑥, we obtain,
(𝑌 − 𝑋) = 𝐵. (𝑀𝑎𝑥 − 𝑋) ⟺ 𝑌 = 𝑏. 𝑋 + 𝑎 ∧ 𝑏 = 1 − 𝐵 ∧ 𝑎 = 𝐵. 𝑀𝑎𝑥
⟺ 𝑌 = 𝑏. 𝑋 + 𝑎 ∧ 𝑎 = (1 − 𝑏). 𝑀𝑎𝑥 ∧ 𝐵 = 1 − 𝑏
∎

which is as required.

Proposition 1 shows that once the proportional to lost equation is turned into the standard-form
regression equation, as 𝑎 goes up (in the range zero to 𝑀𝑎𝑥), 𝑏 comes down, according to the
formula 𝑏 = 1 − (𝑎/𝑀𝑎𝑥). Thus, stronger proportional recovery patterns, i.e., with bigger 𝐵’s,
lead to increased intercepts and reduced slopes in the standard-form regression.
The set of possible linear relationships that proportional to lost encompasses are shown in figure
2 (panel A change form and D standard-form) in the main body. This makes it clear that
proportional to lost reflects a restricted range of the standard-form regression. Indeed, we can
highlight two varieties of proportional to lost, both of which are sub-models of standard-form
regression:
a) Liberal proportional to lost: standard-form regression in which 0 < 𝑏 ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ 𝑎 < 𝑀𝑎𝑥.
This generalisation enables, for example, constant recovery to be mixed with strong proportional
to lost.
b) Strong proportional to lost: the classic change formulation of proportional to lost, which
(putting mathematical coupling aside) is equivalent to standard-form regression with 0 < 𝑏 ≤ 1
and 𝑎 = (1 − 𝑏). 𝑀𝑎𝑥.
Both these forms require the slope to be less than or equal to the identity function (i.e., 𝑏 ≤ 1).
Liberal proportional to lost, though, does not constrain the relationship between slope and
intercept, while strong proportional to lost does, making strong a sub-model of liberal.
Notably, the liberal and the strong proportional to lost formulations behave differently with
regard to ceiling. That is, it is easy to show that, in the absence of noise, strong proportional to

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

lost cannot generate a ceiling effect, i.e., 𝑌 values above 𝑀𝑎𝑥. Specifically, strong proportional
to lost can be expressed as,
𝑌 = 𝑏. 𝑋 + (1 − 𝑏). 𝑀𝑎𝑥
where, for a given 𝑏, the second summand on the right is constant and the first summand is
maximal when 𝑋 = 𝑀𝑎𝑥. Thus, the maximum 𝑌 value that can be obtained is 𝑏. 𝑀𝑎𝑥 +
(1 − 𝑏). 𝑀𝑎𝑥, which equals 𝑀𝑎𝑥. In contrast, since 𝑏 and 𝑎 are independent in liberal
proportional to lost, both can be set high in their given range, generating 𝑌 values above 𝑀𝑎𝑥.
Now, we move to consider proportional to spared function.
Proposition 2 (Proportional to Spared)
Given that 0 ≤ 𝐵 < 1,
(𝑌 − 𝑋) = 𝐵. 𝑋 ⟺ 𝑌 = 𝑏. 𝑋 + 𝑎 ∧ 𝑏 = (𝐵 + 1) ∧ 1 ≤ 𝑏 < 2 ∧ 𝑎 = 0
Proof
∎

Straightforward.

So, proposition 2 implies that proportional to spared can be expressed in standard-form
regression, with an intercept of zero and a slope that is steeper than or equal to the identity, but
less than 2. This range of possible linear relationships is depicted in Figure 2 (panel B change
formulation and E standard-form).
As was the case for proportional to lost, we can also identify a liberal form of proportional to
spared.
a) Liberal proportional to spared: standard-form regression in which 1 ≤ 𝑏 < 2 and 0 ≤ 𝑎 <
𝑀𝑎𝑥.
b) Strong proportional to spared: the classic change formulation of proportional to spared, which
(apart from mathematical coupling) is equivalent to standard-form regression with 1 ≤ 𝑏 < 2
and 𝑎 = 0.
Both these forms require the slope to be greater than or equal to the identity function, but less
than 2. Strong proportional to spared, though, does not allow the intercept to increase above zero,
while liberal proportional to spared does, making strong a sub-model of liberal.
As shown in Figure 2 (panel E), strong proportional to spared generates ceiling effects, even
without adding noise once 𝑏 > 1 (i.e., once 𝐵 > 0). These ceiling effects increase in severity as
𝑏 (or, indeed, 𝐵) gets bigger. Ceiling effects become even more severe if the intercept is allowed
to be greater than zero, as supported by liberal proportional to spared.
37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Finally, we consider constant recovery (which is, of course, different to constant for standardform regression, which would be 𝑌 = 𝑎).
Proposition 3 (Constant Recovery)
Given that 0 ≤ 𝐴 < 𝑀𝑎𝑥,
(𝑌 − 𝑋) = 𝐴 ⟺ 𝑌 = 𝑏. 𝑋 + 𝑎 ∧ 𝑏 = 1 ∧ 0 ≤ 𝑎 < 𝑀𝑎𝑥
Proof
∎

Straightforward.

This reformulation makes clear that constant recovery generates the range of possible linear
relationships shown in Figure 2 (panels C and F). For 𝑎 bigger than zero, it also generates
increasingly severe ceiling effects as 𝑎 increases, even without a noise term.

2 Summary of Model Formulations (c.f. Introduction Section of Main Body)
We employ several different model formulations in this paper. We summarise these formulations
and where they are used here.
Ground Truth Simulations (c.f. subsection “Synthetic data simulation experiments” in
“Results” section)
We generate fake, i.e., synthetic, data according to (constrained) standard-form regression
models, of the form,
𝑌 = 𝑏. 𝑋 + 𝑎
where the constraints are exactly as in figure 2, i.e., proportional to lost (panel D), proportional
to spared (panel E), and constant recovery (panel F).
Fitted to Ground Truth Simulation Data (c.f. subsection “Synthetic data simulation
experiments” in “Results” section)
In all cases, we fit the model
𝑌 = 𝑏. 𝑋 + 𝑎
to the ground-truth simulation data; so we obtain estimates of slope, 𝑏, and intercept, 𝑎, (along
with their confidence intervals). Then, we assess the accuracy of fitting by comparing to the true
slope and intercept; c.f. previous section.
Fitted to Human Data, before Discarding Ceiling (c.f. subsection “Bayesian hierarchical
model” in “Results” section and Figure 4)
This is the first fitting to human data. We fit two models:
38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1. (unconstrained) standard-form regression, i.e., 𝑌 = 𝑏. 𝑋 + 𝑎.
2. Typical change-form regression, i.e., 𝑌 − 𝑋 = 𝑏. (𝑀𝑎𝑥 − 𝑋) + 𝑎.
To fully illustrate how extreme the effect of Compression Enhanced Coupling can be on the
fitting of the change form model, we allowed corresponding flexibility to the change- and
standard-form equations and incorporated an intercept (𝑎) into the change-form model.
Fitted to Human Data, with Ceiling Discarded (c.f. subsection “Final model comparison (on
human data) in the subset of FM-initial 10-45” of “Results” section)
We fitted the following models to the human data.
1. (unconstrained) standard-form regression, i.e., 𝑌 = 𝐵. 𝑋 + 𝐴.
2. Change-form proportional to lost, i.e., 𝑌 − 𝑋 = 𝐵. (𝑀𝑎𝑥 − 𝑋).
3. Change-form proportional to spared, i.e., 𝑌 − 𝑋 = 𝐵. 𝑋.
4. Change-form constant recovery, i.e., 𝑌 − 𝑋 = 𝐴.
2, 3, and 4, here, are as per panels A, B, and C of Figure 2.

3 Data acquisition and details on the Fugl Meyer Scale (c.f. section Methods of Main
Body)
We contacted nine corresponding authors of eleven studies comprising longitudinal data on
motor function measured on the Fugl Meyer scale post-stroke (screening of titles & abstracts,
keywords “poststroke”, “recovery”, “motor function”, “longitudinal”, “Fugl-Meyer” on PubMed
as well as following referenced literature, criteria: > 20 stroke patients, initial and follow-up Fugl
Meyer Score of the upper limb; initial: acute phase post-stroke, follow-up: 3-6 months poststroke). The response rate was 56 %. Only two authors ((Hawe, Scott, & Dukelow, 2019),
(Guggisberg, Nicolo, Cohen, Schnider, & Buch, 2017)) were able to share their data (reasons for
the decline: limited by ethics, in-house study). As individual-level data from (Zarahn et al., 2011)
was openly available, we were, therefore, able to merge it with data from (Hawe et al., 2019) and
(Guggisberg et al., 2017). Please see (Hawe et al., 2019) for a more detailed description of the
data extraction. In brief, published figures of initial and end FM scores were digitized and
positions of points extracted in Matlab, missing data was 17.7 %, primarily due to overlapping
data points.

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The FM assessment is a quantitative instrument to determine sensorimotor impairment poststroke, divided into five domains (motor function, sensory function, balance, joint range of
motion, and joint pain) (Fugl-Meyer et al., 1975). Please note that we considered information on
the motor performance of the affected upper limb only; a minimum of 0 implied no preserved
and a maximum of 66 indicated full motor function of the upper limb (multiple items on
movement, coordination, reflex action on the shoulder, elbow, forearm, wrist, hand, each
evaluated on a 3-point ordinal scale (0 = no performance, 1 = partial performance, 2 = full
performance).

4 Defining simulated ceiling: Details on measurement noise (c.f. section Methods of
Main Body)
When simulating the outcome, FM-end, we first added “State noise” (Gaussian noise, mean = 0,
Standard deviation (SD) = 5) to the output of the linear ground truth model. “State noise” can be
understood as unexplained randomness associated with the internal state of the system, e.g.,
variation in the alertness of subjects. This form of noise reflects the actual capacity of the brain,
ignoring the measurement method, and thus, naturally, is not bounded by the Fugl-Meyer scale.
Next, we enforced ceiling by setting any value greater than 66 to 66, i.e., the maximum value of
the Fugl Meyer assessment. This imposition of ceiling reflects the application of the Fugl-Meyer
scale and the parameters associated with it. This testing process will naturally involve a second
source of random variability – so-called measurement noise. The latter reflects variability in the
administration of the scale, which can be as subtle as the motivation a tester engenders in the
patient and him- or herself. We justify our setting of measurement noise (Gaussian noise, mean =
0, SD = 2) in what follows. Since this further application of Gaussian noise will place some data
points above ceiling, we enforced a final ceiling by once again setting any value greater than 66
to 66.
We relied on information about the test-retest reliability of the FM-scale, when estimating an
appropriate level of measurement noise. Reported test-retest and inter-rater reliabilities for the
Fugl Meyer are r>=0.96 over repeated tests (Gladstone, Danells, & Black, 2002). Accordingly,
we assessed the ratio of the data SD that the noise SD has to be to obtain such an r-value. This
correlation is between a first and second test, where the only difference between the two is the
addition of the noise.
40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The results of this simulation are shown in Supplementary Figure 1, which demonstrates that
noise with 10-20% (or even up to 30%) of the standard deviation of the original scores, gives
strong enough correlations to match empirically reported r-values. Given our “true” models,
standard deviations of the outcome had a range of 5.3 – 33.7. For reasons of simplicity, we
calculated a probable level of noise based on the smallest occurring standard deviation, i.e., SD =
5.3, and an assumption of 30 % noise for all models; this gives us a rounded measurement noise
standard deviation value of 2.

Supplementary Figure 1. Correlation of variables X and Y, representing two measurements,
where X is Y plus zero mean Gaussian noise. The standard deviation of the Gaussian noise is
varied relative to a fixed standard deviation for X.

5 Additional comments on simulations (c.f. section Methods of Main Body)
Importantly, the model comparison problem we are undertaking is simplified because the linear
fits provided by each of the three recovery theories – proportional to lost, to spared, and constant
– are, in all but one case, non-overlapping. This overlap can be seen in panels [A. B & C], as well
41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

as [D, E & F] of Figure 2. Specifically, whether in change or standard-form, apart from the identity
mapping, i.e., Y = X (which all the models allow, but will not arise in our fitting), the model spaces
are disjoint. This effectively ensures model retrievability, i.e., if we can show that each model can
retrieve the parameters of synthetic data it generated (the issue considered in section 8 of the
supplementary material), no non-generating model will fit better than a generating model.
Of course, this only applies to the three specific recovery models – proportional to lost,
proportional to spared, and constant recovery. We will also fit (unconstrained) standard-form
regression, which can generate all the linear fits of the three specific models, as well as fits that
they cannot generate.

6 Bayesian hierarchical models for the standard-form regression and change model
of fitters (FM-initial: > 10): Posterior predictive checks (c.f. Results section of Main
Body)

Supplementary Figure 2. Bayesian hierarchical models: Posterior predictive checks. A
(Unconstrained) Standard-form regression. B Change model. Histograms of the predicted means
of FM-end in case of the standard-form regression or Change in case of the change model based
on the sampled posteriors in comparison to the true mean of FM-end or Change (darker blue
vertical line). Agreement of means indicates reliable predictions of patterns that are present in
the real data.

7 Detailed evaluation of simulations (c.f. Results section of Main Body)
We report here the results of our ground truth simulations, which are performed for the three key
models: proportional to lost function recovery, proportional to spared function recovery, and
42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

constant recovery. In each of these cases, data is generated according to the standard-form
regression version of each model, i.e., the equations presented in panels [D, E, and F] of Figure
2. These re-expressions are justified in supplementary materials 1. Thus, the generating models
can be expressed as Y=b.X+a, with b the true slope and a the true intercept in the tables. Also,
for proportional to lost function recovery b=1-B and a=B.Max, with the “amount of recovery”
(1st column of tables) equal to B.100; for proportional to spared function recovery b=(1+B) and
a=0, with “amount of recovery” equal to B.100; and for constant recovery b=1 and a=A, with
“amount of recovery” equal to A.
Each row in each table below corresponds to simulations in which we generate 1000 data sets
according to given ground truth (i.e., setting of b and a) and then fit the same model (Y=b.X+a)
to each data set. The critical criterion for judging the effectiveness of model retrieval is the
number of times the true parameter settings (i.e., for a and b) were in the confidence intervals
resulting from model fitting; we report the proportion that met the 68% and 95% Confidence
Intervals (CIs). Model retrieval is maximally accurate if 68% (respectively 95%) of fits are in the
68% (respectively 95%) CIs. We also report the variability ratio, i.e., the ratio of standard
deviations of Y and X (log of this number is shown in Figure 1) and then the two relevant
correlations: r(X,Y) and r(X,Y-X), i.e., FM-initial – FM-end and FM-initial – Change. Finally, we
report the average number of subjects at or above absolute ceiling, i.e., the 𝑌 ≥ 𝑀𝑎𝑥 = 66.
We first state a summary of simulation results and then present the corresponding tables:
Proportional to lost function recovery
Baseline models (state noise only): Proportional to lost function recovery in the range of 10 % to
90 % was characterized by positive intercepts and slopes in-between values of 0 and 1. While
intercepts increased with the amount of proportional to lost function recovery (range: 6.6 – 59.4),
the opposite behavior was found for slopes (range: 0.9 – 0.2), Supplementary Table 1a illustrates
these trajectories. This is consistent with proportional to lost function recovery when formulated
as a standard-form regression; see proposition 1 in supplementary materials (part 1) and figure 2
panel [D]. Additionally, as expected and highlighted in (Hope et al., 2018) and (Hawe et al.,
2019a), Pearson correlation values steadily decreased for FM-initial – Change until an almost
perfect anti-correlation of -1, which was contrasted with decreasing positive correlation values for
43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FM-end – FM-initial, when increasing absolute percentages of proportional to lost function
recovery. Further, higher percentages of proportional to lost function were associated with a
decrease in standard deviation ratio, reaching a minimum value of 0.3 for 90% recovery (c.f.
Figure 6, B and C, left plots). In case of 70 % recovery, the absolute value of the correlation of
FM-initial – Change surpassed FM-end – FM-initial by 0.24, therefore, perfectly demonstrating
the inflation of correlation due to mathematical coupling and its enhancement as the variability
ratio reduces.
Ceiling enforced: Enforcing ceiling aggravated the dissociation of correlations of FM-initial –
Change and FM-end – FM-initial, in line with predictions by (Hope et al., 2018). The percentage
of subjects at absolute ceiling (i.e. FM-end = 66) reached a maximum of 21.4 % for 90 % recovery
(range: 4.1 % - 21.4 %, 70 % proportional recovery: 14.8 %).
Subset approaches FM-initial 10 to 60, 50 and 40: Reducing the number of subjects according
to their FM-initial scores re-established accurate inferences of intercepts and slopes, as was
indicated by met confidence intervals. The most substantial subset FM-initial 10 to 60 enabled
veridical model estimation up to 30 % of proportional to lost function recovery, FM-initial 10 to
50 up to 70 % and FM-initial 10 to 40 for the entirety of models. This increase in accurate model
estimation was paralleled by a decrease in subjects at ceiling.
Supplementary table 1a: Proportional to lost function recovery: No ceiling enforced.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

Estimated

Met

Met

68%-CI

95%-CI

Slope

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

10%

6.60

6.61

0.69

0.95

0.90

0.90

0.70

0.94

20%

13.20

13.21

0.68

0.95

0.80

0.80

0.71

0.96

30%

19.80

19.81

0.69

0.95

0.70

0.70

0.69

0.96

40%

26.40

26.38

0.68

0.96

0.60

0.60

0.68

0.94

50%

33.00

32.94

0.70

0.96

0.50

0.50

0.68

0.96

60%

39.60

39.57

0.68

0.95

0.40

0.40

0.70

0.94

70%

46.20

46.20

0.67

0.94

0.30

0.30

0.69

0.92

80%

52.80

52.83

0.69

0.95

0.20

0.20

0.69

0.95

90%

59.40

59.37

0.71

0.94

0.10

0.10

0.68

0.95

44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ratio STD

Correlation

Correlation

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

0.94

0.95

-0.33

0.85

0.94

-0.57

0.76

0.93

-0.72

0.66

0.90

-0.81

0.58

0.87

-0.87

0.49

0.82

-0.90

0.41

0.72

-0.93

0.35

0.57

-0.94

0.30

0.33

-0.95

Supplementary table 1b: Proportional to lost function recovery: Ceiling enforced.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

10%

6.60

7.09

0.61

0.90

0.90

0.88

0.49

0.85

20%

13.20

13.72

0.59

0.90

0.80

0.78

0.46

0.83

30%

19.80

20.38

0.56

0.87

0.70

0.68

0.43

0.80

40%

26.40

27.09

0.51

0.83

0.60

0.57

0.35

0.70

50%

33.00

33.71

0.51

0.85

0.50

0.47

0.27

0.68

60%

39.60

40.37

0.47

0.82

0.40

0.37

0.22

0.55

70%

46.20

47.01

0.42

0.79

0.30

0.26

0.14

0.44

80%

52.80

53.56

0.42

0.81

0.20

0.16

0.06

0.28

90%

59.40

59.39

0.61

0.92

0.10

0.07

0.08

0.33

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

0.93

0.95

-0.37

10

0.83

0.94

-0.60

11

0.74

0.92

-0.74

13

0.64

0.90

-0.83

14

0.55

0.86

-0.88

17

45

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0.46

0.80

-0.92

21

0.38

0.70

-0.94

26

0.30

0.53

-0.96

35

0.23

0.29

-0.97

52

Supplementary table 1c: Proportional to lost function recovery: Ceiling enforced, Subset 10
- 60.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

10%

6.60

6.68

0.67

0.94

0.90

0.90

0.69

0.95

20%

13.20

13.29

0.69

0.94

0.80

0.80

0.68

0.94

30%

19.80

19.95

0.66

0.94

0.70

0.69

0.67

0.94

40%

26.40

26.62

0.67

0.95

0.60

0.59

0.65

0.93

50%

33.00

33.32

0.64

0.92

0.50

0.49

0.60

0.91

60%

39.60

40.07

0.61

0.91

0.40

0.38

0.54

0.86

70%

46.20

46.76

0.57

0.89

0.30

0.27

0.40

0.77

80%

52.80

53.38

0.52

0.86

0.20

0.17

0.25

0.61

90%

59.40

59.33

0.65

0.93

0.10

0.07

0.20

0.55

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

0.96

0.94

-0.29

2

0.86

0.92

-0.52

3

0.77

0.90

-0.68

4

0.68

0.87

-0.78

5

0.58

0.83

-0.85

8

0.50

0.77

-0.89

11

0.41

0.66

-0.92

16

0.33

0.50

-0.94

24

0.26

0.26

-0.97

41

46

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary table 1d: Proportional to lost function recovery: Ceiling enforced, Subset
10 - 50.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

10%

6.60

6.64

0.66

0.95

0.90

0.90

0.67

0.95

20%

13.20

13.14

0.69

0.95

0.80

0.80

0.69

0.94

30%

19.80

19.86

0.69

0.96

0.70

0.70

0.70

0.96

40%

26.40

26.42

0.65

0.94

0.60

0.60

0.67

0.95

50%

33.00

33.02

0.67

0.94

0.50

0.50

0.67

0.95

60%

39.60

39.78

0.69

0.95

0.40

0.39

0.68

0.95

70%

46.20

46.43

0.65

0.95

0.30

0.29

0.69

0.95

80%

52.80

53.13

0.62

0.92

0.20

0.18

0.55

0.90

90%

59.40

59.27

0.67

0.94

0.10

0.07

0.46

0.81

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

0.99

0.90

-0.23

0

0.91

0.88

-0.42

0

0.82

0.85

-0.58

0

0.73

0.82

-0.69

1

0.65

0.76

-0.76

1

0.57

0.68

-0.82

3

0.50

0.58

-0.87

6

0.42

0.42

-0.91

12

0.34

0.21

-0.94

27

Supplementary table 1e: Proportional to lost function recovery: Ceiling enforced, Subset 10
- 40.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

47

True

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

10%

6.60

6.61

0.71

0.95

0.90

0.90

0.71

0.95

20%

13.20

13.26

0.69

0.94

0.80

0.80

0.70

0.95

30%

19.80

19.71

0.68

0.94

0.70

0.70

0.69

0.95

40%

26.40

26.39

0.70

0.94

0.60

0.60

0.70

0.95

50%

33.00

33.03

0.69

0.97

0.50

0.50

0.68

0.96

60%

39.60

39.64

0.69

0.95

0.40

0.40

0.68

0.95

70%

46.20

46.26

0.68

0.94

0.30

0.30

0.69

0.94

80%

52.80

53.04

0.65

0.94

0.20

0.18

0.64

0.95

90%

59.40

59.16

0.68

0.94

0.10

0.08

0.63

0.93

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

1.09

0.83

-0.16

0

1.00

0.79

-0.31

0

0.93

0.75

-0.44

0

0.85

0.70

-0.55

0

0.79

0.63

-0.63

0

0.73

0.55

-0.70

0

0.67

0.44

-0.76

2

0.60

0.30

-0.82

6

0.49

0.15

-0.88

17

Supplementary table 1f: Proportional to lost function recovery: Ceiling enforced, Subset 10
- 45.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

10%

6.60

6.61

0.67

0.94

0.90

0.90

0.67

0.94

20%

13.20

13.14

0.68

0.95

0.80

0.80

0.70

0.95

30%

19.80

19.77

0.69

0.95

0.70

0.70

0.68

0.95

40%

26.40

26.49

0.68

0.95

0.60

0.60

0.67

0.95

50%

33.00

33.08

0.71

0.96

0.50

0.50

0.71

0.96

60%

39.60

39.66

0.69

0.95

0.40

0.40

0.70

0.95

48

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

70%

46.20

46.38

0.66

0.94

0.30

0.29

0.64

0.94

80%

52.80

53.03

0.68

0.95

0.20

0.18

0.66

0.93

90%

59.40

59.25

0.68

0.94

0.10

0.07

0.54

0.89

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

1.03

0.87

-0.19

0

0.95

0.84

-0.36

0

0.87

0.81

-0.50

0

0.79

0.76

-0.62

0

0.71

0.70

-0.70

0

0.65

0.61

-0.76

1

0.58

0.50

-0.82

3

0.51

0.35

-0.87

8

0.41

0.17

-0.92

20

Proportional to spared function recovery
Baseline models (state noise only): It is important to note that – in contrast to proportional to lost
function – when formulated in standard-form, proportional to spared function is characterized by
intercepts of zero and slopes greater than one (and less than 2); see Figure 2, panel [E]. Pearson
correlations of FM-initial – Change as well as FM-end – FM-initial reached maximal values of
almost 1 for increasing degrees of proportional to spared function recovery. These were
accompanied by ratios of standard deviations greater than one (90 %: 1.9) (c.f. Figure 6, B and
C, center plots). This is the regime “on the hill” in our surface plot, i.e., log variability ratio
substantially greater than zero, Figure 1.
Ceiling enforced: Setting any FM-end values greater than it to 66 had a detrimental effect on the
accurate estimation of parameters for all proportional to spared instantiations, confidence intervals
were not met in any of the cases. Crucially, estimated intercept and slope combinations resembled
those of the true constant and proportional to lost function recovery models: Intercepts increased
in parallel to increasing amounts of proportional to spared function, while slopes started at values
close to one and successively decreased to a minimum of 0.76. Even in the case of only 10 %

49

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

proportional to spared function, there were 9.1 % of subjects at absolute ceiling (maximum: 90 %
proportional to spared function recovery with 30.9 % subjects at ceiling).
Subset approaches FM-initial 10 to 60, 50, 40: Once again, accuracy of estimation
performance increased with decreasing upper bounds for the FM-initial scores, yet not as
completely as for proportional to lost function: FM-initial 10 – 60: up to 10 %, FM-initial 10 –
50: up to 30 % and FM-initial 10 – 40: up to 70 % of proportional to spared function recovery.
Supplementary table 2a: Proportional to spared function recovery: No ceiling enforced.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

10%

0.00

0.00

0.67

0.94

1.10

1.10

0.71

0.94

20%

0.00

0.01

0.70

0.95

1.20

1.20

0.68

0.95

30%

0.00

0.01

0.71

0.95

1.30

1.30

0.71

0.95

40%

0.00

-0.01

0.67

0.95

1.40

1.40

0.68

0.96

50%

0.00

0.00

0.67

0.95

1.50

1.50

0.67

0.94

60%

0.00

0.00

0.69

0.95

1.60

1.60

0.69

0.95

70%

0.00

-0.02

0.71

0.96

1.70

1.70

0.68

0.96

80%

0.00

-0.02

0.67

0.94

1.80

1.80

0.68

0.94

90%

0.00

0.00

0.70

0.96

1.90

1.90

0.68

0.96

Ratio STD

Correlation

Correlation

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

1.11

0.99

0.66

1.21

1.00

0.87

1.30

1.00

0.93

1.40

1.00

0.96

1.50

1.00

0.98

1.60

1.00

0.98

1.70

1.00

0.99

1.80

1.00

0.99

1.90

1.00

0.99

Supplementary table 2b: Proportional to spared function recovery: Ceiling enforced.
50

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

10%

0.00

1.80

0.12

0.39

1.10

1.03

0.00

0.03

20%

0.00

4.17

0.00

0.00

1.20

1.04

0.00

0.00

30%

0.00

7.02

0.00

0.00

1.30

1.02

0.00

0.00

40%

0.00

10.06

0.00

0.00

1.40

0.99

0.00

0.00

50%

0.00

13.21

0.00

0.00

1.50

0.94

0.00

0.00

60%

0.00

16.26

0.00

0.00

1.60

0.90

0.00

0.00

70%

0.00

19.20

0.00

0.00

1.70

0.85

0.00

0.00

80%

0.00

22.05

0.00

0.00

1.80

0.80

0.00

0.00

90%

0.00

24.68

0.00

0.00

1.90

0.76

0.00

0.00

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

1.07

0.96

0.11

22

1.08

0.96

0.13

36

1.07

0.95

0.06

46

1.05

0.94

-0.04

54

1.02

0.92

-0.15

61

0.99

0.91

-0.25

65

0.95

0.89

-0.33

68

0.92

0.87

-0.41

72

0.88

0.86

-0.47

75

Supplementary table 2c: Proportional to spared function recovery: Ceiling enforced,
Subset 10 - 60.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

10%

0.00

0.46

0.61

0.92

1.10

1.08

0.54

0.87

20%

0.00

1.73

0.17

0.50

1.20

1.13

0.00

0.08

30%

0.00

3.75

0.00

0.01

1.30

1.14

0.00

0.00

51

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

40%

0.00

6.42

0.00

0.00

1.40

1.12

0.00

0.00

50%

0.00

9.30

0.00

0.00

1.50

1.09

0.00

0.00

60%

0.00

12.26

0.00

0.00

1.60

1.04

0.00

0.00

70%

0.00

15.24

0.00

0.00

1.70

1.00

0.00

0.00

80%

0.00

18.09

0.00

0.00

1.80

0.95

0.00

0.00

90%

0.00

20.82

0.00

0.00

1.90

0.90

0.00

0.00

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

1.13

0.96

0.24

8

1.17

0.96

0.38

18

1.19

0.96

0.39

28

1.18

0.95

0.32

36

1.15

0.94

0.22

42

1.12

0.93

0.11

46

1.09

0.91

-0.01

49

1.06

0.90

-0.11

53

1.02

0.88

-0.20

56

Supplementary table 2d: Proportional to spared function recovery: Ceiling enforced,
Subset 10 - 50.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

10%

0.00

0.04

0.69

0.95

1.10

1.10

0.66

0.95

20%

0.00

0.14

0.67

0.95

1.20

1.19

0.68

0.94

30%

0.00

0.38

0.69

0.93

1.30

1.28

0.64

0.92

40%

0.00

1.31

0.37

0.75

1.40

1.34

0.15

0.51

50%

0.00

3.08

0.03

0.18

1.50

1.35

0.00

0.00

60%

0.00

5.24

0.00

0.00

1.60

1.34

0.00

0.00

70%

0.00

7.72

0.00

0.00

1.70

1.31

0.00

0.00

80%

0.00

10.40

0.00

0.00

1.80

1.28

0.00

0.00

90%

0.00

13.02

0.00

0.00

1.90

1.23

0.00

0.00

52

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

1.18

0.93

0.22

0

1.27

0.94

0.42

1

1.35

0.95

0.56

5

1.39

0.96

0.64

10

1.41

0.96

0.66

16

1.41

0.95

0.62

20

1.39

0.94

0.57

23

1.37

0.93

0.49

27

1.34

0.92

0.41

30

Supplementary table 2e: Proportional to spared function recovery: Ceiling enforced,
Subset 10 - 40.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

10%

0.00

-0.02

0.68

0.96

1.10

1.10

0.69

0.95

20%

0.00

-0.01

0.66

0.94

1.20

1.20

0.68

0.94

30%

0.00

-0.02

0.71

0.96

1.30

1.30

0.72

0.95

40%

0.00

-0.04

0.67

0.95

1.40

1.40

0.67

0.95

50%

0.00

0.04

0.70

0.94

1.50

1.50

0.68

0.95

60%

0.00

0.20

0.67

0.95

1.60

1.59

0.67

0.95

70%

0.00

0.52

0.64

0.93

1.70

1.67

0.61

0.92

80%

0.00

1.39

0.47

0.83

1.80

1.72

0.33

0.71

90%

0.00

2.78

0.14

0.47

1.90

1.74

0.01

0.12

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

1.26

0.87

0.16

0

1.34

0.89

0.31

0

53

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1.44

0.91

0.44

0

1.53

0.92

0.55

0

1.62

0.93

0.63

0

1.70

0.94

0.70

1

1.77

0.94

0.75

3

1.82

0.95

0.78

7

1.83

0.95

0.79

10

Supplementary table 2f: Proportional to spared function recovery: Ceiling enforced,
Subset 10 - 45.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

10%

0.00

0.04

0.67

0.93

1.10

1.10

0.68

0.93

20%

0.00

-0.02

0.70

0.95

1.20

1.20

0.69

0.95

30%

0.00

0.03

0.67

0.94

1.30

1.30

0.69

0.94

40%

0.00

0.19

0.70

0.94

1.40

1.39

0.69

0.95

50%

0.00

0.74

0.59

0.90

1.50

1.46

0.56

0.87

60%

0.00

1.79

0.30

0.70

1.60

1.51

0.09

0.44

70%

0.00

3.32

0.04

0.24

1.70

1.53

0.00

0.01

80%

0.00

5.25

0.00

0.01

1.80

1.52

0.00

0.00

90%

0.00

7.47

0.00

0.00

1.90

1.50

0.00

0.00

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

1.21

0.91

0.19

0

1.31

0.92

0.36

0

1.39

0.93

0.50

0

1.48

0.94

0.61

2

1.54

0.95

0.68

4

1.59

0.95

0.71

7

1.61

0.95

0.72

10

1.61

0.94

0.70

14

54

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1.60

0.94

0.67

17

Constant recovery
Baseline models (state noise only): When formulated in standard-form regression, the natural
behavior of constant models is expressed by increasing intercepts, with unvarying slopes at one;
see Figure 2[F]. Pearson correlations for FM-end – FM-initial, as well as the ratio of standard
deviations, occupy values close to 1, FM-initial – Change, in contrast, are not correlated; these
phenomena are independent of the amount of constant recovery (c.f. Figure 6, B and C, right
plots).
Ceiling enforced: The ceiling effect rendered it impossible to veridically estimate the true model
parameters. Confidence intervals were not met in any simulation run for any constant model above
5 points recovery. Of further note, the ratio of standard deviations decreased from 0.99 to a
minimum of 0.13; see Figure 6 [C], rightmost panel, thus becoming even more extreme than the
ratio for proportional to lost function. A dissociation of correlations also reflected this: the
correlation of FM-initial – Change dropped from zero to an almost perfect anticorrelation of -1,
while the correlation of FM-end – FM-initial showed the opposite behavior, starting at 0.96, yet
dropping to 0.36 for a maximum of 50 points constant recovery; see Figure 6 [B] rightmost panel.
The percentages of subjects at ceiling increased from 8.2 % to 45.3 %.
Subset approaches FM-initial 10 to 60, 50, 40: Reducing analyses to subjects with initial FM
scores of 10 – 60 only marginally improved parameter estimation performance, i.e., up to 5 points
constant recovery. Considering subjects with initial FM scores of 10 – 50 and 10 – 40 allowed
accurate estimation up to 10 – 15 points and 25 points, respectively. Noteworthily, estimation
performance dropped once the percentage of subjects at ceiling exceeded 7 %.
Exclusively looking at subjects in the range of FM-initial 10 – 60 reduced the empirical number
of subjects at absolute ceiling from 37 to 18 (15.2 % and 9.0 %, respectively), in the range of FMinitial 10 – 50 to 7 (4.7 %) and in the range of FM-initial 10 – 40 to 4 (4.3 %).
Supplementary table 3a: Constant recovery: No ceiling enforced.

55

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

5

5.00

4.99

0.70

0.95

1.00

1.00

0.69

0.95

10

10.00

10.00

0.67

0.94

1.00

1.00

0.68

0.95

15

15.00

14.97

0.70

0.94

1.00

1.00

0.68

0.95

20

20.00

19.99

0.68

0.94

1.00

1.00

0.67

0.94

25

25.00

24.99

0.71

0.95

1.00

1.00

0.70

0.95

30

30.00

29.98

0.69

0.95

1.00

1.00

0.67

0.95

35

35.00

34.99

0.69

0.95

1.00

1.00

0.68

0.95

40

40.00

40.01

0.69

0.96

1.00

1.00

0.66

0.95

45

45.00

45.03

0.70

0.95

1.00

1.00

0.68

0.95

50

50.00

50.01

0.69

0.95

1.00

1.00

0.68

0.95

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

Ratio STD

Correlation

Correlation

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

1.04

0.96

0.00

1.04

0.96

0.00

1.04

0.96

0.00

1.04

0.96

0.00

1.04

0.96

0.00

1.04

0.96

0.00

1.04

0.96

0.00

1.04

0.96

0.00

1.04

0.96

0.00

1.04

0.96

0.00

Supplementary table 3b: Constant recovery: Ceiling enforced.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

5

5.00

6.37

0.25

0.60

1.00

0.95

0.01

0.17

10

10.00

13.15

0.00

0.03

1.00

0.88

0.00

0.00

56

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

15

15.00

20.43

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.78

0.00

0.00

20

20.00

27.88

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.67

0.00

0.00

25

25.00

35.35

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.55

0.00

0.00

30

30.00

42.46

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.42

0.00

0.00

35

35.00

49.05

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.30

0.00

0.00

40

40.00

54.85

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.20

0.00

0.00

45

45.00

59.56

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.11

0.00

0.00

50

50.00

62.81

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

0.99

0.96

-0.18

20

0.92

0.95

-0.40

34

0.83

0.94

-0.60

46

0.73

0.91

-0.74

57

0.62

0.88

-0.84

66

0.51

0.83

-0.90

74

0.40

0.76

-0.94

82

0.29

0.67

-0.96

90

0.20

0.54

-0.98

99

0.13

0.24

-0.99

110

Supplementary table 3c: Constant recovery: Ceiling enforced, Subset 10 - 60.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

5

5.00

5.39

0.64

0.93

1.00

0.98

0.57

0.93

10

10.00

11.36

0.28

0.65

1.00

0.94

0.04

0.27

15

15.00

18.08

0.01

0.06

1.00

0.87

0.00

0.00

20

20.00

25.36

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.76

0.00

0.00

25

25.00

32.93

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.64

0.00

0.00

30

30.00

40.39

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.50

0.00

0.00

35

35.00

47.44

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.36

0.00

0.00

57

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

40

40.00

53.69

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.24

0.00

0.00

45

45.00

58.94

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.13

0.00

0.00

50

50.00

62.53

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.06

0.00

0.00

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

1.04

0.95

-0.05

7

1.00

0.95

-0.17

16

0.92

0.94

-0.39

28

0.82

0.92

-0.60

39

0.71

0.89

-0.75

48

0.59

0.85

-0.85

55

0.46

0.78

-0.91

63

0.35

0.69

-0.95

72

0.24

0.55

-0.97

81

0.15

0.38

-0.99

91

Supplementary table 3d: Constant recovery: Ceiling enforced, Subset 10 - 50.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

5

5.00

5.02

0.67

0.96

1.00

1.00

0.69

0.95

10

10.00

10.12

0.68

0.95

1.00

0.99

0.69

0.96

15

15.00

15.46

0.66

0.94

1.00

0.98

0.61

0.91

20

20.00

21.63

0.28

0.64

1.00

0.92

0.05

0.26

25

25.00

28.71

0.00

0.05

1.00

0.81

0.00

0.00

30

30.00

36.35

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.67

0.00

0.00

35

35.00

44.00

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.51

0.00

0.00

40

40.00

51.23

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.34

0.00

0.00

45

45.00

57.42

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.20

0.00

0.00

50

50.00

61.87

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.09

0.00

0.00

58

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

1.09

0.92

0.00

0

1.08

0.92

-0.01

1

1.06

0.92

-0.05

6

1.00

0.92

-0.20

13

0.90

0.90

-0.43

21

0.77

0.87

-0.65

29

0.63

0.81

-0.80

37

0.48

0.72

-0.89

45

0.33

0.58

-0.95

55

0.21

0.40

-0.98

64

Supplementary table 3e: Constant recovery: Ceiling enforced, Subset 10 - 40.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

5

5.00

5.04

0.68

0.96

1.00

1.00

0.69

0.95

10

10.00

10.03

0.68

0.96

1.00

1.00

0.66

0.95

15

15.00

14.99

0.70

0.96

1.00

1.00

0.70

0.95

20

20.00

20.08

0.65

0.95

1.00

1.00

0.65

0.96

25

25.00

25.37

0.66

0.93

1.00

0.98

0.66

0.93

30

30.00

31.65

0.39

0.77

1.00

0.90

0.15

0.56

35

35.00

39.15

0.02

0.09

1.00

0.75

0.00

0.00

40

40.00

47.30

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.54

0.00

0.00

45

45.00

54.82

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.33

0.00

0.00

50

50.00

60.64

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.15

0.00

0.00

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

1.17

0.85

0.00

0

1.17

0.85

0.00

0

1.17

0.85

0.00

0

59

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1.16

0.85

-0.01

1

1.14

0.86

-0.04

4

1.06

0.85

-0.17

9

0.92

0.82

-0.43

17

0.73

0.74

-0.69

25

0.52

0.62

-0.85

35

0.33

0.44

-0.94

45

Supplementary table 3f: Constant recovery: Ceiling enforced, Subset 10 - 45.
Amount of

True

Estimated

recovery

Intercept intercept

Met

Met

True

68%-CI

95%-CI Slope

Estimated

Met

Met

slope

68%-

95%-

CI

CI

5

5.00

5.01

0.68

0.94

1.00

1.00

0.67

0.94

10

10.00

10.03

0.69

0.96

1.00

1.00

0.70

0.96

15

15.00

15.05

0.70

0.95

1.00

1.00

0.68

0.94

20

20.00

20.51

0.63

0.93

1.00

0.97

0.63

0.92

25

25.00

26.69

0.32

0.71

1.00

0.91

0.10

0.45

30

30.00

33.75

0.01

0.10

1.00

0.80

0.00

0.00

35

35.00

41.51

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.63

0.00

0.00

40

40.00

49.31

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.44

0.00

0.00

45

45.00

56.14

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.26

0.00

0.00

50

50.00

61.26

0.00

0.00

1.00

0.11

0.00

0.00

Ratio STD

Correlation Correlation Numbers of subjects at or

Y/X

X-Y

X - Change

above absolute ceiling

1.12

0.89

0.00

0

1.12

0.89

0.00

0

1.12

0.89

-0.01

1

1.09

0.89

-0.05

4

1.03

0.89

-0.18

9

0.92

0.86

-0.40

17

0.77

0.82

-0.64

24

0.60

0.73

-0.81

33

60

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0.43

0.60

-0.91

42

0.27

0.42

-0.96

52

8 Bayesian hierarchical models FM-initial 10 – 45 for Fitters: Model comparison
based on the WAIC and interpretation of marginal posterior distributions (c.f.
section Results in Main Body)

Supplementary Figure 3. Subset FM-Initial 10 – 45 for fitters. Model comparison based on the
widely applicable criterion (WAIC), resulting in a similar model ranking in comparison to the
leave-one-out-cross-validations results. The standard-form regression model is top-ranked,
closely followed by the proportional to lost function model and constant recovery model.

9 Further Discussion of Fitting Results (c.f. section Results in Main Body)
61

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Here, we provide further interpretation of the fitting results that we obtain for our human data.
There are three cases where our fitting gives parameter estimates that are just outside the range
of accurate retrieval according to our ground-truth (synthetic data) simulations. This happens for
change-form proportional to spared for both fitters alone and fitters & non-fitters combined, and
change-form constant recovery for fitters alone. Importantly, these are all losing models. That is,
for fitters, change-form proportional to spared was the worst fitting followed by change-form
constant recovery, while for fitters & non-fitters, change-form proportional to spared was the
worst model.
Since these are losing models, the key inferential error that we want to defend ourselves against
is that we have under-estimated the R-squared and model evidence for these, since only this
would alter our conclusions, as to which are the winning models. Critically, though, in all these
cases, any inaccuracy in fitting would work in the opposite direction, i.e., to over-estimate the
quality of fit. This is very simple because if the particular model was the true generating model,
the correct parameter setting would be in the parameter space being fitted. The parameter values
selected in the model fitting have to be the correct settings or “better” fittings than them.
Otherwise, they would not have been selected by the fitting algorithm.
Thus, in all these critical cases, the R-squared and model evidence can only be correct or overestimated, under-estimation is not possible. However, even if there is over-estimation, the
models still lose, confirming that the inferences we have made are sound. We discuss these three
cases in a little more depth next.
Constant Recovery: when we fit the constant recovery rule in its change formulation (see Figure
2[C]) to the Fitters group, we obtain an R-squared of 5.8% and a constant of 26pt (see section
“Final Model Comparison (on human data) in the Subset of FM-initial 10-45”). In supplementary
material section 8 (“Detailed Evaluation of Simulations”), we show synthetic data simulation
results for the different models. The simulations for constant recovery, see Supplementary
Table 3f, show that with 10-45 subsetting, we get very accurate parameter retrieval for constants
up to 20 points. For a constant of 25, though, retrieval becomes less accurate and worsens further
for 30 and beyond.
The central inference that we are seeking to make in our analysis of fitters is that standard-form
regression has the highest R-squared and model evidence, followed by proportional to lost
function and then constant recovery. Thus, as just discussed, the scenario that we wish to defend
62

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ourselves against is that we have underestimated the R-squared and model evidence for the fit of
constant recovery. For the reasons just discussed, we can argue that such an underestimation has
not been made. This, then, suggests that our conclusion that standard-form and proportional to
lost fit better than constant recovery for the 10-45 subset of the fitters data, is indeed a reliable
inference.
For the Fitters & Non-fitters combined data set, constant recovery obtains a constant of
~20points, putting it in the range of reliable parameter retrieval.
Proportional to Spared: When we fit the proportional to spared model in the change formulation
(see Figure 2[B]) for both fitters alone and fitters & non-fitters, we obtain slopes that are in the
upper part of the allowable range, where retrievability of parameters starts to breakdown; see
Supplementary Table 2f, for 10-45 subsetting, which is around 60%. However, both for fitters
and fitters & non-fitters, when this arises, we can use the argument just made to justify that an
under-estimate of fit has not been made, supporting our inferences that models other than
proportional to spared are the best fitting.

10 Additional subset evaluations for Fitters: Bayesian hierarchical models FMinitial 10 – 40 and FM-initial 10 – 50 (c.f. Results section of Main Body)

63

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 4. Alleviating confounds by ceiling effects and mathematical
coupling: Marginal posteriors for Fitters of the hierarchical models’ parameters
considering all subjects with initial FM scores between ten and 40. Final model
comparison. A. Proportional to lost function recovery (formulated as in Figure 2[A]); B.
Proportional to spared function recovery (formulated as in Figure 2[B]); C. Constant recovery
(formulated as in Figure 2[C]); D. (Unconstrained) Standard-form regression; E. Final Bayesian
model comparison relying on leave-one-out-cross-validation. Empty circles represent the
64

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

LOOCV-Score, black error bars the corresponding standard error. The filled black circles mark
the models’ in-sample deviance, grey triangles the difference to the top-ranked model, as well as
the associated standard error. Lastly, the lowest LOOCV-value is indicated by the vertical
dashed grey line. The standard-form regression model provides the best out-of-sample
performance and is ranked first in the model comparison, closely followed by the constant and
proportional to lost function recovery models.

65

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 5. Alleviating confounds by ceiling effects and mathematical
coupling: Marginal posteriors for Fitters of the hierarchical models’ parameters
considering all subjects with initial FM scores between ten and 50. Final model
comparison. A. Proportional to lost function recovery (formulated as in Figure 2[A]); B.
Proportional to spared function recovery (formulated as in Figure 2[B]); C. Constant recovery
66

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(formulated as in Figure 2[C]); D. (Unconstrained) Standard-form regression; E. Final Bayesian
model comparison relying on leave-one-out-cross-validation. Empty circles represent the
LOOCV-Score, black error bars the corresponding standard error. The filled black circles mark
the models’ in-sample deviance, grey triangles the difference to the top-ranked model, as well as
the associated standard error. Lastly, the lowest LOOCV-value is indicated by the vertical
dashed grey line. The standard-form regression model provides the best out-of-sample
performance and is ranked first in the model comparison, immediately followed by the
proportional to lost function recovery model. The constant recovery model follows with quite
some distance, the proportional to spared recovery model is ranked last, as in the other subsets’
model comparisons.

Gladstone, D. J., Danells, C. J., & Black, S. E. (2002). The Fugl-Meyer assessment of motor
recovery after stroke: A critical review of its measurement properties. Neurorehabilitation and
Neural Repair, 16(3), 232–240.
Guggisberg, A. G., Nicolo, P., Cohen, L. G., Schnider, A., & Buch, E. R. (2017). Longitudinal
structural and functional differences between proportional and poor motor recovery after stroke.
Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, 31(12), 1029–1041.
Hawe, R. L., Scott, S. H., & Dukelow, S. P. (2019). Taking Proportional Out of Stroke
Recovery. Stroke, 50(1), 204–211.
Prabhakaran, S., Zarahn, E., Riley, C., Speizer, A., Chong, J. Y., Lazar, R. M., … Krakauer, J.
W. (2008). Inter-individual Variability in the Capacity for Motor Recovery After Ischemic
Stroke. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, 22(1), 64–71.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1545968307305302
Zarahn, E., Alon, L., Ryan, S. L., Lazar, R. M., Vry, M.-S., Weiller, C., … Krakauer, J. W.
(2011). Prediction of Motor Recovery Using Initial Impairment and fMRI 48 h Poststroke.
Cerebral Cortex, 21(12), 2712–2721. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhr047

67

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009159; this version posted October 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

68

