medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Individual differences in the course of youth depression: The importance of renitence and
reversion
Matt Hawrilenko, PhD1
Katherine E. Masyn, PhD 2
Janine Cerutti, BA3
Erin C. Dunn, ScD, MPH 3,4,5
1 University of Washington School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, Seattle, WA
2 School of Public Health, Georgia State University
3 Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA
4 Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
5 Center on the Developing Child at Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
Corresponding Author: Matt Hawrilenko, PhD, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Seattle, WA 98105. email: mhavril@uw.edu.
Phone: 215-779-7271.
Acknowledgments: This research was funded by the National Institute of Mental Health of the
National Institutes of Health under Award Numbers K01MH102403 and 1R01MH113930
(Dunn). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of the National Institutes of Health. We are extremely grateful to all the
families who took part in this study, the midwives for their help in recruiting them, and the
whole ALSPAC team, which includes interviewers, computer and laboratory technicians, clerical
workers, research scientists, volunteers, managers, receptionists and nurses. The UK Medical
Research Council and the Welcome Trust (Grant ref: 102215/2/13/2) and the University of
Bristol provide core support for ALSPAC. A comprehensive list of grants funding is available on
the ALSPAC website (http://www.bristol.ac.uk/alspac/external/documents/grantacknowledgements.pdf). This publication is the work of the authors who will serve as guarantors
for the contents of this paper.

Page
1 of
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been
certified
by 39
peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Studies of developmental trajectories of depression are important for understanding its
etiology. Existing studies have been limited by short time frames and no studies have explored a
key factor: differential patterns of responding to life events. This paper introduces a novel
analytic technique, growth mixture modeling with structured residuals, to examine the course of
youth depression symptoms in a large, prospective cohort (N=11,641, ages 4-16.5). Age-specific
critical points were identified at ages 10 and 13 where depression symptoms spiked for a
minority of children. However, most depression risk was due to dynamic responses to
environmental events, drawn not from a small pool of persistently depressed children, but a
larger pool of children who varied across higher and lower symptom levels.

Page 2 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Depression is one of the most common, costly, and disabling mental disorders worldwide
(GBD Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collaborators, 2017) with lifetime
prevalence estimates of 11.7% among adolescents (Merikangas et al., 2011) and 16.6% among
adults in the United States (Kessler et al., 2005). A large proportion of depression cases begin
early in development, with one-third of people who experience depression having their first onset
before age 21 (Zisook et al., 2007). Youth who experience depression are a particularly
vulnerable group, as they are at an increased risk of suicide (Gould, Greenberg, Velting, &
Shaffer, 2003), substance abuse (Lai, Cleary, Sitharthan, & Hunt, 2015), cigarette smoking
(Chaiton, Cohen, O'Loughlin, & Rehm, 2009), and are more likely to experience recurrent
episodes of depression as adults (P.M. Lewinsohn, Rohde, Seeley, Klein, & Gotlib, 2000; Rao et
al., 1995). In fact, earlier onsets of depression are associated with worse illness course and
outcome into adulthood (Costello, Foley, & Angold, 2006; Zisook et al., 2007). These findings
underscore the need to understand the etiology and course of depression over time in order to
prevent and treat the disorder as early in the lifespan as possible.
However, efforts to characterize the etiology and course of depression have had limited
success due to depression’s heterogenous nature (van Loo, de Jonge, Romeijn, Kessler, &
Schoevers, 2012). Here, heterogeneity refers to the nature of depression itself as a phenomenon
with a variable symptom profile and variable developmental course regulated by time-invariant
and time-varying processes. There are at least three major challenges related to depression
heterogeneity that may lead researchers to arrive at erroneous, inconsistent, or conflicting
findings regarding the etiology and course of depression.
The first major challenge is that depression is difficult to measure both in childhood and
across the life course, because no single definition of “depression” exists. According to the

Page 3 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders fifth edition ((American Psychiatric
Association, 2013), there are 227 different ways to meet the diagnostic threshold for a major
depressive episode, owing to different combinations of affective, cognitive, and behavioral
symptoms (I.R. Galatzer-Levy & Bryant, 2013). Most troublingly, depression phenotypes may
differ by age because symptom type, frequency, and severity are more or less prominent at
different ages (Carlson & Kashani, 1988; Garvey & Schaffer, 1994; Hegeman, Kok, van der
Mast, & Giltay, 2012). Even with DSM-5’s wide inclusion criteria, the boundaries for what
constitutes “depressed” may be too narrow, as subclinical depressive symptoms have been
associated with substantial functional impairment (J. P. Allen, Chango, Szwedo, & Schad, 2014;
Kessler, Zhao, & Blazer, 1997). Thus, depression has been alternately viewed not just as a binary
construct (where people either have or do not have depression), but as a dimensional construct
(everyone has some amount of depressive symptoms), or a combination of the two (Kotov et al.,
2017). Reflecting these nuances, the most widely used scales to measure depressive symptoms
vary in the affective, cognitive, and behavioral symptoms measured and consequently are only
moderately correlated (Fried, 2017), meaning that a person’s level of “depression” could be
assessed very differently depending on the instrument used to measure it.
The second challenge is that depression emerges and changes across development; that is,
it is an age-dependent trajectory of symptoms. Depression is rare in childhood until age 11, but
then has larger yearly increases in prevalence through age 15 (Avenevoli, Swendsen, He,
Burstein, & Merikangas, 2015). This age-dependence suggests that age-related events likely
influence the onset of the disorder. Such events may span everything from biological changes
including puberty (Graber, Lewinsohn, Seeley, & Brooks-Gunn, 1997) to sociocultural factors
like psychosocial stress (Hyde, Mezulis, & Abramson, 2008) and factors that lie in between, such

Page 4 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

as family history of depression (Kendler, Gatz, Gardner, & Pedersen, 2005). Moreover,
developmental trajectories of depressive symptoms may be systematically different across
children, meaning that different children may develop depression at different times via different
pathways (Ellis et al., 2017; Shore, Toumbourou, Lewis, & Kremer, 2018).
The third challenge is that depression varies in how long symptoms last (chronicity) and
how frequently symptoms return (recurrence). Some young people have minimal symptoms
throughout their lives, whereas others have persistently high symptoms, and others have
symptoms that fluctuate more dynamically across levels of severity (Hosenfeld et al., 2015;
Lorenzo-Luaces, 2015). Prior studies in adolescents have found that the duration of a depressive
episode can vary in length from 2 weeks to 10 years, and that one third of recovered 14 to 18year-olds had a recurrence within 4 years (Lewinsohn, Clarke, Seeley, & Rohde, 1994). In this
paper, we posit that chronicity and recurrence may in part be driven by renitent responding and
its opposite, reversing responding (collectively called responding). We define renitent
responding as the degree to which a deviation from one’s own average symptom levels
perpetuates across time. Renitent responding is different from a similar construct, inertia
(Kuppens et al., 2012), because renitent responding captures how a person’s symptoms respond
to life events, rather than how symptoms cause themselves from one moment to the next. People
with renitent responding may have high chronicity. When something causes them to become
depressed, they remain depressed for long periods of time; when they feel better, this too
perpetuates. In contrast to renitent responding, reversing responding characterizes people whose
symptoms, once moved from their average level, tend to fluctuate up and down. People with
reversing responding may transition more frequently from relapse to recurrence. Extreme levels
of both renitent and reversing responding may be associated with increased psychopathology

Page 5 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Houben, Van Den Noortgate, & Kuppens, 2015). As posited by developmental psychopathology
theories (Curran & Bauer, 2011), patterns of responding to any given depressive episode may be
regulated by personal characteristics. For example, young adults with depression have been
shown to employ coping behaviors that make their depressive symptoms better or worse (Bolger,
1990; Compas, Orosan, & Grant, 1993; Galatzer-Levy, Burton, & Bonanno, 2012). Such
behaviors, including reaching out for social support or withdrawing from social interactions, can
shape responding during a depressive episode. Vulnerability characteristics, including early
childhood abuse, negative life events, parental psychopathology, and chronic physical disorders
(I.R. Galatzer-Levy & Bryant, 2013; Ten Have et al., 2018), may increase people’s tendency for
renitent responding, whereas sleep, healthy diet (Cairns, Yap, Pilkington, & Jorm, 2014), social
support, and positive coping (Dumont & Provost, 1999) may lead to a balanced, middle ground
between renitent and reversing responding. Unpacking how personal characteristics and
environmental experiences shape renitent and reversing responding may be a key component to
understanding depression heterogeneity (Franklin, Jamieson, Glenn, & Nock, 2015).
To address some of these heterogeneity issues, growth mixture modeling (GMM; (Jung
& Wickrama, 2008; Muthen & Muthen, 2000) has emerged as an analytic technique to
characterize developmental pathways. In brief, GMM seeks to identify different pathways to
developing depression by classifying people into subgroups with similar patterns of symptom
change across time. It is a latent variable approach because subgroup membership is not directly
observed, but rather indirectly indicated by average symptom levels and trajectories of change
over time. A major advantage of GMM over growth curve modeling is that it relaxes the
assumption that all individuals are drawn from a single population, so inferences can be made
within and across more meaningful subgroups (e.g., different risk factors can be explored for

Page 6 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

people with minimal symptoms versus those who develop depression at younger ages versus
those who develop depression at older ages). In their recent review of the literature, Ellis and
colleagues (2017) found 18 studies that examined depressive symptom trajectories in children
and adolescents. The studies are difficult to parsimoniously summarize because findings on the
numbers of classes and the development of depression over time varied according to the age
ranges included (notably, only one study included children younger than 10), and whether
community or clinical samples were used. However, despite methodological differences, all
studies found support for multiple classes over a single class, and nearly all studies identified a
group with persistently minimal symptoms, as well as a group with symptoms that increase over
time (typically examining children aged 12 and older).
GMM has also been used to model developmental changes in internalizing symptoms, a
closely related construct to depression. Internalizing symptoms consist of negative internal
experiences such as anxiety, sadness, and somatic issues. These GMM studies have found that
symptom trajectories are best characterized by four to six subgroups (Dekker et al., 2007;
Edwards et al., 2014), capturing children with consistently low symptoms, persistently high
symptoms, low symptoms that increased during the adolescent years, and high symptoms that
somewhat decreased as children aged.
For example, using data from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children
(ALSPAC), Edwards et al. (2014) examined trajectories of internalizing symptoms from ages 4
through 11.5. They found that 75% of the sample had low symptoms across childhood, with the
rest being divided into four subgroups consistent with previous analyses: a group with
persistently high symptoms, a group whose symptoms increased across childhood, a group
whose symptoms decreased across childhood, and a group whose symptoms rose to a moderate

Page 7 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

symptom level around age 8 and then tapered off by age 11. In another GMM analysis of
ALSPAC, Rice et al. (2018) used latent class growth analysis, a special form of growth mixture
modeling that assumes there is no within-class variability in growth factors, and similar to
Edwards and colleagues, they characterized 74% of people as having persistently low risk, and
the remainder as having early adolescent onset or late adolescent onset depressive symptoms.
Together, GMM studies of depression and internalizing symptoms demonstrate that
subtyping depression by its developmental course can paint a clearer picture of qualitatively
different courses of depressive symptoms, which can aid in generating hypotheses about their
etiological determinants. Despite their utility, existing GMM studies of depression have been
limited in three primary ways. First, all studies ignored the first major heterogeneity challenge
described previously: the problem of measurement. These studies used only a single instrument
over time and assumed that symptoms measured depression equally well at different ages. Given
the heterogeneity in both symptoms and measures of depression, better measuring depressive
symptoms by using multiple measures, and testing and accommodating how the measurement
model changes over time, can strengthen conclusions and lead to more replicable results. Second,
existing studies are limited because they mostly focus on a narrow range of ages, with only a few
including children younger than 10 years old (Dekker et al., 2007; Edwards et al., 2014; Whalen
et al., 2016). However, developmental pathways to depression likely begin much earlier than
adolescence, as certain depressive symptoms have been shown to manifest as early as age 5
(Whalen, Sylvester, & Luby, 2017). Furthermore, childhood studies of depressive symptom
trajectories have followed participants for an average of 3-6 years (Ellis et al., 2017), limiting the
opportunity to track longer-term developmental patterns. Thus, the extent to which
developmental profiles of depression symptoms vary from childhood through adolescence

Page 8 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

remains unknown. Third, with some recent exceptions (see review by Musliner, Munk-Olsen,
Eaton, & Zandi, 2016), little work has linked these developmental trajectories to their etiological
determinants. Linking discrete developmental trajectories to the social and biological factors that
set these trajectories in motion is critical for understanding how risk factors differentially
influence the development of depression, and can lead to identifying, as early on as possible,
children most at risk. Finally, no existing studies have addressed the challenge that depression
varies systematically over time due to things other than age. Because all existing studies have
developed latent classes purely as a function of age, they have ignored systematic patterns of
renitent and reversing responding. Identifying systematic differences in patterns of responding
may help identify groups of people who cope more or less effectively with the life events that
lead to their depression, and also elucidate malleable risk factors (Franklin et al., 2015).
Current Study
The primary goal of this study was to use GMM to identify subgroups of children with
different depressive symptom trajectories and patterns of relapse and recurrence across two
decades of life—from ages 4 through 16.5 years—using data from a unique ongoing longitudinal
sample called the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC). To
simultaneously explore age-dependent trajectories and patterns of responding to changes in
symptoms, we introduce a novel form of growth mixture modeling, the growth mixture model
with structured residuals (GMM-SR). A secondary goal of this study was to explore how five of
the most common and impactful social factors related to depression influenced membership in
these subgroups. In the current study, we address the aforementioned limitations of previous
GMM studies by modeling depression as a latent variable, measured by multiple instruments
assessing depressive symptoms across time, and accounting for the possibility that symptoms

Page 9 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

functioned differently at different ages. We used this latent depression variable in a GMM-SR to
characterize depression trajectories, including patterns of renitent responding and reversing
responding, across this 13-year period. By jointly characterizing both age-related change and
patterns of responding and identifying etiological factors for both, our aim was to better describe
heterogeneity in the etiology of depression.
Methods
Sample and Procedures
ALSPAC sampled children born to mothers who were living in the county of Avon
England (120 miles west of London) with estimated delivery dates between April 1991 and
December 1992 (Boyd et al., 2012; Fraser et al., 2013). When the oldest children were
approximately 7 years old, an attempt was made to bolster the initial sample with eligible cases
who had failed to join the study originally. 15,454 eligible pregnant women agreed to participate
and were enrolled in the study, which resulted in 15,589 fetuses and a sample size of 14,901 who
were alive at 1 year of age. The study website contains details of all the data that is available
through a fully searchable data dictionary and variable search tool:
www.bristol.ac.uk/alspac/researchers/our-data/. Ethical approval for the study was obtained from
the ALSPAC Ethics and Law Committee and the Local Research Ethics Committee.
The current study is based on an analytic sample of 11,641 children who had data on at
least one measure of depressive symptoms, as described below. Children included in our analytic
sample did not differ from those who were excluded with respect to sex. However, children who
were excluded tended to be non-white (9.4% of excluded participants vs. 4.3% in analytic
sample), have lower levels of maternal education (48% of excluded participants were less than
O-level vs. 27% of included participants), and were more likely to be unmarried (40% vs. 22%).

Page 10 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Measures
Outcome: Youth depressive symptoms. We used three measures that tapped depressive
symptoms, all reported by mothers. These measures were derived from two subscales of the
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ; Goodman, 1997), and the Short Mood and
Feelings Questionnaire (SMFQ; Angold et al., 1995). Questionnaires were selected, in part,
because they tapped the most relevant depression symptoms at each age. The latent variable,
discussed below, is interpreted as the common cause of all symptoms across questionnaires.
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire. The current study used the SDQ to assess child
emotional and behavioral problems. The SDQ is one of the most commonly used dimensional
ratings of child psychopathology in epidemiology studies and has excellent psychometric
properties (Ezpeleta, Granero, de la Osa, Penelo, & Domènech, 2013; Muris, Meesters, & van
den Berg, 2003). The SDQ has five subscales containing five items each and is rated on a threepoint scale (0=not true, 1=somewhat true, or 2=certainly true), capturing the child’s behavior and
feelings within the past six months. The current study used two of the five SDQ subscales, child
emotional problems and peer difficulties, which are often combined to represent “internalizing
symptoms” (R. Goodman, 2001). Mothers completed the SDQ using mailed questionnaires at
seven time-points when their child was ages 4, 7, 8, 9.5, 11.5, 13, and 16.5 years.
Short Mood and Feelings Questionnaire. The SMFQ is commonly used in
epidemiological studies to assess depressive symptoms in adolescents and older children
(Lundervold, Hinshaw, Sorensen, & Posserud, 2016; Patton et al., 2008). The SMFQ has been
shown in diverse populations to differentiate clinic from community samples and correlates
highly with questionnaire and interview measures of psychopathology and clinician-rated
diagnoses of depression in early and late adolescence (Turner, Joinson, Peters, Wiles, & Lewis,

Page 11 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2014). Mothers completed the SMFQ by mailed questionnaire at three time-points when their
child was 11.5, 13, and 16.5.
Social factors. We examined the role of five social factors as predictors of trajectory
class membership: 1) maternal education (as a measure of socioeconomic position), 2) maternal
psychopathology, 3) caregiver physical/emotional cruelty, 4) living in a single parent household,
and 5) neighborhood disadvantage. These factors were chosen based on previous studies
showing they precede the development of psychopathology in other samples (Petterson &
Albers, 2001); (Felitti et al., 1998; S. H. Goodman & Gotlib, 1999), which suggests they also
precede the development of related coping behaviors. Each determinant was measured via
maternal report on one to four occasions from psychometrically validated standardized measures,
a single item via mailed questionnaires, or via an in-person interview and was coded as present
versus absent, as described in Appendix A. To ensure these factors preceded the measurement of
depressive symptoms, all factors were measured at or before the age of four years. The current
analysis focused on etiology rather than factors more dynamically related to inertia, such as
sleep, diet, and social support, because including them would have considerably complicated the
analysis and interpretation of an already complex statistical model.
Analytic Strategy
Analyses were conducted in four phases: (1) construction of a measurement model, (2)
identification of a growth model, (3) enumeration and selection of a mixture model, and (4)
exploration of the predictors of latent class membership.
1. Latent Depression Score Measurement Model. Item level confirmatory factor models
were used to test and account for the possibility that questionnaire items had different
relationships to the latent construct, depression, at different ages (i.e., measurement invariance).

Page 12 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Based on results from these preliminary analyses (see Appendix B), which revealed that the
SDQ behavioral items and several of the SMFQ items had age-related changes caused by factors
other than depression, parcels were constructed, meaning all items were divided into subsets and
each subset was averaged (Little, Cunningham, Shahar, & Widaman, 2002). There were five
parcels: the SDQ-emotions subscale, SDQ-peer difficulties subscale, and three groups of items
from the SMFQ. Because the preliminary analyses found that some symptoms had systematic
changes over time unrelated to depression (scalar non-invariance), each parcel was constructed
so that its items followed a similar pattern of scalar non-invariance. This accounted for these
unrelated, systematic changes by releasing the scalar constraints across noninvariant waves.
Factor score estimates, which represent the latent depression score at each time point, were
obtained from this model to use in subsequent growth models (Curran et al., 2018).
2. Growth model. To examine the importance of renitent and reversing responding, latent
curve models were compared to latent curve models with structured residuals (LCM-SR;
(Curran, Howard, Bainter, Lane, & McGinley, 2014). In traditional latent curve models,
depression scores are modeled only as a function of age. In LCM-SRs, response to symptom
changes is modeled in the form of a structured residual. In this model, the residual is the
difference between the observed depression score and the depression score predicted by each
child’s growth trajectory. The residual represents the influence of unmodeled life events (i.e., the
effect of everything except for age). The structured residual imposes an autoregressive structure
whereby each residual was systematically related to the one immediately before it and
immediately after it. Thus, when an unmodeled life event caused a child’s depression to go
higher or lower than their own average level, the autoregressive terms represents how the child’s
symptoms responded to that event. A positive autoregression represents renitent responding, or

Page 13 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the tendency of a child’s depression level to remain above or below their predicted score from
one time point to the next. A negative autoregression represents reversing responding, or the
tendency of a child’s depression to systematically fluctuate across higher and lower scores. An
autoregression of zero (the assumption of traditional growth models) means that the child’s
depression was well-modeled by the trajectory alone and did not have any systematic carry-over
due to unmodeled events.
Three phantom variables (i.e., placeholders with missing values for all participants) were
included between the longest time intervals to reduce the influence of unequally spaced measures
on the autoregressive parameter. Time was coded as age in months.
3. Growth mixture model class enumeration. Growth mixture models using up to 8
classes were fit to the data, with varying levels of constraints placed on the covariance structure.
A wide variety of fit statistics were used to empirically determine the best model. The final
model was chosen based on empirical fit to the data (using fit statistics), fit to the individual
(visual inspection to ensure that latent classes accurately represented trajectories of the people
within them), and the model’s ability to provide theoretically useful distinctions across classes
(Masyn, 2013).
4. Predictors of latent class membership. The two-step method (Bakk & Kuha, 2018) was
used to examine how the probability of latent class membership varied across social factors. The
first of the “two-steps” refers to determining the best growth mixture model (as above). In the
second step, the growth mixture portion of the model was held fixed, while class probabilities
and the relationships between predictors and latent classes were freely estimated. To manage
Type I error, predictors were block-tested using a Wald Test with the Benjamini-Hochberg
correction (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995) to probe contrasts between classes.

Page 14 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Missing data. Data missingness was handled in two stages. In the first stage, missingness
on depression scores was adjusted using the saturated correlates method, which included
information from baseline auxiliary variables in the measurement model (see Appendix C;
(Collins, Schafer, & Kam, 2001). In the second stage, missing predictor variables were imputed
based on the mixture model. Mixture model parameters were fixed to the estimates derived from
the final mixture model and means and covariances of predictors were free to vary across classes
(this procedure is analogous the two-step method; Bakk & Kuha, 2017).
Mplus Version 8.0 was used for all analyses (Muthén & Muthén, 1998-2010).
Results
Sample Characteristics. Descriptive statistics for predictor variables and depression
factor scores are presented in Table 1. Mean depression scores did not change much over time,
although variability increased with age. Nearly one in four children had mothers who met criteria
for psychopathology between birth and 3 years old. Twelve percent of children lived in a
household with a single parent for at least part of their first four years, and 13% of children met
criteria for neighborhood disadvantage. Just 6% of children met criteria for emotional or physical
abuse at least once through 3.5 years of age. Most predictor correlations were small and in the
expected direction, suggesting these social factors represented distinct constructs (Table 1).
Measurement model. Fit of the final model with partial scalar invariance was excellent
(CFI = .999, TLI = .998, RMSEA = .015) and superior to the fit of the model with full scalar
invariance (c2diff(5) = 970.50, p < .0001), indicating that some symptoms changed systematically
over time due to something other than depression (full details of the measurement model are
provided in Appendix B). Factor score distributions had moderate levels of skew and kurtosis.
Because skew and kurtosis may cause GMMs to extract latent classes that characterize properties

Page 15 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of the distribution rather than true population-wide heterogeneity (Curran & Bauer, 2003), factor
scores were log-transformed, resulting in approximately normal distributions with skew and
kurtosis values all < |1.0|.
Growth model. Fit statistics for growth models are shown in Appendix D. The best fit to
the data was provided by a latent curve model with structured residuals. This model used a
fourth-degree polynomial (e.g., quartic) with random linear, quadratic, and cubic variances, the
quartic variance constrained at zero, three phantom variables to make measure spacing more
equidistant, and stationarity of autoregressive parameters (i.e., the autoregressive term was equal
over time). This model indicated that the sample mean did not change much from baseline scores
(the peak and trough were 0.23 SD apart), but there was considerable variation in trajectories,
and that residuals were moderately positively correlated (standardized AR parameter ~ 0.38),
meaning that the average child had a small-to-moderate amount of renitent responding.
Mixture model. Fit statistics for mixture models are presented in Appendix E.
Information criteria were unhelpful in model selection because they all decreased without signs
of leveling off with additional classes. Consequently, the final model was selected based on
likelihood ratio tests (Lo-Mendell-Rubin adjusted likelihood ratio test), interpretability, and
visual inspection of fit to individual level data. The best performing model based on these criteria
was a six-class model with intercept and slope variances constrained equal across classes,
quadratic and higher degree polynomial variances constrained at zero, a diagonal covariance
matrix (i.e., the covariation between intercept and slope was fully explained by latent class
membership), and an autoregressive parameter that varied across classes.
Latent class trajectories are shown in Figure 1a and prototypical patterns of responding,
generated from a parametric bootstrap, are shown in Figure 1b. To ease interpretation, Figure

Page 16 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1a includes a reference line at the 90th-percentile depression score, which is often used as a rough
proxy for a clinical diagnosis of depression (Zavos, Rijsdijk, Gregory, & Eley, 2010). Raw
trajectories of individuals in each latent class are shown in Figure 2. Classification precision of
individuals into latent classes was moderately low (entropy = .67), perhaps because
autoregressive terms have considerable error at the individual level with just seven observed
timepoints. However, in samples as large as the present one, autoregressive terms are still
accurately estimated at the group level (Schultzberg & Muthen, 2018).
Classes were more clearly separated by their trajectories and patterns of responding than
by baseline symptom levels. Developmental trajectories varied considerably across classes.
Approximately half of all children experienced stable, low symptoms with moderate levels of
renitent responding across childhood and adolescence (Minimal Symptoms class, 48.7%, n=
6543, AR parameter=0.43). The next two largest classes experienced moderately high symptoms
and were primarily differentiated by their patterns of responding. The High and Renitent class
(30.4%, n = 3129) exhibited the strongest levels of renitent responding in the sample (AR
parameter = 0.90), meaning that if a life event caused them to move above or below their typical
depression level, they tended to stay there for very long periods of time. In contrast to the High
and Renitent class, the High and Reversing class (8.1%, n = 618) had nearly the same mean
trajectory, but experienced high levels of reversing responding (AR parameter = -0.50), as they
experienced sharp oscillations around their estimated mean levels. The Childhood Decrease
(7.5%, n = 756) class experienced high symptoms at an early age, but these symptoms came
down gradually over the course of early and middle childhood and remained at a low level over
adolescence; their symptom changes had minimal carry-over across waves (AR = 0.05). The
final two classes were separated by their trajectories over middle childhood and adolescence. The

Page 17 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Late Childhood Peak class (3.0%, n = 334) experienced an increase in symptoms, primarily
through middle childhood, then a large decrease in symptoms over adolescence; this class was
also characterized by reversing responding. The Adolescent Spike class (2.3%, n = 261) remained
relatively stable at a low-to-moderate level of symptoms until adolescence, at which point their
symptoms spiked to the highest average levels observed in the study.
Predictors of class membership. Predictors of class membership are presented in Table 2,
and corresponding probabilities of class membership across predictors are shown in Figure 3.
Likelihood ratio tests indicated that each variable was a statistically significant predictor of class
membership. Generally, maternal psychopathology, neighborhood disadvantage, childhood
abuse, and female sex were associated with increased risk of belonging to a group other than the
minimal symptoms group. Maternal psychopathology conveyed the highest risk, with the
probability of being in the Minimal Symptoms class dropping by more than half from 57% for
those with no maternal psychopathology to 24% for those with maternal psychopathology. The
pattern of findings for maternal education were somewhat more complex. Higher levels of
maternal education were associated with lower odds of being in the High and Renitent group as
compared to any other group, but—counterintuitively—higher levels of maternal education were
also associated with increased risk of being in any group as compared to the Minimal Symptoms
group (excluding the High and Renitent group).
Two different sets of comparisons were particularly meaningful. The first was between
the High and Renitent versus High and Reversing classes, because those classes both had high
symptom levels and were distinguished primarily by differences in response to symptom
changes. The second was between Late Childhood Peak versus Adolescent Spike classes,
because those classes were distinguished primarily by the timing of a spike in depression

Page 18 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

symptoms. The High and Renitent group was differentiated from the High and Reversing group
only by maternal education, with higher levels of maternal education associated with higher
probabilities of being in the High and Reversing group. The Late Childhood Peak and
Adolescent Spike classes were differentiated only by sex; males had three times the odds of
females of spiking in adolescence as compared to late childhood.
Sensitivity analysis. To understand the effect of model specification on latent class
structure, the final model was compared to analogous models with the structured residuals held
class invariant, and with the structured residuals removed entirely. Similar developmental
trajectory patterns across both parameterizations were found, but latent classes without inertia
had more extreme scores. Notably, when excluding structured residuals from the model, the
group with consistently high symptom levels was smaller (11.1% versus 30.7%) and plateaued at
more extreme scores (above the 90th percentile), suggesting that accounting for renitent and
reversing responding functioned to explain the most extreme scores. A side-by-side comparison
of the two models is available in Appendix F.
Discussion
This study characterized subgroups of children by their differing developmental
trajectories of depression—and differing patterns of responding to life events—from age 4
through 16.5, in a large, prospective, population-based sample. To our knowledge, this was the
first GMM study to disentangle age-dependent and age-independent patterns of symptom
change, via the concepts of renitent and reversing responding. This study also included a 13-year
follow-up period, a wider age span than nearly all previous GMM studies of depression. Overall,
the primary findings included identification of potentially sensitive periods for developing
depression in both early childhood and adolescence as well as the importance of patterns of

Page 19 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

responding to life events for explaining the highest levels of childhood depression. Results also
suggested robust but complex relationships between social factors of depression and latent class.
One striking difference from previous research is that the classes in this study with
consistently high symptom levels were larger in size, but had lower average symptom levels than
observed elsewhere, indicating that those at risk for severe depression were drawn from a
relatively wide pool of children who experienced varying periods of higher and lower symptoms
rather than a smaller pool of children with consistently high symptoms. With a few exceptions,
average depression scores in even the most extreme latent class were well below the 90th
percentile, which is typically used as a rough proxy for a clinical diagnosis of depression (Zavos
et al., 2010). A sensitivity analysis using traditional GMM methods, which excluded the
autoregressive parameter that captured renitent and reversing responding (Appendix D), found
latent classes similar to those identified in previous ALSPAC work (Edwards et al., 2014; Rice et
al., 2019), with 75% of children in a minimal symptoms group, and those in the higher symptoms
groups showing more extreme scores than the high symptoms groups observed in the main
analyses. Thus, explicitly modeling renitent and reversing responding leads to the conclusion that
the highest levels of depression were better explained by transient states than persistent traits.
Two extremes of responding were evident in these data. The High and Renitent and High
and Reversing groups had nearly identical trajectories but were clearly separated by their
autoregressive parameters. For the High and Renitent group, experiencing a perturbation above
their typical depression level at any given observation occasion was strongly predictive of
remaining above their typical level at the next observation. Consequently, these children spent
longer continuous periods of time either above or below their expected averages. The High and
Reversing group had more frequent symptom oscillations (AR= -0.50), meaning that if they were

Page 20 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

below their typical level at one time point, they were likely to be above it at the next time point
and vice versa. Together, these two classes can be thought of as comprising children with
dynamic risk for depression, with the High and Renitent group more likely to experience longer
episodes, and the High and Reversing group more likely to experience frequent episodes. This
risk is termed dynamic because it occurred independently of child age, and was instead driven by
unmodeled, trait-level processes that could include both biological factors and characteristic
ways of coping with life events. These results are consistent with daily monitoring studies that
have found that people who experience both highly unstable emotions (strong negative
autocorrelations) and highly inert emotions (strong positive autocorrelations) had overall lower
psychological well-being (Houben et al., 2015). Such processes have been thought to reflect
deficits in coping, to be characteristic of people who experience multiple bouts of depression,
and to serve as modifiable targets for intervention (Waugh & Koster, 2015). Given that the
average gap between depressive symptoms measures in the current study was 17 months, both
renitent and reversing responding may better represent difficulty adjusting to life events than
patterns of daily coping, although these two processes are strongly related (Kanner, Coyne,
Schaefer, & Lazarus, 1981).
The present study builds on the literature by showing that certain periods of development
have increased importance in shaping the course of depressive symptoms. In contrast to the
dynamic risk groups describe above, there appear to be two inflection points of age-specific risk
for a minority of the sample, one occurring around age 10 and peaking at age 13 (Late Childhood
Peak group; 3.0% of the sample), and another beginning after age 13 and peaking at age 16.5
(Adolescent Spike group; 2.3% of the sample). It is notable that these inflection points
correspond with a heightened period of internal transitions (i.e., puberty) and external transitions

Page 21 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(i.e., social environmental changes, such as high stakes academic testing and more complex
friendships and peer expectations) that previous studies have linked to the onset of depression
(Graber et al., 1997). Sex differences in the present sample correspond closely to different
pubertal timing between girls and boys. Girls, who begin to experience puberty as early as age
10, were much more likely to be in the Late Childhood Peak group that experienced increasing
symptoms between ages 10-13. Boys, who begin to experience puberty several years later—as
early as age 12—were much more likely to belong to the Adolescent Spike group that
experienced increases between ages 13-16. These results are consistent with those of Kwong and
colleagues (2019) who, analyzing ALSPAC data with a different methodology, found that ages
13 and 16 had the peak velocity of changes in depression symptoms for boys and girls,
respectively (Kwong et al., 2019). The current results suggest that the changes that led to these
peak velocities were set in motion 3-5 years prior to the peak velocities being achieved and may
have been driven by a small subset of the population. Moreover, the combined size of these two
age-specific risk groups was just 5.3% of the sample, whereas 38.5% of the sample experienced
dynamic risk, suggesting that most of the risk for depression was driven by dynamic responding
to environmental events.
In contrast to the sharp inflection points described above, the Childhood Decrease group
had high levels of symptoms early in childhood that decreased over development and into
adolescence. Compared to the High and Renitent group, children in this class were more likely to
be male, have more educated mothers, and less likely to have maternal psychopathology. The
contrast to the High and Renitent group may reflect early risk that was buffered by protective
factors of higher maternal education and lower history of maternal psychopathology.

Page 22 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Three of the six social factors examined in this study—maternal psychopathology,
neighborhood disadvantage, and child abuse—were strongly related to differences between the
lowest symptoms class (Minimal Symptoms) and the highest symptom classes (High and
Renitent, High and Reversing), with odds ratios ranging from 2 to 5. Coming from a single
parent household generated a similar pattern of effects, but with a much smaller effect size. This
pattern of findings is consistent with the stress sensitization hypothesis, that exposure to early
childhood adversity increases the probability of developing depression in response to any given
stressor (Hammen, Henry, & Daley, 2000; McLaughlin, Conron, Koenen, & Gilman, 2010).
The role of maternal education in determining developmental trajectories of depressive
symptoms appears complex. On the one hand, children whose mothers had higher levels of
education were less likely to belong to the High and Renitent group than any other group,
indicating a protective effect consistent with previous research (e.g., (J. Allen, Balfour, Bell, &
Marmot, 2014; Meltzer, Gatward, Goodman, & Ford, 2003). On the other hand, children with
higher maternal education also had lower odds of belonging to the Minimal Symptoms group than
any other group (except for the High and Renitent group), indicating that although they were
protected from the High and Renitent group, they faced higher risks of experiencing more
depressive symptoms in each of the sensitive periods identified by this study.
One possibility for explaining the protective effects of education—that is, the movement
from the High and Renitent class to other classes with less consistent depressive symptoms—is
that education level, an indicator of social class, captures the level of access to and quality of
resources families can use to buffer their children’s risk of depressive symptoms. Notably,
maternal education was the only social determinant to differentiate the High and Renitent class
from the High and Reversing class. Although it is important to avoid overinterpreting this

Page 23 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

finding because maternal education was generally predictive of belonging to any group other
than the High and Renitent group, one possibility is that low socioeconomic status predicts
poorer child socio-emotional development and adaptive functioning (Bradley & Corwyn, 2002),
and these poor socio-emotional skills lead to maladaptive coping behaviors that increase
children’s vulnerability to depression the face of stressful life events and other risk factors.
Why children with higher maternal education were less likely to be in the Minimal
Symptoms class than any other class is puzzling. One possibility is that given the relative lack of
social mobility and perceived importance of education for class mobility (Goldthorpe, 2016),
children of more educated parents feel more pressure to achieve academically from a young age,
leading to higher levels of stress. Alternatively, parents with higher levels of economic
disadvantage may be facing myriad other stressors and have less opportunity to identify smaller
shifts in their children’s emotions and behavior as they emerge over time.
Limitations
The present study was limited by examining maternal report of symptoms only. While
latent variable models were used to attempt to combine information across mother and child
reports of symptoms, the only wave of overlap—age 16.5—had such low correlations between
parent and child measures (r = .36) that they did not appear to measure the same construct.
Consequently, the very high odds ratios between maternal psychopathology and risk of being in
any class besides Minimal Symptoms must be tempered by the possibility that depressed mothers
may have been more likely to rate their children as depressed.
An additional limitation of this study is the length of time between observations. The
theory of renitent and reversing responding draws from clinical observation of recurrent major
depression. More frequent measurement occasions would be ideal for understanding the duration

Page 24 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of depression episodes with more precision. Nonetheless, the present findings illustrate that
patterns of responding to life events that transact over longer periods of time have important
implications for how depression functions across childhood and adolescence.
Finally, this sample is limited in terms of geographic diversity. Given high levels of study
enrollment from families in the Bristol area, it is a strongly representative sample; however, the
extent to which the sensitive period findings will generalize outside of the UK, with its particular
social class structure and socially-specific developmental milestones, is unclear. Cross-cultural
replication may be helpful for disentangling the effects of age-related sensitive periods from
those related to socially imposed developmental milestones, such as educational testing.
Conclusions
This study captured the widest age range to-date in a GMM study of childhood and
adolescent depression and was the first GMM study to simultaneously explore systematic agedependent and age-independent patterns of changes in depression. It identified critical points of
age-specific risk at ages 8 and 13 when depression symptoms began to grow for a minority of the
sample, whose symptoms would peak 3-5 years later. Most importantly, risk for experiencing the
highest levels of depression was neither age-specific nor drawn from a small pool of persistently
depressed children, but instead drawn from a larger pool of children who moved dynamically
between higher and lower symptom levels depending on how they responded to life events. From
a prevention perspective, these findings suggest that early interventions targeting broad coping
processes rather than indicated interventions targeting age-specific developmental events may be
most effective for decreasing the burden of depression across the life course.

Page 25 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Allen, J., Balfour, R., Bell, R., & Marmot, M. (2014). Social determinants of mental health. Int Rev
Psychiatry, 26(4), 392-407. doi:10.3109/09540261.2014.928270
Allen, J. P., Chango, J., Szwedo, D., & Schad, M. (2014). Long-term sequelae of subclinical
depressive symptoms in early adolescence. Dev Psychopathol, 26(1), 171-180.
doi:10.1017/s095457941300093x
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th
ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Angold, A., Costello, E. J., Pickles, A., Messer, S. C., Winder, F., & Silva, D. (1995). The
development of a short questionnaire for use in epidemiological studies of depression in chidlren
and adolescents. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 5, 237-249.
Avenevoli, S., Swendsen, J., He, J. P., Burstein, M., & Merikangas, K. R. (2015). Major depression in
the national comorbidity survey-adolescent supplement: prevalence, correlates, and treatment. J
Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 54(1), 37-44.e32. doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2014.10.010
Bakk, Z., & Kuha, J. (2018). Two-Step Estimation of Models Between Latent Classes and External
Variables. Psychometrika, 83(4), 871-892. doi:10.1007/s11336-017-9592-7
Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful
approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological),
289-300.
Bolger, N. (1990). Coping as a personality process: a prospective study. J Pers Soc Psychol, 59(3),
525-537.
Bradley, R. H., & Corwyn, R. F. (2002). Socioeconomic status and child development. Annu Rev
Psychol, 53, 371-399. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135233
Cairns, K. E., Yap, M. B., Pilkington, P. D., & Jorm, A. F. (2014). Risk and protective factors for
depression that adolescents can modify: a systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal
studies. J Affect Disord, 169, 61-75. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2014.08.006
Page 26 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Chaiton, M. O., Cohen, J. E., O'Loughlin, J., & Rehm, J. (2009). A systematic review of longitudinal
studies on the association between depression and smoking in adolescents. BMC Public Health, 9,
356. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-9-356
Collins, L. M., Schafer, J. L., & Kam, C. M. (2001). A comparison of inclusive and restrictive
strategies in modern missing data procedures. Psychol Methods, 6(4), 330-351.
Compas, B. E., Orosan, P. G., & Grant, K. E. (1993). Adolescent stress and coping: implications for
psychopathology during adolescence. J Adolesc, 16(3), 331-349. doi:10.1006/jado.1993.1028
Costello, E. J., Foley, D. L., & Angold, A. (2006). 10-year research update review: The epidemiology
of child and adolescent psychiatric disorders: II. developmental epidemiology. Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 45(1), 8-25.
Curran, P. J., & Bauer, D. J. (2011). The disaggregation of within-person and between-person effects
in longitudinal models of change. Annu Rev Psychol, 62, 583-619.
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.093008.100356
Curran, P. J., Cole, V., Giordano, M., Georgeson, A. R., Hussong, A. M., & Bauer, D. J. (2018).
Advancing the Study of Adolescent Substance Use Through the Use of Integrative Data Analysis.
Eval Health Prof, 41(2), 216-245. doi:10.1177/0163278717747947
Curran, P. J., Howard, A. L., Bainter, S. A., Lane, S. T., & McGinley, J. S. (2014). The separation of
between-person and within-person components of individual change over time: a latent curve
model with structured residuals. J Consult Clin Psychol, 82(5), 879-894. doi:10.1037/a0035297
Dekker, M. C., Ferdinand, R. F., van Lang, N. D., Bongers, I. L., van der Ende, J., & Verhulst, F. C.
(2007). Developmental trajectories of depressive symptoms from early childhood to late
adolescence: gender differences and adult outcome. J Child Psychol Psychiatry, 48(7), 657-666.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2007.01742.x
Dumont, M., & Provost, M. A. (1999). Resilience in Adolescents: Protective Role of Social Support,
Coping Strategies, Self-Esteem, and Social Activities on Experience of Stress and Depression.
Journal of Youth Adolescence, 28(3), 343-363. doi:10.1023/a:1021637011732
Page 27 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Dunn, E. C., McLaughlin, K. A., Slopen, N., Rosand, J., & Smoller, J. W. (2013). Developmental
timing of child maltreatment and symptoms of depression and suicidal ideation in young
adulthood: results from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Depression and
Anxiety, 30(10), 955-964. doi:10.1002/da.22102
Dunn, E. C., Soare, T. W., Raffeld, M. R., Busso, D. S., Crawford, K. M., Davis, K. A., . . . Susser, E.
S. (2018). What life course theoretical models best explain the relationship between exposure to
childhood adversity and psychopathology symptoms: recency, accumulation, or sensitive
periods? Psychological Medicine, 48(15), 2562-2572. doi:10.1017/S0033291718000181
Edwards, A. C., Latendresse, S. J., Heron, J., Cho, S. B., Hickman, M., Lewis, G., . . . Kendler, K. S.
(2014). Childhood internalizing symptoms are negatively associated with early adolescent alcohol
use. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 38(6), 1680-1688.
Ellis, R. E. R., Seal, M. L., Simmons, J. G., Whittle, S., Schwartz, O. S., Byrne, M. L., & Allen, N. B.
(2017). Longitudinal Trajectories of Depression Symptoms in Adolescence: Psychosocial Risk
Factors and Outcomes. Child Psychiatry Hum Dev, 48(4), 554-571. doi:10.1007/s10578-0160682-z
Felitti, V. J., Anda, R. F., Nordenberg, D., Williamson, D. F., Spitz, A. M., Edwards, V. J., . . . Marks,
J. S. (1998). Relationships of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to many of the leading
causes of death in adults: The adverse childhood experiences (ACE) study. American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, 14(4), 245-258.
Franklin, J. C., Jamieson, J. P., Glenn, C. R., & Nock, M. K. (2015). How developmental
psychopathology theory and research can inform the research domain criteria (RDoC) project. J
Clin Child Adolesc Psychol, 44(2), 280-290. doi:10.1080/15374416.2013.873981
Fraser, A., Macdonald-Wallis, C., Tilling, K., Boyd, A., Golding, J., Davey Smith, G., . . . Lawlor, D.
A. (2013). Cohort Profile: the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children: ALSPAC
mothers cohort. Int J Epidemiol, 42(1), 97-110. doi:10.1093/ije/dys066

Page 28 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fried, E. I. (2017). The 52 symptoms of major depression: Lack of content overlap among seven
common depression scales. J Affect Disord, 208, 191-197. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2016.10.019
Galatzer-Levy, I. R., & Bryant, R. A. (2013). 626,120 ways to have posttraumatic stress disorder.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8(6), 651-662.
Garvey, M. J., & Schaffer, C. B. (1994). Are some symptoms of depression age dependent? J Affect
Disord, 32(4), 247-251.
GBD 2017 Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collaborators. (2018). Global, regional, and
national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 354 diseases and injuries for
195 countries and territories, 1990–2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2017. The Lancet, 392(10159), 1789-1858. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(18)32279-7
Goldthorpe, J. H. J. J. o. t. B. A. (2016). Social class mobility in modern Britain: Changing structure,
constant process. 4(89-111).
Goodman, R. (1997). The strengths and difficulties questionnaire: A research note. Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, 38, 581-586.
Goodman, R. (2001). Psychometric properties of the strengths and difficulties questionnaire. J Am
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 40(11), 1337-1345. doi:10.1097/00004583-200111000-00015
Goodman, S. H., & Gotlib, I. H. (1999). Risk for psychopathology in the children of depressed
mothers: a developmental model for understanding mechanisms of transmission. Psychological
Review, 106(3), 458.
Gould, M. S., Greenberg, T., Velting, D. M., & Shaffer, D. (2003). Youth suicide risk and preventive
interventions: a review of the past 10 years. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 42(4), 386-405.
doi:10.1097/01.Chi.0000046821.95464.Cf
Graber, J. A., Lewinsohn, P. M., Seeley, J. R., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1997). Is psychopathology
associated with the timing of pubertal development? J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry,
36(12), 1768-1776. doi:10.1097/00004583-199712000-00026

Page 29 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Hammen, C., Henry, R., & Daley, S. E. (2000). Depression and sensitization to stressors among young
women as a function of childhood adversity. J Consult Clin Psychol, 68(5), 782-787.
Hegeman, J. M., Kok, R. M., van der Mast, R. C., & Giltay, E. J. (2012). Phenomenology of
depression in older compared with younger adults: meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry, 200(4), 275281. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.111.095950
Hosenfeld, B., Bos, E. H., Wardenaar, K. J., Conradi, H. J., van der Maas, H. L., Visser, I., & de
Jonge, P. (2015). Major depressive disorder as a nonlinear dynamic system: bimodality in the
frequency distribution of depressive symptoms over time. BMC Psychiatry, 15, 222.
doi:10.1186/s12888-015-0596-5
Houben, M., Van Den Noortgate, W., & Kuppens, P. (2015). The relation between short-term emotion
dynamics and psychological well-being: A meta-analysis. Psychol Bull, 141(4), 901-930.
doi:10.1037/a0038822
Hyde, J. S., Mezulis, A. H., & Abramson, L. Y. (2008). The ABCs of depression: integrating affective,
biological, and cognitive models to explain the emergence of gender differences in depression.
Psychological Review, 115(2), 291-313.
Kanner, A. D., Coyne, J. C., Schaefer, C., & Lazarus, R. S. (1981). Comparison of two modes of stress
measurement: daily hassles and uplifts versus major life events. J Behav Med, 4(1), 1-39.
Kendler, K. S., Gatz, M., Gardner, C. O., & Pedersen, N. L. (2005). Age at onset and familial risk for
major depression in a Swedish national twin sample. Psychol Med, 35(11), 1573-1579.
doi:10.1017/s0033291705005714
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime
prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593-602.
Kotov, R., Krueger, R. F., Watson, D., Achenbach, T. M., Althoff, R. R., Bagby, R. M., . . .
Zimmerman, M. (2017). The Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP): A

Page 30 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

dimensional alternative to traditional nosologies. J Abnorm Psychol, 126(4), 454-477.
doi:10.1037/abn0000258
Kuppens, P., Sheeber, L. B., Yap, M. B., Whittle, S., Simmons, J. G., & Allen, N. B. (2012).
Emotional inertia prospectively predicts the onset of depressive disorder in adolescence. Emotion,
12(2), 283-289. doi:10.1037/a0025046
Lai, H. M., Cleary, M., Sitharthan, T., & Hunt, G. E. (2015). Prevalence of comorbid substance use,
anxiety and mood disorders in epidemiological surveys, 1990-2014: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Drug Alcohol Depend, 154, 1-13. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.05.031
Lewinsohn, P. M., Clarke, G. N., Seeley, J. R., & Rohde, P. (1994). Major Depression in Community
Adolescents: Age at Onset, Episode Duration, and Time to Recurrence. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 33(6), 809-818. doi:10.1097/00004583-19940700000006
Lewinsohn, P. M., Rohde, P., Seeley, J. R., Klein, D. N., & Gotlib, I. H. (2000). Natural course of
adolescent major depressive disorder in a community sample: Predictors of recurrence in young
adults. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1584-1591.
Little, T. D., Cunningham, W. A., Shahar, G., & Widaman, K. F. (2002). To Parcel or Not to Parcel:
Exploring the Question, Weighing the Merits. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary
Journal, 9(2), 151-173. doi:10.1207/S15328007SEM0902_1
Little, T. D., & Masyn, K. E. (2013). Latent Class Analysis and Finite Mixture Modeling. In: Oxford
University Press.
Lorenzo-Luaces, L. (2015). Heterogeneity in the prognosis of major depression: from the common
cold to a highly debilitating and recurrent illness. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci, 24(6), 466-472.
doi:10.1017/s2045796015000542
Merikangas, K. R., He, S., Burstein, M., Swanson, S. A., Avenevoli, S., Cui, L., . . . Swendsen, J.
(2011). Lifetime prevalence of mental disorders in U.S. adolescents: Results from the National

Page 31 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Comorbidity Survey Replication-Adolescent Supplement (NCS-A). Journal of the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 49(10), 980-989.
Muris, P., Meesters, C., & van den Berg, F. (2003). The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire
(SDQ)--further evidence for its reliability and validity in a community sample of Dutch children
and adolescents. European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 12(1), 1-8. doi:10.1007/s00787-0030298-2
Musliner, K. L., Munk-Olsen, T., Eaton, W. W., & Zandi, P. P. (2016). Heterogeneity in long-term
trajectories of depressive symptoms: Patterns, predictors and outcomes. J Affect Disord, 192, 199211. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2015.12.030
Muthen, B., & Muthen, L. K. (2000). Integrating person-centered and variable-centered analyses:
growth mixture modeling with latent trajectory classes. Alcohol Clin Exp Res, 24(6), 882-891.
Muthén, L. K., & Muthén, B. O. (1998-2010). Mplus user's guide. Retrieved from Los Angeles, CA:
Patton, G. C., Olsson, C., Bond, L., Toumbourou, J. W., Carlin, J. B., Hemphill, S. A., & Catalano, R.
F. (2008). Predicting female depression across puberty: a two-nation longitudinal study. J Am
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 47(12), 1424-1432. doi:10.1097/CHI.0b013e3181886ebe
Petterson, S. M., & Albers, A. B. (2001). Effects of poverty and maternal depression on early child
development. Child Dev, 72(6), 1794-1813.

Rice, F., Riglin, L., Thapar, A. K., Heron, J., Anney, R., O’Donovan, M. C., & Thapar, A.
(2019). Characterizing developmental trajectories and the role of neuropsychiatric genetic
risk variants in early-onset depression. JAMA psychiatry, 76(3), 306-313. doi:
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2018.3338.
Schultzberg, M., & Muthén, B. (2018). Number of subjects and time points needed for
multilevel time-series analysis: A simulation study of dynamic structural equation
modeling. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 25(4), 495-515.

Page 32 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Shore, L., Toumbourou, J. W., Lewis, A. J., & Kremer, P. (2018). Review: Longitudinal trajectories of
child and adolescent depressive symptoms and their predictors – a systematic review and metaanalysis. 23(2), 107-120. doi:10.1111/camh.12220
Ten Have, M., de Graaf, R., van Dorsselaer, S., Tuithof, M., Kleinjan, M., & Penninx, B. (2018).
Recurrence and chronicity of major depressive disorder and their risk indicators in a population
cohort. Acta Psychiatr Scand, 137(6), 503-515. doi:10.1111/acps.12874
Turner, N., Joinson, C., Peters, T. J., Wiles, N., & Lewis, G. (2014). Validity of the Short Mood and
Feelings Questionnaire in late adolescence. Psychol Assess, 26(3), 752-762.
doi:10.1037/a0036572
van Loo, H. M., de Jonge, P., Romeijn, J. W., Kessler, R. C., & Schoevers, R. A. (2012). Data-driven
subtypes of major depressive disorder: A systematic review. BMC Med, 10, 156.
Waugh, C. E., & Koster, E. H. (2015). A resilience framework for promoting stable remission from
depression. Clin Psychol Rev, 41, 49-60. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2014.05.004
Whalen, D. J., Luby, J. L., Tilman, R., Mike, A., Barch, D., & Belden, A. C. (2016). Latent class
profiles of depressive symptoms from early to middle childhood: predictors, outcomes, and
gender effects. J Child Psychol Psychiatry, 57(7), 794-804. doi:10.1111/jcpp.12518
Whalen, D. J., Sylvester, C. M., & Luby, J. L. (2017). Depression and Anxiety in Preschoolers: A
Review of the Past 7 Years. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am, 26(3), 503-522.
doi:10.1016/j.chc.2017.02.006
Zavos, H. M., Rijsdijk, F. V., Gregory, A. M., & Eley, T. C. (2010). Genetic influences on the
cognitive biases associated with anxiety and depression symptoms in adolescents. J Affect Disord,
124(1-2), 45-53. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2009.10.030
Zisook, S., Lesser, I., Stewart, J. W., Wisniewski, S. R., Balasubramani, G. K., Fava, M., . . . Rush, A.
J. (2007). Effect of age at onset on the course of major depressive disorder. Am J Psychiatry,
164(10), 1539-1546. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.06101757

Page 33 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1 (a) Latent Class Trajectories and (b) Prototypical Autoregressive Structures
A

B

Note. Figure 1b was generated using a parametric bootstrap. Grey dashed line represents individual
estimated means. The solid black line represents prototypical residual structures.

Page 34 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. Observed trajectories by modal class assignment

Note. 30 participants were randomly sampled from each class. Thick lines represent class average
trajectories. Line opaqueness represents classification uncertainty, with more opaque lines
representing higher classification certainty.

Page 35 of 39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012872; this version posted November 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3. Probability of Class Membership by Social Predictor Variables

Note. For each level of each social factor, bars sum to 100%.

Page 36 of 39

Table 1. Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations for Study Variables
Log-Transformed Depression
Symptom Scores by Age
n
Mean
SD
Min/Max
1. 3.9 years
11,641 0.76
0.29
0.03/1.88
2. 6.8 years
11,641 0.77
0.35
0.05/2.03
3. 8.1 years
11,641 0.84
0.36
0.07/2.06
4. 9.6 years
11,641 0.76
0.37
0.00/2.14
5. 11.7 years
11,641 0.74
0.38
0.05/2.24
6. 13.1 years
11,641 0.74
0.39
0.04/2.24
7. 16.5 years
11,641 0.75
0.38
0.02/2.33

1
--.79
.72
.64
.56
.55
.53

2
----.91
.84
.76
.75
.67

3
------.88
.79
.76
.71

4
--------.84
.81
.71

5
----------.87
.74

6
------------.79

7
---------------

8
---------------

9
---------------

10
---------------

11
---------------

Social Predictor Variables
n
%
Count Min/Max
8. male
11,641 51.0% 5938
0/1
-.02 -.05 -.05 -.07 -.07 -.09 -.14
--------9. Maternal psychopathology
8,431 23.1% 1945
0/1
.26
.29
.31
.29
.28
.27
.26
.01
------10. Single parent
8,239 12.1%
999
0/1
.09
.10
.11
.11
.10
.09
.11
.00
.25
----11. Neighborhood disadvantage
8,578 13.2% 1135
0/1
.16
.19
.19
.19
.19
.18
.16
-.03
.31
.30
--12. Child abuse
9,019
6.1%
551
0/1
.14
.16
.16
.15
.15
.14
.14
.12
.16
.07
.15
13. Mother's education
10,583
----1/4
-.07 -.06 -.06 -.07 -.08 -.07 -.08 -.01 -.08 -.22 -.16
Less than O-level
2,846 26.9% 2846
------------------------O-level
3,736 35.3% 3736
------------------------A-level
2,520 23.8% 2520
------------------------Degree or above
1,481 14.0% 1481
------------------------Note. M = Mean. SD = Standard Deviation. Means and frequencies were calculated using available data at each time wave. Because depression scores were
calculated from factor score estimates, all people with even a single score at a single wave have complete data. Polyserial and polychoric correlations were
calculated for continuous and categorical items, respectively, using full information maximum likelihood estimation.

Page 37 of 39

12
------------------------.09
---------

Table 2. Predictors of Latent Class Membership

Referent Class =
Minimal Symptoms

Referent Class =
Adolescent Spike

Referent Class =
Late Childhood Peak

Referent Class =
Childhood Decrease

Referent Class =
High and Unstable

Odds
Ratio

95% CI

Odds
Ratio

95% CI

Odds
Ratio

95% CI

Odds
Ratio

95% CI

Odds
Ratio

95% CI

High and Stable
Male
Maternal psychopathology
Single parent
Neighborhood disadvantage
Abuse
Mother's Ed: 0-level
Mother's Ed: A-level
Mother's Ed: Degree

0.79
5.04
1.34
2.10
2.38
0.81
0.67
0.76

[0.69, 0.91]
[4.20, 6.05]
[1.07, 1.69]
[1.68, 2.61]
[1.75, 3.23]
[0.67, 0.96]
[0.55, 0.83]
[0.59, 0.96]

2.40
1.64
1.49
1.65
1.23
0.71
0.40
0.41

[1.82, 3.17]
[1.20, 2.26]
[0.94, 2.38]
[1.07, 2.56]
[0.70, 2.15]
[0.48, 1.05]
[0.27, 0.59]
[0.25, 0.65]

0.80
2.20
1.92
1.24
1.26
0.71
0.45
0.31

[0.60, 1.07]
[1.55, 3.14]
[1.14, 3.23]
[0.80, 1.91]
[0.73, 2.19]
[0.47, 1.08]
[0.29, 0.70]
[0.20, 0.49]

0.63
1.99
1.30
1.51
1.49
0.77
0.58
0.42

[0.50, 0.78]
[1.56, 2.54]
[0.92, 1.83]
[1.07, 2.11]
[0.97, 2.30]
[0.57, 1.04]
[0.42, 0.80]
[0.29, 0.59]

1.11
1.18
1.03
1.15
1.29
0.65
0.45
0.33

[0.88, 1.41]
[0.93, 1.49]
[0.74, 1.44]
[0.83, 1.59]
[0.79, 2.08]
[0.46, 0.91]
[0.31, 0.64]
[0.22, 0.50]

High and Unstable
Male
Maternal psychopathology
Single parent
Neighborhood disadvantage
Abuse
Mother's Ed: 0-level
Mother's Ed: A-level
Mother's Ed: Degree

0.71
4.29
1.30
1.82
1.85
1.24
1.50
2.26

[0.57, 0.89]
[3.33, 5.52]
[0.93, 1.82]
[1.32, 2.52]
[1.14, 3.00]
[0.89, 1.73]
[1.07, 2.10]
[1.56, 3.26]

2.15
1.40
1.45
1.44
0.96
1.09
0.88
1.21

[1.55, 2.99]
[0.97, 2.01]
[0.85, 2.46]
[0.87, 2.38]
[0.48, 1.90]
[0.67, 1.78]
[0.54, 1.44]
[0.70, 2.11]

0.72
1.87
1.86
1.07
0.98
1.10
1.01
0.93

[0.52, 1.01]
[1.27, 2.77]
[1.05, 3.30]
[0.65, 1.77]
[0.51, 1.91]
[0.67, 1.83]
[0.61, 1.68]
[0.55, 1.58]

0.56
1.69
1.26
1.31
1.16
1.19
1.28
1.24

[0.43, 0.74]
[1.24, 2.30]
[0.82, 1.92]
[0.86, 1.99]
[0.66, 2.06]
[0.79, 1.80]
[0.84, 1.96]
[0.79, 1.95]

-----------------

-----------------

Childhood Decrease
Male
Maternal psychopathology
Single parent
Neighborhood disadvantage

1.27
2.54
1.03
1.40

[1.02, 1.58]
[1.93, 3.33]
[0.73, 1.48]
[0.98, 1.99]

3.83
0.83
1.15
1.10

[2.76, 5.32]
[0.57, 1.20]
[0.67, 1.97]
[0.65, 1.86]

1.28
1.11
1.48
0.82

[0.93, 1.78]
[0.74, 1.65]
[0.82, 2.65]
[0.49, 1.37]

---------

---------

---------

---------

Predictor

Page 38 of 39

Abuse
Mother's Ed: 0-level
Mother's Ed: A-level
Mother's Ed: Degree
Late Childhood Peak
Male
Maternal psychopathology
Single parent
Neighborhood disadvantage
Abuse
Mother's Ed: 0-level
Mother's Ed: A-level
Mother's Ed: Degree

1.59
1.04
1.17
1.82

[1.01, 2.52]
[0.77, 1.42]
[0.85, 1.61]
[1.30, 2.55]

0.82
0.92
0.69
0.98

[0.42, 1.60]
[0.57, 1.47]
[0.43, 1.11]
[0.57, 1.67]

0.85
0.93
0.79
0.75

[0.45, 1.59]
[0.57, 1.50]
[0.48, 1.29]
[0.46, 1.23]

---------

---------

---------

---------

0.99
2.29
0.70
1.70
1.88
1.13
1.48
2.42

[0.75, 1.30]
[1.60, 3.28]
[0.41, 1.18]
[1.10, 2.61]
[1.08, 3.27]
[0.75, 1.70]
[0.98, 2.24]
[1.59, 3.68]

2.99
0.75
0.78
1.34
0.97
0.99
0.87
1.30

[2.06, 4.33]
[0.48, 1.16]
[0.40, 1.51]
[0.74, 2.41]
[0.47, 2.03]
[0.57, 1.72]
[0.50, 1.52]
[0.72, 2.36]

-----------------

-----------------

-----------------

-----------------

-----------------

-----------------

Adolescent Spike
Male
0.33
[0.25, 0.43]
----------------Maternal psychopathology
3.07
[2.20, 4.28]
----------------Single parent
0.90
[0.56, 1.44]
----------------Neighborhood disadvantage
1.27
[0.81, 1.99]
----------------Abuse
1.93
[1.09, 3.44]
----------------Mother's Ed: 0-level
1.14
[0.77, 1.69]
----------------Mother's Ed: A-level
1.70
[1.15, 2.51]
----------------Mother's Ed: Degree
1.86
[1.17, 2.96]
----------------Note. Block tests indicated that each variable was a statistically significant predictor of class membership; Single Parent Household was significant at p=.040; all
other variables were significant at p < .0001. Bolded estimates were statistically significant after using a Benjamini-Hochberg correction with the false discovery
rate set to .05. The reference group for Mother’s Education was less than 0-level.
Ed=education.

Page 39 of 39

