medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

MicroRNA-mRNA networks define translatable molecular outcome phenotypes in osteosarcoma.
Authors: Christopher E. Lietz1, Cassandra Garbutt1†, William T. Barry2, Vikram Deshpande3, Yen-Lin Chen4,
Santiago A. Lozano-Calderon1, Yaoyu Wang2,5‡, Brian Lawney2,5‡, David Ebb6, Gregory M. Cote7, Zhenfeng
Duan8, Francis J. Hornicek8, Edwin Choy7, G. Petur Nielsen3, Benjamin Haibe-Kains9, John Quackenbush2,5‡,
Dimitrios Spentzos1*.
Affiliations:
1
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
2
Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.
3
Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
4
Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
5
Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA.
6
Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
7
Department of Hematology/Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
8
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.
9
Department of Medical Biophysics, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University of Toronto.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dimitrios Spentzos (dspentzos@mgh.harvard.edu).
† Currently at Illumina, Inc.
‡ Previously at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute.

ABSTRACT
Background: There is a lack of well validated biomarkers in osteosarcoma, a rare, recalcitrant disease with
variable outcome and poorly understood biologic behavior, for which treatment standards have stalled for
decades. The only standard prognostic factor in osteosarcoma remains the amount of pathologic necrosis
following pre-operative chemotherapy, which does not adequately capture the biologic complexity of the tumor
and has not resulted in optimized patient therapeutic stratification. New, robust biomarkers are needed to
understand prognosis and better reflect the underlying biologic and molecular complexity of this disease.
Methods: We performed microRNA sequencing in 74 frozen osteosarcoma biopsy samples, the largest single
center translationally analyzed cohort to date, and separately analyzed a multi-omic dataset from a large (n =
95) NCI supported national cooperative group cohort. Molecular patterns were tested for association with
outcome and used to identify novel therapeutics for further study by integrative pharmacogenomic analysis.
Results: MicroRNA profiles were found predict Recurrence Free Survival (5-microRNA profile, Median RFS
59 vs 202 months, log rank p=0.06, HR 1.87, 95% CI 0.96-3.66). The profiles were independently prognostic of
RFS when controlled for metastatic disease at diagnosis and pathologic necrosis following chemotherapy in
multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression (5-microRNA profile, HR 3.31, 95% CI 1.31–8.36, p=0.01).
Strong trends for survival discrimination were observed in the independent NCI dataset, and transcriptomic
analysis revealed the downstream microRNA regulatory targets are also predictive of survival (median RFS 17
vs 105 months, log rank p=0.007). Additionally, DNA methylation patterns held prognostic significance.
Through machine learning based integrative pharmacogenomic analysis, the microRNA biomarkers identify
novel therapeutics for further study and stratified application in osteosarcoma.
Conclusions: Our results support the existence of molecularly defined phenotypes in osteosarcoma associated
with distinct outcome independent of clinicopathologic features. We validated candidate microRNA profiles
and their associated molecular networks for prognostic value in multiple independent datasets. These networks
may define previously unrecognized osteosarcoma subtypes with distinct molecular context and clinical course
potentially appropriate for future application of tailored treatment strategies in different patient subgroups.
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

KEYWORDS
Osteosarcoma, microRNA, prognostic signature, sequencing, methylation, pharmacogenomics

BACKGROUND
Osteosarcoma is a primary bone malignancy most prevalent in adolescents and young adults, with a second
peak in later adulthood. While chemotherapy with the standard cisplatin/doxorubicin/methotrexate regimen
(known as MAP), combined with surgical resection has markedly improved prognosis in patients with localized
tumors, up to 40-50% of patients experience relapse and eventually succumb to the disease and the prognosis
for patients presenting with metastatic disease is even poorer [1],[2]. There have been no new therapeutic
advances in the last 30 years and progress in this disease is hindered by the lack of well validated biomarkers of
outcome that may facilitate stratification of patients for new therapies [3],[4],[5],[6]. Pathologic necrosis in
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy holds prognostic significance but is imperfectly correlated with outcome
in the subset of patients with suboptimal response [2]. In addition, it is semi-quantitative, and can only be
assessed by expert pathologists only after several cycles of chemotherapy are already administered. A recent
large randomized international trial (EURAMOS [6]), using pathologic necrosis to stratify patients for the
addition of ifosfamide/etoposide or interferon to the adjuvant treatment, failed to produce a survival benefit
underscoring both the need for novel therapeutics as well as the limitations of currently available
prognostic/stratification markers leading to an increased interest in molecular markers of outcome. In this
context, miRNAs have recently gained attention, due to their recognized regulatory role for large numbers of
downstream genes in cancer. Our group previously presented pilot findings suggesting that microRNAs are
useful in osteosarcoma prognostic stratification [7]. Here, we present an external, large-scale validation study
and reproducibility assessment of previously defined miRNA profiles prognostic of outcome, using two
independent large patient cohorts. One is a single center cohort from a large referral center (Massachusetts
General Hospital), and the other is based on data recently released by the NCI Therapeutically Applicable
Research to Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET) program, analyzed by RNA sequencing and Real Time
PCR, respectively, and representing the largest translationally studied clinical cohorts to date, in this rare tumor.
We further showed that gene targets of the prognostic miRNAs also provide robust outcome prediction and
suggest that the miRNAs potentially define new, previously unrecognized molecular phenotypes with clinical
relevance. Finally, we explore possible novel therapeutic implications by analyzing connections of the
molecular profiles with new drugs that may be effective in osteosarcoma.
RESULTS
Characteristics of the two osteosarcoma cohorts and description of candidate miRNA signatures
The clinical and pathologic characteristics of the two osteosarcoma cohorts are shown in Table 1. In general, the
NCI TARGET cohort included patients with relatively younger age and was more recently initiated thus
providing shorter follow up than the MGH cohort. All but 10 MGH samples were pre-chemotherapy diagnostic
biopsy samples, the remaining being pre-chemotherapy diagnostic resections. For the NCI TARGET dataset, all
samples were pre-chemotherapy, but information on how many were biopsies or pre-chemotherapy diagnostic
resections is not available. Virtually all patients in the MGH cohort had undergone treatment with at least the
standard MAP (or AP) regimen. Full individual patient detailed treatment information is not yet available for
the NCI TARGET cohort, but the reported treatment protocols contained at least the three components of the
MAP regimen, (doxorubicin, cisplatin and methotrexate).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1. Clinical characteristics of the MGH and TARGET cohorts.
Cohort
N
Years collected
before 2000
2000-2004
2005-2009
after 2009
Not available
Age at Diagnoses (years)
Median
Range
Sex (# / %)
Male
Female
Tumor Location
Axial
Appendicular
Upper
Lower
Histologic Subtype
NOS
Osteoblastic
Fibroblastic
Chondroblastic
Small Cell
Mixed
Metastases at Diagnoses (# / %)
No
Yes
Chemotherapy regime
MAP or AP
MAP and other
Other
Not available
Chemo-response3
Optimal
Suboptimal
Not available
Events
Deaths 4
Recurrences
Follow Up Time (years)
Median
Alive at last follow up
AWD
Avg. Follow Up and range
NED
Median follow up and range
1

MGH
74
1994-2013
25
23
19
7
0

TARGET 1
95 2
2000-2012
0
25
45
22
3

22.5
8 - 72

14.7
3-39

49 / 66
25 / 34

54 / 57
41 / 43

2
72
7
65

5
90
7
83

42
5
4
16
4
3

Not available

57 / 77
17 / 23

71 / 75
24 / 24

29
40
3
2

17
9
0
69

25
26
23

22
30
43

28
36

37 5
47 6

6.4
44
N = 11
10.5 (4.3 – 19.0)
N = 33
11.2 (2.8 – 19.2)

3.6
58
Not available
Not available

Data collection is ongoing by the NCI for the TARGET cohort. 2NmiRNA = 86, NRNAseq = 93, NMethylation = 83. 3Optimal chemoresponse was defined as ≥ 90% tumor necrosis at definitive surgery. 4Deaths from osteosarcoma. 530 deaths in the TARGET miRNA
cohort. 641 recurrences in the TARGET miRNA cohort.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

We mapped our previously published prognostic signatures to the new cohorts for further validation. These
signatures were a 5-miRNA profile (hsa-miR-495-3p, hsa-miR-487b-3p, miR-410-3p, hsa-miR-329-3p, hsamiR-664a-3p), and a 22-miRNA profile (which includes the 5 miRNAs, Table S1) which had been previously
defined in an initial pilot discovery sample cohort [7], that was entirely separate from any of the two cohorts
described in this study and was studied using a different assay technology (expression microarray). It has been
recognized that the majority of the previously identified prognostic miRNAs are encoded on the 14q32
chromosomal locus, which is the largest non-coding cluster in the human genome and is regulated partly via
methylation and genomic imprinting mechanisms [8],[9],[10],[11]. Therefore, secondarily, we considered an
expanded set of 27 miRNAs located on 14q32 that were previously found to be univariately prognostic of
outcome in the pilot dataset [8]. Due to mapping attrition across platforms, from the 22-miRNA profiles, 21
and 18 transcripts were mapped onto the MGH RNAseq, and TARGET qRTPCR data, respectively. Similarly,
from the 27-miRNA profile, 26 transcripts were mapped onto the TARGET Taqman qRTPCR data.
Application of the prognostic miRNA profiles in the MGH osteosarcoma cohort
We tested the prognostic value of the signatures on the MGH small RNA sequencing dataset (n=74), after
excluding samples with no or very low tumor content in the frozen specimen by pathology review. Given the
technical differences and mapping attrition between the different assay platforms, an application of a fully predefined prognostic regression model could not be performed, thus we tested our previously identified signatures
with two approaches that are less sensitive to the technical differences between the different assays: First, we
performed unsupervised hierarchal clustering with the two miRNA profiles, which provided strong prognostic
discrimination (Fig. 1a-b). Specifically, the 5-miRNA profile and 22-miRNA profiles discriminated between
two groups with median RFS 59 vs 202 months, (log rank p=0.06, HR 1.87, 95% CI 0.96-3.66), and 33 months
vs not reached, (log rank p=0.032, HR 1.99, 95% CI 1.04-3.80), respectively. Cluster reproducibility was high
as indicated by the cluster R index [12] (5-miRNA profile R: 0.80, 22-miRNA profile R: 0.94). Further, we
performed individualized patient prediction via supervised analysis using the “signed averaged expression”
survival prediction method. This is a very simple approach to achieve an event risk score for each patient via
averaging expression levels of candidate markers weighted by their Hazard Ratio for association with outcome,
greatly minimizing the overfitting risk associated with more complex models, as we and others have previously
shown [8]. With this approach, and using signs based on the pre-defined Hazard Ratios form the previously
published “discovery” dataset [7] we also showed a robust prognostic performance of the previously defined
signatures (Fig. 1c-d-e-f). While the analysis using the entire cohort did not produce significant prognostic
discrimination, an analysis stratified by the presence of metastatic tumor at the time of diagnosis resulted in
significantly different prognostic groups. Specifically, both profiles predicted two groups with median RFS 202
months vs not reached (for the group without metastasis at diagnosis) and median RFS 13 vs 27 months (for the
group with metastasis at diagnosis) by Kaplan Meier analysis (stratified log rank p=0.031 and 0.042, for the 5miRNA and 22-miRNA profiles, respectively).
The profiles were also prognostic of Overall Survival and discriminated between two clustering-based groups
with median OS 69 months vs not reached, (log rank p=0.012, HR 2.65, 95% CI 1.20-5.89), and median OS 100
months vs not reached, (log-rank p=0.06, HR 2.00, 95% CI 0.95-4.22), for the 5-miRNA and 22-miRNA
profiles, respectively (Fig. 2). In multivariate analysis, both profiles maintained independent prognostic value
adjusted for metastatic status at diagnosis (HR 2.28, Cox regression p=0.04 and HR 2.00, p=0.06 for the 5miRNA and the 22-miRNA profile, respectively). The 5-miRNA profile also maintained prognostic value even
when controlling for both metastatic status and pathologic necrosis, despite the limited statistical power of such
a multivariate analysis (HR 6.1, 95% CI 1.90-19.87). Analysis using the supervised signed average expression
method produced similar results with a strong trend for survival (Fig. S1).
The prognostic power of the profiles was found to be independent of confounding by known major
clinicopathologic prognostic factors. For example, as above, the 5-miRNA profile was significantly prognostic
of RFS when stratified by the presence of metastasis at diagnosis (no metastasis: median RFS 202 vs not
reached, metastasis: 13 vs 27 months, p=0.031). In multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression, the
miRNA signatures remained independently prognostic of RFS when controlled for the presence of metastatic

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

disease at diagnosis and pathologic necrosis following preoperative chemotherapy (5 miRNA profile: HR 3.31,
95% CI 1.31-8.36, p=0.01).
Finally, we tested the secondary, (also predefined) 27 miRNA profile, consisting of the subset of miRNAs
based on the 14q32 locus. Using the signed averaged supervised method, two subgroups were defined within
the MGH cohort with significantly different RFS stratified for the presence of metastasis at diagnosis (median
RFS 100 months vs not reached and 13 vs 19 months, stratified log rank p=0.058), corroborating the previously
hypothesized prognostic value of this miRNA signature (Fig. S2).
Composite prognostic model integrating miRNA profiles and chemotherapy induced pathologic necrosis
Given that chemotherapy induced pathologic necrosis is the only currently utilized prognostic factor that has
been proposed to therapeutically stratify patients, we reasoned that a composite model including both miRNA
biomarkers and pathologic necrosis may provide increased and refined discriminatory power, as was suggested
in the prior pilot study [7]. Indeed, when we created a composite model integrating both variables, we found
that three separate patient subgroups were identified, with significantly different RFS (Fig. 3). Specifically, we
identified a “very favorable”, a “very unfavorable”, and an “intermediate” outcome groups, suggesting that the
molecular markers can be used synergistically with pathologic assessment to allow improved patient
stratification. The “intermediate group” consisted of patients with good prognosis profile but suboptimal
necrosis and vice versa, (these two subgroups were shown to not have different outcome, further justifying
grouping them into one category). Confounding by metastatic status was also excluded as the distribution of
metastatic or not metastatic tumors was not different between the three prognostic groups (Fisher’s p=NS).
Similar clustering-based analysis for OS produced significant or trending results (Fig. S3).
Application of the prognostic miRNA profiles in the NCI TARGET osteosarcoma cohort
We used TaqMan miRNA RTPCR data provided through the recent NCI TARGET osteosarcoma cohort public
release (n=86). After mapping and applying standard normalization, we performed unsupervised and supervised
RFS analysis, using the same approaches as for the MGH sequencing cohort. Due to mapping attrition between
the earlier generation microarray and TaqMan RTPCR platforms it was difficult to reconstruct the precise
profiles, and the 5 and 22 miRNA profiles did not reach nominal significance. However, the pre-defined 27
miRNA profile including all the univariately prognostic miRNAs on 14q32, which mapped much more
efficiently (26 of 27 probes) on the TaqMan platform, very closely approached prognostic significance.
Applying a continuous risk score via the signed average supervised method we obtained a Cox regression, HR
1.32 (95% CI 0.98-1.78, p=0.065). The profile was also independent of confounding by metastatic status by
multivariable Cox regression (HR 1.32, 95% 0.98-1.77, p=0.063). Furthermore, when controlling for metastasis
at the time of diagnosis, clustering using the 22-miRNA profile (reduced to 18 miRNAs due to mapping
attrition) showed a trend toward significance (median RFS 8 vs 27 months, and 64 vs 105 months for metastatic
and non-metastatic subgroups, respectively, stratified log rank p=0.11). Of note, the NCI TARGET cohort has a
much shorter follow up than both the MGH cohort and the previously published discovery cohort, potentially
limiting its statistical power.
Gene sets regulated by the miRNA profiles are strongly prognostic of recurrence and survival
To gain insight into the downstream consequences of the prognostic miRNA driven regulation, we analyzed the
NCI TARGET mRNAseq data (large RNA sequencing, n=93) using experimentally verified gene targets for
each of the prognostic miRNAs, identified through miRTarBase [13], a widely utilized database of miRNA
target interactions. For each miRNA we compiled two gene target lists, an expansive list of experimentally
verified targets and a restrictive list with additional targeted experimental evidence of miRNA/mRNA
functional interaction.
We first performed Gene Set Analysis with the LS/KS test [14] for each list collectively for the end points of
Recurrence Free and Overall Survival and found that several of the 5 and the 22 miRNA target gene sets were
significantly prognostic of outcome (Table 2). The restrictive target list was too small (< 5 targets) for many of
the miRNAs but still produced some significant results for miRNAs with enough gene targets included in the
analysis. To further test for the possibility of random association due to the multitude of variables, we generated

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

10 random gene sets from the RNAseq data of equal size to the union of the 5 miRNA target lists (44 genes)
and performed Gene Set Analysis. None of the random gene sets achieved the p value significance of the
candidate miRNA target list by the LS test (Supplementary Methods and Results).

Table 2. miRNA target gene set analysis for RFS and OS with experimentally verified miRNA gene targets sets
for the 22-miRNA profile (miRNAs from the 5-miRNA profile are shown in bold). All miRNA gene target sets
with significant or trending LS permutation test p-values for the expansive analysis are shown.
miRNA Gene Target
Sets
hsa-miR-329-3p
hsa-miR-410-3p
hsa-miR-139-5p
hsa-miR-335-3p
hsa-miR-487b-3p
hsa-miR-432-5p
hsa-miR-493-5p

Experimentally Verified Gene Target Lists
p-value
p-value
Expansive
Restrictive
(RFS)
(OS)
344
0.00232
0.00552
8
157
0.00462
0.05839
10
69
0.00541
0.03526
25
193
0.02183
0.33236
3
15
0.07972
0.02288
8
63
0.08432
0.03707
4
70
0.09954
0.09239
3

p-value
(RFS)
0.00098
0.09067
0.01062
0.34046
0.07061
0.54804
0.34046

p-value
(OS)
0.01705
0.05576
0.29243
0.732
0.0044
0.35184
0.47078

Then, we performed unsupervised clustering and supervised signed averaged analysis with the union of the
restrictive list gene targets from both the 5-miRNA (cluster R-index = 0.67) and the 22-miRNA (cluster R-index
= 0.71) signatures on the NCI TARGET dataset and found that the gene targets consistently discriminated
between two groups of samples with significantly different RFS (Fig. 4) and a strong trend for different OS
(Fig. S4). Only one of the random gene lists demonstrated a prognostic discrimination as strong as that of the
miRNA target gene list using the same methodology, suggesting that this finding was not a result of a random
distinction due to a large number of possibly uninformative genes (File S1). Finally, we performed composite
prognostic analysis with the gene target classification and pathologic necrosis, and as was the case for miRNA
profiles, a similar distinction between three prognostic subgroups was observed (Fig. S5).
DNA methylation patterns of the miRNA prognostic signatures are also prognostic of outcome
We previously reported evidence for epigenetic regulation of the prognostic miRNAs and that their DNA
methylation patterns correlate with miRNA expression and aggressive osteosarcoma behavior in vitro [8]. We
tested the clinical relevance of this hypothesis using methylation array data from the NCI TARGET clinical
cohort. We identified a total of 44 probes corresponding to CpG sites annotated to the 5-miRNA profile. We
then assessed the methylation patterns of these probes in the two prognostic patient subgroups previously
defined by 5-miRNA clustering and found that 15 of these CpG sites were differentially methylated between the
two groups (p< 0.05). Further, the methylation pattern suggested that, on average, these CpG sites were
hypermethylated in one group relative to the other (Table S2, Fig. 5a). Additionally, hierarchical clustering
using the 44 methylation probes discriminated between two patient groups (R-index = 0.78) with strikingly
different outcomes (Fig. 5b). To assess the robustness of this observation, we repeated the analysis after
removing the 50% least variant CpG probes and observed that the survival results did not materially change.
Finally, we tested the association between DNA methylation and miRNA expression. We focused on the 4 of
the 5 prognostic miRNAs located in the previously described, possibly epigenetically regulated non-coding
cluster on 14q32. Each miRNA significantly correlated with at least 32 of the 44 CpG probes located in this
genomic region (Spearman p <0.05 median Spearman coefficient 0.351, range 0.295-0.361, Table S3)
suggesting miRNA patterns are partly modulated by DNA methylation.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

RNA networks define possible novel outcome related molecular phenotypes
We asked whether the transcriptomic patterns described above represent simple prognostic associations, or they
may perhaps track underlying discernible phenotypes with possibly distinct molecular networks and clinical
behavior. We reasoned that if there are wider molecular phenotypes hidden in the dataset, individual patient
samples should be classified similarly as “high” or “low” risk using different types of molecular markers,
mRNAs or miRNAs. We thus compared the miRNA-based and gene target-based classifications of the samples
in the NCI TARGET dataset and found that they were significantly associated and highly concordant. For
example, the Cramer’s V test for sample classification concordance between the 5 miRNA derived clusters and
the 5-miRNA gene target derived (mRNA) clusters was 0.52 with a Fisher’s p<0.001 (detailed concordance
findings in Table S4), irrespective of whether unsupervised or supervised methodology was used for
classification. The survival associated subgroups generated using the 44 methylation probes annotated to the
prognostic miRNAs were not concordant with the RNA based subgroups. These observations suggest that
miRNA/gene target networks may track distinct molecular phenotypes of outcome in osteosarcoma, and that
these phenotypes may be modulated by DNA methylation, which offers additional, but not fully overlapping
prognostic information.
Pathway analysis of miRNA targets
Building on the finding of the relationship between miRNA gene targets and outcome, we sought to identify
associated molecular pathways with potential biologic or therapeutic implications. Gene set enrichment analysis
was performed through the DAVID [15] functional annotation tool using the gene targets of the prognostic
miRNAs. In order to strengthen the confidence in the detected pathways only BioCarta and KEGG [16]
pathways with FDR < 0.05 [17] and EASE score p < 0.05 [18] in the restrictive 22 and 5-miRNA profiles,
respectively, were considered significantly enriched. Using these criteria 29 KEGG and 10 BioCarta pathways
were identified as enriched in both profiles (Table S5). Both the “PI3K” and “MAPK” pathways were identified
as top-ranking enriched pathways, and 34 of the other pathways identified intersected “PI3K” or “MAPK”
through key signaling enzymes such as PI3K, AKT/PKB, PTEN, MAPK1/3 or MEK. In order to test if these
striking connections were specific to the identified pathways, we analyzed 10 BioCarta and 29 KEGG pathways
with the lowest non-significant enrichment ranking within the 22-miRNA gene target set and only nine of them
intersected the “PI3K” or “MAPK” pathways. Additionally, the “FOXO pathway”, downstream of AKT [19]
and implicated in osteosarcoma [20], was identified in the BioCarta pathway analysis, and binding sites for
FOXO1 were enriched in the genes of the miRNA targets through a parallel transcription factor binding analysis
(FDR < 0.05). These results provide a glimpse into the downstream pathways which may become therapeutic
targets in tumors with dysregulated miRNA expression.
Pharmacogenomic integrative analysis reveals clinically applicable pharmaceuticals for osteosarcoma
The prognostic significance of the downstream miRNA gene targets prompted us to consider possible
therapeutic applications of these findings. While screening for individual genes that could be targeted for
specific inhibition can be useful, these large prognostic genomic signatures are often difficult to interpret
biologically, and prioritization of a single gene or pathway is not always obvious. We opted for a
comprehensive pharmacogenomic approach that analytically connects signatures, drugs and cell types aiming to
prioritize novel therapeutic options for further development. We leveraged our PharmacoGx platform [21], and
its web interface (PharmacoDB) [22], which provides for statistical analysis of primary experimental data from
large publicly available databases of cell line drug sensitivities and gene signatures. We used PharmacoDB
version 1.1.1 which includes 650,894 individual drug sensitivity experiments across 1,691 cell lines, and 19,933
possible gene markers currently included in the analytical pipeline.
In this analysis, we considered the top 20 experimentally verified gene targets (when available) for each of the
22 prognostic miRNAs ranked by their univariate p value for association with RFS. We input these genes into
PharmacoDB, generating a list of 689 unique drugs for which any of the 415 gene targets were found to be a
predictive marker of activity (one miRNA had only 15 available gene targets). Using our gene targets,
PharmacoDB provided 340,436 experimental gene-drug correlations for further analysis. The drug list was
filtered for reasonably large effect size (regression coefficient >|0.25|) and a stringent nominal p value (<0.001),

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

with respect to association with at least one predictive gene marker, resulting in a list of 161 drugs. To increase
the likelihood the observed drug effect relates to the miRNA network, we only considered drugs that produced
at least three “hits” within the 22 miRNA/gene network and at least one “hit” within the 5 miRNA/gene
network, resulting in a 57-drug list and further limited the list to 39 drugs with at least one interaction with 5
miRNA profile gene targets.
Then, we explicitly tailored the screening process to osteosarcoma. We obtained the median IC50 for the 34 out
of the 39 drugs, for which PharmacoDB Batch Query provided drug response data for at least one of fifteen
available osteosarcoma cell lines. We then set the IC50 for cisplatin, a core drug of active osteosarcoma
regimens in clinical practice, as the minimum threshold for final drug selection, resulting in a final distilled list
of 19 drugs (Table 3). Examining the final candidate list, we noticed that doxorubicin, another standard and
probably the most active single conventional chemotherapy drug for osteosarcoma was included. Methotrexate
and etoposide fell just below our stringent selection threshold but also produced “hits” when using slightly
relaxed but still reasonably robust filtering criteria (coefficient>|0.15|, p < 0.05). These findings serve as a
“positive control” that this analysis pipeline can discover active drugs, in addition suggesting that the miRNA
networks may offer some predictive value for response to conventional chemotherapy. Further, sixteen of the 19
drugs in the final list have been included in phase I or phase II clinical trials for the treatment of various types of
cancer.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 3. Pharmaceuticals for which PharmacoDB analysis reveals a drug response predictive association with
miRNA gene targets. Methotrexate, etoposide, and cisplatin are included for comparative purposes. Median
IC50 values are obtained across all osteosarcoma cell lines. The median regression coefficient is calculated
from the significant gene – drug interactions used to identify the drugs. The nine bolded drugs act through
pathways enriched in target genes of the miRNA profile (shown and bolded in Table S5). Specifically,
dinaciclib, CGP060474, and alvocidib inhibit the “cell cycle pathway”, trametinib, AZ628, and PD-0325901
inhibit the “MAPK pathway”, dasatinib and nilotinib act through the “Inhibition of Cellular Proliferation” by
Gleevec pathway, and pictilisib inhibits the “PI3K pathway”.
Median
Median
Chemical
Name
Drug Class
Regression
IC50 (µM)
Replicates
Coefficient
thapsigargin
SERCA inhibitor
0.003
0.273
1
daporinad
NAPRT inhibitor
0.004
0.323
1
paclitaxel
microtubule stabilizing agent
0.016
0.552
1
†
dinaciclib
CDK inhibitor
0.016
0.288
3
†
CGP-60474
CDK inhibitor
0.028
0.266
3
panobinostat
HDAC inhibitor
0.112
0.291
1
†
WH-4-023
Src inhibitor
0.156
0.268
2
methotrexate
DHFR inhibitor
0.160
1*
†
alvocidib
CDK inhibitor
0.221
0.283
3
irinotecan
topoisomerase inhibitor
0.444
0.265
4*
doxorubicin
topoisomerase inhibitor
0.521
0.260
4*
topotecan
topoisomerase inhibitor
0.698
0.273
4*
trametinib
MEK inhibitor
0.897
0.270
2
†
AZ628
RAF inhibitor
0.966
0.256
1
TAE684
ALK inhibitor
1.143
0.266
1
dasatinib
Abl/Src inhibitor
2.846
0.304
2
pictilisib
PI3K inhibitor
3.359
0.452
1
etoposide
topoisomerase inhibitor
3.678
4*
tozasertib
aurora kinase inhibitor
4.504
0.377
1
PD-0325901
MEK inhibitor
5.199
0.292
2
nilotinib
Abl inhibitor
5.703
0.278
1
cisplatin
alkylating agent
8.414
1*
* The drug class includes a chemical replicate corresponding to a reference pharmaceutical.
†
Experimental drug response (IC50) data is only available for a limited number (≤ 3) of
osteosarcoma cell lines
Of these, four drugs are part of standard care, four are targeted agents that have or are being tested in dedicated
sarcoma trials, including panobinostat [23], alvocidib [24], dasatinib [25], and nilotinib [26],[27], and two of
which have been tested in osteosarcoma; namely alvocidib and dasatinib, which has shown some evidence of
activity in an early clinical trial. In this trial, the 46 high-grade, metastatic, pre-treated, osteosarcoma subjects
experienced a 15% two-year survival rate, 11% experienced 6-month progression free survival, and three
subjects experienced >10% decrease in tumor size, or >15% decrease in tumor density [25]. Despite the modest
result observed with dasatinib monotherapy in the SARC009 trial, our analysis predicts for potential synergy
between dasatinib and MAP chemotherapy in a subset of patients undergoing standard treatment. To this end,
dasatinib has previously been shown to synergize with doxorubicin in vitro [28]. Finally, a recently published
clinical trial of regorafenib vs placebo, (SARC024 [29]), reported increased progression free survival for pre-

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

treated, metastatic osteosarcoma patients. We thus tested if there is an interaction between the miRNA target
profile and regorafenib response and we discovered that this indeed is the case, using the previously described
cut offs (coefficient >|0.15|, p<0.05). Of note, further support for in vitro synergy between regorafenib and
doxorubicin, has been provided in a different cancer type [30].
Six other non-classic chemotherapeutic drugs from the list have been tested in clinical trials, though not yet with
osteosarcoma patients. For these drugs we also found in vitro data for effect in osteosarcoma cell lines, separate
and independent of the experiments already included in PharmacoDB. These drugs include dinaciclib [31],
panobinostat [32], trametinib [33], TAE684 [34] (ceritinib), pictilisib [35], and tozasertib [36]. Interestingly,
TAE684 (ceritinib) was previously found to reverse cisplatin resistance in vitro in osteosarcoma by our own
sarcoma research group [34]. Recently, clinical efficacy for nilotinib in high-risk chordoma subjects (another
type of primary bone tumor) was established by our own sarcoma research group, where the median overall
survival time was 61.5 months [26]. Additionally, a phase II trial for single agent panobinostat was
prospectively registered in March of 2018, which is designed to include a sub-cohort of 20 osteosarcoma
patients (ACCT008/NORTH). A phase I/IIa trial studying trametinib is recruiting patients, including with
osteosarcoma (NCT02124772). These proof-of-principle findings suggest this approach can identify compounds
with at least initial evidence for activity against osteosarcoma and, additionally, could serve as a large-scale
screening tool to prioritize use of these compounds based on tumor profiles of candidate miRNA/mRNA
networks presented in this study.
We finally examined the intersection of the results of the pharmacogenomic analysis and the analysis of the
pathways enriched in the miRNA target sets (Tables 3 and 4). We found that four of the drugs identified in this
pharmacogenomic analysis directly target the MAPK or PI3K pathway, both of which are enriched in the gene
target set of the prognostic miRNAs. Because aberrant miRNA expression appears to modulate these pathways,
inhibiting key elements may be especially effective in tumors where the miRNA signatures predict poor
prognosis. Therapeutics targeting these pathways have shown in vitro activity in osteosarcoma, and ongoing
clinical trials (NCT03458728 and NCT02124772) are evaluating drugs targeting both mechanisms, one of
which includes combination therapy with trametinib, a drug identified in our analysis.
DISCUSSION
Osteosarcoma treatment is based on a combined modality approach consisting of surgery and neoadjuvant and
adjuvant chemotherapy with the MAP regimen. This treatment standard, unchanged in the last 20-30 years, has
led to an improvement in outcome compared to poor results previously obtained with surgical resection alone,
but leaves much to be improved, as up to 50% of the patients, many of them children and young adults,
eventually relapse and succumb to their disease. Development of new therapies is challenging because of the
relative rarity of the tumor and the lack of robust biomarkers that would help stratify outcome risk and prioritize
patients for trials. In this context, we, and others, have previously reported initial findings suggesting that
miRNA profiles, obtained at the time of pre-chemotherapy diagnostic biopsy, can be promising biomarkers of
outcome following standard therapy[7],[8],[37]. These initial reports were based on relatively small sample
sizes and expression microarray technologies with inherent technical limitations and uncertainty about their
wider reproducibility. In this study, we tested hypotheses based on miRNA profiles and their associated gene
target networks, validated their prognostic power in two large genomic datasets, and placed them in the wider
molecular context of relevant tumor outcome phenotypes in osteosarcoma.
Our two study cohorts (n=74, 95) are large for this rare disease and such sample sizes have not been reported to
date in osteosarcoma biomarker studies. Our study is unique in that it combines the strength of a large well
annotated cohort based on a single expert referral center, (Massachusetts General Hospital) with presumably
more limited clinical heterogeneity, with the strength of a large multicenter, nation-wide cohort, based on the
NCI TARGET initiative, capturing real life heterogeneity and variability of a large population across the entire
North American continent. Two different genomic assays (small RNA sequencing and TaqMan miRNA
qRTPCR) were used in the two cohorts, and messenger (large) RNAseq and methylation array data were also
available for one cohort. Despite these inherent challenges in the analysis and validation process across multiple

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

platforms, our study findings support the hypothesis that these miRNA profiles and networks can be
reproducible across a large external population, bringing them one step closer to eventual clinical applicability.
We used simple methodology (signed averaged expression) to calculate risk scores, an approach that is
inherently less prone to overfitting, as it does not rely on identifying an optimal model. In addition,
unsupervised clustering analysis, which is practically devoid of overfitting also resulted in significant survival
discrimination, further supporting the robust prognostic information carried by the miRNA profiles. That said,
when a single technology is eventually chosen for clinical application, it is conceivable that a fully parametric
multivariate model may be optimal for individualized outcome prediction.
Particularly notable is the fact that sets of experimentally validated gene (mRNA) targets of the prognostic
miRNAs were also found to be strongly prognostic of outcome suggesting a possibly active miRNA/mRNA
network. Furthermore, we observed a significant and moderately strong concordance between miRNA and
mRNA classification of individual samples as ‘high” or “low” risk. This despite the inherent variability of these
analyses and the fact that different assays were used for miRNA and mRNA analysis in the NCI dataset. This
observation supports the notion, initially suggested in our early studies, that miRNA patterns are not simply
markers of outcome but may track underlying molecular phenotypes where distinct miRNA/mRNA networks
modulate tumor behavior and patient course.
To the extent that relevant data were available, we also demonstrated that the prognostic value of the miRNA
profiles was independent of the main known clinicopathologic variables that affect outcome in osteosarcoma,
namely the presence of metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis and pathologic necrosis in response to
neoadjuvant MAP based chemotherapy. Furthermore, we propose a simple composite model integrating
information from both pathologic necrosis and miRNA biomarkers that allows improved and more refined
stratification into three relevant prognostic groups, again validating a hypothesis previously suggested in our
pilot work [7]. Given the failure thus far to improve patient outcomes based on conventional “high” and “low”
risk stratification using pathologic necrosis, a three-group composite stratification approach may offer a more
powerful and refined application. Based on this model, a very favorable prognosis group scan be safely
monitored with a negligible risk of recurrence. An intermediate prognosis group can be approached by
selectively developing new treatments adding to the backbone of standard MAP chemotherapy. Finally, a very
unfavorable prognosis group may derive a very limited benefit from standard chemotherapy. In our analysis,
this group appears to have an outcome equal to what was historically the case for surgical treatment in the prechemotherapy era and may require an entirely different approach to test novel therapies based on the unique
molecular subtype that this group represents.
The finding that DNA methylation patterns corresponding to the prognostic miRNAs are also prognostic of
outcome provides large scale clinical validation of tentative observations made in prior pilot small sample
cohorts [8],[38]. In addition, the correlation between methylation and miRNA expression implies that there is a
potential for a regulatory mechanism, at least in the 14q32 non-coding locus, which hosts most of the prognostic
miRNAs. However, the sample classification between the methylation and RNA markers was discordant
suggesting that the methylation patterns are not simply duplicating information contained in the transcriptome.
It is not clear at this point, whether the specific methylation markers reported here are uniquely relevant to
miRNA expression and outcome, or whether they are surrogates for more global methylation patterns in
osteosarcoma, as was recently suggested [38].
Through our work and that of others, the prognostic value of miRNA profiles in osteosarcoma appears to be
validated. Clinical application of these profiles will further rest in their potential to guide treatment. The recent
large randomized international EURAMOS trial, failed to detect a survival advantage to inclusion of
ifosfamide/etoposide to the post-operative regimen for patients with poor pathologic response [6], as well as
inclusion of interferon a for the patients with good pathologic response [3]. These findings may signify the lack
of true benefit from the utilized drugs, but alternatively may also be partly due to the possibility that pathologic
necrosis after 10 weeks of MAP treatment may not be the optimal marker, in isolation, for stratifying patients

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

for alternate treatment. Our composite prognostic analysis combining pathologic necrosis and miRNA profiles
offers a possible new powerful and refined method to stratify patients for various treatment strategies.
Our pharmacogenomic approach coupled with pathway analysis provides initial insights into novel therapeutic
strategies, whereby new drugs, that may be already developed for other indications, or are shown to have
activity against osteosarcoma in clinical trials (such as dasatinib [25], regorafenib [29]) can be shown to be
active or synergistic in patients who are receiving standard MAP chemotherapy based on the miRNA network
profiles. While these new paradigms require additional validation in both clinical as well as experimental
studies, this approach to drug repurposing is particularly well suited for this rare tumor where drug development
has stalled for the last 30 years. Several possible drug candidates are revealed, including CDK inhibitors, MEK
inhibitors, as well as PI3K pathway inhibitors, the therapeutic value of which was also proposed by a recent
osteosarcoma genomic study in a different clinical and experimental setting [39]. Our data further support these
findings and suggest that miRNAs may partly modulate the PI3K effect in a subset of osteosarcoma tumors and
may allow stratification for the use of relevant inhibitors in clinical practice.
While the findings on the MGH dataset more closely resembled and validated hypotheses initially presented in
the early studies, the findings from the TARGET miRNA expression data were suggestive of a prognostic
association but did not reach the same level of definitive significance. This may be due to several confounding
issues such as the less complete clinical annotation and shorter follow up of the TARGET dataset, differences
between the cohorts, such as in median age (22.5 vs 15 years), and differences in assay technologies used (RNA
seq vs RTPCR) and related cross platform probe mapping attrition. Nonetheless, the strong prognostic value of
the miRNA gene targets in the NCI TARGET data (derived via RNA seq technology from larger patient cohort
than the miRNA assays) and the fact that the profiles in the NCI TARGET data show a strong trend for
significance with stratification for metastatic disease, strongly supports the notion that miRNA derived
networks do have prognostic influence and this may become more clear when longer follow up and more
complete annotation, particularly full treatment information, becomes available from the NCI.
Future functional studies will help elucidate the precise mechanisms by which the miRNA/mRNA networks
affect tumor behavior and how best to exploit them therapeutically in a specific manner, as initial reports have
suggested [40]. Further clinical steps may include testing the possibility that the molecular markers or
phenotypes statistically interact or predict for an effect from the use of intensified or alternative chemotherapy,
such as ifosfamide/etoposide, which remains an active regimen despite the failure to demonstrate survival
benefit in the EURAMOS [6] trial. In addition, the use of these markers via pharmacogenomic analysis as a tool
to select patients for clinical trials of new candidate drugs merits further testing. Finally, from a research
strategy perspective, our study exemplifies the benefit of maximizing use of local resources in a large single
institution referral center coupled with NCI supported efforts to generate national cooperative group-based
resources and molecular data that would be impossible to otherwise efficiently generate and disseminate. We
believe this is a great model to accelerate scientific discovery and clinical validation, particularly in rare or
pediatric tumors.
CONCLUSIONS
We performed the first small RNA sequencing osteosarcoma study to date and validate candidate prognostic
miRNA signatures associated with outcome independent of known clinicopathologic factors. Furthermore,
integration of a large, multi-omic, national cooperative group supported dataset revealed that downstream
regulatory targets of the miRNA signatures are also prognostic of outcome, suggesting that miRNA driven
molecular networks represent previously undefined outcome phenotypes in osteosarcoma. These subtypes may
be translatable for stratifying patients for novel and alternate therapeutic strategies.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

METHODS
The MGH human osteosarcoma cohort RNA isolation and small RNA sequencing
Eighty (80) pre-chemotherapy diagnostic frozen samples from patients with high grade osteosarcoma were
retrieved from the MGH Pathology archives based on an IRB approved retrospective tissue and clinical
information protocol. Samples were banked between 1994-2013 and selection was done chronologically,
subject only to tissue availability, pathology confirmation, and confirmation of treatment with neoadjuvant
and/or adjuvant chemotherapy. All slides were reviewed again by an expert study pathologist confirm diagnosis
and to determine tumor cellularity. Six samples with very low tumor cellularity (<5%) were excluded resulting
in 74 samples selected for further study.
RNA was isolated with the QIAGEN RNeasy® Plus Universal Mini Kit (Qiagen) using an adapted protocol
designed to increase the quality of extracted RNA from bone [41]. Sequencing was performed at the Center for
Cancer Computational Biology at Dana Farber Cancer Institute (Boston, MA). RNA quantity was determined
on the Qubit using the Qubit RNA High Sensitivity Assay Kit (Life Tech) and RNA quality was determined on
the Bioanalyzer using the RNA Pico Kit (Agilent). Using the NEBNext Multiplex Small RNA Library Prep Kit
for Illumina (NEB), 100ng of total RNA was converted into a DNA library following the manufacturer’s
protocol, with no modifications. Library quantity was determined using the Qubit High Sensitivity DNA Kit
(Life Tech) and library size was determined using the Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity Chip Kit (Agilent). Finally,
libraries were subjected to qPCR using the Universal Library Quantification Kit for Illumina (Kapa Biosystems)
and run on the 7900HT Fast qPCR machine (ABI). Libraries passing quality control were diluted to 2nM,
combined into library pools, and sequenced on the NextSeq 500 (Illumina) at a final concentration of 2pM.
Sequencing was done across three NextSeq Single Read 75 Cycle High Throughput V2 flowcells following
standard protocols. Small-RNAseq reads were processed and quantified using the sRNAtoolbox sRNAbench
tool [42]. The pipeline automatically identified and removed adapter sequences from the input fastq files.
Hierarchal read mapping was performed to first map reads to the UniVec database to filter common laboratory
contaminants, and then to rRNAs. The preprocessing steps are performed with Bowtie [43]. The remaining
reads are then mapped to human miRNAs annotated in miRbase [44] version 21. Mature and precursor miRNAs
were independently mapped and quantified. The raw mature miRNA read counts (2003 transcripts) were
normalized and log base 2 transformed using the DESeq2 R package [45] prior to analysis.
NCI TARGET human osteosarcoma cohort and associated molecular data
A publicly available human osteosarcoma molecular dataset was obtained from the NCI TARGET
(Therapeutically Applicable Research to Generate Effective Treatments) osteosarcoma project data matrix
(https://ocg.cancer.gov/programs/target/data-matrix). This dataset currently (data collection is ongoing by the
NCI) contains a total of 95 clinically annotated samples for which ABI TaqMan MegaplexTM human miRNA
qRTPCR data (ABI) (n = 86), Illumina RNA seq data (n = 93), and Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450K
(n = 83) is available. Experimental and data processing methodology for miRNA expression, RNA seq, and
methylation data, employed by the TARGET study team, is available on the TARGET osteosarcoma webpage
(https://ocg.cancer.gov/programs/target/target-methods). We transformed and normalized raw miRNA qRTPCR
data using the standard 2-∆Ct transformation as previously described [46]. We further analyzed the gene level
RNAseq data provided by TARGET. All transcript reads less than 200 bases in length based on the Ensembl
Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 38 patch release 12 (GRCh38.p12) were removed. DESeq2 [45]
was then used to normalize and log base 2 transform the read count expression data. Gene annotations were
obtained through the Ensembl BioMart tool [47]. Beta mixture-quantile normalized [48] methylation β values
were downloaded, and then inter-array normalization and M value [49] conversion was performed via the
methylumi R package [50]. HumanMethylation450 v1.2 manifest file was used to obtain probe annotations and
is available at https://support.illumina.com/downloads/infinium_humanmethylation450_product_files.html.
Candidate signature mapping across experimental assays and platforms
We mapped candidate prognostic miRNAs from the previously published discovery dataset, generated using
DASL miRNA microarrays [7], to mature human miRNAs in the MGH RNA sequencing dataset and the NCI
TARGET qRTPCR dataset, utilizing miRbase [44] and the BLASTN algorithm. We only considered for further

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

analysis miRNAs with perfect 18-mer contiguous sequence homology to the original DASL probes (some of
which were only 18 nucleotides long). This mapping selected 21 of the original 22 prognostic miRNAs on the
MGH dataset, and 18 of the 22 miRNAs on the NCI TARGET dataset. In addition, for the 27 miRNA predefined prognostic profile on the 14q32 locus [8], mapping selected 27/27 miRNAs on the MGH RNA seq
cohort and 26/27 miRNAs on the TARGET TaqMan RTPCR cohort. Detailed mapping output is shown Table
S1.
Unsupervised and Supervised Survival analysis and prediction
Unsupervised hierarchal clustering using the previously described prognostic miRNA profiles in the MGH and
TARGET datasets was performed with the centered correlation and average linkage method [51] and resulting
groups were then analyzed for survival differences. Cluster reproducibility was assessed with the R-index [12].
For supervised survival analysis, we used the simple and robust signed average method as previously described
by us and others [8],[52],[53],[54]. In this approach, the expression of the miRNAs in a given prespecified
profile was averaged and weighted by +1 or -1 depending on the direction of the Hazard Ratio/coefficient of
each miRNA’s association with outcome on a univariate Cox Regression analysis. Signs were taken from the
previously published pilot study. Using this metric as a prognostic risk index two groups were defined by the
median value as a cut off. Survival differences between cluster defined or signed average defined groups were
tested with Kaplan-Meier analysis and the log rank test for significance. Multivariate analysis for confounding
prognostic factors was performed using a Cox Regression model, with the profile and relevant factors entered as
independent variables.
Bioinformatic identification miRNA gene targets
miRTarBase [13] was used to identify experimentally verified gene targets of the miRNA profiles. The
miRTarBase reports miRNA gene targets at different levels of confidence depending on the type of
experimental assays (reporter assay, Western blot, qPCR, microarray, NGS, pSILAC (pulsed Stable Isotope
Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture). We defined two gene target lists, one “restrictive” and one
“expansive” based on a higher and a relatively lower confidence for miRNA-mRNA functional interaction,
respectively.
Differential expression, Gene set analysis, and Standard statistical tests
Continuous variable differential analysis between two groups of samples was performed by a t-test with pvalues adjusted to control the false discovery rate (FDR) using the Benjamini – Hochberg step-up procedure for
multiple testing [55]. Gene set analysis for the association of the expression profiles of miRNA gene targets
with survival was performed with the functional class scoring method, applying the LS/KS test with appropriate
permutation-based p values [14]. For the expansive miRNA gene target analysis, a filter was applied to remove
genes with the lowest 20% variance, to reduce statistical noise. Associations between two categorical variables
were evaluated with two-tailed chi-square/Fisher’s exact test. Cramer’s V test employed to assess the strength
of the classification concordance between different profiles. Spearman rank and Pearson’s r statistics were used
to evaluate continuous variable correlations.
MiRNA gene target pathway enrichment analysis
Enrichment of BioCarta pathways, KEGG [16] pathways, and transcription factor binding sites in the prognostic
miRNA gene targets was evaluated using the DAVID Functional Annotation Tool [15]. BioCarta and KEGG
pathways with FDR [17] < 0.05 and EASE score [18] p < 0.05 in the restrictive 22 and 5-miRNA gene target
lists, respectively, were considered significant. Many KEGG terms generic to cancer were identified as
significant. We considered these terms to be redundant, and less specific than other pathways, and thus omitted
them from the results, but the complete results are available in File S1. For transcription factor binding site
analysis, there is still significant uncertainty about experimentally verified annotations, and a lot of nominally
significant sequences were identified, so an equally stringent significance cut off of FDR < 0.05 was used in
both 22-miRNA and 5-miRNA restrictive gene target lists.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Integrative Pharmacogenomic Analysis
We used the miRNA gene target profiles for pharmacogenomic drug interaction discovery using PharmacoDB
[22] interface, which performs data analysis via the PharmacoGx R package [21]. The expansive list of
experimentally verified gene targets of the 22-miRNA profile was ranked by univariate p-value for association
with RFS. The 20 top gene targets for each miRNA were entered in the PharmacoDB and PharmacoGx pipeline
analyzing drug/gene predictive interactions across seven large scale datasets including a total of 650,894
individual drug sensitivity experiments across 1691 cell lines, and 19933 possible gene markers via a
multivariate regression model adjusting for tissue source and experimental batch. We chose drug candidates at a
stringent 0.001 regression p-value for predictive association with gene markers, and a regression coefficient >
|0.25| for effect size. To increase the specificity of the resulting drug list, only drugs passing the p-value and
effect size filters for at least three of the 22-miRNA profile gene targets and at least one of the 5-miRNA profile
gene targets were retained for further analysis. The in vitro experimental data of the filtered drug list was then
evaluated specifically in 15 osteosarcoma cell lines through the PharmacoDB Batch Query to obtain sensitivity
measures (IC50 dose response metric) for response to candidate drugs. For each drug we calculated the median
IC50 across all cell lines to minimize outlier effects and drugs were ranked by median IC50 value. The final
drug sensitivity list was compared to the IC50 values for standard chemotherapeutic drugs used and known to
be effective in osteosarcoma.
Statistical Software
The NCI BRB-ArrayTools v4.6.0 [56], R (version 3.4.3), and SPSS v 24 software, were used.
FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1. Kaplan-Meier log-rank Recurrence Free Survival analysis of candidate profiles on the MGH dataset.
Unsupervised hierarchal clustering a) 5-miRNAs, Median RFS 59 vs 202 months, p=0.06, b) 22 miRNAs, 33
months vs not reached, p=0.032. Supervised signed average prediction: 5 miRNAs, stratified p=0.031, median
RFS: c) Not metastatic: 202 months vs not reached, e) Metastatic: 13 vs 27 months. 22 miRNAs, stratified
p=0.042, median RFS: d) Not metastatic: 202 months vs not reached, f) Metastatic: 13 vs 27 months.
Figure 2. Kaplan-Meier log-rank Overall Survival analysis of candidate profiles on the MGH dataset by
unsupervised hierarchical clustering. a) 5-miRNAs, Median OS 69 months vs not reached, p=0.012, b) 22
miRNAs, 100 months vs not reached, p=0.061.
Figure 3. Kaplan-Meier log rank Recurrence Free Survival survival analysis of groups generated by a
composite classification rule combining miRNA profiles and pathologically assessed chemoresponse (PCR).
Three groups were defined: “Very favorable” (good prognostic profile/optimal chemoresponse, top curve),
“very unfavorable” (poor prognostic profile/suboptimal chemoresponse, bottom curve) and “intermediate”
(good prognostic profile/suboptimal chemoresponse, or poor prognostic profile/optimal chemoresponse, middle
curve). Clustering: a) 5 miRNA-profile/PCR, Median RFS 18 vs 202 months vs not reached, p=0.003. b) 22
miRNA-profile/PCR, Median RFS 21 vs 100 months vs not reached, p=0.026. Signed average: c) 5 miRNAprofile/PCR, Median RFS 13 vs 100 months, vs not reached, p=0.039. d) 22 miRNA-profile/PCR, Median RFS
16 vs 100 months vs not reached, p=0.039.
Figure 4. Kaplan-Meier Recurrence Free Survival analysis and gene target expression heatmaps of survival
subgroups generated with the union of the restrictive list gene targets of the 5-miRNA profile for RFS. a)
Unsupervised clustering, median RFS 17 (Group1) vs 105 months (Group2), log rank p=0.007. b) Supervised
signed average prediction, median RFS 17 (Group1) vs 105 (Group2) months, log rank p=0.001.
Figure 5. a) Heatmap depicting methylation differences between two groups defined by unsupervised hierarchal
clustering using the 5-miRNA profile. b) Kaplan-Meier Recurrence Free Survival analysis of sample groups
generated by unsupervised hierarchal clustering of the methylation probes annotated to the 5-miRNA prognostic
profile. Median RFS 21 vs 105 months, log rank p=0.011.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ADDITIONAL FILES
Supplementary Methods and Results. Additional details of the methodology and results are presented.
(DOCX)
Figure S1. Kaplan-Meier log-rank Overall Survival analysis of candidate profiles on the MGH dataset by the
supervised signed average prediction method. (PNG)
Figure S2. Kaplan-Meier log-rank Recurrence Free Survival analysis using the 27-miRNA profile and the
signed averaged supervised method defined subgroups stratified for the presence of metastasis at diagnosis.
(PNG)
Figure S3. Kaplan-Meier log rank Overall Survival analysis of groups generated by a composite classification
rule combining miRNA profiles and pathologically assessed chemoresponse (PCR). (PNG)
Figure S4. Kaplan-Meier analysis of Overall Survival groups generated by unsupervised clustering and
supervised signed average analysis with the union of the restrictive list gene targets of the 5 and 22 miRNA
signatures on the NCI TARGET data. (PNG)
Figure S5. Kaplan-Meier log rank Recurrence Free Survival analysis of groups generated by a composite
classification rule based on miRNA target gene profiles and pathologically assessed chemoresponse (PCR).
(PNG)
Table S1. 5-miRNA and 22- miRNA profiles (and the secondary 27 miRNA profile) mapped to each dataset.
(DOCX)
Table S2. Differential methylation of the CpG probes annotated to the 5-miRNA profile, between the miRNA
defined cluster groups. (DOCX)
Table S3. Median Spearman coefficients comparing 5 miRNA profile (the 4 located on 14q32) expression and
methylation. (DOCX)
Table S4. Cramer’s V and Fisher’s exact test results for concordance between the classifications derived from
the miRNA signatures and the corresponding gene targets. (DOCX)
Table S5. All significantly enriched BioCarta pathways, KEGG pathways, and transcription factor binding sites
in the prognostic miRNA gene targets. (DOCX)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

REFERENCES
1.
Mirabello L, Troisi RJ, Savage SA: Osteosarcoma incidence and survival rates from 1973 to 2004: data
from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program. Cancer 2009, 115(7):1531-1543.
2.
Savage SA, Mirabello L: Using epidemiology and genomics to understand osteosarcoma etiology.
Sarcoma 2011, 2011:548151.
3.
Bielack SS, Smeland S, Whelan JS, Marina N, Jovic G, Hook JM, Krailo MD, Gebhardt M, Papai Z,
Meyer J et al: Methotrexate, Doxorubicin, and Cisplatin (MAP) Plus Maintenance Pegylated Interferon
Alfa-2b Versus MAP Alone in Patients With Resectable High-Grade Osteosarcoma and Good
Histologic Response to Preoperative MAP: First Results of the EURAMOS-1 Good Response
Randomized Controlled Trial. J Clin Oncol 2015, 33(20):2279-2287.
4.
Maki RG: Ifosfamide in the neoadjuvant treatment of osteogenic sarcoma. J Clin Oncol 2012,
30(17):2033-2035.
5.
Ferrari S, Ruggieri P, Cefalo G, Tamburini A, Capanna R, Fagioli F, Comandone A, Bertulli R, Bisogno
G, Palmerini E et al: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy with methotrexate, cisplatin, and doxorubicin with or
without ifosfamide in nonmetastatic osteosarcoma of the extremity: an Italian sarcoma group trial
ISG/OS-1. J Clin Oncol 2012, 30(17):2112-2118.
6.
Marina NM, Smeland S, Bielack SS, Bernstein M, Jovic G, Krailo MD, Hook JM, Arndt C, van den
Berg H, Brennan B et al: Comparison of MAPIE versus MAP in patients with a poor response to
preoperative chemotherapy for newly diagnosed high-grade osteosarcoma (EURAMOS-1): an openlabel, international, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol, 17(10):1396-1408.
7.
Kelly AD, Haibe-Kains B, Janeway KA, Hill KE, Howe E, Goldsmith J, Kurek K, Perez-Atayde AR,
Francoeur N, Fan JB et al: MicroRNA paraffin-based studies in osteosarcoma reveal reproducible
independent prognostic profiles at 14q32. Genome Med 2013, 5(1):2.
8.
Hill KE, Kelly AD, Kuijjer ML, Barry W, Rattani A, Garbutt CC, Kissick H, Janeway K, Perez-Atayde
A, Goldsmith J et al: An imprinted non-coding genomic cluster at 14q32 defines clinically relevant
molecular subtypes in osteosarcoma across multiple independent datasets. J Hematol Oncol, 10(1):107.
9.
da Rocha ST, Edwards CA, Ito M, Ogata T, Ferguson-Smith AC: Genomic imprinting at the mammalian
Dlk1-Dio3 domain. Trends Genet 2008, 24(6):306-316.
10.
Seitz H, Royo H, Bortolin ML, Lin SP, Ferguson-Smith AC, Cavaille J: A large imprinted microRNA
gene cluster at the mouse Dlk1-Gtl2 domain. Genome Res 2004, 14(9):1741-1748.
11.
Kagami M, O'Sullivan MJ, Green AJ, Watabe Y, Arisaka O, Masawa N, Matsuoka K, Fukami M,
Matsubara K, Kato F et al: The IG-DMR and the MEG3-DMR at human chromosome 14q32.2:
hierarchical interaction and distinct functional properties as imprinting control centers. PLoS Genet
2010, 6(6):e1000992.
12.
McShane LM, Radmacher MD, Freidlin B, Yu R, Li MC, Simon R: Methods for assessing
reproducibility of clustering patterns observed in analyses of microarray data. Bioinformatics 2002,
18(11):1462-1469.
13.
Chou CH, Shrestha S, Yang CD, Chang NW, Lin YL, Liao KW, Huang WC, Sun TH, Tu SJ, Lee WH et
al: miRTarBase update 2018: a resource for experimentally validated microRNA-target interactions.
Nucleic Acids Res, 46(D1):D296-D302.
14.
Pavlidis P, Qin J, Arango V, Mann JJ, Sibille E: Using the gene ontology for microarray data mining: a
comparison of methods and application to age effects in human prefrontal cortex. Neurochem Res 2004,
29(6):1213-1222.
15.
Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA: Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using
DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc 2009, 4(1):44-57.
16.
Kanehisa M, Sato Y, Furumichi M, Morishima K, Tanabe M: New approach for understanding genome
variations in KEGG. Nucleic Acids Res, 47(D1):D590-D595.
17.
Efron B: Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife. Ann Statist 1979, 7(1):1-26.
18.
Hosack DA, Dennis G, Jr., Sherman BT, Lane HC, Lempicki RA: Identifying biological themes within
lists of genes with EASE. Genome Biol 2003, 4(10):R70.
19.
Burgering BM, Kops GJ: Cell cycle and death control: long live Forkheads. Trends Biochem Sci 2002,
27(7):352-360.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Guan H, Tan P, Xie L, Mi B, Fang Z, Li J, Yue J, Liao H, Li F: FOXO1 inhibits osteosarcoma
oncogenesis via Wnt/beta-catenin pathway suppression. Oncogenesis, 4:e166.
Smirnov P, Safikhani Z, El-Hachem N, Wang D, She A, Olsen C, Freeman M, Selby H, Gendoo DM,
Grossmann P et al: PharmacoGx: an R package for analysis of large pharmacogenomic datasets.
Bioinformatics, 32(8):1244-1246.
Smirnov P, Kofia V, Maru A, Freeman M, Ho C, El-Hachem N, Adam GA, Ba-Alawi W, Safikhani Z,
Haibe-Kains B: PharmacoDB: an integrative database for mining in vitro anticancer drug screening
studies. Nucleic Acids Res, 46(D1):D994-D1002.
Cassier PA, Lefranc A, Y Amela E, Chevreau C, Bui BN, Lecesne A, Ray-Coquard I, Chabaud S, Penel
N, Berge Y et al: A phase II trial of panobinostat in patients with advanced pretreated soft tissue
sarcoma. A study from the French Sarcoma Group. British Journal Of Cancer, 109:909.
Luke JJ, D'Adamo DR, Dickson MA, Keohan ML, Carvajal RD, Maki RG, de Stanchina E, Musi E,
Singer S, Schwartz GK: The Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor Flavopiridol Potentiates Doxorubicin
Efficacy in Advanced Sarcomas: Preclinical Investigations and Results of a Phase I Dose-Escalation
Clinical Trial. Clinical Cancer Research, 18(9):2638-2647.
Schuetze SM, Wathen JK, Lucas DR, Choy E, Samuels BL, Staddon AP, Ganjoo KN, von Mehren M,
Chow WA, Loeb DM et al: SARC009: Phase 2 study of dasatinib in patients with previously treated,
high-grade, advanced sarcoma. Cancer, 122(6):868-874.
Cote GM, Barysauskas CM, DeLaney TF, Schwab J, Raskin K, Lozano-Calderon S, Bernstein K,
Mullen JT, Haynes AB, Hornicek F et al: A Phase 1 Study of Nilotinib Plus Radiation in High-Risk
Chordoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, 102(5):1496-1504.
Alemany R, Moura DS, Redondo A, Martinez-Trufero J, Calabuig S, Saus C, Obrador-Hevia A, Ramos
R, Villar VH, Valverde C et al: Nilotinib as Coadjuvant Treatment with Doxorubicin in Patients with
Sarcomas: A Phase I Trial of the Spanish Group for Research on Sarcoma. Clinical Cancer Research.
Pichot CS, Hartig SM, Xia L, Arvanitis C, Monisvais D, Lee FY, Frost JA, Corey SJ: Dasatinib
synergizes with doxorubicin to block growth, migration, and invasion of breast cancer cells. British
journal of cancer 2009, 101(1):38-47.
Davis LE, Bolejack V, Ryan CW, Ganjoo KN, Loggers ET, Chawla S, Agulnik M, Livingston MB,
Reed D, Keedy V et al: Randomized Double-Blind Phase II Study of Regorafenib in Patients With
Metastatic Osteosarcoma. Journal of Clinical Oncology:JCO.18.02374.
Wang YJ, Zhang YK, Zhang GN, Al Rihani SB, Wei MN, Gupta P, Zhang XY, Shukla S, Ambudkar
SV, Kaddoumi A et al: Regorafenib overcomes chemotherapeutic multidrug resistance mediated by
ABCB1 transporter in colorectal cancer: In vitro and in vivo study. Cancer Lett, 396:145-154.
Fu W, Ma L, Chu B, Wang X, Bui MM, Gemmer J, Altiok S, Pledger WJ: The cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor SCH 727965 (dinacliclib) induces the apoptosis of osteosarcoma cells. Molecular cancer
therapeutics, 10(6):1018-1027.
Wirries A, Jabari S, Jansen EP, Roth S, Figueroa-Juarez E, Wissniowski TT, Neureiter D, Klieser E,
Lechler P, Ruchholtz S et al: Panobinostat mediated cell death: a novel therapeutic approach for
osteosarcoma. Oncotarget, 9(68):32997-33010.
Baranski Z, Booij TH, Kuijjer ML, de Jong Y, Cleton-Jansen A-M, Price LS, van de Water B, BovÃ©e
JVMG, Hogendoorn PCW, Danen EHJ: MEK inhibition induces apoptosis in osteosarcoma cells with
constitutive ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Genes & cancer, 6(11-12):503-512.
Ye S, Zhang J, Shen J, Gao Y, Li Y, Choy E, Cote G, Harmon D, Mankin H, Gray NS et al: NVPTAE684 reverses multidrug resistance (MDR) in human osteosarcoma by inhibiting P-glycoprotein
(PGP1) function. Br J Pharmacol, 173(3):613-626.
Anderson JL, Park A, Akiyama R, Tap WD, Denny CT, Federman N: Evaluation of In Vitro Activity of
the Class I PI3K Inhibitor Buparlisib (BKM120) in Pediatric Bone and Soft Tissue Sarcomas. PLoS
One, 10(9):e0133610.
Tavanti E, Sero V, Vella S, Fanelli M, Michelacci F, Landuzzi L, Magagnoli G, Versteeg R, Picci P,
Hattinger CM et al: Preclinical validation of Aurora kinases-targeting drugs in osteosarcoma. Br J
Cancer, 109(10):2607-2618.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

37.

38.

39.

40.
41.
42.

43.
44.
45.
46.
47.

48.

49.

50.
51.
52.

53.

54.
55.

56.

Sarver AL, Thayanithy V, Scott MC, Cleton-Jansen AM, Hogendoorn PC, Modiano JF, Subramanian S:
MicroRNAs at the human 14q32 locus have prognostic significance in osteosarcoma. Orphanet J Rare
Dis 2013, 8:7.
Rosenblum JM, Wijetunga NA, Fazzari MJ, Krailo M, Barkauskas DA, Gorlick R, Greally JM:
Predictive properties of DNA methylation patterns in primary tumor samples for osteosarcoma relapse
status. Epigenetics 2015, 10(1):31-39.
Perry JA, Kiezun A, Tonzi P, Van Allen EM, Carter SL, Baca SC, Cowley GS, Bhatt AS, Rheinbay E,
Pedamallu CS et al: Complementary genomic approaches highlight the PI3K/mTOR pathway as a
common vulnerability in osteosarcoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014, 111(51):E5564-5573.
Rupaimoole R, Slack FJ: MicroRNA therapeutics: towards a new era for the management of cancer and
other diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov, 16(3):203-222.
Carter LE, Kilroy G, Gimble JM, Floyd ZE: An improved method for isolation of RNA from bone.
BMC Biotechnol, 12:5.
Rueda A, Barturen G, Lebron R, Gomez-Martin C, Alganza A, Oliver JL, Hackenberg M:
sRNAtoolbox: an integrated collection of small RNA research tools. Nucleic Acids Res, 43(W1):W467473.
Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL: Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short DNA
sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol 2009, 10(3):R25.
Kozomara A, Birgaoanu M, Griffiths-Jones S: miRBase: from microRNA sequences to function.
Nucleic Acids Res, 47(D1):D155-D162.
Love MI, Huber W, Anders S: Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data
with DESeq2. Genome Biol, 15(12):550.
Schmittgen TD, Livak KJ: Analyzing real-time PCR data by the comparative C(T) method. Nat Protoc
2008, 3(6):1101-1108.
Guberman JM, Ai J, Arnaiz O, Baran J, Blake A, Baldock R, Chelala C, Croft D, Cros A, Cutts RJ et al:
BioMart Central Portal: an open database network for the biological community. Database (Oxford),
2011:bar041.
Teschendorff AE, Marabita F, Lechner M, Bartlett T, Tegner J, Gomez-Cabrero D, Beck S: A betamixture quantile normalization method for correcting probe design bias in Illumina Infinium 450 k DNA
methylation data. Bioinformatics, 29(2):189-196.
Du P, Zhang X, Huang CC, Jafari N, Kibbe WA, Hou L, Lin SM: Comparison of Beta-value and Mvalue methods for quantifying methylation levels by microarray analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 2010,
11:587.
Davis S, Du P, Bilke S, Triche T, Jr, Bootwalla M: methylumi: Handle Illumina methylation data. In.,
vol. R package version 2.28.0; 2018.
Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D: Cluster analysis and display of genome-wide
expression patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998, 95(25):14863-14868.
Wirapati P, Sotiriou C, Kunkel S, Farmer P, Pradervand S, Haibe-Kains B, Desmedt C, Ignatiadis M,
Sengstag T, Schutz F et al: Meta-analysis of gene expression profiles in breast cancer: toward a unified
understanding of breast cancer subtyping and prognosis signatures. Breast Cancer Res 2008, 10(4):R65.
Desmedt C, Haibe-Kains B, Wirapati P, Buyse M, Larsimont D, Bontempi G, Delorenzi M, Piccart M,
Sotiriou C: Biological processes associated with breast cancer clinical outcome depend on the molecular
subtypes. Clin Cancer Res 2008, 14(16):5158-5165.
Haibe-Kains B, Desmedt C, Rothe F, Piccart M, Sotiriou C, Bontempi G: A fuzzy gene expressionbased computational approach improves breast cancer prognostication. Genome Biol 2010, 11(2):R18.
Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y: Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Powerful Approach to
Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B (Methodological) 1995, 57(1):289300.
Simon R, Lam A, Li MC, Ngan M, Menenzes S, Zhao Y: Analysis of gene expression data using BRBArrayTools. Cancer Inform 2007, 3:11-17.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

DECLARATIONS
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Samples were selected based on an IRB approved retrospective tissue and clinical information protocol.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Availability of data and materials
The independent NCI TARGET datasets are available through the data matrix at
https://ocg.cancer.gov/programs/target/data-matrix .
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Funding
Supported by R01CA178908 to Dimitrios Spentzos, R35CA220523 to John Quackenbush, and the Casper
Colson philanthropic donation to Dimitrios Spentzos and the Sarcoma Program at the MGH Cancer Center.
Data collection was supported by the Jennifer Hunter Yates Foundation, the Kenneth Stanton Sarcoma Fund,
and the Cassandra Moseley Fund to the MGH Sarcoma Data Repository (PI: Dr Yen-Lin Chen). The funding
bodies had no role in the design of the study and collection, analysis, interpretation of data, or in writing the
manuscript.
Authors’ contributions
DS, JQ, WTB, GPN, EC, DE, FJH, YLC, SLC designed the study.
CL, CG, YW, BL performed experiments and generated data.
CL, CG, DS, YW, BL, GC, ZD, WTB, VD, BHK, analyzed and interpreted data.
CL, DS, WTB, BHK, wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Haotong Wang, Ruoyu Miao, and Jason Kim, for assistance with retrieving clinical data,
Christie Swett for assistance with specimen retrieval, and Renee Rubio for technical assistance with sequencing.
The results presented here are in part based upon data generated by the Therapeutically Applicable Research to
Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET) initiative, which is publicly available at
https://ocg.cancer.gov/programs/target/data-matrix. Information about TARGET can be found at
http://ocg.cancer.gov/programs/target.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

f)

Figure 1. Kaplan-Meier log-rank Recurrence Free Survival analysis of candidate profiles on the MGH dataset.
Unsupervised hierarchal clustering a) 5-miRNAs, Median RFS 59 vs 202 months, p=0.06, b) 22 miRNAs, 33
months vs not reached, p=0.032. Supervised signed average prediction: 5 miRNAs, stratified p=0.031, median
RFS: c) Not metastatic: 202 months vs not reached, e) Metastatic: 13 vs 27 months. 22 miRNAs, stratified
p=0.042, median RFS: d) Not metastatic: 202 months vs not reached, f) Metastatic: 13 vs 27 months.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

a)

b)

Figure 2. Kaplan-Meier log-rank Overall Survival analysis of candidate profiles on the MGH dataset by
unsupervised hierarchical clustering. a) 5-miRNAs, Median OS 69 months vs not reached, p=0.012, b) 22
miRNAs, 100 months vs not reached, p=0.061.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Unsupervised Clustering
a)

b)

Supervised Signed Averaged expression prediction
c)

d)

Figure 3. Kaplan-Meier log rank Recurrence Free Survival analysis of groups generated by a composite
classification rule combining miRNA profiles and pathologically assessed chemoresponse (PCR). Three groups
were defined: “Very favorable” (good prognostic profile/optimal chemoresponse, top curve), “very
unfavorable” (poor prognostic profile/suboptimal chemoresponse, bottom curve) and “intermediate” (good
prognostic profile/suboptimal chemoresponse, or poor prognostic profile/optimal chemoresponse, middle
curve). Clustering: a) 5 miRNA-profile/PCR, Median RFS 18 vs 202 months vs not reached, p=0.003. b) 22
miRNA-profile/PCR, Median RFS 21 vs 100 months vs not reached, p=0.026. Signed average: c) 5 miRNAprofile/PCR, Median RFS 13 vs 100 months, vs not reached, p=0.039. d) 22 miRNA-profile/PCR, Median RFS
16 vs 100 months vs not reached, p=0.039.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

a)

b)

Figure 4. Kaplan-Meier Recurrence Free Survival analysis and gene target expression heatmaps of survival
subgroups generated with the union of the restrictive list gene targets of the 5-miRNA profile for RFS. a)
Unsupervised clustering, median RFS 17 (Group1) vs 105 months (Group2), log rank p=0.007. b) Supervised
signed average prediction, median RFS 17 (Group1) vs 105 (Group2) months, log rank p=0.001.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007740; this version posted October 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

a)

b)

Figure 5. a) Heatmap depicting methylation differences between two groups defined by unsupervised hierarchal
clustering using the 5-miRNA profile. b) Kaplan-Meier Recurrence Free Survival analysis of sample groups
generated by unsupervised hierarchal clustering of the methylation probes annotated to the 5-miRNA prognostic
profile. Median RFS 21 vs 105 months, log rank p=0.011.

