medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Using the Association Between Antibiotic Susceptibility and Genetic Relatedness to
Rescue Old Drugs for Empiric Use
Derek R MacFadden MD1,2, Bryan Coburn MD PhD1,3, Karel Břinda PhD2,4, Antoine Corbeil
MD7, Nick Daneman MD1, David Fisman MD1,5, Robyn S Lee PhD4,5, Marc Lipsitch DPhil2,
Allison McGeer MD1,5, Roberto G. Melano PhD6,7, Samira Mubareka MD1,7, William P Hanage
PhD2.
Keywords: Empiric antibiotics; rapid diagnostics; clinical decision-making; genomics; Gramnegative; antibiotic resistant organisms.
Running Title: Using Genetic Relatedness to Rescue Old Antibiotics
Author Affiliations:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States
University Health Network, Toronto, Canada
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States
Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Public Health Ontario Laboratory, Toronto, Canada
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada

Corresponding Author: Derek MacFadden. derek.macfadden@mail.utoronto.ca.
Alternate Corresponding Author: William P Hanage. whanage@hsph.harvard.edu.
Summary: Rapid genomic approaches that capitalize on the association between genetic
relatedness and phenotype can improve our selection of antibiotics, allowing us to rescue older
drugs for empiric use and better select newer and broader spectrum agents.
Word Count (excluding Abstract and References): 2783
All authors have seen and approved the manuscript and have contributed significantly to
the work.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background. Rising rates of antibiotic resistance have led to the use of broader spectrum
antibiotics and increasingly compromise empiric therapy. Knowing the antibiotic susceptibility of
a pathogen’s close genetic relative(s) may improve empiric antibiotic selection.
Methods. Using genomic and phenotypic data from three separate clinically-derived databases
of Escherichia coli isolates, we evaluated multiple genomic methods and statistical models for
predicting antibiotic susceptibility, focusing on potentially rapidly available information such as
lineage or genetic distance from archived isolates. We applied these methods to derive and
validate prediction of antibiotic susceptibility to common antibiotics.
Results. We evaluated 968 separate episodes of suspected and confirmed infection with
Escherichia coli from three geographically and temporally separated databases in Ontario,
Canada, from 2010-2018. The most common sequence type (ST) was ST131 (30%). Antibiotic
susceptibility to ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole were lowest (<=72%). Across
all approaches, model performance (AUC) ranges for predicting antibiotic susceptibility were
greatest for ciprofloxacin (0.76-0.97), and lowest for trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (0.51-0.80).
When a model predicted a susceptible isolate, the resulting (post-test) probabilities of
susceptibility were sufficient to warrant empiric therapy for most antibiotics (mean 92%). An
approach combining multiple models could permit the use of narrower spectrum oral agents in 2
out of every 3 patients while maintaining high treatment adequacy (~90%).
Conclusions. Methods based on genetic relatedness to archived samples in E. coli could be
used to rescue older and typically unsuitable agents for use as empiric antibiotic therapy, as
well as improve decisions to select newer broader spectrum agents.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Background
Antibiotic resistance is a major global threat to public health[1]. Antibiotic resistant organisms
(AROs) and mechanisms of antibiotic resistance are selected through the use of antibiotics in
humans, animals, and environments[2]. The prevalence of AROs in human infections has been
increasing in many regions and across many different bacterial species[1,3]. As a result, empiric
antibiotic therapy (administered prior to knowledge of the organism’s antibiotic susceptibility
phenotype) has become increasingly challenging for both community- and hospital-acquired
infectious syndromes. Inadequate empiric therapy, i.e., treatment that does not include an agent
to which the etiologic pathogen is susceptible, has been associated with worse patient
outcomes[4–6]. Moreover, increasing antibiotic resistance in common infections leads to more
frequent use of broader spectrum antibiotic agents, with added toxicity and enhanced selection
of antibiotic resistance by targeting a wider array of pathogenic, opportunistic, and commensal
bacteria.

Reducing the time from presentation and sample collection to reporting of antibiotic
susceptibility has long been touted as a potential means to improve early adequate therapy and
reduce the use of unnecessarily broad antibiotic agents[7,8]. Development of rapid diagnostic
tests that can narrow these ‘windows’ of empiric antibiotic therapy are the focus of active
research, but translation of these tests to clinical practice has been slow, due to inconsistency
between individual or combined genetic loci and expected phenotype, specialized equipment,
cost, challenges of commercialization, and poor integration into clinical workflow[7]. Recently,
genomic approaches have been identified as rapid diagnostic tests, offering the promise of
culture-independent (and -dependent) identification of: (1) species; (2) relationship(s) to genetic
neighbors/groups/clusters from databases of known isolates; and (3) prediction of antibiotic
resistance based on (2). However, the traditional approach to predicting antibiotic resistance

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

rests on identification of individual resistance loci to predict phenotype. This requires a highquality database of resistance-causative elements and is further complicated by significant cost,
large physical space requirements, complicated workflow, limited expertise, and long
sequencing/bioinformatic processing times even with real-time sequencing technologies[9]. On
the other hand, a recently introduced alternative approach called genomic neighbor typing infers
antibiotic resistance and susceptibility by identifying sample’s closest relatives in a database of
genomes with known phenotypes [10]. This relies on strong correlation between phylogenetic
group and resistance phenotype, which is observed for many bacteria[11–13].

As neighbor typing uses all genomic data available from a given set of reads, identification of a
best match isolate or lineage (i.e. a genetically related cluster or group such as multi-locus
sequence type) can occur within minutes (as opposed to hours or days for loci-based
approaches depending upon the sequencing technology used). Proof of principle has been
demonstrated for Streptococcus pneumoniae and Neisseria gonorrhoeae, with determination of
resistance or susceptibility within ten minutes of Oxford Nanopore Technologies’ © MinION
sequencing of cultured isolates and respiratory metagenomic samples[10]. Limited data also
suggest that the association between antibiotic susceptibility phenotype and lineage may also
hold true for Enterobacteriaceae[14,15], but this approach requires further validation. It is also
unknown whether predicting antibiotic susceptibility phenotype based on the phenotype of the
nearest genetic neighbor provides advantages over using the average phenotype of a broader
(or higher level) lineage (e.g. ST, clonal complex, or cluster). In order to understand the
potential clinical application of these techniques, we sought to validate the association between
genetic relatedness (using nearest neighbor and lineage markers) and antibiotic susceptibility
phenotype in the most common Gram-negative pathogen in humans, Escherichia coli.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Methods
Study Design
We performed a retrospective study to evaluate whether genetic relatedness can predict
antibiotic susceptibility in E. coli isolates from 968 episodes of suspected and confirmed human
infection. Three separate datasets were combined for this analysis and include: (Dataset 1) 411
E.coli isolates from bloodstream infections at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre (SHSC), a
single tertiary care medical centre in Toronto, Canada, collected over the years 2010-2015;
(Dataset 2) 177 E.coli from suspected urinary tract infections from SHSC for the year 2018; and
(Dataset 3) 380 multi-drug resistant (MDR) E.coli isolates from urinary sources from the
Canadian province of Ontario collected in 2010 and 2015, where MDR was defined as
resistance to at least three different classes of routinely tested antibiotics.

Resistance Phenotype
Antibiotic susceptibility phenotypes for ciprofloxacin (fluoroquinolones), trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole (sulfonamides), ceftriaxone (3rd generation cephalosporins), gentamicin
(aminoglycosides), and ertapenem (carbapenems), were determined for each isolate using
Vitek 2 AST cards. Clinical laboratory standards institute (CLSI) 2015 breakpoints were
employed for determining susceptible and non-susceptible phenotypes for all datasets
(Supplementary Table 1). For Dataset 2, only formal ESBL testing was available (not
ceftriaxone MICs reported) and as such we classified all non-ESBL producing E.coli as
susceptible to ceftriaxone. Given that we calculated susceptibility using MIC’s and static
breakpoints for all datasets, there were no temporal changes in the interpretation of
susceptibility. We have considered all non-susceptible isolates as resistant throughout this
paper.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Whole Genome Sequencing
Genomes for each dataset were sequenced separately using a NextSeq High Output platform
with Nextera Library Preparation with mean coverages of 134X, 90X, and 81X for dataset 1, 2,
and 3 respectively. Further sequencing details can be found in the Supplementary Methods.

Overall Prediction Approach
As overfitting could be a major limitation of our approach, and to simulate potential clinical
implementation strategies, we externally validated previously collected derivation datasets
(Dataset 1 and 3) for predicting the susceptibility of isolates from the most recent dataset
(Dataset 2). Where applicable, we also evaluated the sets internally with bootstrapping to adjust
for optimism (overfitting). We followed the general principles of the TRIPOD statement for
reporting of multivariable prediction models [16].

Four prediction model approaches were employed and are described in detail in the
Supplemental material. Briefly the first model is an ST Parametric Model Approach which uses
ST (marker of lineage) as a categorical predictor within a logistic regression model to predict the
probability of susceptibility. The second model is a Cluster Parametric Model Approach that
uses labelled genetic clusters (marker of lineage) as categorical predictors in a logistic
regression model to predict the probability of susceptibility. The third model is an ST Reference
Database Approach that uses the average prevalence of susceptibility of an antibiotic for a
given ST (marker of lineage) as the predicted probability of susceptibility. And the fourth model
is a Best Genetic Match Reference Database Approach that uses the susceptibility phenotype
of the best genetic match (nearest neighbor) in a reference database as the predicted
susceptibility. The above analyses were performed separately for each antibiotic.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

To further simulate the antibiotic decision-making process, we explored two different scenarios
where an antibiotic was selected based upon sequential model outputs, either favouring narrow
spectrum agents or favoring high likelihood of adequacy of coverage. We called these
Sequential Decision-making Models. Further details on these methods are described in the
Supplemental material. Research ethics board approval was obtained for this study at SHSC.

Results
Description of the Datasets
We collected and sequenced the genomes of 968 unique E.coli isolates from separate clinical
episodes of suspected infection, across three datasets. The characteristics of each dataset are
shown in Table 1 below.

Genetic Relatedness of Different Datasets and Antibiotic Resistance Phenotype
To illustrate the linkage between relatedness and resistance, a genetic tree was constructed
using Mash distances, associated ST, antibiotic susceptibility phenotype, and source dataset
(Figure 1). Broad genetic clusters tended to match or be nested within STs, and closely related
isolates have similar antibiograms.

From the Mash tree illustrating high level relationships between the genomes (Figure 1), there
are clear genetic clusters that emerge. These phylogenetic groups are generally nested within
specific STs, with ST131 being the most prevalent in each dataset (Table 1). Unsurprisingly,
there is a higher prevalence of resistance for almost all antibiotic groups in the MDR dataset
(Dataset 3) compared to Datasets 1 and 2. Despite the fact that the three datasets are
separated on different scales (temporally, geographically, anatomically), they show genetic
diversity that is well distributed across different phylogroups (Figure 1).

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ST Parametric Model Approach (Lineage-based)
We calculated the AUCs and test characteristics for predicting antibiotic susceptibility of Dataset
2 isolates using a parametric logistic regression model with STs as categorical predictors,
across a variety of derivation datasets (Supplementary Table 3). AUCs ranged from 0.89-0.91
for ciprofloxacin, 0.77-0.80 for ceftriaxone, 0.68 to 0.75 for gentamicin, and 0.6-0.73 for
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. For ertapenem, we performed internal derivation for Dataset 1,
Dataset 3, and Datasets 1 and 3 combined (Dataset 2 could not be used as there was 100%
susceptibility to ertapenem), and found apparent and optimism adjusted AUCs ranging from 0.70.99 and 0.67-0.99 respectively (Supplementary Table 2).

Cluster Parametric Model Approach (Lineage-based)
We calculated the AUC and test characteristics for predicting antibiotic susceptibility (internally)
for each dataset with a parametric logistic regression model with clusters as categorical
predictors, using a variety of derivation datasets (Supplementary Table 4). AUCs ranged from
0.76-0.9 for ciprofloxacin, 0.69-0.82 for ceftriaxone, 0.66-0.77 for gentamicin, and 0.65-0.75 for
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. For ertapenem, we performed internal derivation for Dataset 1
and Dataset 3, and found apparent and optimism adjusted AUCs ranging from 0.74-0.98 and
0.7-0.98 respectively (Supplementary Table 2).

ST Reference Database Approach (Lineage-based)
We calculated the AUCs and test characteristics for predicting antibiotic susceptibility for
isolates in Dataset 2 with an ST Reference Database, using a variety of derivation datasets
(Supplementary Table 5). AUCs ranged from 0.85-0.95 for ciprofloxacin, 0.67-0.85 for
ceftriaxone, 0.73-0.83 for gentamicin, and 0.56-0.8 for trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Best Genetic Match Reference Database Approach (Nearest neighbor)
We calculated the AUCs and test characteristics for predicting antibiotic susceptibility for
isolates in Dataset 2 with a Best Genetic Match Reference Database, using a variety of
derivation datasets (Supplementary Table 6). For all isolates, AUCs ranged from 0.83-0.92 for
ciprofloxacin, 0.58-0.72 for ceftriaxone, 0.65-0.66 for gentamicin, and 0.53-0.63 for
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. For the top 25%’tile of best match datasets, AUCs ranged from
0.85-0.97 for ciprofloxacin, 0.57-0.88 for ceftriaxone, 0.76-0.86 for gentamicin, and 0.54-0.73 for
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. In any method based on comparing new samples with an
existing database, it is important to investigate how large the database needs to be to permit
accurate prediction. Thus, we evaluated the impact of varying reference database sizes on the
performance of the genetic distance approach, with results shown in Figure S1.

Summary of Test Characteristics Across Models
In Figures 2a-d, we summarize the post-test probabilities of susceptibility for: (1) positive model
predictions indicating a likely susceptible isolate (PPV [positive predictive value]); and (2) for
negative model predictions indicating a likely resistant isolate (1-NPV [Negative predictive
value]). Here we see that the models that provide the best positive and negative predictive
values are the ST Reference Database, the Best Genetic Match Reference Database, and
combinations of the two (Supplementary Table 7). We also see that for most antibiotics and
models, that the post-test probabilities for results indicating a susceptible result are sufficiently
high (relative to syndromic thresholds) to support recommendation of therapy. Similarly, for
most antibiotics and models the post-test probabilities of results indicating resistance is
sufficiently low to support withholding therapy for a particular agent. Lastly, combined derivation
datasets tend to have the most consistent model performance.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Sequential Antibiotic Decision-Making Based Upon a Prespecified Antibiotic Cascade
When using a sequential selection model favouring narrow spectrum antibiotics, adequate
therapy was achieved for 89-98% of recommendations, with 47-70% of recommendations being
a narrower spectrum agent with oral formulation (i.e. ciprofloxacin or trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole). Spectrum scores for the narrow spectrum model cascade were consistently
lower than those attained with the employment of typical empiric agents (Supplementary Table
7). Using an adequacy focused cascade, adequate therapy was achieved for 98-100% of
recommendations, with 0-5% of recommendations being narrower spectrum agents with oral
formulation options. Spectrum scores were generally high, but were lower than the most broad
spectrum agent ertapenem.

To summarize, when using a narrow-spectrum focused cascade, the models yield excellent
adequacy while enabling over ⅔ of recommendations to be narrow spectrum oral agents. When
using an adequacy focused cascade they yield close to perfect adequacy but at the expense of
using broader spectrum agents (Supplementary Table 7).

Discussion
In this study, we demonstrate that we can predict the resistance phenotype of E.coli by rapidly
determining the genetic relatedness of the infecting pathogen to a database of sequenced
isolates with known resistance phenotypes. We show that these relationships can be used to
generate post-test probabilities of susceptibility in excess of 0.8 or 0.9 which render antibiotics
with a high prevalence of resistance to be empirically useful (e.g. ciprofloxacin or trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole for urinary tract infection). In essence, adoption of this approach would modify
the current stages of empiric therapy to introduce a new window that is informed by genetic

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

relatedness, and information that is available in advance of standard phenotypic testing. This
approach is a supplement to, not a replacement for, gold standard phenotype. The contribution
of such a system could be to improve the quality of antimicrobial prescribing in the window
between culture positivity and phenotypic testing results, by 1) reducing the expected time from
culture positivity to adequate treatment and 2) reducing the duration of use of broad-spectrum
agents to treat infections that could be adequately treated with a narrow-spectrum agent.

Looking at the distribution of STs across the datasets (Figure 1, Table 1) we see that Dataset 3
is enriched for ST131, and this is presumably due to the intentionally biased sampling approach
toward MDR. However, it means that lineage and nearest neighbor approaches will be able to
draw sample phenotype predictions from different datasets based on genetic proximity, not
simply ones most closely related on temporal, geographic, or anatomic scales.

When predicting antibiotic resistance based on lineage, ST Parametric Model and Cluster
Parametric Model Approaches (Supplementary Tables 3 and 4) provide reasonable
discrimination for ciprofloxacin susceptibility (AUCs 0.76 - 0.91), in keeping with existing
literature[15]. This emphasizes the strong association between lineage and ciprofloxacin
susceptibility. By contrast there were only modest associations for the other antibiotic classes
(AUCs 0.6-0.82). For all antibiotic classes, the use of combined derivation datasets (1 and 2 and
3 or 1 and 3) seemed to perform well most consistently, and this supports the use of an
aggregated derivation dataset across time, geography, and anatomic location.

Using an ST Reference Database approach has the appeal of providing improved predictions
for less common STs. When considering only those isolates with a matching ST in the reference
database, the discrimination of this approach paralleled and sometimes exceeded that of ST

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

and Cluster Parametric Models (Supplementary Table 5). The notable downside to this
approach is the inability to provide predictions for sequence types outside of the reference
database, though the proportion of these were small and decreased with increasing reference
database size.

A Best Genetic Match Reference Database Approach (nearest neighbor) offers potential
improvement over the ST Reference Database Approach (lineage), in that it might improve
predictive performance for those classes that have a weaker association with specific lineage
(e.g. ceftriaxone, gentamicin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole). The genetic distance approach
seemed to operate best under two circumstances: (1) when only the ‘top matches’ were
considered and (2) when a combined derivation dataset was used. This ‘top match’ nearest
neighbor approach is potentially implemented using a predefined threshold of Mash distance (or
other genetic distance measure), but suffers from having a significant number of samples for
which predictions may not be offered. Interestingly, the ‘top match’ approach can improve AUCs
compared to other approaches for the antibiotics that are less strongly associated with
phenotype (ceftriaxone, gentamicin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole).

One important consideration with a genetic distance based model, is the consideration of how
large the reference database should be. Using repeated sampling, we found that optimal
performance could be achieved with relatively small derivation datasets, consisting of 100-200
samples. However, the necessary size will likely depend on the diversity of the population being
evaluated, with more diverse populations requiring larger databases. This is reflected in the
performance seen with combined derivation datasets.

There are limitations to our study. First, we were only able to consider the construction of
reference databases confined to the geographic region of the province of Ontario. However, this
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

region is geographically large and contains a population of over 14 million people. As such, our
results still support construction of regional databases at least at this jurisdictional level, which is
generalizable to many areas globally. Secondly, we did not evaluate the utility of this approach
for other bacterial species, however E.coli is the most common Gram-negative pathogen in the
hospital and community. Future work will aim to prospectively evaluate these techniques in a
clinical setting using rapid sequencing approaches across geographic scales and additional
pathogens. In summary, our results suggest that rapidly obtainable genomic information from
clinical isolates can support intelligent choices that improve empiric antibiotic therapy, both by
rescuing narrow spectrum agents for therapeutic use and by better selecting broader spectrum
agents.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Funding
We would like to acknowledge the funding support provided through the McLaughlin Accelerator
Grant at the University of Toronto. DRM was supported through the Clinician Scientist Training
Program at the University of Toronto, and a Canadian Institutes of Health Research Training
Award. The project described was also supported by Cooperative Agreement Number
U54GM088558 from the National Institute Of General Medical Sciences. The content is solely
the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institute Of General Medical Sciences or the National Institutes of Health.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Conflicts of Interest
ML has received honoraria/consulting income from Merck, Pfizer, Antigen Discovery, and
Affinivax, and research support through his institution from Pfizer.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgements
There are no additional acknowledgements.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1.

Review on Antimicrobial Resistance. Tackling Drug-resistant Infections Globally: Final
Report and Recommendations. 2016.

2.

Lipsitch M, Samore MH. Antimicrobial Use and Antimicrobial Resistance: A Population
Perspective. Emerging Infectious Diseases. 2002; 8:347–354. Available at:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid0804.010312.

3.

Frieden T. Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the United States 2013. 2013.

4.

Kumar A, Roberts D, Wood KE, et al. Duration of hypotension before initiation of effective
antimicrobial therapy is the critical determinant of survival in human septic shock. Crit Care
Med 2006; 34:1589–1596.

5.

Bodilsen J, Dalager-Pedersen M, Schønheyder HC, Nielsen H. Time to antibiotic therapy
and outcome in bacterial meningitis: a Danish population-based cohort study. BMC Infect
Dis 2016; 16:392.

6.

Doganis D, Siafas K, Mavrikou M, et al. Does early treatment of urinary tract infection
prevent renal damage? Pediatrics 2007; 120:e922–8.

7.

MacFadden DR, Leis JA, Mubareka S, Daneman N. The opening and closing of empiric
windows: the impact of rapid microbiologic diagnostics. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 59:1199–1200.

8.

Timbrook TT, Morton JB, McConeghy KW, Caffrey AR, Mylonakis E, LaPlante KL. The
Effect of Molecular Rapid Diagnostic Testing on Clinical Outcomes in Bloodstream
Infections: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2017; 64:15–23.

9.

Boolchandani M, D’Souza AW, Dantas G. Sequencing-based methods and resources to
study antimicrobial resistance. Nat Rev Genet 2019; 20:356–370.

10. Břinda K, Callendrello A, Cowley L, et al. Lineage calling can identify antibiotic resistant
clones within minutes. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/403204.
11. Nazir H, Cao S, Hasan F, Hughes D. Can phylogenetic type predict resistance
development? J Antimicrob Chemother 2011; 66:778–787.
12. Massot M, Daubié A-S, Clermont O, et al. Phylogenetic, virulence and antibiotic resistance
characteristics of commensal strain populations of Escherichia coli from community
subjects in the Paris area in 2010 and evolution over 30 years. Microbiology 2016; 162:642.
13. Hussain A, Ranjan A, Nandanwar N, Babbar A, Jadhav S, Ahmed N. Genotypic and
Phenotypic Profiles of Escherichia coli Isolates Belonging to Clinical Sequence Type 131
(ST131), Clinical Non-ST131, and Fecal Non-ST131 Lineages from India. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 2014; 58:7240.
14. Tchesnokova V, Billig M, Chattopadhyay S, et al. Predictive diagnostics for Escherichia coli
infections based on the clonal association of antimicrobial resistance and clinical outcome.
J Clin Microbiol 2013; 51:2991–2999.
15. MacFadden DR, Melano RG, Coburn B, Tijet N, Hanage WP, Daneman N. Comparing

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Patient Risk Factors, Sequence Type, and Resistance Loci Identification Approaches for
Predicting Antibiotic Resistance in Bloodstream Infections. J Clin Microbiol 2019; Available
at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JCM.01780-18.
16. Collins GS, Reitsma JB, Altman DG, Moons KGM. Transparent Reporting of a multivariable
prediction model for Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis (TRIPOD): the TRIPOD Statement.
Br J Surg 2015; 102:148–158.
17. Cressman AM, MacFadden DR, Verma AA, Razak F, Daneman N. Empiric Antibiotic
Treatment Thresholds for Serious Bacterial Infections: A Scenario-Based Survey Study.
Clin Infect Dis 2018; Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciy1031.
18. Gupta K, Hooton TM, Naber KG, et al. International clinical practice guidelines for the
treatment of acute uncomplicated cystitis and pyelonephritis in women: A 2010 update by
the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the European Society for Microbiology and
Infectious Diseases. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 52:e103–20.
19. Mandell LA, Wunderink RG, Anzueto A, et al. Infectious Diseases Society of
America/American Thoracic Society Consensus Guidelines on the Management of
Community-Acquired Pneumonia in Adults. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2007; 44:S27–
S72. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/511159.

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Tables
Table 1. Characteristics of datasets.

*N(%)

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure Legends
Figure 1. Mash tree (left), ST, phenotypic susceptibility by antibiotic, and dataset, by
individual isolate. Antibiotic susceptibility is denoted in green and resistance in red, with
antibiotics abbreviated as: CIP (ciprofloxacin), CRO (ceftriaxone), GEN (gentamicin), SXT
(trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole), ETP (ertapenem). ST 9999 represents all remaining or
unknown STs.
Figure 2a. Selected post-test probabilities of ciprofloxacin susceptibility (in Dataset 2)
based on Model Predictions of Resistant or Susceptible, by model type and derivation
dataset.
Figure 2b. Selected post-test probabilities of ceftriaxone susceptibility (in Dataset 2)
based on Model Predictions of Resistant or Susceptible, by model type and derivation
dataset.
Figure 2c. Selected post-test probabilities of gentamicin susceptibility (in Dataset 2)
based on Model Predictions of Resistant or Susceptible, by model type and derivation
dataset.
Figure 2d. Selected post-test probabilities of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
susceptibility (in Dataset 2) based on Model Predictions of Resistant or Susceptible, by
model type and derivation dataset.
*The aim of the models is to shift green data-points to the right and red data points to the
left.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2a.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2b.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2c.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006106; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2d.

25

