medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Identification of non-small cell lung cancer subgroups with distinct
immuno-therapy outcomes from integrating genomics and electronic
health records on a graph convolutional network
Chao Fang1, Dong Xu2, Jing Su3, *, Jonathan Dry1, *, Bolan Linghu1, *
1

Oncology Research and Early Development, Oncology R&D, AstraZeneca, Boston,

Massachusetts, 02451, USA
2

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Christopher S Bond Life

Sciences Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, 65211, USA.
3

Department of Biostatistics and Data Science, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem,

North Carolina, 27157, USA.
Chao Fang: chao.fang4@astrazeneca.com
Dong Xu: xudong@missouri.edu
Jing Su: jsu@wakehealth.edu
Jonathan Dry: jonathan.dry@astrazeneca.com
Bolan Linghu: bolan.linghu@astrazenca.com
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Jing Su: Email: jsu@wakehealth.edu
Jonathan Dry: Email: jonathan.dry@astrazenca.com
Bolan Linghu: Email: bolan.linghu@astrazeneca.com

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Recently immuno-oncology (IO) therapies, especially checkpoint inhibitor therapies, have
transformed the therapeutic landscape of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However,
responses to IO in NSCLC are highly disparate because patients are heterogenous with a
variety of genomic and clinical-phenotype complexity. Thus, there is a pressing need to
discover and characterize NSCLC subgroups to advance precision immuno-oncology.
However, this is a challenging task largely due to: 1) the study cohort is too small to
investigate this heterogeneous disease; 2) the datasets used in subtyping studies are not
comprehensive enough to incorporate both genomic data and diverse clinical-phenotype
data with long-term follow-ups, and 3) the subtyping algorithms and models are ineffective
in integrating high-dimensional data from both genomic and clinical domains. To address
these challenges, we have developed a graph convolutional neural network (GCN) method
to discover NSCLC complexity on IO treatment responses based on the high-dimensional
electronic health records (EHR) and genomic data from 1,937 IO treated NSCLC patients.
First, using Flatiron Health’s database, we identified a IO treated NSCLC cohort (n =
1,937), with genomic data from Foundation Medicine’s targeted DNA deep-sequencing,
clinical data from harmonized real-world EHR from 275 US oncology practices, and
survival data after IO treatment with a median follow-up time of 6.61 months (average
follow-up time 9.11 months). We then developed a GCN based artificial intelligence (AI)
model to build a patient-patient similarity network from integrating both genomic and EHR
data to discover novel NSCLC subgroups with dramatically different responses to IO
therapies. We have demonstrated the performance of the GCN is superior to commonly
used machine learning methods such as autoencoder, UMAP, and tSNE, and superior to

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

utilizing genomic or clinical data alone. Importantly, we have successfully discovered the
IO responsive (covers 20.27% of the cohort) and the IO non-responsive (45.46%)
subgroups that demonstrate significant overall survival difference after IO treatments (9.42
vs. 20.35 months, 𝑝 < 0.0001). These two subgroups demonstrate enrichments of novel
clinical phenotypes and genomic traits beyond well-known IO biomarkers of tumor
mutation burden and PDL1 status, such as enrichment of abnormal blood Basophils and
KRAS mutations in the responsive subgroup and the enrichment of low hemoglobin, low
lymphocytes, PI3KCA amplifications, etc. in the non-responsive subgroup, suggesting
distinct clinical and molecular underpinnings. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
study to employ a graph-based AI approach to integrate both high-dimensional clinical and
genomic features to investigate IO treatment responses in NSCLC. The new subtypes
discovered in this work cast new lights on understanding the heterogeneity of IO treatment
responses, and pave ways to inform clinical decision making for precision oncology of
NSCLC.
Keywords: artificial intelligence, graph convolutional neural network, machine learning,
immuno-oncology, precision oncology, non-small cell lung cancer, disease subtyping

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
According to American Cancer Society1, non-small cell lung cancer is the second most
common cancer in both men and women. About 228,150 new cases of lung cancer were
identified in 2019 and about 142,670 deaths were from lung cancer; among them, about
80%-85% of lung cancers are non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)2. The NSCLC can be
adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, large cell carcinoma, and other subtypes. The
causes of NSCLC are various: 1) about 80% of lung cancer deaths are caused by smoking
or exposure to secondhand smoke; 2) lung cancer in non-smokers can be caused by radon,
air pollution, asbestos, and/or diesel exhaust; 3) risk factors for lung cancer can caused by
certain DNA of lung cells. Besides the complicated causing factors, NSCLC is a
heterogeneous disease, which makes the prognosis prediction very challenging. The
treatment strategies in NSCLC are very limited, which urgently needs developing tools to
determine the survival subgroups.
Some previous works studied the NSCLC heterogeneity among patients to identify the
NSCLC molecular subtypes3-8. This is because genomics, mRNA profiling, and proteomics
have proven promising in characterizing cancer subtypes for personalized therapeutics. For
instance, tumor mutational burden (TMB) as determined via genomic profiling has been
shown to affect response to nivolumab in NSCLC patients. Real-world-evidence (RWE)
based clinical phenotype data such as electronic health records (EHR), which include
patient exposures, lab data, diagnosis, medications, and clinical outcomes represent another
promising resource for precision oncology, have also been used to identify subtypes9-14.
However, most existing cancer patient stratification methods use genomics evidence only,
without consideration of real-world clinical phenotypes. Conversely, most EHR studies

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

model clinical phenotypes with respect to outcome (e.g. patient survival), rarely
considering the integration of genomics data. The integration of genomics and real-world
clinical phenotype evidence is expected to drive to reveal the full landscape of human
cancer, therefore enabling novel discoveries towards cancer biology, therapeutics and
patient stratification.
Recently, IO treatments, especially checkpoint inhibitor therapies, have significantly
improved the overall survival in some NSCLC cases and achieve some great success15-20.
However, responses to IO are highly disparate, because of the genetic and clinical
heterogeneity across NSCLC patients. Subtyping the heterogeneous NSCLC cases for
precision immune-oncology remains a challenging problem. For instance, understanding
which of these many DNA-seq mutations are important in NSCLC treatment response is
not easy to solve. Although studies of NSCLC genomes have implicated several genes as
likely crucial mediators for tumor initiation and progression (TP5321, EGFR22,
CDKN2A/CDKN2B23, etc.), the experimental validation of the most important, functional
genomic changes in NSCLC cells remains a challenge. Also, the available preclinical and
clinical results are either too small, lacking important data domains, or follow-up time is
too short24-28, which is also another challenging factor for patient subtyping.
Existing AI work in cancer subtyping and prognostic modeling has some limitations
because the subtyping algorithms and models are not effective in incorporating big data
from different domains. Previous methods using a grid-based problem formulation29-31 did
not take into consideration the patient-patient interaction as what a graph formulation does.
Several traditional machine-learning based methods have been applied to cancer
subtyping32-34. However, there are some limitations such that those methods may not be

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

effective to detect high-level distinguishable features from the integrated heterogeneous
patient EHR and genomics features for patient subtyping. Some recent applications have
utilize deep learning methods such as word embedding35,36, recurrent neural networks30,3739

, convolutional neural networks31 or stacked denoising autoencoders (SDA)29,40 and

demonstrating significant performance for several prediction tasks. However, those models
are not trained use a sufficient large amount of patient EHR data to some degree, and hence,
the performance of those model may not be sufficient to be used for patient cancer
subtyping and prognostic purposes.
To address the abovementioned problems, for the first time, we integrate both genomics
and real-world clinical-phenotype evidence using Flatiron Health’s longitudinal database.
We have built a NSCLC cohort (n = 1,973) for precision IO oncology, with genomic data
from Foundation Medicine’s targeted DNA deep-sequencing, real-world-evidence (RWE)
from harmonized electronic health records (EHR), and survival data after IO treatment. We
applied both unsupervised machine learning and data-driven graph methods41,42. These two
types of methods are complementary and together enable more comprehensive discoveries.
Graph-based convolutional neural networks were used to build autoencoder framework as
the implementation for integration of both clinical and genomic features. We believe the
systematic integration of genomics and real-world clinical phenotype evidence will
redefine the NSCLC disease landscape and may revolutionize personalized treatment
paradigms. The autoencoders framework learns high-level feature embedding through
reconstructing the original input using combinations of nonlinear functions. The learned
feature embedding can then be further used for spectral clustering and identify
differentiable survival subgroups, i.e. responsive and non-responsive. Several clinical

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

features enrichment and genomic signaling pathways were also identified, which may be
used for directing clinical cancer research. This provides a truly unique opportunity to
improve our understanding of how cancer should be segmented for personalized therapies
to achieve our goals.
We discovered two subtypes with significant differences in survival, apart from clinical
characteristics. We also identified two subtypes have different signaling pathways. Hence,
the survival subtype graph-based model proposed here is essential for NSCLC therapeutic
intervention, and potentially for some other diseases as well.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Materials and Methods
Datasets and study design
The aim of this study is to develop a data-driven, AI graph-based approach to identify
differential survival subgroups across NSCLC IO-treated patients using their clinical
phenotype traits and genomic features.
Flatiron NSCLC data set
The patients had NSCLC had genomic testing from January 2010 to October 2018 were
selected. The overall Flatiron Health longitudinal EHR-derived database included over 210
cancer clinics representing more than 1.2 million active patients across the United States.
The database is updated 3-4 months actively with increasing number of patients added. The
clinical data were collected from Flatiron Health, while the genomic data were from
Foundation Medicine. The clinical data included in the Flatiron database contains several
aspects of tables: demographic, clinical, and outcomes data. This study was conducted in
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
IRB not applicable since the analysis uses retrospective data from secondary source.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The inclusion criterium for the experiment was that NSCLC patients diagnosed
advanced disease between January 2011 and August 2018. The patients were treated with
immunotherapy: Perbrolizumab, Nivolumab, Atezolizumab, or Durvalumab. The end point
is using overall survival time starting from the first line of IO treatment. If a patient has
deceased, then the decease date was used as the end point date. If a patient has lost his
follow-up information, then the last visit date was used to calculate survival months from
the 1L IO starting date. For the PDL1 status, the most recent successful test is used, if
available. To put another word, if there are two recent successful tests with the same result
date, then the positive test is preferred and used.
In this dataset, 1,973 patients were IO treated. The patients are 7.4% African American,
73.7% European white, 2.4% Asian, and 7.4% others as reported. The data were composed
of 953 (49.2%) females and 984 (50.8%), and the median age is 69.0 years for overall
populations. The overall characteristics are shown in Figure 1. The individuals represented
in the clinical dataset are from diverse racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic backgrounds. The
EMR data are deidentified, and the study was governed by institutional review board
approval and informed consent.
Clinical features and genomic features
To make accurate prediction, it is important to provide useful input features to machine
learning methods. Here, a feature vector corresponding to the patient clinical and genomic
features, which consists of a rich set of information derived from individual patient.
For clinical feature array contains three parts: 1) Clinical measurements: PDL1 tumor
status, PDL1 TIL status, TMB, microsatellite instability (MSI), gender, race, eastern
cooperative oncology group (ECOG) performance, group stage, smoking status, ALK
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

pathological biomarker, BRAF pathological biomarker, EGFR pathological biomarker,
KRAS pathological biomarker, ROS1 pathological biomarker, PDL1 pathological tumor
cell measurement and PDL1 pathological immune cell measurement and line of therapy. 2)
Lab measurements: leukocytes, hemoglobin, platelets, hematocrit, erythrocytes, creatinine,
urea nitrogen, alanine aminotransferase, sodium, potassium, aspartate aminotransferase,
alkaline phosphatase, albumin, bilirubin, protein, lymphocytes per 100 leukocytes, calcium,
lymphocytes, monocytes per 100 leukocytes, glucose, chloride, monocytes, neutrophils,
basophils per 100 leukocytes, glomerular filtration rate, basophils, eosinophils per 100
leukocytes, glomerular filtration rate, eosinophils, magnesium, granulocytes per 100
leukocytes, neutrophils, lactate dehydrogenase, and ferritin. The lab features are sorted by
frequency and for all IO patients 1,937, only the lab measurements above 800 counts are
kept. Otherwise, some lab measurements contain many missing values, which are not
included. 3) Vital features contain: body height, body weight and oxygen saturation in
arterial blood by pulse oximetry. For current version of Flatiron, the blood pressure
measurements contain different units, and not cleaned, and hence, for current
implementation, we did not include the blood pressure. We will include it in the future
work.
For the genomic features, each patient can have different gene mutation measurements,
all patient genes have been measured, and the results are either mutated or not mutated. We
filtered out the gene list and kept those genes with at least 50 patients have such gene
mutation in the measurement. The reduced list contains following genes (sorted by
frequency): “TP53”, “KRAS”, “CDKN2A”, “STK11”, “CDKN2B”, “EGFR”, “PIK3CA”,
“LRP1B”, “MYC”, “KEAP1”, “NF1”, “NKX2.1”, “PTEN”, “SMARCA4”, “ARID1A”,

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“RBM10”, “RB1”, “SOX2”, “NFKBIA”, “CCND1”, “FGF3”, “FGF4”, “FGF19”,
“BRAF”,

“MLL2”, “ATM”, “MDM2”, “ERBB2”, “TERC”, “MET”, “SPTA1”,

“FGFR1”, “RICTOR”, “MCL1”, “DNMT3A”, “ARID2”, “PRKCI”, “FAT1”, “ZNF703”,
“TERT”, “APC”, “NFE2L2”, “FGF12”, “MYST3”, “FRS2”, “TET2”, “PTPRD”, and
“CCNE1”. For each patient, the genomic features are represented as a vector of length 48.
The value of it is either 1 (mutated) or 0 (not mutated).
The clinical feature vector is concatenated with the genomic feature vector to represent
as the feature for each patient.
Problem formulation
The patient subtyping can be formulated as a graph community spatial clustering problem
on an undirected graph encoding patient-patient relationships. We consider the patientpatient relationship is represented by a graph with node content as 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸, 𝑋) with N
nodes (patients) 𝑣/ ∈ 𝑉, 𝑖 ∈ [0, 𝑁] , edges connectivity ( 𝑣/ , 𝑣5 ) ∈ 𝐸 , where the edge
connectivity can be either 0 (disconnected) or 1 (connected), and 𝑥/ ∈ 𝑋, 𝑖 ∈ [0, 𝑁] is the
attribute vector associated with vertex 𝑣/ . Each patient has an attribute vector such as
clinical features (such as: age; TMB; LDH (Lactate dehydrogenase)) and mutation features
(such as EGFR, KRAS, PARK2) as node features. The node features are converted into
categorical feature vectors X: the mutation features are binary encoding, i.e. if a patient has
that specific gene mutation, the corresponding gene feature is 1; otherwise, 0. For
continuous features, we used the high- and low-bound measurement bound provided by the
Flatiron and categorize the continuous features into categorical features. For example, a
patient has hemoglobin measurement as 8.3, the low- and high-bound for hemoglobin is
14 and 18, respectively. It falls between two bounds, which indicate a “normal” class. The
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

two nodes are connected if the node feature vectors are similar. Here we applied cosine
similarity to be the measurement to define similarity. If cosine similarity is less than 0.5,
then there is not a link connected between two nodes; otherwise, connected. So formally,
the graph can be represented by two types of information, the patient content information
𝑋 ∈ 𝑅9×; and the structure information 𝐴 ∈ 𝑅9×9 , where 𝐴 is an adjacent matrix of 𝐺 and
𝐴/,5 = 1 if 𝑒/,5 ∈ 𝐸 otherwise, 0.
Given a patient-patient graph 𝐺, patient subtyping is to partition the patient nodes from
G into k disjoint subgroups {𝐺? , 𝐺@ , … , 𝐺B } so that: (1) the patient nodes within the same
cluster have similar clinical outcome (survival) to each other than patient nodes in different
clusters in terms of graph structure; (2) the patient nodes within the same subgroup are
more likely to have similar clinical and genomic attribute values.
Deep feature representation for graph clustering
It is beneficial to formulate the patient-patient relationship into a graph since both the node
content (patient clinical and genomic features) and structure interaction (patient-patient
connectivity) will be integrated and used. To fully extract and have deep feature
representation, we apply the marginalized graph autoencoder (MGAE) method 43 to exploit
the patient network information.
The MGAE is based on graph convolutional network (GCN)

44

and to learn the

convolution feature representation on the structure information with node content in the
spectral domain. The MGAE extends GCN to a purely unsupervised clustering task.
MGAE can exploit the interplay between node content and graph structure information by
using a marginalization process, which is to encode content features of graph into the deep

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

learning framework. MGAE also uses stacked graph convolutional network for learning
deep graph representation for clustering. 43
Graph convolutional network
Graph convolutional network (GCN) 44 applies the convolution operation on a graph from
the spectral domain. Given the adjacency matrix A and content matrix X of a graph, the
spectral convolution function used to calculate layer-wise transformation is defined as:
𝑍 (EF?) = 𝑓(𝑍 (E) , 𝐴)
Here, 𝑍 (E) ∈ 𝑅9×; (n nodes and d features) defines the input for layer l. The input layer
contains the patient clinical and genomic feature matrix for our problem. The feature
dimension of input layer is 227, which was derived from original 100 features. Our graph
model has three hidden layers and the embedding dimension is same as input layer 227.
MGAE embedding method reconstructs the feature matrix of node without hidden layers.
GCN

44

applies Chebyshev polynomials

45

to approximate the convolution filter. The

layer-wise propagation rule for GCN can be then defined as:
𝑓(𝑍 (E) , 𝐴) = 𝜎(𝐷𝑍 (E) 𝑊)
Here, D is the degree matrix for A. W is the learnable weights. 𝜎(⋅) is an activation function
such as ReLU 46.
Marginalized graph autoencoder (MGAE)
The MGAE 43 is a content and structure augmented autoencoder. MGAE reconstructs the
input 𝑋 = {𝑥? , … , 𝑥9 } ∈ 𝑅9×; by using a single mapping function 𝑓(∙), that minimizes the
squared reconstruction loss:
‖𝑋 − 𝑓(𝑋)‖@

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

For graph convolution networks, the loss function becomes:
‖𝑋 − 𝐷𝑋𝑊‖@ + 𝜆‖𝑊‖@Q
Here, D is the degree matrix for A. W is the parameter matrix. ‖𝑊‖@Q is a regularization
term with coefficient 𝜆 being a tradeoff.
The marginalized graph autoencoder provides an effective way to integrate both content
and structure information. To encourage the interplay between content and structure
information, MGAE introduces some random noises into the content features during
training. The corruption process can be randomly removing some features or setting them
to 0. Given the corrupted version of the original input X, the corrupted version of original
input X is:
𝑋R = {S,
𝑥? … , 𝑥S9 }

The objective function becomes:
Y
1
@
UV𝑋 − 𝐷𝑋XW 𝑊V + 𝜆‖𝑊‖@Q
𝑚
/Z?

And the final graph embedded representation Z is defined as:
𝑍 = 𝐴[𝑋𝑊
Patient subtype clustering with MGAE
We applied the spectral clustering algorithm 43 for patient subtyping. The symbol used and
pseudo-code is defined as follows:

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Given the patient graph network 𝐺 with n nodes, each patient node is a 𝑑-dimension
attribute vector. The patient attribute matrix 𝑋 ∈ 𝑅9×; of 𝐺, the total number of patient
subtypes 𝑘, the corruption probability p, and the number of stacked autoencoder layers
𝛤. In our problem formulation, 𝛤 = 2. 𝑍 (`) = 𝑋 is the input to the first layer.
Step-1:
For 𝑙 = 1 to 𝛤
Construct a single layer denoise autoencoder with input data 𝑍 (Eu?)
Learn the autoencoder output representation 𝑍 (E) according to
𝑍 = 𝐴[𝑋𝑊
Step-2:
𝑍` ⇐ 𝑍 (x)
𝑍? ⇐ 𝑍` 𝑍` y
1
𝑍@ ⇐ (|𝑍? | + |𝑍?{ |)
2
Step-3:
Run spectral clustering on 𝑍@

Interpretable clinical patient similarity networks
Formulating the patient-patient relationship as a graph-based model can address many
challenges in analysis and is naturally interpretable. In the network design, each node
represents an individual patient and an edge between two patients represents pairwise
similarity. In terms of individual patient, each pair with similar characteristics can then be
tightly connected to each other. In terms of a subgroup of patients, i.e. clusters, each
subgroup can enrich for different comorbidities and biological meanings, such as survival,
adverse event and/or drug dose.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

NSCLC-specific patient graph network overall workflow
The patient clinical features are from electronic medical records and genomic features are
from Foundation Medicine. We collected and filtered out patients treated by immune
therapy. There are total 1,973 patients in the cohort.
We designed and applied an unsupervised, graph based neural network that uses both
patient clinical feature and genomic feature to infer a patient-patient similarity network as
the computational model to represent a complex patient population. The overall method
workflow is shown in Figure 1. We first applied marginalized graph autoencoder (MGAE)
43

to get graph representation encoding both patient network graph structure information

and patient node clinical and genomic features. Then, we applied two-layer stacked graph
convolutional network to extract high level feature representation.
After getting the latent space representation, the spectral clustering algorithm

43

was

applied on the patient graph network to generate graph clusters. Those clusters are patient
subgroups. For each subgroup, we performed survival analysis and detect potential
biomarkers for each subtype.

Patient subtype survival analysis
We used the Kaplan-Meier (KM) estimate

47

to measure the fraction of subgroup patient

drug response. In clinical trials, the effect of an intervention is assessed by measuring the
number of patients survived or saved after that intervention over a period of time. The
starting time in our case is the first IO treatment starting time for patients, and the patient
deceased time is used to be the event occurrence date in the survival analysis. In Flatiron
database, there are also patients under study that were uncooperative and refused to be

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

remained in the study or when some of the patients may not have experienced the event or
death before the end of the study, although they would have experienced or died if
observation continued, or were lost in touch midway in the study. We labeled these
situations as censored observations. The statistical difference between different groups of
patients of KM estimate could be used to study the drug response of different groups.
Signaling pathway analysis
We hypothesized that genetic abnormalities alter the activities of key signaling pathways
and consequently lead to the differential survivals observed between the responsive and
the non-responsive subtypes. We further assumed that a single functional genetic alteration
of a determinative gene in such key signaling pathways is sufficient to impact patients’
responses to IO. Key signaling pathways thus could be revealed by searching for the
combinations of such determinative genetic alterations. Mathematically, such a
combination of alterations satisfies the following criteria: 1) Differentially enriched in
responsive vs. non-responsive subtypes. That is, patients in the responsive subgroup are
more likely to have at least one of these genetic alterations, and the Non-responders are
more likely to host none of such alterations, or vice versa. 2) necessary. If any of the genetic
alterations is removed from the combination, the differential enrichment of these genetic
alterations in the two subtypes will become weaker. 3) Complete. If any other genetic
alteration is added into the combination, the differential enrichment will not turn stronger.
Genetic alterations considered in this work included functional mutations (gain or loss of
biological functions), copy number amplifications, and copy number deletions. The
differential enrichment of the combination of genetic alterations in responsive or nonresponsive subtypes was measured by the p-values of Fisher’s exact test. The optimal

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

combinations were discovered by greedy search algorithm. The possible signaling
pathways related with the discovered differentially enriched genetic alterations were
inferred

using

Ingenuity

Pathway

Analysis48

(QIAGEN

Inc.,

https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuitypathway-analysis).

Results
Cohort characteristics
The baseline demographic and pathologic characteristics is shown in Figure 2. Figure 2a
shows how the cohort was identified with inclusion and exclusion criteria. Figure 2b shows
the cohort characteristics. There are totally 1,937 patients in the cohort. The median age is
67 and about half of the population is female. We also report the race, histology, stage,
ECOG value, smoking status, and previous treatment in the statistics. All the patients in
this cohort were treated by immunotherapy (IO), which means the patients were treated by
one of the IO drugs: Perbrolizumab, Nivolumab, Atezolizumab, or Durvalumab. Figure 2c
shows the clinical features, such as hemoglobin, erythrocytes, hematocrit, etc. They can be
classified into molecular pathological features, blood test, and demographic behavioral and
vital pathologic features. Figure 2d shows the waterfall plot for gene mutation. Each row
represents a gene and each column represents a patient. The mutation type can be SV
(structural variant), CN (copy number variations), and RE (rearrangement). From Figure
2d, we found there are seven genes found most frequency of mutation along the NSCLC
patient cohort. The potentially actionable somatic mutations found in this study is
consistent with prior studies49. The EGFR and KRAS were the most commonly identified
oncogenic drivers and were with very rare exception mutationally exclusive. CDKN2A and
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

CDKN2B have copy number mutation patterns. Comparing with other two TCGA lung
cancer comprehensive paper
Atlas Research Network

50

50,51

, our finding is consistent with theirs. Cancer Genome

found statistically recurrent mutations in 11 genes, including

mutation of TP53 in nearly all specimens. Significantly altered pathways included NFE2L2
and KEAP1 in 34%, squamous differentiation genes in 44%, phosphatidylinositol-3-OH
kinase pathway genes in 47%, and CDKN2A and RB1 in 72% of tumors

50

. EGFR

mutations were more frequent in female patients, where mutations in RBM10 were
common in males 51.
Patient subgroups (clusters)
The NSCLC patients were clustered into five subgroups using the spectral algorithm.
Figure 3a shows the tSNE plot for patients assigned to five clusters. The survival plots for
each subgroup is shown in Figure 3b. A total of 1,937 patients NSCLC IO treatment
patients were selected to build the patient cohort in this experiment. The responsive and
non-responsive subtype groups were selected by our graph-based method. The responsive
subtype group has better overall survival than the non-responsive subtype group. There are
400 patients in the selected responsive subtype group while 897 patients in the nonresponsive subtype group. Figure 3c shows how graph based the convolutional graph
network outperforms other best machine learning methods such as autoencoder, UMAP,
etc. Specifically, we compared MGAE clustering methods with other clustering methods,
which are: tSNE 52 + clustering, UMAP 53 + clustering, autoencoder + clustering, denoise
autoencoder + clustering, and MGAE without denoising, and MGAE. We used a volcano
plot and KM plot to visualize and evaluate how good the clustering algorithm can perform
on patient subtyping tasks. The purpose is to find out whether the denoising process can
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

contribute to the feature learning and eventually for patient subtyping. Also, it is important
to validate whether the problem formulation makes a difference, that is formulating the
patient-patient relationship as graph vs. a plain matrix. We can observe that graph-based
MGAE approach problem formulation has the best patient subtyping among other methods.
The volcano plots and KM survival analysis shows that the responsive (green curve) and
non-responsive (red curve) have a significant difference. The other methods do not have a
good way to stratify the subgroups into responsive or non-responsive, which can be
observed both from volcano plots. The reason behind this is that patient EHR contains
high-dimensional, heterogeneous and incomplete features and a graph-based model can
effectively describe such complex patient network system. Graph-based approach favors
over grid-based approach in terms of leveraging the rich patient clinical information in
graph-structure data and learn effective node or graph representation from both node/edge
attributes and the graph topological structure. Figure 3d shows that both clinical and
genomic features show better clustering results comparing to use just one feature alone.
Also, k=5 gives good clustering results that can better stratify responsive and nonresponsive subtypes comparing to choosing other parameters. Figure 3e shows the five
subtypes identified by MGAE. For each cluster, the K-M estimation will get the median
survival time. Same for the overall cohort. From that figure, the clinical important clusters
can be selected for further analysis.

Annotation describes molecular feature and clinical feature
The subgroups detected can contain potential biomarkers. The GCN successfully detect
several subgroups from IO cohort. The KM plots were generated for each subgroup. The

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

responsive group represents the patients with good survival prognosis, whereas the nonresponsive group represents the patients with bad survival prognosis. (Figure 3b and Figure
3e). After merging the two non-responsive groups, (since their corresponding survival
prognosis are very close), Figure 4 shows the clinical and genomic features enrichment in
responsive and non-responsive groups. The enrichment was determined by the greater
number of occurrences in responsive or non-responsive subgroups. From Figure 4, an
observation is that some blood measurements abnormality may be act as biomarker for
future study as they are differential between responsive and non-responsive subgroups.
Two genetic alteration combinations were identified (Supplemental Table 1), one
enriched in responsive subtype (genetic abnormalities were highlighted in green shade) and
the other in non-responsive subtype (in brown shade). Genes specific to responsive subtype,
non-responsive subtype, or shared by both subtypes were presented in green, brown, and
yellow colors. Interestingly, functional mutations (in 6 genes) and copy number
amplifications (in 7 genes) dominated the 12 genes specific to the responsive subtype and
copy number deletion (in 1 gene) was rare. In contrast, no obvious pattern of genetic
alteration types were found in Non-responder-specific genes or shared genes.
The landscapes of the genetic alterations in responsive and non-responsive subtypes
were further illustrated by the inferred underlying signaling pathways (Supplemental
Figure 4). The responsive group demonstrated a classical oncogenic signaling axis from
EGFR1/HER2 over-activation to the KRAS and BRAF signaling hubs to the uncontrolled
proliferation featured with p15/p16, cyclins, and RB1. In contrast, the non-responsive
subtype was dominated by DNA damage repair mechanisms, demonstrating the deletions
of STK11 and p53 genes and the functionally active mutation of the TERT gene. Both

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

subtypes shared a common cMET/FGFR – PI3K/AKT pathway but with different
activation mechanisms. For example, The activation of cMET and the deactivation of
PTEN were achieved through copy number variations in responsive group, but through
functional mutations in non-responsive patients. The activation of the FGF pathway was
by the copy number amplification of the FGF12 ligand or the FGFR1 receptor in Nonresponders, but by the functional mutation of FGFR1 in Responders. In summary, while
both subtypes seemly were driven by the common PI3K/AKT pathway, the responsive
subtype demonstrated enhanced proliferation, while the non-responsive subtype exceled in
fast genetic evolution through the malfunctioned DNA damage repairing mechanisms.
Figure 5a shows when TMB54 is in intermediate level (We applied the classification
standard as what Foundation Medicine Inc used)54, the GCN approach can further stratify
patients into responsive and non-responsive subtypes. In contrast, when the PDL1
expression level is high, both responsive and non-responsive subtypes showed similar good
responses to IO treatment. Our findings are that GCN subtyping can provide novel IO
stratification beyond TMB and PDL1. We found GCN can stratify IO-treated patients with
low or intermediate TMB into subtypes with distinct clinical outcomes. When TMB is in
low or intermediate level, the GCN can further stratify patients into responsive and nonresponsive subtypes. This shows that for traditional biomarker TMB, if it labels a patient
not suitable for IO treatment, our approach can be based on that to further suggest subtypes
for new subtypes and for precision treatment. In our dataset, above 90% patients do not
have PDL1 measurements, which suggest that under such situation, our method can
perform patient subtyping independent on traditional biomarkers.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Genomic alternations that are known to boost EGFR/KRAS signaling were examined
for their effects on survival. These genomic variants include EGFR mutation, KRAS
mutation, or KRAS copy number amplification. In the Responsive Subtype (Figure 5c),
patients with any of these genomic variations demonstrated significantly worse survival
(14.4 months vs 23.0 months, log-rank test p-value <= 0.01). Meanwhile, no significant
survival difference was observed in the overall IO cohort (Figure 5d). Further examination
on EGFR mutations (Supplemental Figure 1a) or KRAS mutations/copy number
amplifications (Supplemental Figure 1c) alone also showed no correlation with patients’
overall survival in the whole IO cohort.
The effects of BRAF genomic alteration types on patients’ response to IO treatment in
the overall IO cohort were examined. Patients with BRAF mutations and recombinations
responded better than patients without BRAF genomic abnormality (Supplement Figure 3),
while copy number amplification of BRAF did not affect survival.

Discussion
We carried out our study based on a large number of patients with immune therapy
treatment. A computational practical pipeline was built to detect patient subtypes and
findings in our data. The reason why our approach works well on patient graph-based
problem is that GCN can automatically learn a low-dimensional feature representation for
each node in the graph. The low-dimensional representations are learned to preserve the
structural information of graphs, and thus can be used as features in building machine
learning models for various downstream tasks, such as clustering (here, patient subtyping).
The graph-based approach compared with grid-based approach can better utilizing the

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

structures within the patient clinical and genomic data. The graph convolutional operation
can effectively include the entire graph information and embed the local patient
information. It is a more global approach of using the entire data.
Five clusters are buried in noises in the raw data. Or, more formally, due to the intrinsic
relationship between samples in the raw data, these samples, when projected to 5 clusters
using different approaches, show consistent patterns across these approaches. Other
approaches can recognize the existence of these clusters, but due to the noise in the raw
data, these methods cannot effectively distinguish which sample belongs to which cluster.
Therefore, clusters identified by other approaches are not pure enough and thus fail to show
clinical importance (i.e., not good enough to pass statistic tests).
When working on real-world EMR data, since the noises are in the raw data, traditional
cluster purity metrics are not suitable for evaluating the performance of an approach.
Therefore, we used a pragmatic metric to compare the performance of our approach with
others: whether an approach can effectively identify clinically meaningful subtypes.
Meanwhile, we use concordance analysis to check whether our findings are artifacts.
In the results section, we found some interesting clinical and genomic findings that can
be used to stratify patient subtypes, which can be used to describe associations between
driver mutations and response to targeted therapy. These findings demonstrate the
powerfulness of deep learning and can provide support for further research and discovery
evaluation this approach in oncology.
There are some limitations in this study. First of all, the overall survival analysis is
based on the patient data collected from routine clinical practice. Not every deceased
patient’s data of death was captured, some were imputed using “last day of visit”. Also, the

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

unknown distribution of missingness is also a factor. Furthermore, the time receiving
therapy end point may not account for non-progression-related reasons for discontinuing
therapy.55

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

11
12
13
14
15
16
17

Society, A. C. Key Statistics for Lung Cancer,
<https://www.cancer.org/content/cancer/en/cancer/lung-cancer/about/keystatistics.html> (2019).
Society, A. C. What is Lung Cancer, <https://www.cancer.org/cancer/lungcancer/about/what-is.html> (2019).
Pikor, L. A., Ramnarine, V. R., Lam, S. & Lam, W. L. Genetic alterations defining NSCLC
subtypes and their therapeutic implications. Lung cancer 82, 179-189 (2013).
Thomas, A., Liu, S. V., Subramaniam, D. S. & Giaccone, G. Refining the treatment of
NSCLC according to histological and molecular subtypes. Nature reviews Clinical
oncology 12, 511 (2015).
Wislez, M. et al. Non-mucinous and mucinous subtypes of adenocarcinoma with
bronchioloalveolar carcinoma features differ by biomarker expression and in the
response to gefitinib. Lung cancer 68, 185-191 (2010).
Kim, H. S. et al. Systematic identification of molecular subtype-selective vulnerabilities in
non-small-cell lung cancer. Cell 155, 552-566 (2013).
Timms, K. M. et al. Association of BRCA1/2 defects with genomic scores predictive of
DNA damage repair deficiency among breast cancer subtypes. Breast Cancer Research
16, 475 (2014).
Bergamaschi, A. et al. Distinct patterns of DNA copy number alteration are associated
with different clinicopathological features and gene-expression subtypes of breast
cancer. Genes, Chromosomes and Cancer 45, 1033-1040 (2006).
Miller, V. A. et al. Bronchioloalveolar pathologic subtype and smoking history predict
sensitivity to gefitinib in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Journal of Clinical
Oncology 22, 1103-1109 (2004).
Shim, H. S., Lee, D. H., Park, E. J. & Kim, S. H. Histopathologic characteristics of lung
adenocarcinomas with epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in the International
Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/European
Respiratory Society lung adenocarcinoma classification. Archives of pathology &
laboratory medicine 135, 1329-1334 (2011).
Beaulieu-Jones, B. K. & Greene, C. S. Semi-supervised learning of the electronic health
record for phenotype stratification. Journal of biomedical informatics 64, 168-178
(2016).
Shinagare, A. B. et al. Unsuspected pulmonary embolism in lung cancer patients:
comparison of clinical characteristics and outcome with suspected pulmonary
embolism. Lung cancer 78, 161-166 (2012).
Bepler, G., Neumann, K., Holle, R., Havemann, K. & Kalbfleisch, H. Clinical relevance of
histologic subtyping in small cell lung cancer. Cancer 64, 74-79 (1989).
Dai, X. et al. Breast cancer intrinsic subtype classification, clinical use and future trends.
American journal of cancer research 5, 2929 (2015).
Reck, M. What future opportunities may immuno-oncology provide for improving the
treatment of patients with lung cancer? Annals of oncology 23, viii28-viii34 (2012).
Kim, E. S. et al. The BATTLE trial: personalizing therapy for lung cancer. Cancer discovery
1, 44-53 (2011).
Jeremic, B., Shibamoto, Y., Acimovic, L. & Milisavljevic, S. Initial versus delayed
accelerated hyperfractionated radiation therapy and concurrent chemotherapy in

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

limited small-cell lung cancer: a randomized study. Journal of clinical oncology 15, 893900 (1997).
Gamerith, G., Kocher, F., Rudzki, J. & Pircher, A. ASCO 2018 NSCLC highlights—
combination therapy is key. memo-Magazine of European Medical Oncology 11, 266271 (2018).
Elias, A. et al. Neoadjuvant therapy for surgically staged IIIA N2 non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Lung cancer 17, 147-161 (1997).
Jotte, R. M. et al. IMpower131: Primary PFS and safety analysis of a randomized phase III
study of atezolizumab+ carboplatin+ paclitaxel or nab-paclitaxel vs carboplatin+ nabpaclitaxel as 1L therapy in advanced squamous NSCLC. J Clin Oncol 36, LBA9000 (2018).
Mogi, A. & Kuwano, H. TP53 mutations in nonsmall cell lung cancer. BioMed Research
International 2011 (2011).
Paez, J. G. et al. EGFR mutations in lung cancer: correlation with clinical response to
gefitinib therapy. Science 304, 1497-1500 (2004).
Suzuki, H. et al. Intragenic mutations of CDKN2B and CDKN2A in primary human
esophageal cancers. Human molecular genetics 4, 1883-1887 (1995).
Camidge, D. et al. Progression-free survival (PFS) from a phase I study of crizotinib (PF02341066) in patients with ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). J Clin Oncol
29, 2501 (2011).
Tagalakis, V. et al. High risk of deep vein thrombosis in patients with non-small cell lung
cancer: a cohort study of 493 patients. Journal of Thoracic Oncology 2, 729-734 (2007).
Boch, C. et al. The frequency of EGFR and KRAS mutations in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC): routine screening data for central Europe from a cohort study. BMJ open 3,
e002560 (2013).
Velcheti, V. et al. Programmed death ligand-1 expression in non-small cell lung cancer.
Laboratory investigation 94, 107 (2014).
Spoerke, J. M. et al. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway alterations are associated
with histologic subtypes and are predictive of sensitivity to PI3K inhibitors in lung cancer
preclinical models. Clinical cancer research 18, 6771-6783 (2012).
Miotto, R., Li, L., Kidd, B. A. & Dudley, J. T. Deep patient: an unsupervised representation
to predict the future of patients from the electronic health records. Scientific reports 6,
26094 (2016).
Choi, E., Bahadori, M. T., Schuetz, A., Stewart, W. F. & Sun, J. in Machine Learning for
Healthcare Conference. 301-318.
Nguyen, P., Tran, T., Wickramasinghe, N. & Venkatesh, S. $\mathtt {Deepr} $: a
convolutional net for medical records. IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics
21, 22-30 (2016).
Lu, C.-F. et al. Machine learning–based radiomics for molecular subtyping of gliomas.
Clinical Cancer Research 24, 4429-4436 (2018).
Sherafatian, M. Tree-based machine learning algorithms identified minimal set of miRNA
biomarkers for breast cancer diagnosis and molecular subtyping. Gene 677, 111-118
(2018).
Huang, S. et al. Applications of support vector machine (SVM) learning in cancer
genomics. Cancer Genomics-Proteomics 15, 41-51 (2018).
Choi, E. et al. in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 1495-1504 (ACM).
Choi, Y., Chiu, C. Y.-I. & Sontag, D. Learning low-dimensional representations of medical
concepts. AMIA Summits on Translational Science Proceedings 2016, 41 (2016).

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55

Winslow, M. M. et al. Suppression of lung adenocarcinoma progression by Nkx2-1.
Nature 473, 101 (2011).
Choi, E. et al. in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 3504-3512.
Lipton, Z. C., Kale, D. C. & Wetzel, R. Modeling missing data in clinical time series with
rnns. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04130 (2016).
Che, Z., Purushotham, S., Cho, K., Sontag, D. & Liu, Y. Recurrent neural networks for
multivariate time series with missing values. Scientific reports 8, 6085 (2018).
Li, L. et al. Identification of type 2 diabetes subgroups through topological analysis of
patient similarity. Science translational medicine 7, 311ra174-311ra174 (2015).
Kaplan, A. & Lock, E. F. Prediction with dimension reduction of multiple molecular data
sources for patient survival. Cancer informatics 16, 1176935117718517 (2017).
Wang, C., Pan, S., Long, G., Zhu, X. & Jiang, J. in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. 889-898 (ACM).
Kipf, T. N. & Welling, M. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907 (2016).
Hammond, D. K., Vandergheynst, P. & Gribonval, R. Wavelets on graphs via spectral
graph theory. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis 30, 129-150 (2011).
Nair, V. & Hinton, G. E. in Proceedings of the 27th international conference on machine
learning (ICML-10). 807-814.
Bland, J. M. & Altman, D. G. Survival probabilities (the Kaplan-Meier method). BMJ 317,
1572, doi:10.1136/bmj.317.7172.1572 (1998).
Kramer, A., Green, J., Pollard, J., Jr. & Tugendreich, S. Causal analysis approaches in
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Bioinformatics 30, 523-530,
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt703 (2014).
Jordan, E. J. et al. Prospective comprehensive molecular characterization of lung
adenocarcinomas for efficient patient matching to approved and emerging therapies.
Cancer discovery 7, 596-609 (2017).
Network, C. G. A. R. Comprehensive genomic characterization of squamous cell lung
cancers. Nature 489, 519 (2012).
Network, C. G. A. R. Comprehensive molecular profiling of lung adenocarcinoma. Nature
511, 543 (2014).
Maaten, L. v. d. & Hinton, G. Visualizing data using t-SNE. Journal of machine learning
research 9, 2579-2605 (2008).
McInnes, L., Healy, J. & Melville, J. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and
projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426 (2018).
Schrock, A. et al. 1170PAnalysis of POLE mutation and tumor mutational burden (TMB)
across 80,853 tumors: Implications for immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICPIs). Annals of
Oncology 28 (2017).
Singal, G. et al. Association of patient characteristics and tumor genomics with clinical
outcomes among patients with non–small cell lung cancer using a clinicogenomic
database. Jama 321, 1391-1399 (2019).

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by AstraZeneca (AZ) Postdoc Funding. The highperformance computing resource was supported by Scientific Computing Platform (SCP)
at AZ. D.X.’s work was partially supported by the National Institutes of Health (R35GM126985). We would like to thank our colleagues Kris Sachsenmeier, Zhongwu Lai,
Melinda Merchant, Mingchao Xie and Steven Criscione for their helpful discussion and
constructive suggestions.

Authors’ contributions
J.D., J.S. and B.L. designed and directed this study. D.X. provided scientific suggestions
and helpful discussion. C.F. collected and processed the data, built the model, trained the
model, carried out experiments. All people analyzed and validated the experimental results
of data analysis. All people wrote, reviewed and revised the manuscript.

Additional information

Supplementary Information accompanies this paper available online.

Conflict of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figures

Figure 1. The overall workflow: The dataset is from real world evidences in Flatiron.
Each patient has his clinical features and genomic features measured by Foundation
Medicine. The features are preprocessed (See Material and Method part for details) and
then concatenated. We applied marginalized graph autoencoder (mGAE) to learn each
patient latent representation. Then, we applied spectral clustering algorithm to identify
patient subtypes (clusters). Last but not least, we performed data analysis such as survival
plot to compare between different subgroups and identified the clinical and genomic
findings.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a)

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(b)

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(c)

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(d)
Figure 2. Identification of IO treated NSCLC cohort from Flatiron database and
cohort characteristics a) Cohort Identification: define the cohort with inclusion and
exclusion criteria. b) baseline demographic and pathologic characteristics c) an overview
of all clinical features classified into molecular pathology features, blood test features. It
also shows the incompleteness in RWE. d) genomic features are shown in waterfall plot.

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a)

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Month

Month
(b)

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(c)

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(d)

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(e)

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Month

Month
(f)
Figure 3. GCN discovered NSCLC subgroups with dramatically different responses
to IO therapies from integrating both genomic data and EHR and GCN showed
superior performances to commonly used machine learning methods. a) The GCN
effectively learns embedding from patient clinical and genomic features. Here, a tSNE
plot is to show the high level embedding in 2-d. The embeddings are formed five clusters
which indicates five subgroups. 3b) The survival plots of five subgroups corresponding to
the five clusters shown in Figure 3a. 3c) GCN approach compared with other machine
learning approaches. Here, we compared our approach with other grid-based method and
other well-established machine learning methods. In the volcano plot, each dot represents
a cluster, the X axis will be the difference of the estimated median survival times between
a cluster and the overall cohort, and the Y will be –log10(p-value), where the p-value will
40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

be from the log-rank test of the KM estimation of survival functions between a cluster
and the overall cohort. It shows that our methods give better subgrouping results
compared with other methods in terms of differentiable survival analysis and statistical
significance. 4d) It shows that integrating both genomic and clinical features give the best
subgroup results. Five clusters give best survival difference. We also explore other cluster
parameters, but they fail to give statistically significant differentiable survival subgroups.
4e) responsive and non-responsive subgroups identified by GCN approach. Here for two
non-responsive subgroups, we merge them together for following analysis. 4f) Survival
plots for responsive and non-responsive subtypes after merging the two non-responsive
subgroups; The survival analysis plot shows statistically significant difference between
two subtypes as the responsive subgroup can have more then 10 months than
nonresponsive one.

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4: Enrichment of distinct clinical-phenotype differentiating the responsive and
nonresponsive IO-treated NSCLC subgroups identified by GCN.

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Our approach stratifies patients when
TMB in low and intermediate range

Month

Month
(a)

43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

No significant stratification when TMB is high

Month

Month
(b)

44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Month

Month
(c)

45

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011437; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Month

Month
(d)
Figure 5: GCN based subgrouping enabled IO based patient stratifications beyond utilizing
TMB
Figure 5a) When TMB in low and intermediate range, GCN further stratifies patients into
responsive and non-responsive subtypes. 5b) When TMB in high range, GCN cannot
further stratify patients. From 5a and 5b it shows that although TMB is a commonly use
biomarker to suggest patient IO treatment response, when TMB is in low and intermediate
range, our approach can still stratify patient into differential survival subgroups with
statistically significance. The effects of genomic alterations that may upregulate the
EGFR/KRAS signaling on overall survivals are demonstrated in the Responsive subtype
(5c) and the overall cohort (5d).
46

