medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acute ischemic stroke alters the brain's preference for distinct dynamic
connectivity states
Anna K. Bonkhoff1,2,3, Flor A. Espinoza4, Harshvardhan Gazula5, Victor M. Vergara5, Lukas
Hensel1, Jochen Michely1, Theresa Paul1, Anne Rehme1, Lukas J. Volz1, Gereon R. Fink1,2,
Vince D. Calhoun4,5, and Christian Grefkes1,2*
1

Department of Neurology, University Hospital Cologne & Medical Faculty, University of
Cologne, Germany
2
Cognitive Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-3), Research Centre
Juelich, Juelich, Germany
3
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK4
4
The Mind Research Network, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA
5
Tri-institutional Center for Translational Research in Neuroimaging and Data Science
(TReNDS), Georgia State University, Georgia Institute of Technology, Emory University,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA

* corresponding author:
Christian Grefkes
christian.grefkes@uk-koeln.de
Department of Neurology, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Acute ischemic stroke disturbs healthy brain organization, prompting subsequent plasticity and
reorganization to compensate for loss of specialized neural tissue and function. Static resting-state
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have already furthered our understanding
of cerebral reorganization by estimating stroke-induced changes in network connectivity
aggregated over the duration of several minutes. In this study, we utilized dynamic resting-state
fMRI analyses to increase temporal resolution to seconds and explore transient configurations of
motor network connectivity in acute stroke. To this end, we collected resting-state fMRI data of
31 acute ischemic stroke patients and 17 age-matched healthy controls. Stroke patients presented
with moderate to severe hand motor deficits. By estimating dynamic connectivity within a sliding
window framework, we identified three distinct connectivity configurations of motor-related
networks. Motor networks were organized into three regional domains, i.e. a cortical, subcortical
and cerebellar domain. Temporal connectivity patterns of stroke patients markedly diverged from
those of healthy controls depending on the severity of the initial motor impairment. Moderately
affected patients (n=18) spent significantly more time in a weakly connected configuration that
was characterized by low levels of connectivity, both locally as well as between distant regions.
In contrast, severely affected patients (n=13) showed a significant preference for transitions into a
spatially segregated connectivity configuration. This configuration featured particularly high
levels of local connectivity within the three regional domains as well as anti-correlated
connectivity between distant networks across domains. A third connectivity configuration
represented an intermediate connectivity pattern compared to the preceding two, and
predominantly encompassed decreased inter-hemispheric connectivity between cortical motor
networks independent of individual deficit severity. Alterations within this third configuration thus
closely resembled previously reported ones originating from static resting-state fMRI studies poststroke.
In summary, acute ischemic stroke not only prompted changes in connectivity between distinct
functional networks, yet also caused severe aberrations in temporal properties of large-scale
network interactions depending on the individual deficit severity. These findings offer new vistas
on the dynamic neural mechanisms underlying acute neurological symptoms, cortical
reorganization and treatment effects in stroke patients.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Key words
Ischemic stroke, hand motor deficits, dynamic functional network connectivity, sliding window
analysis, functional segregation and integration

Abbreviations
ARAT – action research arm test
dFNC – dynamic functional network connectivity
MRI – magnetic resonance imaging
BOLD signal – blood oxygenation level dependent signal
FDR – false discovery rate

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Ischemic stroke is a major cause of sudden focal brain damage, which severely disrupts structural
and functional integrity at both local and global scales (von Monakow, 1914; Carrera and Tononi,
2014). Functional neuroimaging has strongly contributed to reveal neural mechanisms engaged in
post-stroke plasticity and reorganization (Grefkes and Fink, 2011; Grefkes and Fink, 2014; Ward,
2017). More precisely, resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have
frequently demonstrated disturbances in inter-hemispheric connectivity following stroke (Carter
et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2010; Golestani et al., 2013; Rehme et al., 2014). A highly consistent
finding encountered in motor stroke is the reduction of interhemispheric connectivity between the
primary sensorimotor cortices, which develops in the first weeks after stroke and returns to levels
observed in healthy subjects in parallel to behavioral recovery (van Meer et al., 2010; Park et al.,
2011; Volz et al., 2016). However, since conventionally applied analysis tools do not allow for a
fine-grained temporal evaluation of resting-state fMRI signals, it is currently unknown whether
such stroke-induced alterations in functional network connectivity additionally exhibit symptomseverity dependent fluctuations. These temporal variations could reflect network flexibility
necessary for neural reorganization underlying recovery of function.
Importantly, the time resolution of resting-state fMRI data has recently been increased by the
advent of time-varying or dynamic functional network connectivity (dFNC) analyses (Chang and
Glover, 2010; Allen et al., 2014; Calhoun et al., 2014). In contrast to the previous assumption of
static connectivity over the entire duration of an fMRI scan, dynamic analyses now allow
connectivity between brain areas to differ over short periods of time. Consequently, connectivity
changes can be assessed in the range of seconds instead of several minutes. By summarizing
reoccurring large-scale patterns of connectivity, dFNC analyses can then be presented as distinct
connectivity states of the brain, as well as transition trajectories between them. These dynamic
measures may enable a more sophisticated evaluation of the spontaneously fluctuating nature of
neural signals compared to static ones, may possess behavioral relevance (Vidaurre et al., 2019)
and are increasingly suggested as novel biomarkers of disease (for recent reviews, c.f.: Hutchison
et al., 2013; Preti et al., 2017; Lurie et al., n.d.). For example, Kim and colleagues (2017) applied
dFNC analyses on Parkinson’s disease patients’ data and substantiated a significant association
between the occurrences of dynamic connectivity states and clinical disease severity. These
dynamic patterns uncovered reductions in functional network segregation that did not manifest in
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

static analyses. Likewise, Espinoza and colleagues (2019) reported a significantly increased
occurrence of a particularly weakly connected dynamic connectivity state in case of Huntington’s
disease. This state’s dynamic connectivity diverged markedly from the well-known static one, thus
facilitating previously inaccessible insights.
Given the increased capacity of dFNC analyses in delineating spontaneously forming connectivity
states, such a dynamic approach seems to be particularly well suited to assess conditions requiring
high levels of network flexibility, as, for example, in case of stroke-induced acute lesions. A focal
lesion may not only disrupt communication within the motor system, but also alter the brain’s
predilection for certain connectivity states (Vergara et al., 2018). Specific dynamic patterns may
be crucial for the process of neural reorganization and hence determine the potential of the brain
to recover (van der Horn et al., 2019).
Therefore, the goal of the current study was to investigate dynamic functional network
connectivity of the motor system in acute ischemic stroke patients. We analyzed resting-state fMRI
data from 31 first-ever stroke patients, presenting with moderate to severe hand motor deficits, and
17 age-matched healthy controls. We hypothesized distinct dFNC patterns in stroke patients linked
to symptom load, i.e., specific patterns for severely and moderately affected patients, that were not
assessable in the static analysis framework. In particular, we expected to observe temporally highly
variable global changes in functional connectivity, readily interpretable as segregation and
integration between functional domains (Friston, 2002; Eickhoff and Grefkes, 2011). These
findings could then extend our mechanistic insights beyond the consistently described decrease in
inter-hemispheric connectivity and thereby reveal new insights in the functional role of dynamic
interactions among brain areas during the recovery process.

Materials and Methods
Participants
Thirty-two first-ever acute ischemic stroke patients admitted to the University Hospital of
Cologne, Department of Neurology (mean age: 68.4 years±12.1 standard deviation (SD), 19 males,
days post stroke: 7.2±2.7SD) and 17 healthy controls (mean age: 65.4 years±6.4SD, 15 males)

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

were recruited for this study. One stroke patient had to be excluded due to severe head motion
during scanning (see below), leaving 31 patients for the final analysis. Stroke patients presented
with acute unilateral hand motor deficits. Further inclusion criteria were: i) 40–90 years of age; ii)
diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) positive for ischemic stroke; iii)
structurally intact ipsilesional pre-central gyrus (M1) as verified by MRI; iv) within two weeks
from symptom onset (one patient was included 16 days after stroke); v) absence of severe aphasia,
apraxia, and neglect. Exclusion criteria were: i) any contraindication to MRI (e.g., cardiac pacemaker); ii) epilepsy; iii) infarcts in multiple territories; iv) hemorrhagic stroke and v) further
neurological diseases. In addition, 17 age-matched healthy subjects with no neurological or
psychiatric disease served as control group. All subjects provided informed written consent in
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and all aspects of this study were approved by the
local ethics committee.
Please note that the raw data of 26 patients was previously included in Volz et al. (2016).
Importantly, the scopes of the two studies strongly differ (dynamic functional connectivity analysis
in acute stroke in the current study versus effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
(rTMS) on motor recovery in Volz et al. (2016)). There is no overlap, neither in the research
question nor in any of the results. Therefore, all analyses described here are novel.

Hand motor function and clinical assessments
Hand motor deficits were quantified using the Action Research Arm Test (ARAT) (Yozbatiran et
al., 2008). This test is widely used in stroke research and assesses gross and fine upper limb
function in four dimensions (i.e., grasp, grip, pinch, and gross movements; range 0–57; 57=normal
performance, 0=unable to perform any movements). Furthermore, we obtained the National
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) for each patient.
In order to test for the impact of the motor deficit on dFNC, we divided the sample into i) a
subgroup of severely affected patients (ARAT Score 0–28) and ii) a subgroup of lightly to
moderately affected patients (ARAT score 29–57). For two patients, ARAT scores were
unavailable due to technical reasons. The first patient was severely affected, according to an
NIHSS of 16, and suffered from hemiplegia with no residual arm function. This was equivalent to
an ARAT score close to zero, hence the patient was assigned to the severely affected subgroup.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The second patient was mildly affected (NIHSS=3) and had only minor hand motor deficits.
Therefore, the patient was assigned to the moderately affected subgroup. Demographic
characteristics of all study participants and clinical features of stroke patients are listed in Table
1.

Age (in years)
Sex (in % female)
Mean Framewise
Displacement
Days since stroke
NIHSS
ARAT affected hand
Lesion volume (in
mm3, median)
CST overlap (in %,
median)

Stroke patients
(n=31)
68.4
39
0.28

Healthy controls
(n=17)
65.4
12
0.27

p-value

7.2
8
30
12816

-

-

6.8

-

-

0.4
0.1
0.8

Table 1. Demographics and clinical characteristics of stroke patients and healthy controls. Age and mean
framewise displacement values were compared by means of two-sided t-tests, sex frequencies by means
of a Pearson's chi-squared test.

Magnetic resonance imaging
Acquisition of resting-state functional MRI data was performed on a Siemens Trio 3T scanner
(Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany). The following gradient echo-planar imaging
(EPI) parameters were applied: repetition time (TR) = 2200 ms, echo time (TE) = 30 ms, field of
view (FOV) = 200 mm, 33 slices, voxel size: 3.1 × 3.1 × 3.1 mm3, 20% distance factor, flip angle
= 90°, 183 volumes (slice coverage of the whole brain). Participants were instructed to lie
motionless in the scanner and keep fixating a red cross on a black screen all through the
approximately seven minute session. For stroke patients, we additionally collected diffusionweighted MR-images (DWI, TR = 5100 ms, TE = 104 ms, FOV = 230 mm, 30 slices, voxel size
= 1.8 × 1.8 × 3.0 mm3) to obtain detailed information on lesion location and extent.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Preprocessing of resting-state functional MRI data
Resting-state functional MRI data was preprocessed using the Statistical Parametric Mapping
software package (SPM12, Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London, UK;
www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) as implemented in MATLAB (version R2019a, MathWorks, Inc.,
Natick, MA, USA). In case of right-hemispheric lesions (n=8), images were flipped along the
midsagittal plane. In this way, all lesions were located in the left hemisphere, thereby ignoring
effects specific to the left or right hemisphere. The first four volumes (“dummy” images) of each
scan were discarded to allow for the development of a steady blood-oxygenation level dependent
(BOLD) activity signal. Preprocessing of the remaining 179 volumes continued with head
movement correction by affine realignment to each scan’s mean image. In stroke subjects,
diffusion-weighted images were co-registered to the mean EPI. Image volumes were spatially
normalized using the “unified segmentation” option after masking lesioned tissue (Ashburner and
Friston, 2005). In a final preprocessing step, images were smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with
a full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of 8 mm.

Controlling for head motion
We verified the absence of severe motion by calculating individual mean and maximum framewise
displacements (Power et al., 2012). As dynamic functional connectivity analyses are sensitive to
head motion, we excluded one subject (subject 32) with a maximum framewise translation of 12.2
mm. No significant group difference in framewise displacements was observable when comparing
the final sample of 31 stroke patients with the 17 healthy controls (two-sided t-test: p=0.79).

Intrinsic connectivity networks
The intrinsic connectivity network components used for dynamic functional connectivity
estimations were computed using spatially constrained independent component analysis (ICA)
(Lin et al., 2010; Du and Fan, 2013) based on components estimated from resting-state fMRI data
of 405 healthy controls (Allen et al., 2014; Calhoun et al., 2001, components are available for
download here: http://trendscenter.org/software/). The advantage of using a spatially constrained
ICA approach with components from healthy participants on the current data sample is that
parcellations are not biased by stroke lesions, yet are still adaptive to the individual and provide
enhanced robustness to artifacts and noise compared to single-subject ICA denoising and
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

regression based back-reconstruction (Salman et al., 2019; Du et al., 2016). We refer to Salman et
al. (2019) for a detailed description of the group information guided ICA (“back-reconstruction”)
algorithm. Given that all patients were scanned very early after stroke (on average 7.2 days),
cortical reorganization is rather unlikely to have significantly changed the functional architecture
(Rehme et al., 2011), further justifying the use of a healthy sample for defining the network
components of interests.
As all patients were selected based on the presence of a motor deficit, we focused our analysis on
the motor system. Accordingly, we obtained 13 motor network components (as extracted in Allen
et al., 2014). These network components were identified as i) left (ipsilesional) primary
sensorimotor cortex, ii) right (contralesional) primary sensorimotor cortex, iii) bilateral ventral
premotor cortex, iv) supplementary motor area (SMA), v) bilateral postcentral gyrus, vi-vii)
paracentral gyrus I and II and viii) bilateral superior parietal lobule; three subcortical (SC)
components ix-xii): Putamen I, Putamen II and thalamus; and finally xii-xiii) two cerebellar (CB)
components: cerebellum right and left. These network components were assigned to one of three
domains, i.e., sensorimotor, subcortical and cerebellar domains (Figure 1).
Before entering the resulting spatial maps and corresponding time-courses into further static and
dynamic functional connectivity pipelines, time courses were detrended (i.e., accounting for linear,
quadratic and cubic trends in the data), despiked using 3Ddespike (Cox, 1996) and filtered by a
fifth-order Butterworth low-pass filter with a high-frequency cutoff of 0.15 Hz. Finally, each timecourse was normalized for variance (Rachakonda et al., 2007).

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1. A Spatial maps of 13 included independent components of all subjects (31 ischemic stroke
patients and 17 healthy controls). These were organized in three domains: Sensorimotor (SMN, 8
components, framed in dark blue), subcortical (SC, 3 components, framed in light blue) and cerebellar (CB,
2 components, framed in orange). Components were back-reconstructed based on the independent
components of the cortical and subcortical sensorimotor as well as cerebellar domains presented in Allen
et al., 2014. B Static functional network connectivity between independent components resulting in a
total of 78 connectivity pairs. Connectivity values correspond to the Fisher’s Z-transformed Pearson
correlation, averaged over the entire group of healthy controls and ischemic stroke patients. Red color
indicates positive, blue color negative correlation. Thus, the connectivity matrix illustrates high positive
intra-domain connectivity within the SMN, SC and SB domains as well as neutral to negative inter-domain
connectivity: SMN-SC, SMN-CB and SC-CB. Asterisks indicate significantly altered static connectivity
between the three subgroups: healthy controls, moderately and severely affected stroke patients (one-way
ANOVA, p<0.05). The components “left ipsilesional sensorimotor” and “bilateral postcentral gyri” were
both characterized by the highest number of disturbed static connectivity pairs (six each).

Static functional network connectivity analysis
The

multivariate

analysis

of

covariance

(MANCOVAN)

toolbox

within

GIFT

(http://trendscenter.org/software/gift) was used to evaluate significant associations of connectivity
within and between functional networks and the variables age, gender, translation, rotation and
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

patient status (healthy controls – stroke patients). We proceeded in sequential multi- and univariate
manners, as first outlined in Allen et al. (2011). Translation and rotation were computed as the
mean of the absolute differences between consecutive time frames. Age, translation and rotation
were treated as continuous variables, while gender and patient status were defined as discrete
variables.
Within-network connectivity
Analyses were performed separately for each of the 13 network components’ spatial maps. We
started with the full set of independent variables and PCA-dimensionality reduced voxel intensities
of spatial maps as multivariate, dependent variables. We then obtained reduced models by
backward elimination, i.e., relying on F-tests at each step, and retained significant independent
variables only. Afterwards, we computed univariate t-tests for significant independent variables
and thus probed the intensity difference for each voxel within a spatial map depending on a specific
variable, while fixing remaining variables. As this resulted in several thousand individual t-tests,
we applied false discovery rate (FDR)-correction for multiple comparisons to determine statistical
significance with a level of p<0.05 (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).
Between-network connectivity
For each participant, we calculated static functional network connectivity strengths between
components via Fisher’s Z-transformed Pearson’s pairwise correlation of time-courses. This
resulted in 78 connectivity pair values per participant, according to the formula: 13 network
components × (13 network components – 1) / 2 = 78.
We refined univariate tests from the two (healthy – stroke patients) to a three groups comparison
(healthy – moderately affected – severely affected stroke patients) and thus evaluated static
functional network connectivity differences in a three-level one-way ANOVA (level of
significance p<0.05). Post-hoc t-tests (healthy – moderate, healthy – severe, moderate – severe)
were performed in case of significant ANOVA results (level of significance p<0.05, FDRcorrected).

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Dynamic functional network connectivity
Dynamic FNC was estimated by means of the sliding window approach as implemented in the
GIFT toolbox (Allen et al., 2014; Damaraju et al., 2014; Sakoğlu et al., 2010; Calhoun et al.,
2014): We first defined 159 individual tapered windows by sliding time rectangles of 44 seconds
(width=20 TRs). These time windows were convolved with a Gaussian of seven seconds (σ=3
TRs) and shifted in steps of 2.2 seconds (1 TR). We opted for common parameter settings,
particularly as prior studies have provided evidence that a window width between 30 to 60 seconds
enables successful derivation of dFNCs, which are not governed by noise (Liégeois et al., 2016;
Preti et al., 2017). Within each of these windows, we computed dFNCs from the l1-regularized
precision matrix, i.e. sparse inverse covariance matrix (Friedman et al., 2008; Varoquaux et al.,
2010; Smith et al., 2011). We regressed out the covariates age, sex, mean framewise translation
and rotation. Finally, we applied Fisher’s Z-transformation to functional connectivity matrices to
obtain Z values and stabilize variance for further analyses.
Clustering analysis
Aiming to condense and thereby improve the interpretability of the rich information of 159 dFNC
matrices per subject, we used k-means clustering (Lloyd, 1982) to compute re-occurring functional
connectivity patterns, i.e. connectivity states, across time and subject space (Hutchison et al., 2013;
Allen et al., 2014; Calhoun et al., 2014). We implemented the l1 distance function (“Manhattan
distance”) given its suitability for high-dimensional data (Aggarwal et al., 2001). As is convention
(Allen et al., 2014; Espinoza et al., 2018), this clustering approach was applied to all subjects’
connectivity matrices twice: Firstly, to determine the optimal number of clusters k (referred to as
states), and then to construct the final k connectivity states. Each window of each subject was
assigned to one of these connectivity states. Notably, this analysis does not guarantee that all
participants visit all of the connectivity states, i.e. some might enter only one or two states in spite
of three or more existing states. We compared the group-averaged connectivity states originating
from the dynamic functional connectivity analysis with the group-averaged static functional
connectivity obtained earlier by calculating the Manhattan distance.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Statistics of dynamic connectivity measures
We statistically evaluated dynamic connectivity specific measures: i) Fraction times (the
percentage of total time a subject spent in a state), ii) dwell times (the time a subject spent in a state
at a time without switching to another one in the meantime), iii) numbers of transitions (how often
a subject changed states) and iv) transition likelihoods (percentages of transition likelihood
between the k connectivity states). Additionally, we tested for group differences in dynamic
connectivity pairs within each connectivity state. Similar to the between-network static functional
connectivity analysis, we initially performed three-level one-way ANOVAs to test for differences
between the three groups: healthy controls, moderately and severely affected stroke patients (level
of significance p<0.05). Post-hoc t-tests (healthy – moderate, healthy – severe, moderate – severe)
were added in case of significant ANOVA results (post-hoc t-tests: level of significance, p<0.05,
FDR-corrected).

Data and code availability
Matlab scripts for dFNC computation were based on templates available in the GIFT toolbox,
additional jupyter notebooks in python 3.7 for statistical evaluations and visualizations can be
found here: https://github.com/AnnaBonkhoff/DFNC_Stroke.

Results
Demographic and clinical characteristics
There were no significant differences in age, sex category and mean framewise displacement
between healthy controls and all stroke patients (Table 1). Patients were scanned 7.2 (±0.6
Standard Error of the Mean (SEM)) days after stroke onset with no statistically significant
difference in time since stroke between subgroups.
Since we defined patient subgroups based on a discrete ARAT-cut-off of 29 (i.e., half of the
maximum score), severely affected patients (n=13, ARAT<29) and moderately affected patients
(n=18, ARAT³29) differed significantly in regard to their motor performance (p<0.05): Arm
motor function was significantly lower in the severely affected group (ARAT=10.0±3.1SEM)
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

compared to the moderately affected group (ARAT=44.5±2.4SEM). In contrast, covariates
including age, days post-stroke and lesion volume did not significantly differ between groups
(Supplementary Table 1).

Static functional network connectivity
Within-network connectivity
MANCOVAN analyses indicated statistically significant group differences between all stroke
patients and healthy controls within the spatial maps of all eight cortical sensorimotor components,
two subcortical components (Putamen I & II, yet not the thalamus) and one cerebellar component
(right cerebellum). Subsequent univariate analyses, centering on the variable patient status (healthy
controls – stroke patients) and signal intensities of each voxel within a spatial map, provided
further evidence of significantly lowered signals within the outlined components in case of stroke
patients (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Overlap maps of DWI lesions (A-D) and within-network connectivity (E). A Entirety of
stroke patients: The majority of lesions was located subcortically, with the maximum overlap (n=18/31)
being in the posterior limb of the internal capsule. B Illustration of the lesion overlap to the corticospinal
tract (CST, in red, median overlap for the entire stroke patient sample: 6.8%). C Subgroup of moderately
affected stroke patients (n=18). D Subgroup of severely affected stroke patients (n=13). Both stroke patient
subgroups primarily presented with subcortical lesions. Importantly, while subgroups were defined based
on their motor function (cut-off: ARAT 28/29), they neither differed in lesion volume, nor corticospinal
tract overlap, c.f. Supplementary table 1. E Stroke patients exhibited significantly reduced within-network

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

connectivity in multiple sensorimotor cortical and subcortical components compared to healthy controls,
i.e., bilaterally in the precentral gyri, the postcentral gyri, the supplementary motor area, paracentral gyri,
superior parietal lobule and subcortically in the Putamen (p<0.05, FDR-corrected for multiple
comparisons). This finding, therefore, replicates main observations in previous studies on functional
connectivity alterations post-stroke (e.g., Carter et al., 2010, Golestani et al., 2013, Rehme et al., 2014).

Between-network connectivity
Static functional network connectivity (over the entire scanning time series) was calculated as
(Fisher Z-scored) Pearson’s correlation between 78 individual component pairs: In general, we
observed strong intra-domain connectivity, i.e. component pairs within either the sensorimotor,
subcortical or cerebellar domains were highly positively correlated. In contrast, inter-domain
connectivity was comparably low, i.e., components from sensorimotor and subcortical or
cerebellar domains were either independent from each other or negatively connected (Figure
1(B)). When screening for group differences between controls, moderately and severely affected
patients by means of a one-way ANOVA, 18 connectivity pairs showed significantly altered
between-network component connectivity. These alterations were mostly located in the cortical
sensorimotor domain (Figure 1(B)). Post-hoc t-tests, contrasting severely affected patients and
healthy controls, revealed a stroke-induced increase in connectivity between subcortical
components (p<0.05, FDR-corrected). In contrast, moderately affected patients comprised
decreases in connectivity strength when compared to healthy controls (p<0.05, FDR-corrected).
For example, connectivity was lower between the left and right components and ventral precentral
components, as well as postcentral components and the supplementary motor area and both
cerebellar components (c.f., Figure 3 for details on altered connectivity pairs). Moderately and
severely affected patients did not feature significantly different static connectivity after correction
for multiple comparisons.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. Circle plots of significant static functional connectivity differences between the subgroups
(post-hoc t-tests, p<0.05, FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons). A Healthy controls versus
moderately affected stroke patients. Connectivity strength in stroke patients was found to be decreased
between the pre- and postcentral areas and between the supplementary motor area and bilateral cerebellar
components as well as the left, ipsilesional precentral gyrus and the right cerebellum, yet comparably
increased between the ipsilesional precentral gyrus and Putamen. B Healthy controls versus severely
affected stroke patients. In contrast to the previous group comparison, only two significantly altered
connectivity pairs emerged: The connectivity between both of the Putamen components as well as the more
anterior Putamen component with the thalamic component were increased in stroke patients. Note that there
were no significant connectivity differences between moderately and severely affected stroke patients.

Dynamic functional network connectivity
We next investigated the temporal properties of functional connectivity, i.e., dFNC. By applying
the k-means clustering algorithm to the estimated 159 functional connectivity matrices per subject
and the optimization criteria for the number of states mentioned above, we identified three
connectivity states, i.e., quasi-stable connectivity patterns, that re-occurred across all subjects

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

during scans collection (Figure 4(B)). The states are presented and described in the order given
by k-means. The first connectivity state was characterized by highly positive intra-domain
connectivity and highly negative inter-domain connectivity. We refer to this state as the regionally
densely connected state with strong inter-domain segregation (overall frequency of State 1: 29%,
Figure 4(A)). This connectivity state was also the one that most closely matched the static
connectivity estimates in terms of Manhattan distance. The second connectivity state featured
comparably weak intra-domain connectivity, which was particularly true for connections of the
ventral precentral and postcentral components. Inter-domain connectivity values close to zero
additionally implied a low connectivity between the three domains. We therefore call this state the
weakly connected state (overall frequency of State 2: 43%, Figure 4(A)). The third connectivity
state represented a combination of the preceding two: Positive intra-domain connectivity, slightly
positive connectivity between the sensorimotor and subcortical domains and negative connectivity
between the cerebellar and both of the sensorimotor and subcortical domains (overall frequency
of State 3: 27%, Figure 4(A)). Therefore, instead of one static connectivity state in the form of
one FNC matrix, we now obtained three dynamic connectivity states and dFNC matrices.
Importantly, one dynamic connectivity state, the weakly connected State 2, differed markedly from
the static version.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4. Dynamic functional network connectivity analysis. A Three resulting connectivity states as
well as their across-group frequencies. The first state was characterized by a highly positive intra-domain
connectivity in all of the domains (SMN, SC, CB) and highly negative inter-domain connectivity. It was
the state resembling the static connectivity matrix the most, measured in Manhattan distance. The second
and most frequent state featured comparably lower connectivity within the sensorimotor domain,
particularly between the ventral precentral component and the paracentral lobule to further sensorimotor
components. Inter-domain connectivity was mostly neutral. The third state comprised positive intra-domain
connectivity, negative inter-domain connectivity between both the sensorimotor and subcortical domains
to the cerebellar domain and no connectivity between the sensorimotor and subcortical domains. B Elbow
criterion. Trajectory of the clustering index with increasing numbers of clusters, i.e., k in k-means
clustering (upper row) and cluster distributions for a given number of clusters (bottom row). As the

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

steepness of the decline in clustering index decreased markedly after three and four clusters, yet the four
cluster solution included a state with a frequency of <10%, k=3 combined the lowest clustering index and
most well-balanced solution.
C Connectivity states separately for each of the three subgroups. Please note that some subjects only
entered one or two of the defined three connectivity states, resulting in varying numbers of subjects within
a specific state (c.f., stated absolute numbers of subjects entering the state as well as the percentage of the
entire subgroup). Connectivity frequencies did not differ significantly between subgroups and states.

Temporal characteristics
We subsequently tested for between-group differences in the measures of dynamic behavior.
Three-level one-way ANOVAs comparing healthy controls, moderately and severely affected
stroke patients revealed significant differences of temporal features in State 2, i.e., the weakly
connected state (Fraction and Dwell times of State 2: p<0.05, Figure 5(A), (B)). Moderately
affected patients had the most deviating behavior: When contrasted with healthy controls, they
particularly preferred State 2 and spent more time in it in total as well as dwelled longer once
having entered it (post-hoc t-tests: Fraction and Dwell times p<0.05, FDR-corrected). With respect
to severely affected patients, moderately affected patients again tended to spend more time in State
2 (post-hoc t-tests: Fraction time: p=0.07, FDR-corrected; Dwell time: not significant). In contrast,
there were no significant between-group differences for the absolute number of transitions between
states. Subjects switched five to seven times on average during the entire scanning period (oneway ANOVA: p>0.05, Figure 5(C)).

Figure 5. Dynamic functional network connectivity analysis: Fraction and dwell times as well as the
number of transitions for the three groups: healthy controls, moderately and severely affected

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

patients (asterisks indicate statistically significant group differences based on one-way ANOVAs, and
post-hoc t-tests, p<0.05, FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons). A Fraction times. Over the entire
scan duration, moderately affected stroke patients spent significantly more time in State 2 than healthy
controls. State 2, the generally most frequent connectivity state, was characterized by comparable low
positive intra-sensorimotor domain connectivity. B Dwell times. Once again, moderately affected stroke
subjects differed from healthy controls and spent significantly more time in State 2 at any one time. C
Number of transitions. The absolute number of transitions did not differ significantly between the three
groups. Subjects switched states between five to seven times on average.

Next, we evaluated the transition likelihoods between states. There were significant between-group
effects (ANOVA p<0.05) with respect to the likelihood of staying within a state and switching to
a new one: Consistent with the observed increase in fraction and dwell times in State 2, moderately
affected patients were more likely to stay in the weakly connected state compared to both healthy
controls and severely affected patients (post-hoc t-tests: p<0.05, FDR-corrected). Of note, severely
affected patients presented with a markedly different behavior: They were not only less likely to
remain in the weakly connected State 2, but demonstrated a significant preference for the
regionally densely connected State 1. Coming from State 2, they were more likely to switch to
State 1 compared to moderately affected patients (post-hoc t-tests: p<0.05, FDR-corrected) and
healthy controls (p=0.056, FDR-corrected, Figure 6). Moderately affected patients and controls
did not differ in this aspect.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 6. Transition matrices displaying the differences in likelihood of changing from one
connectivity state to another between the subgroups. Generally, subjects tended to stay in their current
connectivity state. Thus, if they were in State 1 at any one time t, they would most likely be in the same
connectivity state at t+1, i.e., the next window. The same was true for States 2 and 3 (likelihood of
remaining in the same state: range 87% - 97%). Transitions from any one state to one of the other two states
were less likely (likelihood range 1 – 10%). There were statistically significant group differences for
transitions from State 2 to itself as well as to State 1 (one-way ANOVAs, p < 0.05). Moderately affected
stroke patients had a significantly higher likelihood of staying in State 2 than healthy controls and severely
affected stroke patients (post-hoc t-tests, p<0.05, FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons). In contrast,
severely affected stroke patients had a higher likelihood of not staying in State 2, but switching from this
state to State 1 (post-hoc t-tests, p<0.05, FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons). Therefore, they
preferably transitioned to the regionally densely connected State 1 and left the weakly connected State 2.

Dynamic connectivity characteristics
Lastly, we examined between-group differences in connectivity strengths for each of the three
connectivity states. While we did not detect any significant effects for State 1, i.e. the regionally
densely connected state, moderately affected patients featured a number of differences in States 2
and 3 compared to both severely affected patients and healthy controls. This was especially true
with respect to the connectivity of ipsilesional primary sensorimotor cortex and subcortical
components (Figure 7). In moderately affected patients, connectivity differences in State 3
matched those of the static analysis to a great extent, with reduced connectivity in stroke patients
between the ipsilesional left and contralesional right sensorimotor components, as well as
bihemispherical SMA and one of the paracentral lobule components. Noteworthily, we found
reduced connectivity between the right contralesional sensorimotor and paracentral lobule
components when contrasting severely affected patients with controls. This inter-hemispheric
difference was not detectable in the static analysis and can hence be interpreted as increased
sensitivity of the dynamic analysis. Lastly, moderately and severely affected patients differed in
three cortical–subcortical–cerebellar connectivity strengths: Paracentral – Putamen, left
Sensorimotor – Putamen and Putamen – left Cerebellum (Figure 7).

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 7. Differences in dynamic functional connectivity between the various subgroups: Subgroupspecific connectivity matrices as well as numbers and percentages of subjects within a group entering
this state (left) and circle plots of significant functional dynamic connectivity differences (right, posthoc t-tests, p<0.05, FDR-corrected for multiple comparisons). A & B Differences between healthy
controls and moderately affected stroke patients. Moderately affected stroke patients presented higher
connectivity strength between the ipsilesional sensorimotor area and the more posterior Putamen
component, yet lower connectivity between a bilateral, more ventral precentral component and the same
posterior Putamen component in State 2 (A). Furthermore, connectivity differences in State 3 resembled
the ones in the static functional connectivity analysis: Stroke patients featured significantly lower
connectivity between the ipsi- and contralesional sensorimotor areas as well as lower connectivity between
the ipsilesional sensorimotor area and the paracentral lobule and supplementary motor area (B). C
Differences between healthy controls and severely affected patients in State 3. Stroke patients presented
with a decreased connectivity between the contralesional, right sensorimotor and paracentral areas, while
connectivity between the more anterior Putamen component and both cerebellar components was increased.
D Differences between moderately and severely affected stroke patients in State 3. Several connectivity
pairs were reduced in case of moderately affected stroke patients. These pairs were: Ipsilesional, left
sensorimotor cortex – Putamen, paracentral cortex – Putamen and the more anterior Putamen component –
left cerebellum.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

In summary, we found significant differences in preferences for connectivity states depending on
the degree of motor impairment: While moderately affected patients spent more time in a weakly
connected state, severely affected patients transitioned more often to a regionally densely
connected state with strong intra-domain (e.g. cortico-cortical) connectivity and negative interdomain (e.g. cortico-subcortical) connectivity. Interestingly, and somewhat surprising, functional
connectivity estimates differed more between moderately affected patients and healthy controls
than between severely affected patients and healthy controls. This was particularly the case for
disturbed static functional connectivity between specific brain regions, where moderately affected
patients presented with multiple reduced functional connectivity pairs. In case of severely affected
patients and the static analysis, we found altered functional connectivity pairs only in the
subcortical domain. Disturbances at the level of cortical regions only became evident in the
dynamic analysis. We here substantiated lowered connectivity between the contralesional
sensorimotor and paracentral lobule components post-stroke, indicating an added benefit of
dynamic analysis.

Discussion
Dynamic functional network connectivity analyses encompass the unique capacity of more finegrained conclusions in the temporal domain (Allen et al., 2014; Calhoun et al., 2014). In this study,
we dissected the dynamic connectivity behavior of ischemic stroke patients within the first few
days of their acute event, putting a particular emphasis on hand motor function and the
sensorimotor system. Of note, stroke patients diverged from healthy controls depending on the
severity of their motor deficit: Patients with severe motor symptoms showed a significant
preference for transitioning to State 1, a regionally densely connected state with strong intradomain connectivity. Conversely, moderately impaired patients spent significantly more time in
State 2, a weakly connected state. Both of these patterns remained hidden in previous conventional
static analyses. The third connectivity state did not differ in terms of dynamic connectivity specific
measures, such as transitions, fraction and dwell times, but reflected many of the connectivity
differences observed in the static analysis and previously described in the literature (Carter et al.,
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2010; Wang et al., 2010; Golestani et al., 2013; Rehme et al., 2014). Contrary to our initial
expectations, moderately affected patients comprised more pronounced alterations in functional
connectivity for both the static and dynamic analyses, despite their weaker clinical deficit. These
alterations were located between the ipsi- and contralesional sensorimotor cortices as well as the
contralesional sensorimotor cortex and bilateral paracentral cortex. Importantly, in case of severe
motor symptoms, significantly reduced inter-hemispheric connectivity between cortical
sensorimotor components was exclusively found in the dynamic analysis, highlighting its higher
sensitivity in comparison to the static analysis.

Functional integration and segregation
Dynamic connectivity states can be interpreted within the concepts of functional integration and
functional segregation (Friston, 2011; Eickhoff and Grefkes, 2011). Functional segregation refers
to the parcellation of the brain into regionally unique modules (i.e., areas), each of which may be
assigned to a particular domain. These domains can either orchestrate information transmission
from one to the other – referred to as integration – or process information in isolation – referred to
as segregation; essentially balancing the two extremes to maintain healthy brain functions (Sporns,
2013). In the following, we will evaluate the computed three connectivity states within the
framework of these concepts, establish links to recent literature and embed our findings.
Severely affected patients & State 1
The regionally densely connected State 1 was characterized by highly positive intra-domain
connectivity, i.e. within the sensorimotor, subcortical or cerebellar domains, and negative interdomain connectivity, i.e. between sensorimotor – subcortical, sensorimotor – cerebellar and
subcortical – cerebellar domains. Altogether, this can be interpreted as high segregation between
domains. In view of the significantly increased transition likelihood to this State 1, severely
affected patients thus preferred a state where information could easily travel from one component
to another in the same domain. However, information exchange between components of distinct
domains was hindered. This high intra-domain connectivity or integration was reminiscent of the
over-activation and excessive recruitment of cortical motor areas, particularly of contra-lesional
M1, bilateral premotor cortex and SMA, in task-based studies post-stroke (e.g., Ward et al., 2003;
Rehme et al., 2011, for a review c.f., Rehme et al., 2012). Importantly, Rehme et al. (2011)

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

uncovered these activity changes exclusively for severely affected patients, starting a few days
after stroke, and suggested these to represent early signs of reorganization. Conceivably, the
observed dynamic pattern here, even though expressing connectivity instead of activation and
recruitment, could be a respective correlate – demonstrating the increased employment of
functional connections within well-defined domains, aiming to recover lost motor performance.
This specific pattern may not have been discovered and described in preceding static analyses, as
it was solely expressed in the temporal markers of our dynamic analysis.
Segregation, as a measure of spatial functional specialization, can be quantified in multiple ways
and is often linked to brain modularity. This graph theoretical measure compares densities of
connections within and between domains, with higher values implying greater modularity and
segregation of domains (e.g., c.f., Newman, 2004). Brain modularity was recently suggested as
biomarker of intervention-related brain plasticity, since higher baseline values of modularity were
shown to be predictive of later gains in cognitive function (Gallen and D’Esposito, 2019). This
relationship could be established not only for healthy aging brains, but also, notably, structurally
damaged brains of traumatic brain injury patients (Arnemann et al., 2015; Gallen et al., 2016;
Baniqued et al., 2018). Similarly, when limiting analyses to the cortical motor and visual domains,
Mattar et al. (2018) extracted a link between pronounced modularity and prospective motor skill
learning. In these regards, severely affected patients’ predilection for the segregated State 1 could
represent an attempt to facilitate brain plasticity and regain motor performance. Nonetheless, it has
previously been hypothesized that modularity and segregation might follow an inverse U-shaped
curve and values on either end of the scale could co-occur with maladaptive behavior (Duncan and
Small, 2016). Therefore, not having any available long-term behavioral markers prohibits a
definitive conclusion at this point and necessitates future research to investigate links between
segregation and motor recovery further.
Moderately affected patients & State 2
In contrast, moderately affected patients spent significantly more time in State 2 that comprised
low intra-domain integration and relatively increased inter-domain connectivity – which is
interpretable as reduced segregation. Decreased segregation has been found in healthy as well as
pathological aging (Chan et al., 2014; Wig, 2017; Kim et al., 2017). In principle, this pattern of

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

decreased segregation is also well in line with previous reports of reductions in modularity poststroke, reflecting a decrease in segregation between domains (Gratton et al., 2012; Duncan and
Small, 2016; Siegel et al., 2016; Siegel et al., 2018). Duncan and Small (2016) and Siegel et al.
(2018) reported initially reduced and subsequently increasing segregation in parallel to functional
recovery, suggesting reduced segregation to be a signature of impaired function. However,
substantial differences in average scanning time after stroke (i.e., two weeks (Siegel), forty months
(Duncan & Small) and one week in our study) and clinical deficit (i.e., predominantly cognitive
symptoms (Siegel), aphasia (Duncan & Small) and motor symptoms here) impede any direct
transfer of their conclusions to our findings. The interpretation of reduced segregation in
moderately affected patients as a correlate of impaired function is additionally challenged by the
fact that clinically more affected patients did not show similar alterations. Hence, in our setting,
reduced segregation rather appeared as a signature of (early) reorganization, given that moderately
and severely affected patients differed in motor performance by definition, but not in lesion volume
or corticospinal tract overlap. Also, one could imagine that new connections could be more easily
established starting from a weakly connected state, providing a basis for higher network flexibility.
In contrast, the regionally densely connected State 1 with high intra-domain, yet low inter-domain
connectivity might facilitate regional processing and hence reorganization in the case of a severe
disruption of motor output.
By describing dynamic functional connectivity characteristics of subcortical ischemic vascular
disease (SIVD) patients, Fu and colleagues’ (2019) study may be one of the currently most
comparable studies to ours, given the scarcity of dynamic functional connectivity studies
investigating stroke patients. Clinically, SIVD patients predominantly present with prolonged and
not necessarily acute onset neurocognitive decline as well as chronic deep white matter
hyperintensities and subcortical lacunar infarcts (Hachinski et al., 2006). The analysis of their
dynamic functional connectivity revealed that fraction and dwell times were increased in a weakly
connected state and reduced in a densely connected state – the former finding being much alike
our main finding for moderately affected patients. Duncan and Small (2018), on the other hand,
leveraged the sliding window approach to track dynamic network changes of twelve chronically
aphasic stroke patients (on average 40 months post-stroke) during a six week intervention.
Estimating ten different connectivity states in total, the increase in dwell time of one of these, a

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

particularly weakly connected state, correlated with an increase in language performance.
Altogether, the previous and present findings suggest a consistent link between dynamic measures
and vascular disease, rendering it a promising future technique in the field of neurorehabilitation.

Limitations and future directions
Although our acute stroke patient sample size of n=31 is rather small, it was apparently equipped
with sufficient statistical power, especially given the replication of previous static functional
connectivity findings. We were able to exploit detailed measures of motor function by relying on
a competitive group size of severely affected patients (n=13) (c.f., six to ten severely affected
patients in Carter et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2010; Park et al., 2011; Golestani et al., 2013; Rehme
et al., 2014). We further link current limitations to future directions: In light of the spatial
heterogeneity of stroke lesions as well as not yet satisfactorily accurate predictions of individual
recovery trajectories, future studies should involve larger sample sizes and evaluate symptoms in
a fine-grained as well as prospective fashion to corroborate and extend current finding. In this way,
confidence in their generalizability could be increased. Eventually, this would represent a natural
succession to our approach presented here, where we focused on dynamic connectivity differences
within motor-related networks at the acute stage post-stroke. It would enable the elucidation of
pressing questions, such as: Are dynamic connectivity measures predictive of future outcomes,
especially in regard to treatment effects, including transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)? How do non-motor symptoms affect dynamic
connectivity comprising all conceivable domains? How do dynamic connectivity measures evolve
over time? Existing literature already suggests a delicate relationship between connectivity
changes and the exact time point post-stroke: It has been shown that asymmetries in bihemispherical connectivity peaked approximately one month after the acute event (Park et al.,
2011) and, considering rats, different temporal trajectories emerged depending on lesion location
(van Meer et al., 2010). Asynchronistic behavior could conceivably explain why severely and
moderately affected patients differed in their dynamic connectivity profiles in our analysis. As a
reasonable interpretation, moderately affected patients may have traversed through a more
segregated phase already when regaining function, while severely affected patients lag behind.
Lastly, it might be promising to link findings of fMRI determined connectivity states to micro

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

states as inferred from EEG-data, in light of the increased temporal resolution in both cases (with
EEG still providing higher resolutions, c.f., Zappasodi et al., 2017).

Conclusion
Dynamic functional connectivity analyses hold promise to capture critical characteristics of
cognition and behavior in health and disease (Hutchison et al., 2013). In this study, we build upon
this notion by implementing dynamic functional connectivity analyses to investigate the temporal
behavior within the motor system of 31 acute stroke patients presenting with impairments of hand
motor function. Significant deficit-severity dependent dynamic patterns demonstrated the added
value of dynamic connectivity measures as (resting-state) biomarkers of ischemic vascular disease:
Patients with severe deficits preferred a regionally densely connected, highly segregated state,
conceivably representing an effort to induce brain plasticity and subsequent motor recovery. On
the other hand, patients with moderate deficits spend significantly more time in a weakly connected
state with reduced segregation, potentially picturing a signature of partially recovered motor
function. In summary, employing a dynamic connectivity approach allowed for new insights into
the systems-level effects that a stroke has on neural processing within the motor system, pointing
to differential, reorganizational mechanisms depending on the initial motor deficit.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to our colleagues at the Department of Neurology, University Hospital Cologne &
Medical Faculty, University of Cologne for valuable support and discussions. Furthermore, we are
grateful to our research participants without whom this work would not have been possible.

Funding
AKB’s clinician scientist position is supported by the dean’s office, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Cologne.

Competing interests
None.
28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
Aggarwal CC, Hinneburg A, Keim DA. On the surprising behavior of distance metrics in high
dimensional space. In: International conference on database theory. Springer; 2001. p. 420–434
Allen EA, Damaraju E, Plis SM, Erhardt EB, Eichele T, Calhoun VD. Tracking Whole-Brain
Connectivity Dynamics in the Resting State. Cerebral Cortex 2014; 24: 663–676.
Allen EA, Erhardt EB, Damaraju E, Gruner W, Segall JM, Silva RF, et al. A Baseline for the
Multivariate Comparison of Resting-State Networks [Internet]. Front Syst Neurosci 2011;
5[cited 2019 Mar 9] Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3051178/
Arnemann KL, Chen AJ-W, Novakovic-Agopian T, Gratton C, Nomura EM, D’Esposito M.
Functional brain network modularity predicts response to cognitive training after brain injury.
Neurology 2015; 84: 1568–1574.
Ashburner J, Friston KJ. Unified segmentation. Neuroimage 2005; 26: 839–851.
Baniqued PL, Gallen CL, Voss MW, Burzynska AZ, Wong CN, Cooke GE, et al. Brain network
modularity predicts exercise-related executive function gains in older adults. Frontiers in aging
neuroscience 2018; 9: 426.
Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful
approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal statistical society: series B (Methodological)
1995; 57: 289–300.
Calhoun VD, Adali T, Pearlson GD, Pekar JJ. A method for making group inferences from
functional MRI data using independent component analysis. Human brain mapping 2001; 14:
140–151.
Calhoun VD, Miller R, Pearlson G, Adalı T. The Chronnectome: Time-Varying Connectivity
Networks as the Next Frontier in fMRI Data Discovery. Neuron 2014; 84: 262–274.
Carrera E, Tononi G. Diaschisis: past, present, future. Brain 2014; 137: 2408–2422.
Carter AR, Astafiev SV, Lang CE, Connor LT, Rengachary J, Strube MJ, et al. Resting
interhemispheric functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity predicts performance after
stroke. Annals of neurology 2010; 67: 365–375.
Chan MY, Park DC, Savalia NK, Petersen SE, Wig GS. Decreased segregation of brain systems
across the healthy adult lifespan. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2014; 111:
E4997–E5006.
Chang C, Glover GH. Time–frequency dynamics of resting-state brain connectivity measured
with fMRI. Neuroimage 2010; 50: 81–98.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Cox RW. AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance
neuroimages. Computers and Biomedical research 1996; 29: 162–173.
Damaraju E, Allen EA, Belger A, Ford JM, McEwen S, Mathalon DH, et al. Dynamic functional
connectivity analysis reveals transient states of dysconnectivity in schizophrenia. NeuroImage:
Clinical 2014; 5: 298–308.
Du Y, Allen EA, He H, Sui J, Wu L, Calhoun VD. Artifact removal in the context of group ICA:
A comparison of single‐subject and group approaches. Human brain mapping 2016; 37: 1005–
1025.
Du Y, Fan Y. Group information guided ICA for fMRI data analysis. Neuroimage 2013; 69:
157–197.
Duncan ES, Small SL. Increased Modularity of Resting State Networks Supports Improved
Narrative Production in Aphasia Recovery. Brain Connectivity 2016; 6: 524–529.
Duncan ES, Small SL. Changes in dynamic resting state network connectivity following aphasia
therapy. Brain imaging and behavior 2018; 12: 1141–1149.
Eickhoff SB, Grefkes C. Approaches for the integrated analysis of structure, function and
connectivity of the human brain. Clinical EEG and neuroscience 2011; 42: 107–121.
Eickhoff SB, Stephan KE, Mohlberg H, Grefkes C, Fink GR, Amunts K, et al. A new SPM
toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps and functional imaging data.
Neuroimage 2005; 25: 1325–1335.
Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R. Sparse inverse covariance estimation with the graphical
lasso. Biostatistics 2008; 9: 432–441.
Friston K. Beyond Phrenology: What Can Neuroimaging Tell Us About Distributed Circuitry?
Annual Review of Neuroscience 2002; 25: 221–250.
Friston KJ. Functional and Effective Connectivity: A Review. Brain Connectivity 2011; 1: 13–
36.
Fu Z, Caprihan A, Chen J, Du Y, Adair JC, Sui J, et al. Altered static and dynamic functional
network connectivity in Alzheimer’s disease and subcortical ischemic vascular disease: shared
and specific brain connectivity abnormalities [Internet]. Human Brain Mapping 2019[cited 2019
Apr 9] Available from: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/hbm.24591
Gallen CL, Baniqued PL, Chapman SB, Aslan S, Keebler M, Didehbani N, et al. Modular brain
network organization predicts response to cognitive training in older adults. PloS one 2016; 11:
e0169015.
Gallen CL, D’Esposito M. Brain modularity: A biomarker of intervention-related plasticity.
Trends in cognitive sciences 2019

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Golestani A-M, Tymchuk S, Demchuk A, Goodyear BG, VISION-2 Study Group. Longitudinal
Evaluation of Resting-State fMRI After Acute Stroke With Hemiparesis. Neurorehabilitation and
Neural Repair 2013; 27: 153–163.
Gratton C, Nomura EM, Pérez F, D’Esposito M. Focal Brain Lesions to Critical Locations Cause
Widespread Disruption of the Modular Organization of the Brain. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience 2012; 24: 1275–1285.
Grefkes C, Fink GR. Reorganization of cerebral networks after stroke: new insights from
neuroimaging with connectivity approaches. Brain 2011; 134: 1264–1276.
Grefkes C, Fink GR. Connectivity-based approaches in stroke and recovery of function. The
Lancet Neurology 2014; 13: 206–216.
Hachinski V, Iadecola C, Petersen RC, Breteler MM, Nyenhuis DL, Black SE, et al. National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke–Canadian stroke network vascular cognitive
impairment harmonization standards. Stroke 2006; 37: 2220–2241.
van der Horn HJ, Vergara VM, Espinoza FA, Calhoun VD, Mayer AR, van der Naalt J.
Functional outcome is tied to dynamic brain states after mild to moderate traumatic brain injury.
Human brain mapping 2019
Hutchison RM, Womelsdorf T, Allen EA, Bandettini PA, Calhoun VD, Corbetta M, et al.
Dynamic functional connectivity: Promise, issues, and interpretations. NeuroImage 2013; 80:
360–378.
Kim J, Criaud M, Cho SS, Díez-Cirarda M, Mihaescu A, Coakeley S, et al. Abnormal intrinsic
brain functional network dynamics in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 2017; 140: 2955–2967.
Liégeois R, Ziegler E, Phillips C, Geurts P, Gómez F, Bahri MA, et al. Cerebral functional
connectivity periodically (de) synchronizes with anatomical constraints. Brain structure and
function 2016; 221: 2985–2997.
Lin Q-H, Liu J, Zheng Y-R, Liang H, Calhoun VD. Semiblind spatial ICA of fMRI using spatial
constraints. Human brain mapping 2010; 31: 1076–1088.
Lloyd S. Least squares quantization in PCM. IEEE transactions on information theory 1982; 28:
129–137.
Lurie DJ, Kessler D, Bassett DS, Betzel RF, Breakspear M, Kucyi A, et al. On the nature of
resting fMRI and time-varying functional connectivity. : 31.
Mattar MG, Wymbs NF, Bock AS, Aguirre GK, Grafton ST, Bassett DS. Predicting future
learning from baseline network architecture. Neuroimage 2018; 172: 107–117.
van Meer MP, van der Marel K, Wang K, Otte WM, el Bouazati S, Roeling TA, et al. Recovery
of sensorimotor function after experimental stroke correlates with restoration of resting-state
interhemispheric functional connectivity. Journal of Neuroscience 2010; 30: 3964–3972.

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

von Monakow C. Die Lokalisation im Grosshirn und der Abbau der Funktion durch kortikale
Herde. JF Bergmann; 1914
Newman M. Fast algorithm for detecting community structure in networks. Physical review E,
Statistical, nonlinear, and soft matter physics 2004; 69: 066133.
Park C, Chang WH, Ohn SH, Kim ST, Bang OY, Pascual-Leone A, et al. Longitudinal changes
of resting-state functional connectivity during motor recovery after stroke. Stroke 2011; 42:
1357–1362.
Power JD, Barnes KA, Snyder AZ, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. Spurious but systematic
correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion. Neuroimage
2012; 59: 2142–2154.
Preti MG, Bolton TA, Van De Ville D. The dynamic functional connectome: State-of-the-art and
perspectives. Neuroimage 2017; 160: 41–54.
Rachakonda S, Egolf E, Correa N, Calhoun V. Group ICA of fMRI toolbox (GIFT) manual.
Dostupné z http://www nitrc org/docman/view php/55/295/v1 3d_ GIFTManual pdf [cit 201111-5] 2007
Rehme AK, Eickhoff SB, Rottschy C, Fink GR, Grefkes C. Activation likelihood estimation
meta-analysis of motor-related neural activity after stroke. Neuroimage 2012; 59: 2771–2782.
Rehme AK, Fink GR, von Cramon DY, Grefkes C. The role of the contralesional motor cortex
for motor recovery in the early days after stroke assessed with longitudinal FMRI. Cerebral
cortex 2010; 21: 756–768.
Rehme AK, Volz LJ, Feis D-L, Bomilcar-Focke I, Liebig T, Eickhoff SB, et al. Identifying
neuroimaging markers of motor disability in acute stroke by machine learning techniques.
Cerebral cortex 2014; 25: 3046–3056.
Sakoğlu Ü, Pearlson GD, Kiehl KA, Wang YM, Michael AM, Calhoun VD. A method for
evaluating dynamic functional network connectivity and task-modulation: application to
schizophrenia. Magnetic Resonance Materials in Physics, Biology and Medicine 2010; 23: 351–
366.
Salman MS, Du Y, Lin D, Fu Z, Fedorov A, Damaraju E, et al. Group ICA for identifying
biomarkers in schizophrenia:‘Adaptive’networks via spatially constrained ICA show more
sensitivity to group differences than spatio-temporal regression. NeuroImage: Clinical 2019; 22:
101747.
Siegel JS, Ramsey LE, Snyder AZ, Metcalf NV, Chacko RV, Weinberger K, et al. Disruptions of
network connectivity predict impairment in multiple behavioral domains after stroke.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2016; 113: E4367–E4376.
Siegel JS, Seitzman BA, Ramsey LE, Ortega M, Gordon EM, Dosenbach NUF, et al. Reemergence of modular brain networks in stroke recovery. Cortex 2018; 101: 44–59.
32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Smith SM, Miller KL, Salimi-Khorshidi G, Webster M, Beckmann CF, Nichols TE, et al.
Network modelling methods for FMRI. NeuroImage 2011; 54: 875–891.
Sporns O. Network attributes for segregation and integration in the human brain. Current
Opinion in Neurobiology 2013; 23: 162–171.
Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Poline J-B, Thirion B. Brain covariance selection: better individual
functional connectivity models using population prior. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems. 2010. p. 2334–2342
Vergara VM, Mayer AR, Kiehl KA, Calhoun VD. Dynamic functional network connectivity
discriminates mild traumatic brain injury through machine learning. NeuroImage: Clinical 2018;
19: 30–37.
Vidaurre D, Arenas AL, Smith SM, Woolrich MW. Behavioural relevance of spontaneous,
transient brain network interactions in fMRI. bioRxiv 2019: 779736.
Volz LJ, Rehme AK, Michely J, Nettekoven C, Eickhoff SB, Fink GR, et al. Shaping early
reorganization of neural networks promotes motor function after stroke. Cerebral cortex 2016;
26: 2882–2894.
Wang L, Yu C, Chen H, Qin W, He Y, Fan F, et al. Dynamic functional reorganization of the
motor execution network after stroke. Brain 2010; 133: 1224–1238.
Ward NS. Restoring brain function after stroke—bridging the gap between animals and humans.
Nature Reviews Neurology 2017; 13: 244.
Ward NS, Brown MM, Thompson AJ, Frackowiak RSJ. Neural correlates of outcome after
stroke: a cross‐sectional fMRI study. Brain 2003; 126: 1430–1448.
Wig GS. Segregated systems of human brain networks. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2017; 21:
981–996.
Yozbatiran N, Der-Yeghiaian L, Cramer SC. A standardized approach to performing the action
research arm test. Neurorehabilitation and neural repair 2008; 22: 78–90.
Zappasodi F, Croce P, Giordani A, Assenza G, Giannantoni NM, Profice P, et al. Prognostic
value of EEG microstates in acute stroke. Brain topography 2017; 30: 698–710.

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011031; this version posted November 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary material
Severely
affected (n=13)
Age (in years)

70.0

Moderately
affected
(n=18)
67.0

Healthy
controls (n=17)

p-value

65.4

Sex (in % female)

61

22

12

Mean Framewise
Displacement

0.29

0.27

0.27

NIHSS
ARAT affected
hand
Lesion volume (in
mm3, median)
CST overlap (in %,
median)

10
10

6
45

-

ModerateControls: 0.65
SevereControls: 0.13
ModerateControls: 0.66
SevereControls: 0.01*
ModerateControls: 0.99
SevereControls: 0.59
0.01*
0.00*

12960

12732

-

0.61

9.2

4.8

-

0.68

Supplementary Table 1. Demographics and clinical characteristics of stroke patient subgroups and
healthy controls. Cortico-spinal tract (CST) affection was computed based on lesion overlap with a CST
template provided in the SPM Anatomy Toolbox (Eickhoff et al., 2005).

34

