medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Genetically predicted serum urate, blood pressure and
cardiovascular disease: an updated Mendelian
randomization investigation

Gill

et al. Urate, blood pressure and cardiovascular disease

1

Dipender Gill MD , Stephen Burgess PhD

5

1,2

PhD , Verena Zuber PhD

1,12

4

1

, Xue Li PhD , Ville Karhunen MSc , Alan Cameron MD

, Philip S. Tsao PhD

Evangelos Evangelou PhD

Abbas Dehghan MD PhD

2,3

6,7

8-11

, Derek Klarin MD

, Paul Elliott FMedSci

, VA Million Veteran Program,

1,13-16

1,13,14

17,18

, Scott M. Damrauer MD

4,19

, Evropi Theodoratou PhD

5

, Terry Quinn MD ,

5

*, Jesse Dawson MD PhD *, Ioanna

1,12-14

Tzoulaki PhD

*

*These authors contributed equally and are joint last

Affiliations
1

Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Imperial College London,

London, UK.

2

MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge Institute of Public Health, Cambridge, UK.

3

Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of

Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

4

Centre for Global Health, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

5

University of Glasgow, Institute of Cardiovascular & Medical Sciences, Glasgow, UK.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

6

VA Palo Alto Health Care System, California, USA.

7

Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, California, USA.

8

Malcom Randall VA Medical Center, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

9

Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,

Massachusetts, USA.

10

Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Massachusetts,

USA.

11

Division of Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Therapy, University of Florida School of Medicine,

Gainesville, Florida, USA.

12

Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Ioannina Medical School, Ioannina,

Greece.

13

MRC Centre for Environment and Health, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London,

UK.

14

UK Dementia Research Institute at Imperial College London, London, UK.

15

Imperial Biomedical Research Centre, Imperial College London and Imperial College NHS

Healthcare Trust, London, UK.

16

Health Data Research UK-London, London, UK.

17

Corporal Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center, Philadelphia, USA.

18

Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,

USA.

19

Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of

Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Corresponding author
Dr Dipender Gill

Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Medical School Building, St

Mary's Hospital, Imperial College London, United Kingdom, W2 1PG

Fax: +44 (0) 20 3313 8223

Telephone: +44 (0) 7904843810

E-mail: dipender.gill@imperial.ac.uk

Total word count: 9,038

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background: Elevated serum urate has been associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular
disease (CVD), but it is not known whether this relationship is causal, non-linear or sex-specific. Basic

science and clinical trial data have supported an effect of serum urate on systolic blood pressure

(SBP), which may in turn mediate an effect on CVD risk.

Methods: Using recently available data from the Million Veterans Program and UK Biobank, we
applied improved genetic instruments for serum urate in one and two-sample Mendelian

randomization (MR) analyses to investigate for effects on risk of coronary heart disease (CHD),

peripheral artery disease (PAD), and stroke. Potential mediation through SBP was explored, as well

as evidence of non-linear and sex-specific effects. We performed a number of sensitivity analyses

using different MR methodologies and populations to investigate consistency of our findings.

Results: Higher genetically predicted serum urate was associated with an increased risk of CHD
(odds ratio [OR] per 1-standard deviation increase in genetically predicted urate 1.19, 95%

confidence interval [CI] 1.10-1.30,

(OR 1.11, 95% CI 1.05-1.18,

P=4x10-5), PAD (OR 1.12, 95% CI 1.03-1.21, P=9x10-3), and stroke

P=2x10-4). Similar estimates were produced when applying MR methods

that make distinct assumptions, or when considering different populations. SBP was estimated to

mediate 29%, 44% and 45% of the effect of urate on CHD, PAD and stroke respectively. There was no

evidence of non-linear or sex-specific effects of genetically predicted urate on CVD risk.

Conclusions: Using contemporary data and MR methods, we provide support for an effect of serum
urate on CVD risk that may partly be mediated through SBP. High-quality trials are necessary to

provide definitive evidence on the cardiovascular benefit of urate lowering.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Background
Urate is a breakdown product of purine metabolism. Its raised levels have been associated with a

1

number of adverse health outcomes including gout, hypertension and cardiovascular disease (CVD) .

Efficacious treatments such as allopurinol and probenecid are available for lowering serum urate in

the prevention and treatment of gout. While observational studies consistently support associations

2

of urate with diseases other than gout , it remains unclear whether these represent causal effects.

The relationship between serum urate, obesity, diet and other cardiovascular risk factors raises

3

considerable potential for confounding and reverse causation .

4

Pre-clinical studies support a causal role for urate in hypertension . Randomized clinical trial data

have shown that both allopurinol and probenecid reduce systolic blood pressure (SBP) in

1, 5

hyperuricemic adolescents

. As elevated blood pressure is a risk factor for CVD, it is important to

clarify any role of SBP in mediating an effect of urate on cardiovascular outcomes. Recent trials have

6

highlighted potential non-linear effects of urate lowering , and numerous observational studies have

suggested that the relationship between serum urate and CVD is stronger in women than men

7-9

.

The presence of non-linear or sex-specific relationships between urate and cardiovascular risk

therefore also require further exploration.

3

The genetic determinants of serum urate levels have been increasingly well-characterized . This has

made it possible to identify better instruments for Mendelian randomization (MR) analyses

investigating the effect of genetically predicted serum urate on cardiovascular outcomes than in

10-16

previous efforts

. The use of variants randomly allocated at conception to proxy the effect of

modifying serum urate means that MR is less susceptible to the environmental confounding,

measurement error and reverse causation bias that can limit causal inference in traditional

epidemiological approaches. Previous MR studies have relied on much smaller genome-wide

association studies (GWASs) for serum urate than are currently available

3, 10-17

, and furthermore did

not incorporate recently developed mediation analysis and non-linear MR methods

18-20

.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Using the largest available GWASs of serum urate and the increased number of instruments

3, 17

available

, we update previous MR analyses investigating the effect of serum urate on coronary

heart disease (CHD) and stroke with improved precision, and now also investigate peripheral arterial

disease (PAD) as an outcome. MR methods that are robust to pleiotropic effects of the genetic

variants employed as instruments for urate are applied, with formal mediation analyses integrated

to investigate for any role of SBP in mediating the effect of urate on risk of CVD outcomes. Finally,

we explore for potential non-linear and sex-specific effects of urate on CVD outcomes. Our aim was

to perform a comprehensive investigation into the effect of genetically predicted serum urate on

cardiovascular outcomes, and thus provide crucial insight to guide the design of future clinical trials.

Methods
Genetic association estimates
In two-sample MR, genetic association estimates for serum urate were obtained by using PLINK

software to meta-analyze summary data from GWAS analyses of 110,347 European-ancestry

individuals and 343,836 White British UK Biobank participants respectively

17, 21, 22

. Urate estimates

are provided per 1-standard deviation (SD) increase throughout, which corresponds to 80.3µmol/L.

For consideration of SBP as a mediator in the two-sample multivariable MR, genetic association

estimates were obtained from a GWAS of 317,195 White British UK Biobank participants, where SBP

was measured using automated readings with correction made for any anti-hypertensive drug use

by adding 10mmHg to the measured reading

23

. In contrast, when investigating SBP as an outcome,

genetic association estimates were obtained from the International Consortium for Blood Pressure

(ICBP) GWAS analysis of 287,245 European-ancestry individuals (excluding UK Biobank

participants)

24

. A different population was considered when studying SBP as an outcome to avoid

overlap with the UK Biobank participants used to obtain genetic association estimates for urate, as

25

this can bias MR estimates

. The ICBP study adjusted for body mass index (BMI) when obtaining

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

genetic association estimates for SBP, and hence these data were not meta-analyzed with UK

Biobank SBP genetic association estimates in the study of SBP as a mediator, as such BMI adjustment

can also bias MR estimates

26

. SBP estimates are provided per 1-SD increase, which corresponds to

18.6mmHg. Genetic association estimates for CHD were obtained from the CARDIoGRAMplusC4D

Consortium 1000G multi-ethnic GWAS (77% European-ancestry) of 60,801 cases and 123,504

controls, with a broad and inclusive definition of CHD applied

27

. Genetic association estimates for

PAD were obtained from the Million Veterans Program (MVP) multi-ethnic (72% European-ancestry)

GWAS of 31,307 cases and 211,753 controls, with case definitions made using hospital diagnosis and

28

procedure codes

. Genetic association estimates for stroke were obtained from the MEGASTROKE

29

multi-ethnic (86% European-ancestry) GWAS of 67,162 cases and 454,450 controls

, with the stroke

definition including both ischemic and hemorrhagic etiologies.

One-sample MR analysis was performed in the UK Biobank, a prospective cohort study of

approximately 500,000 participants recruited between 2006 and 2010 from 22 assessment centers

30

across the UK

. Self-reported, physical, biochemical and genetic information was collected and

participants were linked retrospectively and prospectively to their hospital episode statistics as

30

previously described

. Analysis was restricted to self-reported White British participants. In order to

increase statistical power while also maintaining consistency with the disease outcomes considered

in the two-sample MR, CHD, PAD and stroke cases were pooled as CVD events. International

Classification of Diseases version 10 codes were used to identify cases (Supplementary Table 1). To

obtain estimates for the association between the urate GRS and serum urate in UK Biobank

participants, the score was regressed in a linear model against measured levels, with adjustment

2

made for age, age , sex, recruitment center and the first four principal components. To obtain

genetic association estimates for the urate GRS with risk of incident CVD, a Cox proportional hazards

2

regression was used, with adjustment similarly made for age, age , sex, recruitment center and the

first four principal components. Cases where death occurred prior to any incident CVD event were

censored. Genetic association estimates of the urate GRS with SBP were obtained by performing a

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

linear regression against SBP with the same adjustments as above. SBP was calculated as the mean

of the two automated readings taken on the initial assessment.

Genetic variants used as instruments
Genetic instruments for the two-sample MR were identified as single-nucleotide polymorphisms

(SNPs) that were associated with urate (or SBP, in mediation analyses) at genome-wide significance

P<5x10-8) and were in pair-wise linkage disequilibrium (LD) with r2<0.001. Clumping was performed

(

31

using the TwoSampleMR package of R

using the

. For univariable MR, instrument strength was estimated

F-statistic, with variance in the exposure explained assessed using the R2 value11.

A weighted genetic risk score (GRS) for serum urate was used as the instrument in the one-sample

MR analysis. This was constructed using SNPs with minor allele frequency >0.05 that were associated

with urate at

P<5x10-8 in the summary data from a GWAS performed in 288,666 European-ancestry

individuals, clumped to a pairwise LD

r2<0.001 using the TwoSampleMR package of R3, 31. The UK

Biobank population used to select instruments in the two-sample MR analysis was not included here

to avoid overlap with the UK Biobank cohort used to obtain genetic association estimates with

25

outcomes

. Similarly, the population used to derive the weighted GRS for urate in the one-sample

analysis was not also included when deriving instruments for the two-sample analysis because this

would have resulted in overlap of the MVP population that was also used to obtain genetic

association estimates for PAD

3, 25, 28

. The GRS in the one-sample MR was weighted for the association

of the constituent variants with serum urate, and for each individual participant was measured as

the sum of the imputed number of alleles present multiplied by their variant’s weight.

Statistical analysis
In all analyses, SNPs were aligned by their effect alleles and no additional consideration was made

for palindromic variants. Two-sample MR analyses were performed to investigate the effect of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

genetically predicted serum urate on CHD, PAD, stroke and SBP respectively. A Bonferroni threshold

P<0.01) that corrected for multiple testing related to the four outcomes was used to ascertain

(

statistical significance in the main analysis. Inverse-variance weighted MR was used in the main

analysis, with the simple median

35

MR

32

, contamination-mixture method

33

34

, PRESSO

and multivariable

(only for CVD outcomes) sensitivity analyses used to explore the robustness of the findings to

potential pleiotropy of the genetic variants. Given the previously demonstrated overlap in the

3

genetic determinants of urate with other metabolic traits , the multivariable MR sensitivity analysis

adjusted for genetic associations of the instruments with BMI, estimated glomerular filtration rate,

type 2 diabetes mellitus, serum low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, serum high-density lipoprotein

cholesterol and serum triglycerides together in the same model. Such multivariable MR was not

performed when considering SBP as an outcome, due to population overlap with the cohorts used to

25

obtain genetic association estimates for the metabolic exposures

. It was expected that any direct

effects of the instruments on the considered cardiovascular outcomes might be related to their

3

effect on serum urate . Thus, the simple median estimator was preferred to its precision weighted

counterpart and the MR-Egger method was avoided, as these methods are unreliable in such

32, 36

. In MR mediation analyses, multivariable MR was applied in the two-sample setting to

scenarios

adjust for the genetic association of the instruments with SBP, and network MR was used to

estimate the proportion of the total effect of urate on each cardiovascular outcome that is mediated

37

through SBP

. Standard errors were estimated using the propagation of error method. Further

details on these analyses are provided in the Supplementary Methods.

To obtain MR estimates in the one-sample analysis, the ratio method was used, with first order

weights for estimating standard errors

38

. To investigate for any discrepancy in the effects of urate on

CVD risk and SBP respectively based on observed urate levels (non-linear effects) and sex (sex-

specific effects), the cohort was stratified based on these traits and MR analysis was performed for

each stratum separately. Rather than stratify on measured urate itself however, the cohort was

divided into four quantiles based on residual urate, which is the measured urate minus the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

genetically raised urate as determined by each individual’s weighted GRS. Such stratification by

residual urate is necessary, as stratifying on measured urate directly would introduce collider bias if

urate is on the causal pathway from the genetic variants to the outcomes

18

. For consideration of sex-

specific effects, the cohort was simply divided by self-reported sex. Exposure and outcome genetic

association estimates for each stratum were calculated separately. The Cochran’s Q test was used to

investigate heterogeneity between strata based on residual urate and sex respectively, with

P<0.05

denoting statistical significance.

Ethical approval, data availability and reporting
All data used in this work are either publicly accessible or available on request from their original

studies, which obtained appropriate patient consent and ethical approval. The UK Biobank data were

accessed through application 236. All results generated in this work are presented in either the

manuscript or its supplementary files. This study has been reported as per the STROBE-MR

guidelines (Supplementary Checklist)

39

. The study protocol and details were not pre-registered.

Results
Two-sample Mendelian randomization
The instruments for urate that were used in the two-sample MR are presented in Supplementary

Table 2. The main IVW MR showed that higher genetically predicted serum urate levels were

associated with an increased risk of CHD, with odds ratio (OR) per 1-SD increase in genetically

predicted urate 1.19, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.10-1.30,

P =4x10-5. Consistent results were

obtained in MR sensitivity analyses (Figure 1). Higher genetically predicted serum urate was also

associated with increased risk of both PAD (OR 1.12, 95% CI 1.03-1.21,

1.11, 95% CI 1.05-1.18,

P=9x10-3) and stroke (OR

P=2x10-4) in the main IVW analysis, with similar results again obtained in MR

sensitivity analyses that are more robust to the inclusion of pleiotropic variants (Figure 1). For the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

multivariable MR adjusting for genetic confounding through BMI, estimated glomerular filtration

rate, type 2 diabetes and lipid traits, direct effects of these exposures on risk of the respective CVD

outcomes are presented in Supplementary Table 3. Considering SBP, the main IVW and sensitivity

MR analyses all provided supporting evidence of a causal effect of serum urate (IVW estimate in SD

units per 1-SD increase in genetically predicted urate 0.09, 95% CI 0.05-0.12,

P=6x10-7; Figure 2).

Scatter plots depicting the association of the instruments variants with serum urate and the

respective outcomes are presented in Supplementary Figures 1-4.

Performing multivariable MR to adjust for genetically predicted SBP showed attenuation of the urate

effect estimates for the CVD outcomes as compared to the main IVW univariable MR (Figure 3),

supporting that part of the effect of urate on these outcomes is mediated through SBP. Network MR

mediation analysis quantified this as 29% (95% CI 9%-48%) for CHD, 44% (95% CI 5%-83%) for PAD

and 45% (95% CI 14%-76%) for stroke. For CHD there remained evidence of a direct effect of urate

even after adjusting for SBP (OR 1.13, 95% CI 1.03-1.23,

P=0.01). In contrast for PAD and stroke,

although the estimate for the direct effect of urate that is not mediated through SBP was positive,

the confidence interval crossed the null and the results were not statistically significant (PAD OR

1.08, 95% CI 1.00-1.17,

P=0.07; stroke OR 1.06, 95% CI 0.99-1.12, P=0.10). Direct effects of SBP on

the outcomes after adjusting for genetically predicted serum urate are presented in Supplementary

Table 4.

One-sample Mendelian randomization
Baseline characteristics for the UK Biobank population considered in the one-sample MR analysis are

detailed in Supplementary Table 5. A total of 373,167 participants were included in analyses after

accounting for missing data (Supplementary Table 6). Included participants had similar

characteristics to the UK Biobank population more generally (Supplementary Table 5). The first

participant was recruited on 19 December 2006 and outcomes data were available up to 31 March

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

2017. A total of 29,903 incident CVD events (26,280 CHD, 420 PAD, and 3,203 stroke) were identified

in the analysis, with a mean follow up time of 2,928 days. The 107 SNPs included in the urate GRS for

the one-sample MR and their respective weights are detailed in Supplementary Figure 7. Considering

the whole population, the OR of CVD per 1-SD increase in genetically predicted urate was 1.13 (95%

CI 1.07-1.19,

P=1x10-6) and the SD change in SBP per 1-SD increase in genetically predicted urate was

0.06 (95% CI 0.05-0.07,

P<1x10-10).

After splitting the cohort into four quantiles based on residual urate (observed urate corrected for

genetic predisposition), MR estimates for the causal effect of genetically predicted urate on CVD risk

were similar between quantiles (Figure 4), with Cochran’s Q test for heterogeneity

P=0.62. In

contrast, there was statistically significant evidence of heterogeneity between the four quantiles

when considering SBP as an outcome (Cochran’s Q

P=0.02), with the quantile that had lowest

residual urate levels having a higher estimate, and 95% CIs that did not overlap with those for the

quantile with highest residual urate levels (Figure 4). When stratifying by sex, there was no evidence

of any discrepancy in the effect of genetically predicted urate levels on CVD risk (Cochran’s Q

P=0.37), but there was evidence of a greater effect on SBP for women as compared to men
(Cochran’s Q

results.

P=0.01) (Figure 4). Supplementary Table 7 details stratum specific characteristics and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Discussion
We used a comprehensive framework of MR methodologies to perform detailed investigation into

the association of genetically predicted serum urate with CVD outcomes, and replicated findings in

the independent UK Biobank population. The two-sample MR analyses identified consistent

evidence of an effect of higher genetically predicted serum urate levels and risk of CHD, PAD, stroke

and SBP. Performing multivariable MR to adjust for genetic association with SBP attenuated the

estimates for the CVD outcomes to support that at least some of the effect of urate may be

mediated through raised blood pressure. One-sample MR in the UK Biobank using individual

participant data did not provide evidence to support non-linear or sex-specific effects of urate on

CVD risk, although there was some suggestion that a fixed increase in genetically predicted urate

may raise SBP more in those with lower urate levels, and in women as compared to men.

1

Hyperuricemia has been postulated to cause endothelial dysfunction by increasing oxidative stress .

Consistent with our findings, this could directly increase risk of CHD, PAD and stroke through effects

on the vascular endothelium, as well as indirectly by raising blood pressure via impairment of renal

1

function . In an animal model where hyperuricemia was induced using a uricase inhibitor,

4

hypertension followed after three weeks while controls remained normotensive . A systematic

review and meta-analysis of 81 trials including 10,684 participants showed a significant decrease in

total cardiovascular events with allopurinol use, although the reduction in major adverse

6

cardiovascular events and mortality did not reach statistical significance . However, the majority of

6

trial evidence was of low or moderate quality . The results of the Febuxostat and Allopurinol

Streamlined Trial (FAST) and the Allopurinol and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with ischemic

heart disease (ALL-HEART) trials will help provide further insight on potential re-purposing of these

existing agents for CVD prevention

40, 41

. Allopurinol could represent an inexpensive, safe and well-

tolerated drug for reducing cardiovascular risk

42

.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Our current study has several strengths. Some previous MR analyses, including from our group

12, 13

,

have suggested that there may not be any causal effect of genetically predicted serum urate on CVD

outcomes. These findings may have been due to any effect of genetically predicted urate on CVD risk

3

being concealed by pleotropic effects on other metabolic traits , as well as insufficient statistical

power. In the current study, we were not overly reliant on MR methods that are vulnerable to

violations of the instrument-strength independent of direct effect (‘InSIDE’) assumption, such as MR-

36

Egger

, as the genetic determinants of serum urate have been shown to share their etiology with

3

other cardiometabolic risk factors, thus rendering this likely violated . Instead, we used the

contamination-mixture, simple median and MR-PRESSO methods as sensitivity analyses, which

43

typically perform better than MR-Egger

. Our present analysis also incorporated more powerful

instruments for serum urate than were available previously. The variants used as instruments in our

one-sample MR analysis of UK Biobank participants explained approximately 7.7% of the variance in

3

serum urate , in contrast to the 5.3% explained when selecting instrument variants from the

previous largest published GWAS of serum urate

21

. Furthermore, to our knowledge this is the first

MR study to investigate for non-linear and sex-specific effects of genetically predicted serum urate

on CVD risk, as well as potential mediation through SBP. The absence of evidence to support a

greater effect of changes in genetically predicted urate levels on CVD outcomes in those with higher

baseline urate levels supports that relative risk reduction may be similar across the clinically

observed range of urate levels (although absolute risk reduction could differ). The consistent findings

for CVD risk reduction in both men and women can similarly inform trial inclusion and exclusion

criteria.

Our work also has limitations. The MR approach makes a series of modelling assumptions, and in

particular requires that the genetic variants used as instruments do not affect the considered

outcomes through pathways that are independent of urate. While this can never be completely

excluded, we performed a range of MR sensitivity analyses that make distinct assumptions on the

presence of pleiotropic variants and found consistent estimates. MR estimates also represent the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

lifelong cumulative effect of genetically predicted variation in serum urate levels, and may

overestimate the consequence of a clinical intervention aimed at altering urate levels in adult life

44

.

Finally, we investigated SBP in mediating the effect of genetically predicted urate on CVD outcomes,

rather than diastolic blood pressure. These two traits are highly genetically and phenotypically

24

correlated

, and it follows that a similar mediating role may be found for diastolic blood pressure, as

has been highlighted previously

45

.

To summarize, we have found consistent evidence for an effect of genetically predicted serum urate

levels on risk of CHD, PAD, stroke and SBP. Our analyses suggest that urate may be causally

associated with increased cardiovascular risk via both blood pressure dependent and independent

mechanisms, with no evidence of non-linear or sex-specific effects. High-quality trial data are now

necessary to provide definitive evidence on the cardiovascular benefit of urate lowering, with some

large-scale studies already underway

40, 41

.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Contributors
DG, JD, ET and IT designed the study. DG and XL had full access to the data and performed the

analysis. All authors interpreted the results. DG, JD and IT drafted the manuscript. All authors

critically revised the manuscript for intellectual content. All authors approved the submitted version

and are accountable for the integrity of the work.

Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the contributors of the data used in this work: CARDIoGRAMplusC4D,

CKDGen, DIAGRAM, Genetic Investigation of ANthropometric Traits, Global Lipids Genetics

Consortium, International Consortium for Blood Pressure, MEGASTROKE, Million Veterans Program

and UK Biobank.

Sources of Funding
This work was supported by funding from the US Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Research

and Development, Million Veteran Program Grant MVP003 (I01-BX003362). This publication does

not represent the views of the Department of Veterans Affairs of the US Government. DG is funded

by the Wellcome 4i Clinical PhD Program at Imperial College London. VK is funded by the European

Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant

(721567). PE acknowledges support from the Medical Research Council (MR/S019669/1), the

National Institute for Health Research Imperial Biomedical Research Centre, Imperial College London

(RDF03), the UK Dementia Research Institute (DRI) at Imperial College London funded by UK DRI Ltd

(funded by Medical Research Council, Alzheimer’s Society, Alzheimer’s Research UK), and Health

Data Research (HDR) UK London funded by HDR UK Ltd (funded by a consortium led by the Medical

Research Council 1004231). SMD was supported by the Department of Veterans Affairs Office of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Research and Development (IK2-CX001780). ET is funded by a Cancer Research UK Career

Development Fellowship (C31250/A22804). The MEGASTROKE project received funding from

sources specified at http://www.megastroke.org/acknowledgments.html. Details of all

MEGASTROKE authors are available at http://www.megastroke.org/authors.html.

Disclosures
JD and TQ have received charitable research income to conduct clinical trials of allopurinol use in

people with stroke. The remaining authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

References
1.

Feig DI, Kang DH and Johnson RJ. Uric acid and cardiovascular risk.

N Engl J Med .

2008;359:1811-21.

2.

Li X, Meng X, Timofeeva M, Tzoulaki I, Tsilidis KK, Ioannidis JP, Campbell H and Theodoratou

E. Serum uric acid levels and multiple health outcomes: umbrella review of evidence from

observational studies, randomised controlled trials, and Mendelian randomisation studies.

BMJ.

2017;357:j2376.

3.

Tin A, Marten J, Halperin Kuhns VL, Li Y, Wuttke M, Kirsten H, Sieber KB, Qiu C, Gorski M, Yu

Z, Giri A, Sveinbjornsson G, Li M, Chu AY, Hoppmann A, O'Connor LJ, Prins B, Nutile T, Noce D,

Akiyama M, Cocca M, Ghasemi S, van der Most PJ, Horn K, Xu Y, Fuchsberger C, Sedaghat S, Afaq S,

Amin N, Arnlov J, Bakker SJL, Bansal N, Baptista D, Bergmann S, Biggs ML, Biino G, Boerwinkle E,

Bottinger EP, Boutin TS, Brumat M, Burkhardt R, Campana E, Campbell A, Campbell H, Carroll RJ,

Catamo E, Chambers JC, Ciullo M, Concas MP, Coresh J, Corre T, Cusi D, Felicita SC, de Borst MH, De

Grandi A, de Mutsert R, de Vries APJ, Delgado G, Demirkan A, Devuyst O, Dittrich K, Eckardt KU,

Ehret G, Endlich K, Evans MK, Gansevoort RT, Gasparini P, Giedraitis V, Gieger C, Girotto G, Gogele

M, Gordon SD, Gudbjartsson DF, Gudnason V, German Chronic Kidney Disease S, Haller T, Hamet P,

Harris TB, Hayward C, Hicks AA, Hofer E, Holm H, Huang W, Hutri-Kahonen N, Hwang SJ, Ikram MA,

Lewis RM, Ingelsson E, Jakobsdottir J, Jonsdottir I, Jonsson H, Joshi PK, Josyula NS, Jung B, Kahonen

M, Kamatani Y, Kanai M, Kerr SM, Kiess W, Kleber ME, Koenig W, Kooner JS, Korner A, Kovacs P,

Kramer BK, Kronenberg F, Kubo M, Kuhnel B, La Bianca M, Lange LA, Lehne B, Lehtimaki T, Lifelines

Cohort S, Liu J, Loeffler M, Loos RJF, Lyytikainen LP, Magi R, Mahajan A, Martin NG, Marz W,

Mascalzoni D, Matsuda K, Meisinger C, Meitinger T, Metspalu A, Milaneschi Y, Program VAMV,

O'Donnell CJ, Wilson OD, Gaziano JM, Mishra PP, Mohlke KL, Mononen N, Montgomery GW, Mook-

Kanamori DO, Muller-Nurasyid M, Nadkarni GN, Nalls MA, Nauck M, Nikus K, Ning B, Nolte IM,

Noordam R, O'Connell JR, Olafsson I, Padmanabhan S, Penninx B, Perls T, Peters A, Pirastu M, Pirastu

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

N, Pistis G, Polasek O, Ponte B, Porteous DJ, Poulain T, Preuss MH, Rabelink TJ, Raffield LM, Raitakari

OT, Rettig R, Rheinberger M, Rice KM, Rizzi F, Robino A, Rudan I, Krajcoviechova A, Cifkova R, Rueedi

R, Ruggiero D, Ryan KA, Saba Y, Salvi E, Schmidt H, Schmidt R, Shaffer CM, Smith AV, Smith BH,

Spracklen CN, Strauch K, Stumvoll M, Sulem P, Tajuddin SM, Teren A, Thiery J, Thio CHL,

Thorsteinsdottir U, Toniolo D, Tonjes A, Tremblay J, Uitterlinden AG, Vaccargiu S, van der Harst P,

van Duijn CM, Verweij N, Volker U, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Waldenberger M, Whitfield JB, Wild

SH, Wilson JF, Yang Q, Zhang W, Zonderman AB, Bochud M, Wilson JG, Pendergrass SA, Ho K, Parsa

A, Pramstaller PP, Psaty BM, Boger CA, Snieder H, Butterworth AS, Okada Y, Edwards TL, Stefansson

K, Susztak K, Scholz M, Heid IM, Hung AM, Teumer A, Pattaro C, Woodward OM, Vitart V and

Kottgen A. Target genes, variants, tissues and transcriptional pathways influencing human serum

urate levels.

4.

Nat Genet. 2019.

Mazzali M, Hughes J, Kim YG, Jefferson JA, Kang DH, Gordon KL, Lan HY, Kivlighn S and

Johnson RJ. Elevated uric acid increases blood pressure in the rat by a novel crystal-independent

mechanism.

5.

Hypertension. 2001;38:1101-6.

Feig DI, Soletsky B and Johnson RJ. Effect of allopurinol on blood pressure of adolescents

with newly diagnosed essential hypertension: a randomized trial.

6.

JAMA. 2008;300:924-32.

Bredemeier M, Lopes LM, Eisenreich MA, Hickmann S, Bongiorno GK, d'Avila R, Morsch ALB,

da Silva Stein F and Campos GGD. Xanthine oxidase inhibitors for prevention of cardiovascular

events: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

BMC Cardiovasc

Disord. 2018;18:24.
7.

Culleton BF, Larson MG, Kannel WB and Levy D. Serum uric acid and risk for cardiovascular

disease and death: the Framingham Heart Study.

8.

Ann Intern Med. 1999;131:7-13.

Tuttle KR, Short RA and Johnson RJ. Sex differences in uric acid and risk factors for coronary

artery disease.

Am J Cardiol. 2001;87:1411-4.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

9.

Cicero AF, Salvi P, D'Addato S, Rosticci M, Borghi C and Brisighella Heart Study g. Association

between serum uric acid, hypertension, vascular stiffness and subclinical atherosclerosis: data from

the Brisighella Heart Study.

10.

J Hypertens. 2014;32:57-64.

Kleber ME, Delgado G, Grammer TB, Silbernagel G, Huang J, Kramer BK, Ritz E and Marz W.

Uric Acid and Cardiovascular Events: A Mendelian Randomization Study.

J Am Soc Nephrol.

2015;26:2831-8.

11.

Palmer TM, Lawlor DA, Harbord RM, Sheehan NA, Tobias JH, Timpson NJ, Davey Smith G and

Sterne JA. Using multiple genetic variants as instrumental variables for modifiable risk factors.

Stat

Methods Med Res. 2012;21:223-42.
12.

Efstathiadou A, Gill D, McGrane F, Quinn T and Dawson J. Genetically Determined Uric Acid

and the Risk of Cardiovascular and Neurovascular Diseases: A Mendelian Randomization Study of

Outcomes Investigated in Randomized Trials.

13.

J Am Heart Assoc. 2019;8:e012738.

Li X, Meng X, He Y, Spiliopoulou A, Timofeeva M, Wei WQ, Gifford A, Yang T, Varley T,

Tzoulaki I, Joshi P, Denny JC, McKeigue P, Campbell H and Theodoratou E. Genetically determined

serum urate levels and cardiovascular and other diseases in UK Biobank cohort: A phenome-wide

mendelian randomization study.

14.

PLoS Med. 2019;16:e1002937.

Sedaghat S, Pazoki R, Uitterlinden AG, Hofman A, Stricker BH, Ikram MA, Franco OH and

Dehghan A. Association of uric acid genetic risk score with blood pressure: the Rotterdam study.

Hypertension. 2014;64:1061-6.
15.

White J, Sofat R, Hemani G, Shah T, Engmann J, Dale C, Shah S, Kruger FA, Giambartolomei C,

Swerdlow DI, Palmer T, McLachlan S, Langenberg C, Zabaneh D, Lovering R, Cavadino A, Jefferis B,

Finan C, Wong A, Amuzu A, Ong K, Gaunt TR, Warren H, Davies TL, Drenos F, Cooper J, Ebrahim S,

Lawlor DA, Talmud PJ, Humphries SE, Power C, Hypponen E, Richards M, Hardy R, Kuh D, Wareham

N, Ben-Shlomo Y, Day IN, Whincup P, Morris R, Strachan MW, Price J, Kumari M, Kivimaki M, Plagnol

V, Whittaker JC, International Consortium for Blood P, Smith GD, Dudbridge F, Casas JP, Holmes MV,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Hingorani AD and Ucleb. Plasma urate concentration and risk of coronary heart disease: a Mendelian

randomisation analysis.

16.

Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2016;4:327-36.

Li X, Meng XR, Spiliopoulou A, Timofeeva M, Wei WQ, Gifford A, Shen X, He YZ, Varley T,

McKeigue P, Tzoulaki I, Wright AF, Joshi P, Denny JC, Campbell H and Theodoratou E. MR-PheWAS:

exploring the causal effect of SUA level on multiple disease outcomes by using genetic instruments

in UK Biobank.

17.

Ann Rheum Dis. 2018;77:1039-1047.

Neale Lab. Accessed 2019 January 16. Rapid GWAS of thousands of phenotypes for 337,000

samples in the UK Biobank 2018. http://www.nealelab.is/blog/2017/7/19/rapid-gwas-of-thousands-

of-phenotypes-for-337000-samples-in-the-uk-biobank.

18.

Burgess S, Davies NM, Thompson SG and Consortium EP-I. Instrumental variable analysis

with a nonlinear exposure-outcome relationship.

19.

Epidemiology. 2014;25:877-85.

Burgess S, Thompson DJ, Rees JMB, Day FR, Perry JR and Ong KK. Dissecting causal pathways

using mendelian randomization with summarized genetic data: Application to age at menarche and

risk of breast cancer.

20.

Burgess S. Estimating and contextualizing the attenuation of odds ratios due to non

collapsibility.

21.

Genetics. 2017;207:481-487.

Commun Stat-Theor M. 2017;46:786-804.

Kottgen A, Albrecht E, Teumer A, Vitart V, Krumsiek J, Hundertmark C, Pistis G, Ruggiero D,

O'Seaghdha CM, Haller T, Yang Q, Tanaka T, Johnson AD, Kutalik Z, Smith AV, Shi J, Struchalin M,

Middelberg RP, Brown MJ, Gaffo AL, Pirastu N, Li G, Hayward C, Zemunik T, Huffman J, Yengo L, Zhao

JH, Demirkan A, Feitosa MF, Liu X, Malerba G, Lopez LM, van der Harst P, Li X, Kleber ME, Hicks AA,

Nolte IM, Johansson A, Murgia F, Wild SH, Bakker SJ, Peden JF, Dehghan A, Steri M, Tenesa A, Lagou

V, Salo P, Mangino M, Rose LM, Lehtimaki T, Woodward OM, Okada Y, Tin A, Muller C, Oldmeadow

C, Putku M, Czamara D, Kraft P, Frogheri L, Thun GA, Grotevendt A, Gislason GK, Harris TB, Launer LJ,

McArdle P, Shuldiner AR, Boerwinkle E, Coresh J, Schmidt H, Schallert M, Martin NG, Montgomery

GW, Kubo M, Nakamura Y, Tanaka T, Munroe PB, Samani NJ, Jacobs DR, Jr., Liu K, D'Adamo P, Ulivi S,

Rotter JI, Psaty BM, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Campbell S, Devuyst O, Navarro P, Kolcic I, Hastie N,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Balkau B, Froguel P, Esko T, Salumets A, Khaw KT, Langenberg C, Wareham NJ, Isaacs A, Kraja A,

Zhang Q, Wild PS, Scott RJ, Holliday EG, Org E, Viigimaa M, Bandinelli S, Metter JE, Lupo A, Trabetti E,

Sorice R, Doring A, Lattka E, Strauch K, Theis F, Waldenberger M, Wichmann HE, Davies G, Gow AJ,

Bruinenberg M, LifeLines Cohort S, Stolk RP, Kooner JS, Zhang W, Winkelmann BR, Boehm BO, Lucae

S, Penninx BW, Smit JH, Curhan G, Mudgal P, Plenge RM, Portas L, Persico I, Kirin M, Wilson JF,

Mateo Leach I, van Gilst WH, Goel A, Ongen H, Hofman A, Rivadeneira F, Uitterlinden AG, Imboden

M, von Eckardstein A, Cucca F, Nagaraja R, Piras MG, Nauck M, Schurmann C, Budde K, Ernst F,

Farrington SM, Theodoratou E, Prokopenko I, Stumvoll M, Jula A, Perola M, Salomaa V, Shin SY,

Spector TD, Sala C, Ridker PM, Kahonen M, Viikari J, Hengstenberg C, Nelson CP, Consortium CA,

Consortium D, Consortium I, Consortium M, Meschia JF, Nalls MA, Sharma P, Singleton AB, Kamatani

N, Zeller T, Burnier M, Attia J, Laan M, Klopp N, Hillege HL, Kloiber S, Choi H, Pirastu M, Tore S,

Probst-Hensch NM, Volzke H, Gudnason V, Parsa A, Schmidt R, Whitfield JB, Fornage M, Gasparini P,

Siscovick DS, Polasek O, Campbell H, Rudan I, Bouatia-Naji N, Metspalu A, Loos RJ, van Duijn CM,

Borecki IB, Ferrucci L, Gambaro G, Deary IJ, Wolffenbuttel BH, Chambers JC, Marz W, Pramstaller PP,

Snieder H, Gyllensten U, Wright AF, Navis G, Watkins H, Witteman JC, Sanna S, Schipf S, Dunlop MG,

Tonjes A, Ripatti S, Soranzo N, Toniolo D, Chasman DI, Raitakari O, Kao WH, Ciullo M, Fox CS,

Caulfield M, Bochud M and Gieger C. Genome-wide association analyses identify 18 new loci

associated with serum urate concentrations.

22.

Nat Genet. 2013;45:145-54.

Purcell S, Neale B, Todd-Brown K, Thomas L, Ferreira MA, Bender D, Maller J, Sklar P, de

Bakker PI, Daly MJ and Sham PC. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-

based linkage analyses.

23.

Am J Hum Genet. 2007;81:559-75.

Carter AR, Gill D, Davies NM, Taylor AE, Tillmann T, Vaucher J, Wootton RE, Munafo MR,

Hemani G, Malik R, Seshadri S, Woo D, Burgess S, Davey Smith G, Holmes MV, Tzoulaki I, Howe LD

and Dehghan A. Understanding the consequences of education inequality on cardiovascular disease:

mendelian randomisation study.

BMJ. 2019;365:l1855.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

24.

Evangelou E, Warren HR, Mosen-Ansorena D, Mifsud B, Pazoki R, Gao H, Ntritsos G, Dimou

N, Cabrera CP, Karaman I, Ng FL, Evangelou M, Witkowska K, Tzanis E, Hellwege JN, Giri A, Velez

Edwards DR, Sun YV, Cho K, Gaziano JM, Wilson PWF, Tsao PS, Kovesdy CP, Esko T, Magi R, Milani L,

Almgren P, Boutin T, Debette S, Ding J, Giulianini F, Holliday EG, Jackson AU, Li-Gao R, Lin WY, Luan J,

Mangino M, Oldmeadow C, Prins BP, Qian Y, Sargurupremraj M, Shah N, Surendran P, Theriault S,

Verweij N, Willems SM, Zhao JH, Amouyel P, Connell J, de Mutsert R, Doney ASF, Farrall M, Menni C,

Morris AD, Noordam R, Pare G, Poulter NR, Shields DC, Stanton A, Thom S, Abecasis G, Amin N,

Arking DE, Ayers KL, Barbieri CM, Batini C, Bis JC, Blake T, Bochud M, Boehnke M, Boerwinkle E,

Boomsma DI, Bottinger EP, Braund PS, Brumat M, Campbell A, Campbell H, Chakravarti A, Chambers

JC, Chauhan G, Ciullo M, Cocca M, Collins F, Cordell HJ, Davies G, Borst MH, Geus EJ, Deary IJ, Deelen

J, Del Greco MF, Demirkale CY, Dorr M, Ehret GB, Elosua R, Enroth S, Erzurumluoglu AM, Ferreira T,

Franberg M, Franco OH, Gandin I, Gasparini P, Giedraitis V, Gieger C, Girotto G, Goel A, Gow AJ,

Gudnason V, Guo X, Gyllensten U, Hamsten A, Harris TB, Harris SE, Hartman CA, Havulinna AS, Hicks

AA, Hofer E, Hofman A, Hottenga JJ, Huffman JE, Hwang SJ, Ingelsson E, James A, Jansen R, Jarvelin

MR, Joehanes R, Johansson A, Johnson AD, Joshi PK, Jousilahti P, Jukema JW, Jula A, Kahonen M,

Kathiresan S, Keavney BD, Khaw KT, Knekt P, Knight J, Kolcic I, Kooner JS, Koskinen S, Kristiansson K,

Kutalik Z, Laan M, Larson M, Launer LJ, Lehne B, Lehtimaki T, Liewald DCM, Lin L, Lind L, Lindgren

CM, Liu Y, Loos RJF, Lopez LM, Lu Y, Lyytikainen LP, Mahajan A, Mamasoula C, Marrugat J, Marten J,

Milaneschi Y, Morgan A, Morris AP, Morrison AC, Munson PJ, Nalls MA, Nandakumar P, Nelson CP,

Niiranen T, Nolte IM, Nutile T, Oldehinkel AJ, Oostra BA, O'Reilly PF, Org E, Padmanabhan S, Palmas

W, Palotie A, Pattie A, Penninx B, Perola M, Peters A, Polasek O, Pramstaller PP, Nguyen QT,

Raitakari OT, Ren M, Rettig R, Rice K, Ridker PM, Ried JS, Riese H, Ripatti S, Robino A, Rose LM,

Rotter JI, Rudan I, Ruggiero D, Saba Y, Sala CF, Salomaa V, Samani NJ, Sarin AP, Schmidt R, Schmidt H,

Shrine N, Siscovick D, Smith AV, Snieder H, Sober S, Sorice R, Starr JM, Stott DJ, Strachan DP,

Strawbridge RJ, Sundstrom J, Swertz MA, Taylor KD, Teumer A, Tobin MD, Tomaszewski M, Toniolo

D, Traglia M, Trompet S, Tuomilehto J, Tzourio C, Uitterlinden AG, Vaez A, van der Most PJ, van Duijn

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

CM, Vergnaud AC, Verwoert GC, Vitart V, Volker U, Vollenweider P, Vuckovic D, Watkins H, Wild SH,

Willemsen G, Wilson JF, Wright AF, Yao J, Zemunik T, Zhang W, Attia JR, Butterworth AS, Chasman

DI, Conen D, Cucca F, Danesh J, Hayward C, Howson JMM, Laakso M, Lakatta EG, Langenberg C,

Melander O, Mook-Kanamori DO, Palmer CNA, Risch L, Scott RA, Scott RJ, Sever P, Spector TD, van

der Harst P, Wareham NJ, Zeggini E, Levy D, Munroe PB, Newton-Cheh C, Brown MJ, Metspalu A,

Hung AM, O'Donnell CJ, Edwards TL, Million Veteran P, Psaty BM, Tzoulaki I, Barnes MR, Wain LV,

Elliott P and Caulfield MJ. Genetic analysis of over 1 million people identifies 535 new loci associated

with blood pressure traits.

25.

Burgess S, Davies NM and Thompson SG. Bias due to participant overlap in two-sample

Mendelian randomization.

26.

Nat Genet. 2018:50(10):1412-1425.

Genet Epidemiol. 2016;40:597-608.

Holmes MV and Davey Smith G. Problems in interpreting and using GWAS of conditional

phenotypes illustrated by 'alcohol GWAS'.

27.

Mol Psychiatry. 2018.

Nikpay M, Goel A, Won HH, Hall LM, Willenborg C, Kanoni S, Saleheen D, Kyriakou T, Nelson

CP, Hopewell JC, Webb TR, Zeng L, Dehghan A, Alver M, Armasu SM, Auro K, Bjonnes A, Chasman DI,

Chen S, Ford I, Franceschini N, Gieger C, Grace C, Gustafsson S, Huang J, Hwang SJ, Kim YK, Kleber

ME, Lau KW, Lu X, Lu Y, Lyytikainen LP, Mihailov E, Morrison AC, Pervjakova N, Qu L, Rose LM, Salfati

E, Saxena R, Scholz M, Smith AV, Tikkanen E, Uitterlinden A, Yang X, Zhang W, Zhao W, de Andrade

M, de Vries PS, van Zuydam NR, Anand SS, Bertram L, Beutner F, Dedoussis G, Frossard P, Gauguier

D, Goodall AH, Gottesman O, Haber M, Han BG, Huang J, Jalilzadeh S, Kessler T, Konig IR, Lannfelt L,

Lieb W, Lind L, Lindgren CM, Lokki ML, Magnusson PK, Mallick NH, Mehra N, Meitinger T, Memon

FU, Morris AP, Nieminen MS, Pedersen NL, Peters A, Rallidis LS, Rasheed A, Samuel M, Shah SH,

Sinisalo J, Stirrups KE, Trompet S, Wang L, Zaman KS, Ardissino D, Boerwinkle E, Borecki IB, Bottinger

EP, Buring JE, Chambers JC, Collins R, Cupples LA, Danesh J, Demuth I, Elosua R, Epstein SE, Esko T,

Feitosa MF, Franco OH, Franzosi MG, Granger CB, Gu D, Gudnason V, Hall AS, Hamsten A, Harris TB,

Hazen SL, Hengstenberg C, Hofman A, Ingelsson E, Iribarren C, Jukema JW, Karhunen PJ, Kim BJ,

Kooner JS, Kullo IJ, Lehtimaki T, Loos RJF, Melander O, Metspalu A, Marz W, Palmer CN, Perola M,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Quertermous T, Rader DJ, Ridker PM, Ripatti S, Roberts R, Salomaa V, Sanghera DK, Schwartz SM,

Seedorf U, Stewart AF, Stott DJ, Thiery J, Zalloua PA, O'Donnell CJ, Reilly MP, Assimes TL, Thompson

JR, Erdmann J, Clarke R, Watkins H, Kathiresan S, McPherson R, Deloukas P, Schunkert H, Samani NJ

and Farrall M. A comprehensive 1,000 Genomes-based genome-wide association meta-analysis of

coronary artery disease.

28.

Nat Genet. 2015;47:1121-1130.

Klarin D, Lynch J, Aragam K, Chaffin M, Assimes TL, Huang J, Lee KM, Shao Q, Huffman JE,

Natarajan P, Arya S, Small A, Sun YV, Vujkovic M, Freiberg MS, Wang L, Chen J, Saleheen D, Lee JS,

Miller DR, Reaven P, Alba PR, Patterson OV, DuVall SL, Boden WE, Beckman JA, Gaziano JM, Concato

J, Rader DJ, Cho K, Chang KM, Wilson PWF, O'Donnell CJ, Kathiresan S, Program VAMV, Tsao PS and

Damrauer SM. Genome-wide association study of peripheral artery disease in the Million Veteran

Program.

29.

Nat Med. 2019;25:1274-1279.

Malik R, Chauhan G, Traylor M, Sargurupremraj M, Okada Y, Mishra A, Rutten-Jacobs L,

Giese AK, van der Laan SW, Gretarsdottir S, Anderson CD, Chong M, Adams HHH, Ago T, Almgren P,

Amouyel P, Ay H, Bartz TM, Benavente OR, Bevan S, Boncoraglio GB, Brown RD, Jr., Butterworth AS,

Carrera C, Carty CL, Chasman DI, Chen WM, Cole JW, Correa A, Cotlarciuc I, Cruchaga C, Danesh J, de

Bakker PIW, DeStefano AL, den Hoed M, Duan Q, Engelter ST, Falcone GJ, Gottesman RF, Grewal RP,

Gudnason V, Gustafsson S, Haessler J, Harris TB, Hassan A, Havulinna AS, Heckbert SR, Holliday EG,

Howard G, Hsu FC, Hyacinth HI, Ikram MA, Ingelsson E, Irvin MR, Jian X, Jimenez-Conde J, Johnson JA,

Jukema JW, Kanai M, Keene KL, Kissela BM, Kleindorfer DO, Kooperberg C, Kubo M, Lange LA,

Langefeld CD, Langenberg C, Launer LJ, Lee JM, Lemmens R, Leys D, Lewis CM, Lin WY, Lindgren AG,

Lorentzen E, Magnusson PK, Maguire J, Manichaikul A, McArdle PF, Meschia JF, Mitchell BD, Mosley

TH, Nalls MA, Ninomiya T, O'Donnell MJ, Psaty BM, Pulit SL, Rannikmae K, Reiner AP, Rexrode KM,

Rice K, Rich SS, Ridker PM, Rost NS, Rothwell PM, Rotter JI, Rundek T, Sacco RL, Sakaue S, Sale MM,

Salomaa V, Sapkota BR, Schmidt R, Schmidt CO, Schminke U, Sharma P, Slowik A, Sudlow CLM,

Tanislav C, Tatlisumak T, Taylor KD, Thijs VNS, Thorleifsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U, Tiedt S, Trompet S,

Tzourio C, van Duijn CM, Walters M, Wareham NJ, Wassertheil-Smoller S, Wilson JG, Wiggins KL,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Yang Q, Yusuf S, Bis JC, Pastinen T, Ruusalepp A, Schadt EE, Koplev S, Bjorkegren JLM, Codoni V,

Civelek M, Smith NL, Tregouet DA, Christophersen IE, Roselli C, Lubitz SA, Ellinor PT, Tai ES, Kooner

JS, Kato N, He J, van der Harst P, Elliott P, Chambers JC, Takeuchi F, Johnson AD, Sanghera DK,

Melander O, Jern C, Strbian D, Fernandez-Cadenas I, Longstreth WT, Jr., Rolfs A, Hata J, Woo D,

Rosand J, Pare G, Hopewell JC, Saleheen D, Stefansson K, Worrall BB, Kittner SJ, Seshadri S, Fornage

M, Markus HS, Howson JMM, Kamatani Y, Debette S, Dichgans M, Malik R, Chauhan G, Traylor M,

Sargurupremraj M, Okada Y, Mishra A, Rutten-Jacobs L, Giese AK, van der Laan SW, Gretarsdottir S,

Anderson CD, Chong M, Adams HHH, Ago T, Almgren P, Amouyel P, Ay H, Bartz TM, Benavente OR,

Bevan S, Boncoraglio GB, Brown RD, Jr., Butterworth AS, Carrera C, Carty CL, Chasman DI, Chen WM,

Cole JW, Correa A, Cotlarciuc I, Cruchaga C, Danesh J, de Bakker PIW, DeStefano AL, Hoed MD, Duan

Q, Engelter ST, Falcone GJ, Gottesman RF, Grewal RP, Gudnason V, Gustafsson S, Haessler J, Harris

TB, Hassan A, Havulinna AS, Heckbert SR, Holliday EG, Howard G, Hsu FC, Hyacinth HI, Ikram MA,

Ingelsson E, Irvin MR, Jian X, Jimenez-Conde J, Johnson JA, Jukema JW, Kanai M, Keene KL, Kissela

BM, Kleindorfer DO, Kooperberg C, Kubo M, Lange LA, Langefeld CD, Langenberg C, Launer LJ, Lee

JM, Lemmens R, Leys D, Lewis CM, Lin WY, Lindgren AG, Lorentzen E, Magnusson PK, Maguire J,

Manichaikul A, McArdle PF, Meschia JF, Mitchell BD, Mosley TH, Nalls MA, Ninomiya T, O'Donnell

MJ, Psaty BM, Pulit SL, Rannikmae K, Reiner AP, Rexrode KM, Rice K, Rich SS, Ridker PM, Rost NS,

Rothwell PM, Rotter JI, Rundek T, Sacco RL, Sakaue S, Sale MM, Salomaa V, Sapkota BR, Schmidt R,

Schmidt CO, Schminke U, Sharma P, Slowik A, Sudlow CLM, Tanislav C, Tatlisumak T, Taylor KD, Thijs

VNS, Thorleifsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U, Tiedt S, Trompet S, Tzourio C, van Duijn CM, Walters M,

Wareham NJ, Wassertheil-Smoller S, Wilson JG, Wiggins KL, Yang Q, Yusuf S, Amin N, Aparicio HS,

Arnett DK, Attia J, Beiser AS, Berr C, Buring JE, Bustamante M, Caso V, Cheng YC, Choi SH, Chowhan

A, Cullell N, Dartigues JF, Delavaran H, Delgado P, Dorr M, Engstrom G, Ford I, Gurpreet WS,

Hamsten A, Heitsch L, Hozawa A, Ibanez L, Ilinca A, Ingelsson M, Iwasaki M, Jackson RD, Jood K,

Jousilahti P, Kaffashian S, Kalra L, Kamouchi M, Kitazono T, Kjartansson O, Kloss M, Koudstaal PJ,

Krupinski J, Labovitz DL, Laurie CC, Levi CR, Li L, Lind L, Lindgren CM, Lioutas V, Liu YM, Lopez OL,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Makoto H, Martinez-Majander N, Matsuda K, Minegishi N, Montaner J, Morris AP, Muino E, Muller-

Nurasyid M, Norrving B, Ogishima S, Parati EA, Peddareddygari LR, Pedersen NL, Pera J, Perola M,

Pezzini A, Pileggi S, Rabionet R, Riba-Llena I, Ribases M, Romero JR, Roquer J, Rudd AG, Sarin AP,

Sarju R, Sarnowski C, Sasaki M, Satizabal CL, Satoh M, Sattar N, Sawada N, Sibolt G, Sigurdsson A,

Smith A, Sobue K, Soriano-Tarraga C, Stanne T, Stine OC, Stott DJ, Strauch K, Takai T, Tanaka H,

Tanno K, Teumer A, Tomppo L, Torres-Aguila NP, Touze E, Tsugane S, Uitterlinden AG, Valdimarsson

EM, van der Lee SJ, Volzke H, Wakai K, Weir D, Williams SR, Wolfe CDA, Wong Q, Xu H, Yamaji T,

Sanghera DK, Melander O, Jern C, Strbian D, Fernandez-Cadenas I, Longstreth WT, Jr., Rolfs A, Hata J,

Woo D, Rosand J, Pare G, Hopewell JC, Saleheen D, Stefansson K, Worrall BB, Kittner SJ, Seshadri S,

Fornage M, Markus HS, Howson JMM, Kamatani Y, Debette S, Dichgans M, Consortium AF, Cohorts

for H, Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology C, International Genomics of Blood Pressure C,

Consortium I, Starnet, BioBank Japan Cooperative Hospital G, Consortium C, Consortium E-C,

Consortium EP-I, International Stroke Genetics C, Consortium M, Neurology Working Group of the

CC, Network NSG, Study UKYLD, Consortium M and Consortium M. Multiancestry genome-wide

association study of 520,000 subjects identifies 32 loci associated with stroke and stroke subtypes.

Nat Genet. 2018;50:524-537.
30.

Sudlow C, Gallacher J, Allen N, Beral V, Burton P, Danesh J, Downey P, Elliott P, Green J,

Landray M, Liu B, Matthews P, Ong G, Pell J, Silman A, Young A, Sprosen T, Peakman T and Collins R.

UK Biobank: An Open Access Resource for Identifying the Causes of a Wide Range of Complex

Diseases of Middle and Old Age.

31.

PLoS Med. 2015;12(3):e1001779.

Hemani G, Zheng J, Elsworth B, Wade KH, Haberland V, Baird D, Laurin C, Burgess S, Bowden

J, Langdon R, Tan VY, Yarmolinsky J, Shihab HA, Timpson NJ, Evans DM, Relton C, Martin RM, Davey

Smith G, Gaunt TR and Haycock PC. The MR-Base platform supports systematic causal inference

across the human phenome.

eLife . 2018;7.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

32.

Bowden J, Davey Smith G, Haycock PC and Burgess S. Consistent Estimation in Mendelian

Randomization with Some Invalid Instruments Using a Weighted Median Estimator.

Genet Epidemiol.

2016;40:304-14.

33.

Burgess S, Foley CN, Allara E, Staley JR and Howson JM. A robust and efficient method for

Mendelian randomization with hundreds of genetic variants: unravelling mechanisms linking HDL-

cholesterol and coronary heart disease.

34.

bioRxiv. 2019:566851.

Verbanck M, Chen CY, Neale B and Do R. Detection of widespread horizontal pleiotropy in

causal relationships inferred from Mendelian randomization between complex traits and diseases.

Nat Genet. 2018;50:693-698.
35.

Burgess S, Dudbridge F and Thompson SG. Re: "Multivariable Mendelian randomization: the

use of pleiotropic genetic variants to estimate causal effects".

36.

Am J Epidemiol. 2015;181:290-1.

Bowden J, Davey Smith G and Burgess S. Mendelian randomization with invalid instruments:

effect estimation and bias detection through Egger regression.

37.

Int J Epidemiol. 2015;44:512-25.

Carter AR, Sanderson E, Hammerton G, Richmond RC, Smith GD, Heron J, Taylor AE, Davies

NM and Howe LD. Mendelian randomisation for mediation analysis: current methods and challenges

for implementation.

38.

bioRxiv . 2019:835819.

Palmer TM, Sterne JA, Harbord RM, Lawlor DA, Sheehan NA, Meng S, Granell R, Smith GD

and Didelez V. Instrumental variable estimation of causal risk ratios and causal odds ratios in

Mendelian randomization analyses.

39.

Am J Epidemiol. 2011;173:1392-403.

Davey Smith G, Davies NM, Dimou N, Egger M, Gallo V, Golub R, Higgins JP, Langenberg C,

Loder EW, Richards JB, Richmond RC, Skrivankova VW, Swanson SA, Timpson NJ, Tybjaerg-Hansen A,

VanderWeele TJ, Woolf BA and J. Y. STROBE-MR: Guidelines for strengthening the reporting of

Mendelian randomization studies. https://doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.27857v1.

PeerJ Preprints.

2019;7:e27857v1.

40.

MacDonald TM, Ford I, Nuki G, Mackenzie IS, De Caterina R, Findlay E, Hallas J, Hawkey CJ,

Ralston S, Walters M, Webster J, McMurray J, Perez Ruiz F, Jennings CG and Members of the FSG.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Protocol of the Febuxostat versus Allopurinol Streamlined Trial (FAST): a large prospective,

randomised, open, blinded endpoint study comparing the cardiovascular safety of allopurinol and

febuxostat in the management of symptomatic hyperuricaemia.

41.

BMJ Open. 2014;4:e005354.

Mackenzie IS, Ford I, Walker A, Hawkey C, Begg A, Avery A, Taggar J, Wei L, Struthers AD,

MacDonald TM and group A-Hs. Multicentre, prospective, randomised, open-label, blinded end

point trial of the efficacy of allopurinol therapy in improving cardiovascular outcomes in patients

with ischaemic heart disease: protocol of the ALL-HEART study.

42.

BMJ Open. 2016;6:e013774.

Noman A, Ang DS, Ogston S, Lang CC and Struthers AD. Effect of high-dose allopurinol on

exercise in patients with chronic stable angina: a randomised, placebo controlled crossover trial.

Lancet. 2010;375:2161-7.
43.

Slob EAW and Burgess S. A Comparison Of Robust Mendelian Randomization Methods Using

Summary Data.

44.

bioRxiv. 2019:577940.

Burgess S, Ference BA, Staley JR, Freitag DF, Mason AM, Nielsen SF, Willeit P, Young R,

Surendran P, Karthikeyan S, Bolton TR, Peters JE, Kamstrup PR, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Benn M,

Langsted A, Schnohr P, Vedel-Krogh S, Kobylecki CJ, Ford I, Packard C, Trompet S, Jukema JW, Sattar

N, Di Angelantonio E, Saleheen D, Howson JMM, Nordestgaard BG, Butterworth AS, Danesh J,

European Prospective Investigation Into C and Nutrition-Cardiovascular Disease C. Association of LPA

Variants With Risk of Coronary Disease and the Implications for Lipoprotein(a)-Lowering Therapies: A

Mendelian Randomization Analysis.

45.

JAMA Cardiol. 2018;3:619-627.

Grant A and Burgess S. An efficient and robust approach to Mendelian randomization with

measured pleiotropic effects in a high-dimensional setting.

arXiv. 2019:1911.00347.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figures
Figure 1 - Mendelian randomization estimates for the effect of 1-standard
deviation (SD) increase in genetically determined serum urate levels on risk of
coronary heart disease (CHD), peripheral artery disease (PAD) and stroke.

CI: confidence interval; Con-Mix: contamination-mixture; IVW: inverse-variance weighted; MVMR:
multivariable Mendelian randomization (adjusting for genetic association of the instrument variants
with body mass index, estimated glomerular filtration rate, type 2 diabetes mellitus, low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycerides); OR: odds ratio;
PRESSO: pleiotropy residual sum and outlier. The outlier-corrected PRESSO results are presented (five
outlier variants were identified for CHD, eight for PAD, and one for stroke).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 2 – Mendelian randomization estimates for the effect of 1-standard
deviation (SD) increase in genetically determined serum urate levels on
systolic blood pressure.

CI: confidence interval; Con-Mix: contamination-mixture; IVW: inverse-variance weighted;
OR: odds ratio; PRESSO: pleiotropy residual sum and outlier. The outlier-corrected PRESSO results are
presented (21 outlier variants were identified).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 3 – Inverse-variance weighted (IVW) and multivariable Mendelian
randomization (MVMR) estimates for the effect of 1-standard deviation (SD)
increase in genetically determined serum urate levels on risk of coronary heart
disease (CHD), peripheral artery disease (PAD) and stroke. The MVMR analysis
adjusts for the association of the genetic instruments with systolic blood
pressure.

CI: confidence interval; OR: odds ratio.

cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk and systolic blood pressure (SBP) respectively.

It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Quantile 1 contains those with the lowest residual urate level and Quantile 4 contains those with the highest. CI: confidence interval; OR: odds ratio; SD: standard deviation.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.11.19014472; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

Figure 4 – Stratum specific Mendelian randomization (MR) estimates for the effect of genetically predicted serum urate on

