medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Updating Insights into Rosiglitazone and Cardiovascular Risk through Shared Data:
Individual Patient- and Summary-Level Meta-Analyses
Joshua D Wallach, Kun Wang, Audrey D Zhang, Deanna Cheng, Holly K Grossetta Nardini, Haiqun Lin,
Michael B Bracken, Mayur Desai, Harlan M Krumholz, Joseph S Ross
Joshua D Wallach, Assistant Professor
Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Yale School of Public Health and the Collaboration for
Research Integrity and Transparency, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA, 60
College Street, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA
Kun Wang, Statistician II
Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Yale-New Haven Health System, New Haven CT, USA
Audrey D Zhang, Medical Student
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA; Center for Outcomes Research and
Evaluation, Yale-New Haven Health System, New Haven, CT, USA
Deanna Cheng, Graduate Student
Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, 06510,
USA
Holly K Grosetta Nardini, Associate Director
Harvey Cushing/John Hay Whitney Medical Library, Yale University, 333 Cedar St., New Haven, CT
Haiqun Lin, Associate Professor
Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, USA
Michael B Bracken, Professor
Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, 06510,
USA
Mayur Desai, Associate Professor
Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, 06510,
USA
Harlan Krumholz, Professor
Section of Cardiovascular Medicine and the National Clinician Scholars Program, Department of Internal
Medicine, Yale School of Medicine; Department of Health Policy and Management, Yale School of
Public Health; and Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Yale-New Haven Health System, New
Haven CT, USA
Joseph S Ross, Associate Professor
Section of General Medicine and the National Clinician Scholars Program, Department of Internal
Medicine, Yale School of Medicine; Department of Health Policy and Management, Yale School of
Public Health; and Center for Outcomes Research and Evaluation, Yale-New Haven Health System, New
Haven CT, USA
Corresponding author:
Joshua D Wallach, MS, PhD
Assistant Professor

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Department of Environmental Health Sciences
Yale School of Public Health
60 College Street, 4th Floor, Room 411
New Haven, CT, 06510 USA
Email: joshua.wallach@yale.edu
Key words: Drug safety; adverse events; data-sharing; individual patient-level data
Word count: 5022
Figures/Tables: 7 (1 Figure, 6 Tables)
References: 55
Appendix: 1

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

ABSTRACT
Objective To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of the effects of rosiglitazone therapy on
cardiovascular risk and mortality using multiple data sources and varying analytical approaches.
Design Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Data sources GlaxoSmithKline’s (GSK) Clinical Study Data Request (CSDR) and Study Register
platforms, MEDLINE, PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Cochrane Central Registry of Controlled
Trials, Scopus, and ClinicalTrials.gov from inception to January 2019.
Study selection criteria Randomized, controlled, phase II-IV clinical trials comparing rosiglitazone with
any control for at least 24 weeks in adults.
Data extraction and synthesis For analyses of trials for which individual patient-level data (IPD) were
available, we examined a composite of the following events as our primary outcome: acute myocardial
infarction, heart failure, cardiovascular-related deaths, and non-cardiovascular-related deaths. As
secondary analyses, these four events were examined independently. When also including trials for which
IPD were not available, we examined myocardial infarction and cardiovascular-related deaths, ascertained
from summary-level data. Multiple meta-analyses were conducted, accounting for trials with zero events
in one or all arms with two different continuity corrections (i.e., 0.5 constant and treatment arm
comparator continuity correction), to calculate odds ratios and risk ratios with 95% confidence intervals.
Results There were 33 eligible trials for which IPD were available (21156 participants) through GSK’s
CSDR. We also identified 103 additional trials for which IPD were not available from which we
ascertained myocardial infarctions (23683 patients) and 103 trials for cardiovascular-related deaths
(22772 patients). Among trials for which IPD were available, we identified a greater number of
myocardial infarctions and fewer cardiovascular-related deaths reported in the IPD as compared to the
summary-level data. When limited to trials for which IPD were available and accounting for trials with
zero-events in only one arm using a constant continuity correction of 0.5, patients treated with
rosiglitazone had a 39% increased risk of a composite event compared with controls (Mantel-Haenszel
odds ratio 1.39, 95% CI 1.15 to 1.68). When examined separately, the odds ratios for myocardial
infarction, heart failure, cardiovascular-related death, and non-cardiovascular-related death were 1.25
(0.99 to 1.60), 1.60 (1.20 to 2.14), 1.18 (0.64 to 2.17), and 1.13 (0.58 to 2.20), respectively. When all
trials for which IPD were and were not available were combined for myocardial infarction and
cardiovascular-related deaths, the odds ratios were attenuated (1.13 (0.92 to 1.38) and 1.10 (0.73 to 1.65),
respectively). Effect estimates and 95% confidence intervals were broadly consistent when analyses were
repeated including trials with zero events across all arms using constant continuity corrections of 0.5 or
treatment arm continuity corrections.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Conclusions Results of this comprehensive meta-analysis aggregating a multitude of trials and analyzed
using a variety of statistical techniques suggest that rosiglitazone is consistently associated with an
increased cardiovascular risk, likely driven by heart failure events, whose interpretation is complicated by
varying magnitudes of myocardial infarction risk that were attenuated through aggregation of summarylevel data in addition to IPD.

Systematic review registration: https://osf.io/4yvp2/

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

What is already known on this topic:
-

Since 2007, there have been multiple meta-analyses, using various analytic approaches, that have
reported conflicting findings related to rosiglitazone’s cardiovascular risk.

-

Previous meta-analyses have relied primarily on summary-level data, and did not have access to
individual patient-level data (IPD) from clinical trials.

-

Currently, there is little consensus on which method should be used to account for sparse adverse
event data in meta-analyses.

What this study adds:
-

Among trials for which IPD were available, rosiglitazone use was consistently associated with an
increased cardiovascular risk, likely driven by heart failure events.

-

Interpretation of rosiglitazone’s cardiovascular risk is complicated by varying magnitudes of
myocardial infarction risk that were attenuated through aggregation of summary-level data in
addition to IPD.

-

Among trials for which IPD were available, we identified a greater number of myocardial
infarctions and fewer cardiovascular deaths reported in the IPD as compared to the summarylevel data, which suggests that IPD may be necessary to accurately classify all adverse events
when performing meta-analyses focused on safety.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

INTRODUCTION
In 1999, rosiglitazone, manufactured by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) under the brand name Avandia,
was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes
mellitus.1,2 After marketing approval, use of rosiglitazone grew rapidly, with annual sales peaking at
approximately $3.3 billion in 2006.3 However, in May 2007, safety concerns were raised about
rosiglitazone after a meta-analysis of 42 GSK trials suggested that it was associated with a 43% increased
risk of myocardial infarction.4 These safety findings led to questions about whether GSK and the FDA
should have released similar information earlier, and resulted in congressional hearings and an FDA
safety alert.5-7 Between 2010 and 2011, the FDA updated rosiglitazone’s product label to include
information on cardiovascular risks and limited the availability of rosiglitazone as part of a Risk
Evaluation Mitigation Strategy (REMS) program, where patients could only receive rosiglitazone from
certain specialty mail-order pharmacies.2,8 Although the restrictions were withdrawn in 2013 after an
analysis of the Rosiglitazone Evaluation for Cardiac Outcomes and Regulation of glycemic Diabetes
(RECORD) study found rosiglitazone’s cardiovascular safety profile to be no different than that of other
drugs in its class (e.g., sulfonylurea),9 the design and conduct of the RECORD study have been widely
debated, and there may be lingering apprehension among patients and physicians.10,11
Since 2007, there have been multiple meta-analyses, using various analytic approaches, that have
reported conflicting findings related to rosiglitazone’s cardiovascular risk, in part because of limitations in
the meta-analyses and in the original trial designs.12-17 First, previous meta-analyses did not have access to
individual patient-level data (IPD), which provide numerous advantages.18 Most reviews using GSK
summary-level data focused on myocardial infarction and deaths from cardiovascular causes, and it was
not possible to determine mutually exclusive events. Public data sources often only report composite
study outcomes, in which the occurrence of any of the included events is defined as an outcome. IPD may
allow for the identification of additional patient-specific or mutually exclusive adverse events, can be
used to determine potentially missing or poorly reported outcomes, which can help minimize the impact
of selective adverse event reporting in publications, and can be used to more consistently identify and
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

classify events.18 Second, many reviews used meta-analytic approaches that excluded trials with zero
events in the treatment and control groups,4,17 even though these studies suggest that, at least in a clinical
trial population, certain outcomes occur infrequently and their inclusion in meta-analyses can lead to
more precise effect estimates.13,14,19-22 Lastly, most reviews relied exclusively on data from GSK trials and
the Diabetes Reduction Assessment with Ramipril and rosiglitazone Medication (DREAM) trial.4,17 Since
rosiglitazone was approved and the original meta-analyses were published, dozens of additional trials
have been published.
Initiatives to promote open science and data sharing,23-25 including recent efforts by GSK to make
IPD available to external investigators for research that can help advance medical science or improve
patient care,26 present a unique opportunity to better address the question of rosiglitazone’s cardiovascular
risk. Using all trials for which IPD were available from GSK’s rosiglitazone clinical trial program, and
supplemental summary-level data where IPD data were not available, our objective was to conduct a
comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis of rosiglitazone’s cardiovascular risk. Our analyses
considers different data sources and analytical methods to better estimate the effects of rosiglitazone on
cardiovascular risk and mortality, and characterizes risk for a composite outcome of heart failure, acute
myocardial infarction, cardiovascular-related deaths, and non-cardiovascular related deaths, an outcome
informed by previous meta-analyses and black-box warnings.4,17 As secondary analyses, these four events
were examined independently. This work can inform efforts to promote clinical trial transparency, as well
as trial data sharing initiatives, including the role of IPD in meta-analyses of drug safety.
METHODS
This systematic review and meta-analysis is reported according to the Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement.27 The original proposal for the IPD
portion of the study and study protocol is available online: https://osf.io/4yvp2/.
Search Strategy and Data Sources
Clinical trial data on the effects of rosiglitazone therapy on cardiovascular risk and mortality may
be reported in multiple public and nonpublic sources.28 Considering that public sources, such as journals
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

and trial registrations, are more likely to be incomplete,28,29 we prioritized the information reported in IPD
and Clinical Study Reports (CSRs). Therefore, we first identified and requested all phase II, III, and IV
clinical trials of rosiglitazone with IPD made available by GSK through ClinicalStudyDataRequest.com
(CSDR). CSDR was developed by GSK as a system for providing access to patient-level data from
clinical trials.26 CSDR allows independent researchers to request clinical trial IPD from over 1,500
studies. To our knowledge, none of the previous reviews of rosiglitazone’s safety utilized these IPD.
We then reviewed the references included in three prior meta-analyses focused on rosiglitazone
and identified 220 candidate trials for inclusion.4,17,30 On May 3, 2017, we searched “rosiglitazone” in the
“interventional/treatment” field of ClinicalTrials.gov, a registry of clinical trials run by the US National
Library of Medicine, and identified 220 entries. We then performed a full text search for “rosiglitazone”,
limited to phase II-IV trials, on GSK Study Register (Gsk-clinicalstudyregister.com). The GSK Study
Register is a repository of data and information about GSK studies, which includes Protocol Summaries,
Scientific Results Summaries, Protocols, and CSRs. The final search retrieved a total of 150 entries with
Scientific Result Summaries.
In order to identify all published phase II, III, and IV clinical trials for which IPD or CSRs were
not available, a systematic literature search was performed in accordance with the PRISMA statement. An
experienced medical librarian (HKGN) consulted on methodology and ran a medical subject heading
(MeSH) analysis of known key articles provided by the research team [mesh.med.yale.edu].31 In each
database, we ran scoping searches and used an iterative process to translate and refine the searches. To
maximize sensitivity, the formal search used minimal controlled vocabulary terms and synonymous freetext words plus the CAS registry number to capture the concepts of “rosiglitazone” and “Avandia.” This
set was combined with the concept of clinical trials using the Cochrane Highly Sensitive Search
Strategies for identifying randomized trials in MEDLINE. On December 13, 2017, the librarian
performed a comprehensive search of multiple databases: MEDLINE (Ovid ALL, 1946-December Week
1 2017), PubMed for in-process and unindexed material, Embase (Ovid, 1974-2017 December 13), Web
of Science SCI-EXPANDED (Thompson Reuters, all years), Cochrane Central Registry of Controlled
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Trials (Wiley, Issue 12 of 12, December 2017) and Scopus (Elsevier, all years). Both English and foreign
language articles were eligible for inclusion. No date limit was applied. The search retrieved a total of
5629 references, which were pooled in EndNote and de-duplicated [www.endnote.com].32 This set was
uploaded to Covidence [www.covidence.org],33 which identified additional duplicates, leaving 4774 for
screening. On January 31, 2019, all searches were updated and an additional 162 records were added to
Covidence and screened. In all, 6049 studies were retrieved across all databases and dates, and 4,604
studies were screened. All search strategies are in Supplementary appendix box 1, and a flowchart
adapted per PRISMA is presented in Figure 1.
Lastly, for all published articles with unclear adverse events reported, we sent individual emails
that referenced the specific population of interest, outlined the number of relevant adverse events reported
in the publication, and asked the authors to verify whether the abstracted values were correct.
Eligibility Criteria
We included all randomized controlled trials that compared the effect of rosiglitazone with any
control group and excluded studies that: (1) had less than 24 weeks of drug exposure, since previous
meta-analyses have used similar criteria4,17; (2) had no comparator arms; (3) focused on pediatric patient
populations; (4) were terminated early, unless they were stopped after longer than 24 weeks or they were
stopped for cardiovascular-related safety reasons; (5) were extension studies where it was unclear whether
patients switched treatment groups; (6) had non-clinical study designs (e.g., animal studies or trials with
healthy subjects); (7) were presentations or abstracts without adverse events.
Study Selection
Three reviewers (JDW, DC, JSR) screened all of the records identified on CSDR and one
independent reviewer (JDW) screened all other records at the title and abstract level. Potentially eligible
studies were assessed in full text by two reviewers (JDW, ADZ), with arbitration by a third reviewer
(JSR). When multiple publications of one study were retrieved, we used data from the report with the
longest duration of follow-up. For each potentially eligible trial identified, we determined overlapping
ClinicalTrials.gov registrations, publications, CSRs, and IPD. When sponsor/funder trial identifiers and/or
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

ClinicalTrials.gov National Clinical Trial (NCT) identifiers were provided, we used those to match trials
reported across multiple sources. When publications had corresponding ClinicalTrials.gov registrations
with reported results, we abstracted data from the source with the greatest number of events. However, if
a publication or registration had IPD and/or a corresponding GSK Clinical Study ID on Gskclinicalstudyregister.com, we prioritized the IPD and then the CSR or Scientific Result Summary data.
Data collection and analysis
For all included studies, we either used the demographic and study design characteristics
provided in publications, or, when available, data provided by GSK or on ClinicalTrials.gov registries.
We recorded the intention to treat population, average age, proportion male, and proportion White race
for each treatment arm. We also recorded the treatment regimen, treatment dosage, treatment duration,
and relevant adverse events. Groups of patients who received any dosage of rosiglitazone were pooled
together to make up the treatment group. The control group was defined as patients receiving any drug
regimen other than rosiglitazone, including placebo.
IPD
The outcomes selected for this meta-analysis were informed by the previous meta-analyses and
black-box warnings.4,17 The primary outcome for the trials for which IPD were available was the
composite of the following cardiovascular risk and mortality outcomes: acute myocardial infarction
events, heart failure events, cardiovascular-related deaths, and non-cardiovascular related deaths. As
secondary analyses, these four events were examined independently. All clinical trials conducted by GSK
used the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) terms to report trial adverse events
(Supplementary appendix box 2). MedDRA is the international medical terminology developed under
the guidance of the International Conference of Technical Requirements for Registration of
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use.34 Four authors (JDW, DC, KW, JSR) reviewed all adverse event listings
and abstracted data from the adverse event tabulations to identify acute myocardial infarctions, heart
failures, deaths from cardiovascular related cause, and deaths from any cause. Trials made available by

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

GSK through ClinicalStudyDataRequest.com were excluded if they did not report “high-level” or
“preferred” adverse event terms, since our outcomes of interest could only be derived from their use.
Summary data
Due to reporting limitations in publications and CSRs, we focused on myocardial infarction and
cardiovascular-related deaths, as determined by any cardiac cause, cerebrovascular disease, sudden death,
cardiac arrest of unspecific origin, or peripheral artery disease, for trials for which IPD were not available.
Articles that (1) failed to mention a specific adverse event of interest and (2) did not disclose that serious
adverse events were not observed were excluded unless additional information was provided by the
corresponding authors, even though failure to mention a particular outcome does not necessarily imply
that there were no such events in the study.
Assessment of risk of bias in included studies
Two reviewers (JDW, ADZ) assessed the risk of bias based on the Cochrane Collaboration Risk
of Bias Assessment tool (Supplementary appendix box 3).
Validation
Specific outcome classification for a subset of trials for which IPD were available that overlapped
with previously conducted meta-analyses were noted in Supplementary appendix Tables 1 and 2.
Statistical analysis
We performed a series of two-stage meta-analyses considering different data sources and varying
analytical approaches (Table 1). In the first stage, we calculated trial-specific odds ratios or relative risk
and their corresponding 95% confidence intervals. In the second stage, effect estimates from each
individual trial were combined by fixed or random effects meta-analyses models. First, we used Peto’s
method to pool odds ratios, since this was the method reported in the original rosiglitazone metaanalysis.4 Peto’s method is often the standard method for meta-analyses with rare events and small
intervention effects.12,35 While Peto’s method does not require correction for trials where one arm has no
events (single-zero-event trials), the method performs best when event rates are low (<1%) and the
treatment arm allocations are balanced. Previous studies have noted that there is substantial imbalance in
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

the number of patients in many of the rosiglitazone trials.35 We then combined the results from each
individual trial using conventional fixed (Mantel-Haenszel (MH)) or random (Dersimonian and Laird)
effects methods (Table 1). All analyses were repeated including single-zero-event trials and trials with
zero events in both arms (total-zero-event trials), applying two different continuity corrections: (1) a
constant continuity correction, which adds 0.5 to each cell in a 2x2 contingency table for the trials with at
least one zero event, and (2) a treatment arm continuity correction, where values proportionate to the
reciprocal of the size of the opposite treatment group is added to each cell. Four different combinations of
data sources were considered: (1) IPD only, (2) IPD and the RECORD trial, (3) IPD and the summarylevel data (CSRs, data from previous meta-analyses, and publications/ClinicalTrials.gov registrations) and
(4) IPD, the summary-level data, and the RECORD trial. Although the RECORD trial included
observational follow-up of a clinical trial, which fails to meet our pre-specified inclusion criteria,
RECORD data was used to inform the easing of restrictiveness of the rosiglitazone REMS and is
therefore an important source of evidence.10,17,36,37 Since previous studies have noted that the Peto odds
ratio is not recommended when there is substantial imbalance in the number of patients and inverse
variance methods perform poorly when data are sparse,12,35 we focused our reporting on odds ratios with
the use of constant continuity correction of 0.5 and Mantel-Haenszel weighting procedures. Heterogeneity
between trials was assessed using the I-squared statistics, with values greater than 50% indicating
moderate to substantial statistical heterogeneity.
Sensitivity analyses
Three post-hoc subgroup analyses were conducted (Mantel-Haenszel odds ratios and a constant
continuity correction of 0.5), including and excluding total-zero-event trials: indication (type 2 diabetes
mellitus vs. other) for all outcomes; data source (IPD, CSRs/previous meta-analyses, vs. published
articles/ClinicalTrials.gov) for myocardial infarction and cardiovascular related deaths; and control group
(placebo, metformin, sulfonylureas, or other) for all outcomes. Due to the large number of proposed
analyses, and our focus on evaluating the impact of considering different data sources, irregardless of trial

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

size, and statistical techniques, additional sensitivity analyses (e.g., evaluating small study effects and the
impact of excluding trials based on their risk of bias) were outside the scope of this evaluation.
All statistical analyses were performed by one reviewer (JDW) using the “meta” package in R
(version 3.3) and verified by a second statistician (KW).
Patient and public involvement
No patients were involved in setting the research question or the outcome measures, nor were
they involved in developing plans for design or implementation of the study. No patients were asked to
advise on interpretation or writing up of results. There are no plans to disseminate the results of the
research to study participants or the relevant patient community.
RESULTS
Description of included studies
Of the 59 trials identified and requested from the GSK clinical trial registry database, 33 met the
inclusion criteria and had IPD (n=34, including the RECORD study which contained observational
follow-up data) (Figure 1). We identified an additional 31 eligible trials included in previous metaanalyses (n=26)4,17,30, on the GSK Study Register (n=4), and on ClinicalTrials.gov (n=1). Among the 4774
titles and abstracts identified through the literature search, 170 were excluded as duplicates, leaving 4604
for initial screening. We excluded 4331 during the initial screening based on the title and abstract. Among
the remaining 273 records screened at the full-text level, 193 were excluded, mostly because they
represented multiple publications from the same trial, publications from trials for which we already had
IPD or CSRs, or abstracts without data. We were left with 80 trials that met the initial inclusion criteria
and potentially reported outcomes of interest, of which we were able to obtain either myocardial
infarction or cardiovascular related death event data for a total of 76 additional included trials.
Among the 33 trials for which IPD were available, there were a total of 21156 patients, over half
of whom (11837, 56.0%) received rosiglitazone (dosages ranging from 2 to 8 mg per day). Although a
majority of trials enrolled patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (25 of 33, 75.8%), there were 8 (22.9%)
that focused on other non-FDA approved (i.e., off-label) indications (2 psoriasis, 1 rheumatoid arthritis, 1
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

atherosclerosis, and 4 Alzheimer’s disease (Supplementary appendix table 1). Among 11837 patients
allocated to rosiglitazone treatment, there were 274 composite events (147 myocardial infarctions, 122
heart failures, 15 cardiovascular-related deaths, and 22 non-cardiovascular related deaths), whereas there
were 219 composite events (133 myocardial infarctions, 80 heart failures, 10 cardiovascular-related
deaths, and 13 non-cardiovascular related deaths,) among 9319 patients allocated to comparator
treatments (Supplementary appendix table 2).
Among the 103 trials for which IPD were not available included in the meta-analyses for
myocardial infarction, there were a total of 23683 patients, of which 12630 (53.3%) were randomized to
rosiglitazone. Approximately two-thirds of the trials included adult patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
(69, 66.3%). There were 43 myocardial infarctions among the rosiglitazone arms and 40 myocardial
infarctions among the comparators arms. Coincidentally, the same number of trials without IPD
contributed to the meta-analyses for cardiovascular death, which included 22772 patients, of which 12183
(53.4%) were randomized to rosiglitazone. Most trials (71, 68.9%) enrolled patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. There were 26 and 20 deaths from cardiovascular causes among the rosiglitazone and
comparator arms, respectively (Supplementary appendix table 2).
Comparing IPD and summary-level data
We identified 29 trials for which IPD were available and which were included in previous metaanalyses using GSK’s summary level data. Among these, there were three trials with same number of
myocardial infarction events reported in both sources and 23 trials with the same number of
cardiovascular related deaths (Supplementary appendix table 2). However, a greater number of
myocardial infarction events and cardiovascular related deaths were identified using IPD instead of
summary-level data for 26 and one trial(s), respectively. Although there was only one trial where the IPD
contained fewer myocardial infarctions than reported via GSK’s summary level data, five trials contained
fewer cardiovascular related deaths. Lastly, the IPD for the RECORD study contained more myocardial
infarctions and fewer cardiovascular related deaths than were reported in GSK’s summary-level data.
Meta-analyses
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Individual Patient-Level Data Trials
There was a 39% increased odds of a composite event (i.e., myocardial infarction events, heart
failure events, cardiovascular-related deaths, and non-cardiovascular related deaths) among rosiglitazone
patients when compared to patients in control groups (Mantel-Haenszel odds ratio 1.39, 95% Confidence
Interval 1.15 to 1.68; P = 0.0007; I2=0; 31 single-zero-event trials; continuity correction 0.5, Table 2)).
The effect estimate and 95% confidence interval did not change when total-zero-event trials were
included (1.39, 1.15 to 1.68; P = 0.0007; I2=0; 33 total-zero-event trials; continuity correction 0.5; Table
2). When each of the 4 outcomes was examined independently, the odds ratios for myocardial infarction,
heart failure, cardiovascular-related death, and all cause death were 1.25 (1.25, 0.99 to 1.60; I2=0; 30
single-zero-event trials; continuity correction 0.5; Table 3)), 1.60 (1.60, 1.20 to 2.14; P = 0.0016; I2=0;
26 single-zero-event trials; continuity correction 0.5; Table 4)), 1.18 (1.18, 0.64 to 2.17; I2=0; 16 singlezero-event trials; continuity correction 0.5; Table 5)), and 1.13 (1.13, 0.58 to 2.20; I2=0; 16 single-zeroevent trials, continuity correction 0.5; Table 6)), respectively. Although all effect estimates were
attenuated towards the null when the RECORD trial and total-zero-event trials were included with 0.5
continuity corrections, effect estimates were consistently larger when treatment arm continuity corrections
were applied.
Meta-Analysis Using All Trials
Across all data sources, rosiglitazone was associated with a 13% increased odds of myocardial
infarction (Mantel-Haenszel odds ratio 1.13, 0.92 to 1.38; I2=0; 60 single-zero-event trials; continuity
correction 0.5; Table 3)). When all 136 trials (33 from IPD and 103 from CSRs/previous meta-analyses
and publications/ClinicalTrials.gov), including both single-zero-event and total-zero-event trials, were
considered, the odds ratio was 1.11 (1.11, 0.92 to 1.34; I2=0; 136 single-zero-event and zero-total-event
trials; continuity correction 0.5; Table 3). Rosiglitazone was associated with a 10% increased odds of
cardiovascular-related deaths (1.10, 0.73 to 1.65; I2=0; 33 single-zero-event trials; continuity correction
0.5; Table 5). Across all 136 single-zero-event and total-zero-event trials, there was no relationship
between rosiglitazone and death from cardiovascular related causes (1.01, 0.80 to 1.28; I2=0; 136 single15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

zero-event and zero-total-event trials; continuity correction 0.5; Table 5)). Similar to the analyses limited
to IPD, effect estimates were larger (more harmful) when treatment arm continuity corrections were
applied.
There were no statistically significant differences in the post-hoc subgroup analyses for
indications (Type 2 diabetes mellitus vs. other), comparators (placebo, sulfonylureas, metformin, vs.
other), and data sources (IPD, CSRs/previous meta-analyses, vs. publications/ClinicalTrials.gov) (data not
shown). Lastly, among these trials for which IPD and summary-level data were available, effect estimates
and 95% confidence intervals were broadly consistent, regardless of whether the IPD or summary-level
data were used or which statistical approach was used (Supplementary appendix tables 3 and 4).
Quality assessment
The results of the risk of bias assessment are presented in Supplementary appendix text 1 and
table 5.
DISCUSSION
In this comprehensive meta-analysis, we used multiple clinical trial data sources and different
analytical methods to evaluate the effect of rosiglitazone on cardiovascular risk and mortality. Among 33
trials for which IPD were available, we observed a 39% increased odds of a composite outcome (i.e.,
myocardial infarction, heart failure, cardiovascular-related deaths, and non-cardiovascular-related deaths)
among rosiglitazone patients when compared to patients in control groups. However, this association was
likely driven by an increased risk of heart failure associated with rosiglitazone. Furthermore, the
interpretation of rosiglitazone’s cardiovascular risk was complicated by varying magnitudes of
myocardial infarction risk, which were attenuated through aggregation of summary-level data in addition
to IPD.
Although we observed that rosiglitazone use was associated with a nearly 40% increased
cardiovascular risk among trials for which IPD were available, it is likely explained by an increased
number of heart failure events. This is consistent with a previous meta-analysis, which reported a nearly
70% increased risk of heart failure among those receiving rosiglitazone,30 and is consistent with FDA
16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

warnings issued in 2001 and 2006.38 However, since 2007, the controversy surrounding rosiglitazone has
focused primarily on the possible increased risk of myocardial infarction. For instance, Nissen et al.
reported 43% and 28% increased odds for myocardial infarction in their 2007 and 2010 meta-analyses,
respectively.4,17 Our analysis offers only suggestive evidence of an increased risk of myocardial
infarction, as the summary estimate based on trials for which IPD were available has a 95% CI that just
crosses one. Furthermore, across different analytic approaches, odds ratios ranged from 1.07 to 1.30, with
the most attenuated estimates occurring through aggregation of summary-level data in addition to IPD
Data Sharing Implications
Rosiglitazone provides an ideal case to assess the impact of using IPD for safety-related metaanalyses examining relatively rare adverse events. Previous studies have consistently observed incomplete
safety reporting in randomized trials, with some estimates suggesting that less than 50% of randomized
trials adequately report clinical adverse effects.39 Furthermore, concerns have been raised about
discrepancies in the reporting of outcomes across different sources of data,28,29 with registries (e.g.
ClinicalTrials.gov) having poorer reporting quality than CSRs.40 CSRs provide detailed information on
study design and outcomes and are often believed to be sufficient for systematic reviews.41 However, we
identified a greater number of myocardial infarctions and fewer cardiovascular deaths in the IPD
compared to what had previously been reported based on CSRs. Among 29 trials for which IPD were
available and which were included in previous meta-analyses using GSK’s summary-level data, 26 had a
greater number of identifiable myocardial infarctions and 6 had fewer cardiovascular-related deaths in the
IPD when compared to the GSK summary-level data. Therefore, when performing meta-analyses focused
on safety, IPD may be necessary to accurately classify all adverse events, thereby enabling research that
will allow patients, clinicians, and researchers to make more informed decisions about the safety of
interventions.25,42
Numerous initiatives to promote open science and foster clinical trial data sharing have been
developed over the last few years.23-25,43-47 In 2013, GSK launched CSDR, which contains over 1500 trials
from more than a dozen major pharmaceutical companies, including Bayer, Novartis, and Roche.26
17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Similarly, Supporting Open Access to Research (SOAR), a partnership between Bristol-Myer Squibb
(BMS) and Duke Clinical Research Institute, provides access to BMS trial data.48 There are also
university-based platforms, included the Yale Open Data Access (YODA) project, which has partnered
with Johnson & Johnson, Medtronic, Inc., and SI-BONE, Inc.24,49,50 Not only do these platforms ensure
that all shared data are deidentified, they also require requestors to pre-specify their research questions
and methods. Furthermore, they employ a “trusted intermediary” approach, with independent review
committees screening detailed proposals and making data-sharing decisions. While there has already been
a rapid shift towards a data sharing and transparency culture, further opportunities exist for industry,
funders, and researchers to facilitate clinical trial data sharing.
Methodological Implications
In addition to the implications of using IPD as compared to summary-level data, our study
suggests that various statistical methods used to account for sparse adverse event data in meta-analyses
may not drastically alter interpretations regarding rosiglitazone’s risk. Across all outcomes, when trials
with zero-events in both arms were included after adding 0.5, risk estimates were attenuated towards the
null. When a treatment arm continuity correction was used, the risk estimates increased. However, all
95% confidence intervals were broadly consistent and crossed the null odds ratio value of 1.0. Currently,
there is little consensus on which method should be used to account for sparse adverse event data in metaanalyses. For instance, the Cochrane handbook states that “the standard practice in meta-analyses of odds
ratios and risk ratios is to exclude studies from the meta-analysis when there are no events in both
arms”,51 because they do not contribute to the magnitude of effect.52 However, some methodologists
argue that meta-analyses of sparse data should apply multiple methods and continuity correction factors
as sensitivity analyses.53 In our study, we prioritized the Mantel-Haenszel odds ratios approximations
including single-zero-event trials with a 0.5 constant continuity correction, since this is the standard
approach utilized in meta-analytical software. Meanwhile, Sweeting et al. recommend utilizing a
treatment arm continuity correction, which adds a factor of the reciprocal of the opposite treatment arm to
the zero-event cells, instead of a constant continuity correction, especially when treatment groups are
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

unbalanced.53 Future meta-analyses that need to account for sparse data could benefit from performing
multiple sensitivity analyses comparing the results across a number of commonly proposed methods.
While these analyses may not always alter perceptions of safety, they could provide insight regarding the
consistency of effect estimates.
For both myocardial infarction and cardiovascular related deaths, effect estimates were attenuated
towards the null when summary-level data from publications, ClinicalTrials.gov, and CSRs were
included. There are numerous study design characteristics that can potentially explain these results. First,
an increased awareness of the risk of rosiglitazone after the meta-analysis by Nissen et al. in 2007 could
have altered the types of patients that were recruited into subsequent trials, thereby minimizing potential
cardiovascular adverse events.4 Second, different study design considerations in more recent trials,
including treatment comparator(s) and/or concurrent treatments, could have reduced the risk of adverse
cardiovascular outcomes or minimized differences across the treatment arms. However, our post-hoc
subgroup analyses based on comparator type did not reveal any statistically significant interactions. Third,
the studies for which IPD were not available were generally small, with high or unclear risk of bias,
which may have biased the results. Although FDA draft guidance for industry on performing metaanalysis of randomized trials to evaluate drug safety emphasized the importance of prioritizing trial
quality over quantity, it may not always be clear which, if any, study characteristics actually influence the
results of a meta-analysis. Considering that we observed different results when including various data
sources, our findings highlight the importance of presenting and discussing potential differences across all
possible data sources.
Limitations
This study has certain limitations. First, we conducted a large number of pre-specified analyses,
considering multiple outcomes, data sources, and analytical methods. While multiple testing in metaanalyses can be problematic, we did not focus on statistical significance and presented the results from all
analyses to minimize the risk of selective reporting. Second, we selected only two commonly utilized
continuity corrections to account for sparse data. Although numerous other methods have been proposed,
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

there is currently no consensus on whether or how meta-analysis should include information from trials
with zero events in either one or all study arms.35 Future evaluations could explore the impact of
performing more advanced analyses that account for sparse data, such as Poisson or zero-inflated negative
binomial models.13,54 Third, for all of the trials for which IPD were available, we may have missed some
events, as trials used different terminologies with different levels of specificity. Although multiple
reviewers evaluated the lists of trial adverse events, it is possible that certain outcomes may have been
misclassified or missed altogether. Fourth, we only included published articles that mentioned specific
adverse events of interests and/or disclosed that serious adverse events were not observed. However,
failure to mention a particular outcome does not necessarily imply that there were not such events in the
study.28 Although we contacted corresponding authors to clarify potential uncertainties, we may have
missed certain unreported adverse events. Fifth, we did not analyze whether certain characteristics,
including age, sex, and race, influenced study heterogeneity. However, these variables are difficult to
adjust for when combining summary-level and IPD data. Lastly, the results are limited by the quality of
the individual included studies. In particular, the majority of published articles for which IPD were not
available had small sample sizes and were classified as having high risk of bias.
Conclusion
When limited to trials for which IPD were available, rosiglitazone use was consistently associated
with an increased cardiovascular risk, likely driven by heart failure events. However, interpretation of
rosiglitazone’s cardiovascular risk was complicated by varying magnitudes of myocardial infarction risk
that were attenuated through aggregation of summary-level data in addition to IPD. Among trials for
which IPD were available, we identified a greater number of myocardial infarctions and fewer
cardiovascular deaths reported in the IPD as compared to the summary-level data, which suggests that
IPD may be necessary to accurately classify all adverse events when performing meta-analyses focused
on safety.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Mary Hughes and Vermetha Polite of the Cushing/Whitney Medical
Library at Yale for technical support. Mss. Hughes and Polite are employees of Yale University and did
not receive additional compensation for this work, nor do they have competing interest to disclose.
Contributors: JDW, DC, HMK, JSR conceived and designed this study. JDW, KW, ADZ, DC, HKGN
acquired the data. JDW conducted the statistical analysis and drafted the manuscript. All authors
participated in the interpretation of the data and critically revised the manuscript for important intellectual
content. JDW and JSR had full access to all the data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity
of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. JSR provided supervision. JDW and JSR are guarantors.
Funding: This project was conducted as part of the Collaboration for Research Integrity and
Transparency (CRIT) at Yale, funded by the Laura and John Arnold Foundation, which supports JDW,
ADZ, and JSR. These funders played no role in the design of the study, analysis or interpretation of
findings, or drafting the manuscript and did not review or approval the manuscript prior to submission.
The authors assume full responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of the ideas presented.
Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form
at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and declare: In the past 36 months, JDW received research support
through the Meta Research Innovation Center at Stanford (METRICS) from the Laura and John Arnold
Foundation. ADZ received research support through the Yale-Mayo Clinic CERSI (U01FD005938). MB
is currently, or within the last 4 years has been, a consultant to Eli Lilly, Forest Laboratories, Glaxo Inc.,
and Lundbeck Inc., all on matters unrelated to the content of this manuscript. HMK received research
support through Yale from Johnson and Johnson to develop methods of clinical trial data sharing, from
Medtronic, Inc. and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to develop methods for postmarket
surveillance of medical devices (U01FD004585), from the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) to develop and maintain performance measures that are used for public reporting, received
payment from the Arnold & Porter Law Firm for work related to the Sanofi clopidogrel litigation and
from the Ben C. Martin Law Firm for work related to the Cook IVC filter litigation, chairs a Cardiac
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Scientific Advisory Board for UnitedHealth, is a participant/participant representative of the IBM Watson
Health Life Sciences Board, is a member of the Advisory Board for Element Science and the Physician
Advisory Board for Aetna, and is the founder of Hugo, a personal health information platform. JSR
received research support through Yale from Johnson and Johnson to develop methods of clinical trial
data sharing, from Medtronic, Inc. and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to develop methods for
postmarket surveillance of medical devices (U01FD004585), from the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) to develop and maintain performance measures that are used for public reporting, from
the FDA to establish a Center for Excellence in Regulatory Science and Innovation (CERSI) at Yale
University and the Mayo Clinic (U01FD005938), from the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association to better
understand medical technology evaluation, and from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(R01HS022882).
Patient consent: Not required
Ethical approval: Not required
Data sharing: The dataset will be made available via a publicly accessible repository on publication:
https://osf.io/4yvp2/.
Transparency: The manuscripts guarantors (JDW and JSR) affirm that this manuscript is an honest,
accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; that no important aspects of the study have
been omitted; and that any discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant registered) have been
explained.
License: The Corresponding Author has the right to grant on behalf of all authors and does grant on
behalf of all authors, a worldwide license to the Publishers and its licensees in perpetuity, in all forms,
formats and median (whether known now or created in the future), to i) publish, reproduce, distribute,
display and store the Contribution, ii) translate the Contribution into other languages, create adaptations,
reprints, include within collections and create summaries, extracts and/or, abstracts of the Contribution,
iii) create any other derivative work(s) based on the Contribution, iv) to exploit all subsidiary rights in the
Contribution, v) the inclusion of electronic links from the Contribution to third party material where-ever
22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

it may be located; and, vi) license any third party to do any or all of the above.
The default license, a CC BY NC license, is needed.
This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this
work non-commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work
is properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

REFERENCES
1.

Pouwels KB, van Grootheest K. The rosiglitazone decision process at FDA and EMA. What
should we learn? Int J Risk Saf Med. 2012;24(2):73-80.

2.

Woodcock J, Sharfstein JM, Hamburg M. Regulatory action on rosiglitazone by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(16):1489-1491.

3.

Nissen SE. The rise and fall of rosiglitazone. Eur Heart J. 2010;31(7):773-776.

4.

Nissen SE, Wolski K. Effect of rosiglitazone on the risk of myocardial infarction and death from
cardiovascular causes. N Engl J Med. 2007;356(24):2457-2471.

5.

Psaty BM, Furberg CD. Rosiglitazone and cardiovascular risk. New England Journal of Medicine.
2007;356(24):2522-2524.

6.

Rosen CJ. Revisiting the rosiglitazone story--lessons learned. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(9):803806.

7.

Bloomgarden ZT. The Avandia debate. Diabetes Care. 2007;30(9):2401-2408.

8.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA drug safety communication: updated Risk Evaluation
and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) to restrict access to rosiglitazone-containing medicines
including Avandia, Avandamet, and Avandaryl. May 18, 2011. Available at:

https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ DrugSafety/ucm255005.htm. Accessed October 19, 2018. In.
9.

McCarthy M. US regulators relax restrictions on rosiglitazone. BMJ. 2013;347:f7144.

10.

Nissen SE. Setting the RECORD Straight. JAMA. 2010;303(12):1194-1195.

11.

Hickson RP, Cole AL, Dusetzina SB. Implications of Removing Rosiglitazone's Black Box
Warning and Restricted Access Program on the Update of Thiazolinediones and Dipeptidyl
Peptidase-4 Inhibitors Among Patients with Type 2 Diabetes. J Manag Care Spex Phar.
2019;25(1):72-79.

12.

Bracken MB. Rosiglitazone and cardiovascular risk. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(9):937-938; author
reply 939-940.

13.

Cai T, Parast L, Ryan L. Meta-analysis for rare events. Stat Med. 2010;29(20):2078-2089.

14.

Diamond GA, Bax L, Kaul S. Uncertain effects of rosiglitazone on the risk for myocardial
infarction and cardiovascular death. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147(8):578-581.

15.

Friedrich JO, Beyene J, Adhikari NK. Rosiglitazone: can meta-analysis accurately estimate
excess cardiovascular risk given the available data? Re-analysis of randomized trials using
various methodologic approaches. BMC Res Notes. 2009;2:5.

16.

Mannucci E, Monami M, Marchionni N. Rosiglitazone and cardiovascular risk. N Engl J Med.
2007;357(9):938; author reply 939-940.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

17.

Nissen SE, Wolski K. Rosiglitazone revisited: an updated meta-analysis of risk for myocardial
infarction and cardiovascular mortality. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170(14):1191-1201.

18.

Riley RD, Lambert PC, Abo-Zaid G. Meta-analysis of individual participant data: rationale,
conduct, and reporting. BMJ. 2010;340:c221.

19.

Dahabreh IJ, Economopoulos K. Meta-analysis of rare events: an update and sensitivity analysis
of cardiovascular events in randomized trials of rosiglitazone. Clin Trials. 2008;5(2):116-120.

20.

Friedrich JO, Adhikari NK, Beyene J. Inclusion of zero total event trials in meta-analyses
maintains analytic consistency and incorporates all available data. BMC Med Res Methodol.
2007;7:5.

21.

Herbison P, Robertson MC, McKenzie JE. Do alternative methods for analysing count data
produce similar estimates? Implications for meta-analyses. Syst Rev. 2015;4:163.

22.

Tian L, Cai T, Pfeffer MA, Piankov N, Cremieux PY, Wei LJ. Exact and efficient inference
procedure for meta-analysis and its application to the analysis of independent 2 x 2 tables with all
available data but without artificial continuity correction. Biostatistics. 2009;10(2):275-281.

23.

Munafò MR, Nosek BA, Bishop DVM, et al. A manifesto for reproducible science. Nature
human behavior. 2017;1(0021).

24.

Krumholz HM, Ross JS. A model for dissemination and independent analysis of industry data.
JAMA. 2011;306(14):1593-1594.

25.

Ross JS, Krumholz HM. Ushering in a new era of open science through data sharing: the wall
must come down. JAMA. 2013;309(13):1355-1356.

26.

Nisen P, Rockhold F. Access to patient-level data from GlaxoSmithKline clinical trials. N Engl J
Med. 2013;369(5):475-478.

27.

Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, Group P. Preferred reporting items for systematic
reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. BMJ. 2009;339:b2535.

28.

Mayo-Wilson E, Hutfless S, Li T, et al. Integrating multiple data sources (MUDS) for metaanalysis to improve patient-centered outcomes research: a protocol for a systematic review. Syst
Rev. 2015;4:143.

29.

Mayo-Wilson E, Li T, Fusco N, Dickersin K, investigators M. Practical guidance for using
multiple data sources in systematic reviews and meta-analyses (with examples from the MUDS
study). Res Synth Methods. 2018;9(1):2-12.

30.

Mannucci E, Monami M, Di Bari M, et al. Cardiac safety profile of rosiglitazone: a
comprehensive meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Int J Cardiol. 2010;143(2):135-140.

31.

Grossetta Nardini HK, Wang L. The Yale MeSH Analyzer, New Haven, CT: Cushing/Whitney
Medical Library. Available from: http://mesh.med.yale.edu/.

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

32.

Clarivate Analytics. EndNote X9, Philadelphia, PA. Available from: www.endnote.com.

33.

Veritas Health Innovation. Covidence

Systematic Review Software, Melbourne, Australia. Available from: www.covidence.org.
34.

MedDRA Hierarchy. https://www.meddra.org/how-to-use/basics/hierarchy. Accessed 13
September 2018.

35.

Bradburn MJ, Deeks JJ, Berlin JA, Russell Localio A. Much ado about nothing: a comparison of
the performance of meta-analytical methods with rare events. Stat Med. 2007;26(1):53-77.

36.

Home PD, Pocock SJ, Beck-Nielsen H, et al. Rosiglitazone evaluated for cardiovascular
outcomes--an interim analysis. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(1):28-38.

37.

DeAngelis CD, Fontanarosa PB. Ensuring integrity in industry-sponsored research: primum non
nocere, revisited. JAMA. 2010;303(12):1196-1198.

38.

Cohen D. Rosiglitazone: what went wrong? BMJ. 2010;341:c4848.

39.

Ioannidis JP, Lau J. Improving safety reporting from randomised trials. Drug Saf. 2002;25(2):7784.

40.

Wieseler B, Kerekes MF, Vervoelgyi V, McGauran N, Kaiser T. Impact of document type on
reporting quality of clinical drug trials: a comparison of registry reports, clinical study reports,
and journal publications. BMJ. 2012;344:d8141.

41.

Mayo-Wilson E, Li T, Fusco N, et al. Cherry-picking by trialists and meta-analysts can drive
conclusions about intervention efficacy. J Clin Epidemiol. 2017;91:95-110.

42.

Ioannidis JP, Greenland S, Hlatky MA, et al. Increasing value and reducing waste in research
design, conduct, and analysis. Lancet. 2014;383(9912):166-175.

43.

Naudet F, Sakarovitch C, Janiaud P, et al. Data sharing and reanalysis of randomized controlled
trials in leading biomedical journals with a full data sharing policy: survey of studies published in.
BMJ. 2018;360:k400.

44.

Platt R, Ramsberg J. Challenges for Sharing Data from Embedded Research. N Engl J Med.
2016;374(19):1897.

45.

Kalager M, Adami HO, Bretthauer M. Recognizing Data Generation. N Engl J Med.
2016;374(19):1898.

46.

Devereaux PJ, Guyatt G, Gerstein H, Connolly S, Yusuf S, Sharing ICoIfFiTD. Toward Fairness
in Data Sharing. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(5):405-407.

47.

Haug CJ. Whose Data Are They Anyway? Can a Patient Perspective Advance the Data-Sharing
Debate? N Engl J Med. 2017;376(23):2203-2205.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

48.

Pencina MJ, Louzao DM, McCourt BJ, et al. Supporting open access to clinical trial data for
researchers: The Duke Clinical Research Institute-Bristol-Myers Squibb Supporting Open Access
to Researchers Initiative. Am Heart J. 2016;172:64-69.

49.

Ross JS, Waldstreicher J, Bamford S, et al. Overview and experience of the YODA Project with
clinical trial data sharing after 5 years. Sci Data. 2018;5:180268.

50.

Krumholz HM, Waldstreicher J. The Yale Open Data Access (YODA) Project--A Mechanism for
Data Sharing. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(5):403-405.

51.

Higgins JPT, Deeks JJ, Altman DG (editors). Chapter 16: Special topics in statistics. In: Higgins
JPT, Green S (editors), Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version
5.1.0 (updated March 2011). The Cochrane Collaboration, 2011. Available from

www.handbook.cochrane.org.
52.

Whitehead A, Whitehead J. A general parametric approach to the meta-analysis of randomized
clinical trials. Stat Med. 1991;10(11):1665-1677.

53.

Sweeting MJ, Sutton AJ, Lambert PC. What to add to nothing? Use and avoidance of continuity
corrections in meta-analysis of sparse data. Stat Med. 2004;23(9):1351-1375.

54.

Böhning D, Mylona K, Kimber A. Meta-analysis of clinical trials with rare events. Biom J.
2015;57(4):633-648.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

FIGURE LEGEND
Figure 1. Modified PRISMA flow diagram of search. CSDR = Clinical Study Data Request

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Table 1. Analytical methods, continuity corrections, assumptions, and outcomes
Method Measure
Fixed
Data sources
SingleZeroContinuit
or
zerototaly
rando
event
event
correctio
m
trials
trials
n
Peto
Odds ratio Fixed
(1) IPD only
Included Exclude None
(2) IPD +
d
RECORD

MantelHaensz
el or
Dersim
onian
and
Laird
(inverse
varianc
e)

Odds ratio
and
Relative
risk

Fixed
or
rando
m

(1) IPD only
(2) IPD +
RECORD
(3) IPD +
summary
(4) IPD +
summary +
RECORD
(1) IPD only
(2) IPD +
RECORD

Included

Exclude
d or
Include
d

Constant
continuity
correction
of 0.5

Assumptions
to satisfy or
difficulties to
consider
(1) Event rates
<1%
(2) Balanced
groups
(treatment
arms)
(3)
Small/moderat
e treatment
effects

(1) Sample
must be
“large” overall
(crude totals
across all
studies needs
to be at least
5)35
(2) May
perform
comparably or
better than
Peto’s method
at even rates of
5 to 10
percent.35

Outcome(s)

(1) Composite
outcome
(2) Heart
failure
(3) Myocardial
infarction
(4)
Cardiovascular
related deaths
(5) Noncardiovascularrelated deaths
(1) Myocardial
infarction
(2)
Cardiovascular
related deaths

(1) Composite
outcome
(2) Heart
failure
(3) Myocardial
infarction
(4)
Cardiovascular
related deaths
(5) Noncardiovascularrelated deaths
(1) Myocardial
infarction
(2)
Cardiovascular
related deaths,

(1) IPD only
Treatment
(2) IPD +
arm
RECORD
continuity
(3) IPD +
correction
summary
(4) IPD +
summary +
RECORD
IPD = Individual patient-level data; RECORD = Rosiglitazone Evaluation for Cardiac Outcomes and Regulation of glycemic
Diabetes (RECORD) study

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Table 2. Meta-analyses for the composite outcome
Method
Measure
Fixed or
Data sources
random

Peto

Odds ratio

Fixed

MantelHaenszel

Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk

Fixed

MantelHaenszel

Dersimon
ian and
Laird
Dersimon
ian and
Laird
MantelHaenszel

MantelHaenszel

Dersimon
ian and
Laird
Dersimon
ian and
Laird

Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Random
Random
Random
Random
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Random
Random
Random
Random

Singlezeroevent
trials
Included

Zerototalevent
trials
Exclude
d

Contin
uity
correct
ion
None

Effect estimate (95%
CI), P-value

1.40 (1.16-1.69); 0.0004
1.20 (1.06-1.36); 0.0038

31
32

Included

Exclude
d

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

included

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Consta
nt
continu
ity
correcti
on of
0.5

Included

Exclude
d

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

Included

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

Exclude
d

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

included

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

Exclude
d

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

Included

1.39 (1.15-1.68); 0.0007
1.37 (1.14-1.64); 0.0007
1.20 (1.06-1.36); 0.0047
1.17 (1.05-1.31); 0.0049
1.39 (1.15-1.68); 0.0007
1.36 (1.14-1.63); 0.0008
1.20 (1.06-1.36); 0.0047
1.17 (1.05-1.31); 0.0049
1.33 (1.09-1.61); 0.0045
1.30 (1.08-1.56); 0.0049
1.17 (1.03-1.33); 0.0154
1.14 (1.02-1.28); 0.0202
1.33 (1.09-1.61); 0.0046
1.30 (1.08-1.56); 0.0050
1.17 (1.03-1.33); 0.0155
1.14 (1.02-1.28); 0.0203
1.41 (1.16-1.70); 0.0005
1.38 (1.15-1.65); 0.0005
1.20 (1.06-1.36); 0.0039
1.18 (1.05-1.32); 0.0040
1.40 (1.16-1.70); 0.0005
1.38 (1.15-1.65); 0.0005
1.20 (1.06-1.36); 0.0039
1.18 (1.05-1.32); 0.0040
1.33 (1.09-1.61); 0.0047
1.30 (1.08-1.56); 0.0052
1.17 (1.03-1.33); 0.0161
1.14 (1.02-1.28); 0.2010
1.33 (1.09-1.61); 0.0048
1.30 (1.08-1.56); 0.0053
1.17 (1.03-1.33); 0.0162
1.14 (1.02-1.28); 0.0211

31
31
32
32
33
33
34
34
31
31
32
32
33
33
34
34
31
31
32
32
33
33
34
34
31
31
32
32
33
33
34
34

(1) IPD only
(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

(2) IPD +
RECORD

Treatm
ent arm
correcti
on

No.
trial
s

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Table 3. Meta-analysis for myocardial infarction
Method
Measure
Fixed
Data sources
or
rando
m
Peto
Odds ratio
Fixed
(1) IPD only

MantelHaenszel

Dersimon
ian and
Laird

MantelHaenszel

Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk

(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
(1) IPD Only

Singlezeroevent
trials
Included

Zerototalevent
trials
Excluded

Included

Excluded

Included

Included

Included

Excluded

Included

Included

Included

Excluded

Included

Included

Fixed
(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
(1) IPD Only

Conti
nuity
corre
ction
None

Const
ant
conti
nuity
corre
ction
of 0.5

(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
Rando
m

(1) IPD Only
(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
(1) IPD Only
(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
(1) IPD Only

Fixed
(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
(1) IPD Only
(2) IPD + RECORD

Treat
ment
arm
corre
ction

Effect estimate
(95% CI)

No.
Trials

1.30 (1.02-1.67);
0.0349
1.17 (0.99-1.38)
1.19 (0.96-1.48)
1.13 (0.97-1.32)

30

1.25 (0.99-1.60)
1.25 (0.99-1.58)
1.15 (0.98-1.36)
1.14 (0.98-1.33)
1.13 (0.92-1.39)
1.13 (0.92-1.38)
1.10 (0.95-1.28)
1.10 (0.95-1.27)
1.25 (0.98-1.59)
1.24 (0.98-1.57)
1.15 (0.97-1.35)
1.14 (0.98-1.33)
1.11 (0.92-1.34)
1.11 (0.93-1.33)
1.09 (0.95-1.26)
1.09 (0.95-1.25)

30
30
31
31
60
60
61
61
33
33
34
34
136
136
137
137

1.17 (0.92-1.51)
1.16 (0.91-1.49)
1.11 (0.94-1.32)
1.10 (0.94-1.29)
1.09 (0.88-1.35)
1.09 (0.88-1.34)
1.08 (0.92-1.26)
1.07 (0.92-1.24)
1.17 (0.91-1.51)
1.16 (0.91-1.48)
1.11 (0.94-1.31)
1.10 (0.94-1.29)
1.08 (0.89-1.31)
1.07 (0.89-1.30)
1.07 (0.93-1.24)
1.07 (0.92-1.23)
1.29 (1.01-1.64)
1.28 (1.01-1.63)
1.16 (0.99-1.37)
1.15 (0.99-1.35)
1.17 (0.96-1.44)
1.17 (0.96-1.43)
1.12 (0.97-1.31)
1.12 (0.97-1.29)
1.29 (1.01-1.64)
1.28 (1.01-1.62)
1.16 (0.99-1.37)
1.15 (0.99-1.35)

30
30
31
31
60
60
61
61
33
33
34
34
136
136
137
137
30
30
31
31
60
60
61
61
33
33
34
34

31
60
61

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Dersimon
ian and
Laird

Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk

(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
Rando
m

(1) IPD Only

Included

Excluded

Included

Included

(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
(1) IPD Only
(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD

1.14 (0.95-1.38)
1.14 (0.95-1.37)
1.11 (0.96-1.28)
1.11 (0.96-1.27)

136
136
137
137

1.18 (0.92-1.53)
1.17 (0.92-1.50)
1.12 (0.94-1.32)
1.11 (0.94-1.30)
1.10 (0.89-1.37)
1.10 (0.89-1.36)
1.09 (0.92-1.27)
1.08 (0.93-1.25)
1.18 (0.92-1.52)
1.17 (0.91-1.50)
1.12 (0.94-1.32)
1.11 (0.94-1.30)
1.08 (0.89-1.32)
1.08 (0.89-1.31)
1.08 (0.93-1.25)
1.07 (0.93-1.23)

30
30
31
31
60
60
61
61
33
33
34
34
136
136
137
137

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Table 4. Meta-analyses for heart failure
Measure
Fixed
Data sources
Method
or
rando
m
Peto
Fixed
(1) IPD only
Odds ratio
(2) IPD +
RECORD
MantelOdds ratio
Fixed
(2) IPD Only
Haenszel
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Fixed
(2) IPD +
RECORD
Relative risk
MantelOdds ratio
Fixed
(2) IPD Only
Haenszel
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Fixed
(2) IPD +
RECORD
Relative risk
Dersimon Odds ratio
Rando (2) IPD Only
ian and
Relative risk m
Laird
Odds ratio
Rando (2) IPD +
RECORD
Relative risk m
Dersimon Odds ratio
Rando (2) IPD Only
ian and
Relative risk m
Laird
Odds ratio
Rando (2) IPD +
RECORD
Relative risk m
MantelOdds ratio
Fixed
(2) IPD Only
Haenszel
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Fixed
(2) IPD +
RECORD
Relative risk
MantelOdds ratio
Fixed
(2) IPD Only
Haenszel
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Fixed
(2) IPD +
RECORD
Relative risk
Dersimon Odds ratio
Rando (2) IPD Only
ian and
Relative risk m
Laird
Odds ratio
Rando (2) IPD +
RECORD
Relative risk m
Dersimon Odds ratio
Rando (2) IPD Only
ian and
Relative risk m
Laird
Odds ratio
Rando (2) IPD +
RECORD
Relative risk m

Singlezeroevent
trials
Included

Zerototalevent
trials
Excluded

Continui
ty
correctio
n
None

Included

Excluded

Included

included

Constant
continuit
y
correctio
n of 0.5

Included

Excluded

Included

Included

Included

Excluded

Included

included

Included

Excluded

Included

Included

Treatmen
t arm
correct

Effect estimate (95%
CI)

No.
trials

1.66 (1.24-2.22); 0.0006
1.80 (1.46-2.22); <0.0001

26
27

1.60 (1.20-2.14); 0.0016
1.57 (1.18-2.08); 0.0017
1.78 (1.44-2.20); <0.0001
1.74 (1.42-2.14); <0.0001
1.56 (1.17-2.07); 0.0024
1.53 (1.16-2.02); 0.0026
1.75 (1.42-2.16); <0.0001
1.71 (1.40-2.10); <0.0001
1.54 (1.14-2.09); 0.0045
1.52 (1.14-2.03); 0.0041
1.75 (1.41-2.18); <0.0001
1.72 (1.39-2.11); <0.0001
1.50 (1.12-2.01); 0.0068
1.48 (1.12-1.97); 0.0061
1.72 (1.39-2.13); <0.0001
1.69 (1.37-2.08); <0.0001
1.65 (1.23-2.20); 0.0009
1.61 (1.21-2.14); 0.0010
1.81 (1.46-2.24); <0.0001
1.77 (1.44-2.17); <0.0001
1.62 (1.21-2.15; 0.0010
1.59 (1.20-2.10); 0.0012
1.79 (1.45-2.21); <0.0001
1.75 (1.42-2.15); <0.0001
1.58 (1.17-2.13); 0.0032
1.55 (1.16-2.08); 0.0029
1.77 (1.42-2.20); <0.0001
1.73 (1.41-2.14); <0.0001
1.55 (1.15-2.09); 0.0038
1.53 (1.15-2.03); 0.0035
1.75 (1.41-2.17); <0.0001
1.72 (1.40-2.11); <0.0001

26
27
27
27
33
33
34
34
26
26
27
27
33
33
34
34
26
26
27
27
33
33
34
34
26
26
27
27
33
33
34
34

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Table 5. Meta-analysis for cardiovascular-related deaths
Method
Measure
Fixed Data sources
or
rand
om
effect
s
Peto
Odds ratio
Fixed (1) IPD only
(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
MantelOdds ratio
Fixed (1) IPD Only
Haenszel
Relative risk
Odds ratio
(2) IPD + RECORD
Relative risk
Odds ratio
(3) IPD + summary
Relative risk
Odds ratio
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
Relative risk
Odds ratio
(1) IPD Only
Relative risk
Odds ratio
(2) IPD + RECORD
Relative risk
Odds ratio
(3) IPD + summary
Relative risk
Odds ratio
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
Relative risk
Dersimoni
an and
Laird

MantelHaenszel

Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio

Rand
om

(1) IPD Only

Singlezeroevent
trials

Zerototalevent
trials

Contin
uity
correc
tion

Effect estimate
(95% CI)

Included

Excluded

None

1.34 (0.60-2.98)
1.11 (0.76-1.62)
1.23 (0.77-1.98)
1.13 (0.82-1.55)

15
16
33
34

Included

Excluded

Consta
nt
contin
uity
correct
ion of
0.5

Included

Included

1.13 (0.58-2.21)
1.13 (0.58-2.20)
1.07 (0.75-1.54)
1.07 (0.75-1.53)
1.10 (0.73-1.65)
1.09 (0.73-1.64)
1.08 (0.80-1.44)
1.07 (0.80-1.44)
0.97 (0.56-1.66)
0.97 (0.57-1.65)
1.02 (0.73-1.42)
1.02 (0.73-1.41)
1.00 (0.75-1.32)
1.00 (0.76-1.32)
1.01 (0.80-1.28)
1.01 (0.80-1.27)

15
15
16
16
33
33
34
34
33
33
34
34
136
136
137
137

Included

Excluded

Included

Included

Included

Excluded

1.15 (0.55-2.41)
1.15 (0.55-2.39)
1.08 (0.64-1.56)
1.08 (0.75-1.55)
1.12 (0.72-1.74)
1.12 (0.72-1.73)
1.08 (0.80-1.47)
1.08 (0.80-1.46)
0.95 (0.53-1.69)
0.95 (0.54-1.68)
1.01 (0.72-1.43)
1.01 (0.72-1.42)
1.00 (0.74-1.33)
1.00 (0.74-1.32)
1.01 (0.79-1.29)
1.01 (0.80-1.28)
1.23 (0.62-2.42)
1.22 (0.62-2.42)
1.10 (0.77-1.58)
1.10 (0.77-1.57)
1.17 (0.77-1.77)
1.17 (0.77-1.77)
1.11 (0.83-1.50)

15
15
16
16
33
33
34
34
33
33
34
34
136
136
137
137
15
15
16
16
33
33
34

(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
(1) IPD Only
(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary

Fixed

(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
(1) IPD Only
(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +

Treatm
ent
arm
correct
ion

No.
Trials

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Dersimoni
an and
Laird

Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk

RECORD
(1) IPD Only

Included

Included

Included

Excluded

Included

Included

(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
Rand
om

(1) IPD Only
(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD
(1) IPD Only
(2) IPD + RECORD
(3) IPD + summary
(4) IPD + summary +
RECORD

1.11 (0.83-1.49)
1.15 (0.66-1.99)
1.14 (0.66-1.99)
1.09 (0.77-1.52)
1.08 (0.78-1.52)
1.08 (0.81-1.44)
1.08 (0.81-1.43)
1.07 (0.84-1.36)
1.07 (0.85-1.35)

34
33
33
34
34
136
136
137
137

1.26 (0.58-2.72)
1.26 (0.59-2.70)
1.10 (0.76-1.59)
1.10 (0.76-1.58)
1.19 (0.75-1.88)
1.18 (0.75-1.86)
1.11 (0.82-1.52)
1.11 (0.82-1.51)
1.15 (0.63-2.10)
1.15 (0.63-2.09)
1.08 (0.77-1.54)
1.08 (0.77-1.53)
1.08 (0.80-1.45)
1.08 (0.80-1.45)
1.07 (0.84-1.37)
1.07 (0.84-1.36)

15
15
16
16
33
33
34
34
33
33
34
34
136
136
137
137

Table 6. Meta-analyses for non-cardiovascular related deaths

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Method

Measure

Peto

Odds ratio

Fixed
or
rando
m
Fixed
Fixed

MantelHaenszel

MantelHaenszel

Dersimon
ian and
Laird
Dersimon
ian and
Laird
MantelHaenszel

MantelHaenszel

Dersimon
ian and
Laird
Dersimon
ian and
Laird

Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk
Odds ratio
Relative risk

Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Rando
m
Rando
m
Rando
m
Rando
m
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Fixed
Rando
m
Rando
m
Rando
m
Rando
m

Data sources

Singlezero-event
trials

(1) IPD only

Included

Zerototalevent
trials
Excluded

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

Excluded

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

included

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

Excluded

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

Included

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

Excluded

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

included

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

Excluded

(2) IPD +
RECORD
(2) IPD Only

Included

Included

(2) IPD +
RECORD

Continuity
correction

Effect estimate
(95% CI)

No.
Trials

None

1.42 (0.72-2.81)

16

0.85 (0.66-1.10)

17

1.18 (0.64-2.17)
1.18 (0.65-2.15)
0.84 (0.65-1.08)
0.84 (0.66-1.08)
1.04 (0.62-1.73)
1.04 (0.63-1.71)
0.83 (0.65-1.06)
0.84 (0.66-1.06)
1.18 (0.60-2.30)
1.18 (0.61-2.28)
0.83 (0.64-1.07)
0.83 (0.65-1.07)
1.01 (0.58-1.74)
1.01 (0.59-1.74)
0.82 (0.64-1.05)
0.83 (0.65-1.05)
1.32 (0.71-2.45)
1.32 (0.71-2.44)
0.85 (0.66-1.10)
0.86 (0.67-1.10)
1.22 (0.73-2.06)
1.22 (0.73-2.05)
0.86 (0.67-1.10)
0.87 (0.68-1.10)
1.25 (0.63-2.50)
1.25 (0.63-2.48)
0.83 (0.64-1.08)
0.84 (0.65-1.07)
1.16 (0.66-2.04)
1.16 (0.66-2.03)
0.84 (0.65-1.08)
0.85 (0.66-1.08)

16
16
17
17
33
33
34
34
16
16
17
17
33
33
34
34
16
16
17
17
33
33
34
34
16
16
17
17
33
33
34
34

Constant
continuity
correction
of 0.5

Treatment
arm correct

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000463; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Identification

Screening

Records
identified
through
database
searching
(n = 4774)

Records after
duplicates
removed
(n = 4604)

Trials requested
from GSK
clinical-trial
registry database
(CDSR.com)
(n = 59)

Irrelevant
(n = 4331)

Eligibility

Full-text articles
excluded, with reasons
(n = 193)

Full-text articles
assessed for
eligibility
(n = 273)

-

-

-

Studies
potentially
reporting
outcomes of
interest (n = 80)

-

Multiple publications
for the same trial or
duplicate publication
(n = 66)
Already identified on
CSDR.com, GSK
Study Register,
ClinicalTrials.gov, or
in previous metaanalyses (n = 52)
Abstract, without data
(n = 29)
Unable to identify,
exhausted all library
sources (n = 16)
Wrong study
design/intervention (n
= 14)
Non-English (n = 10)
<24 weeks exposure
(n=3)
Pediatric trial (n = 2)
Registry, without data
(n = 1)

Included

Contacted authors, but
no information on
outcomes (n = 5)

Studies included in quantitative
synthesis (meta-analysis) (n = 75)
- 71 publications (72 studies)
included in quantitative
synthesis for myocardial
infarction
- 72 studies included in
quantitative synthesis for
cardiovascular death

Trials identified
through the GSK
Study Register
(n = 150)

Trials excluded (n = 24)
- Trials with <24
weeks’ duration (n =
7)
- 49653/292,
49653/342,
49653/352,
49653/376,
49653/025,
49653/140,
49653/395
- Trials with no
comparator arm
and/or extension
study (n = 10)
- 49653/009,
49653/112,
49653/114,
49653/183,
49653/326,
AVA102675,
AVA102677,
AVA104671,
AXR100723,
AVA100468
- Trials without “highlevel” or “preferred”
adverse event
reported (n = 5)
- 49653/015,
49653/131
49653/109,
49653/452,
49653/461
- 49653/369
- Trials with early
termination (n = 1)
- AVD111960
- Trials with pediatric
patients (n = 1)
- 49653/207

Studies included
in quantitative
synthesis (metaanalysis)
(n = 34)

Trials identified
in previous
Nissen metaanalyses
(n = 56)

Trials excluded (n =
147)
- Already identified on
CSDR.com or in
previous metaanalyses (n = 66)
- Trials with <24
weeks’ duration (n =
22)
- Trials with no
comparator arm
and/or extension
study (n = 29)
- Trials with early
termination (n = 3)
- Trials with pediatric
patients (n = 1)
- Trials without data,
or incorrect study
design (n = 25)

Studies included
in quantitative
synthesis (metaanalysis)
(n = 4)

Trials identified
in previous
Mannucci et al.
meta-analysis
(n = 164)

Trials excluded (n =
30)
- Already identified
on CDSR.com or on
GSK Study Register

Studies included
in quantitative
synthesis (metaanalysis)
(n = 26)

Trials identified
on
ClinicalTrials.gov
(n = 220)

Trials excluded (n =
164)
- <24 weeks, already
identified on
CDSR.com or on
GSK Study Register

Studies included
in quantitative
synthesis (metaanalysis)
(n = 0)

Trials excluded (n =
220)
- Already identified
on CSDR.com, GSK
Study Register, or in
previous metaanalyses (n = 47)
- Trials without
rosiglitazone
intervention (n =6)
- Trials with <24
weeks’ duration (n =
39)
- Trials classified as
“withdrawn”,
“terminated” or
“suspended”
(without reported
results or a
publication) (n = 25)
- Trials without
reported results or a
publication (n = 18)
- Trials with pediatric
patients (n = 6)
- Trials with incorrect
study design, no
comparator, or
without enough
information (n = 78)

Studies included
in quantitative
synthesis (metaanalysis)
(n = 1)

