medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

FDA oversight of NSIGHT genomic research: the need for an integrated systems approach to
regulation
1

2,3

4

5

6,7,8

Laura V. Milko , Flavia Chen , Kee Chan , Amy M. Brower , Pankaj B. Agrawal
, Alan H.
6,8
1
2,9
6,8
2,3
Beggs , Jonathan S. Berg , Steven E. Brenner , Ingrid A. Holm , Barbara A. Koenig , Richard
5,10
1,11
12
B. Parad , Cynthia M. Powell , *Stephen F. Kingsmore

1

Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill NC 27599

2

Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco CA 94143

3

Program in Bioethics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco CA 94143

4

Department of Health Policy and Administration, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60612

5

American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, 7101 Wisconsin Avenue Suite 1101,
Bethesda, MD 20184
6

Division of Genetics & Genomics, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston
Children’s Hospital, Boston MA 02115
7

Division of Newborn Medicine, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston MA 02115

8

Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA 02115

9

Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley 94720

10

Department of Pediatric Newborn Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston MA
02115
11

Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill NC 27599

12

Rady Children’s Institute for Genomic Medicine, San Diego, CA 92123

*Correspond with Dr. Stephen F. Kingsmore, Rady Children’s Institute for Genomic Medicine,
San Diego, CA 92123

1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

ABSTRACT
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) funded the Newborn Sequencing In Genomic medicine
and public HealTh (NSIGHT) Consortium to investigate the implications, challenges and
opportunities associated with the possible use of genomic sequence information in the
newborn period. Following announcement of the NSIGHT awardees in 2013, the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) contacted investigators and requested that pre-submissions to
investigational device exemptions (IDE) be submitted for the use of genomic sequencing under
Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations (21 CFR) part 812. IDE regulation permits clinical
investigation of medical devices that have not been approved by the FDA. To our knowledge,
this marked the first time the FDA determined that NIH-funded clinical genomic research
projects are subject to IDE regulation. Here we review the history of and rationale behind FDA
oversight of clinical research and the NSIGHT Consortium’s experiences in navigating the IDE
process. Overall, NSIGHT investigators found that FDA’s application of existing IDE regulations
and medical device definitions aligned imprecisely with the aims of publicly funded exploratory
clinical research protocols. IDE risk assessments by the FDA were similar to, but distinct from,
protocol risk assessments conducted by local Institutional Review Boards (IRBs), and had the
potential to reflect novel oversight of emerging genomic technologies. However, the pre-IDE
and IDE process delayed the start of NSIGHT research studies by an average of 10 months, and
significantly limited the scope of investigation in two of the four NIH approved projects. Based
on the experience of the NSIGHT Consortium, we conclude that policies and practices governing
the development and use of novel genomic technologies in clinical research urgently need

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

clarification in order to mitigate potentially conflicting or redundant oversight by IRBs, NIH,
FDA, and state authorities.

INTRODUCTION
In 2013, the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(NICHD) and the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) co-founded the Newborn
Sequencing In Genomic medicine and public HealTh (NSIGHT) Consortium to better understand
1

the use of genomic testing in the newborn period . Respondents to the request for proposals
were asked to address one or more of the following scientific questions: For disorders currently
screened for in newborns, how can genomic sequencing replicate or augment known newborn
screening results? What knowledge about conditions not currently screened for in newborns
could genomic sequencing of newborns provide? And, what additional clinical information
could be learned from genomic sequencing relevant to the clinical care of newborns? In
addressing these questions, applicants were required to develop a research project with three
components: genomic sequencing, clinical research, and ethical, legal, and social implications
(ELSI) research. The NICHD and NHGRI ultimately funded the proposals of four academic
medical institutions, and here we describe their unique experiences responding to the Food and
Drug Administration's (FDA) unprecedented oversight of NIH-sponsored clinical research
projects, and provide insight and recommendations for regulators, researchers, and policymakers.

Regulatory Background

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

The use of genetic and genomic sequencing to guide clinical decision making has rapidly
increased, driven by the decreasing cost and turnaround time of next generation sequencing
(NGS) technologies, expanding knowledge about the impact of genetic variation on disease and
treatment choice, and growing evidence of the benefits of precision medicine to save lives and
improve health outcomes. Though the regulation of genetic testing technologies has received
attention over the past 25 years, establishing meaningful oversight of genetic and genomic
testing has proven complicated. The variable scope, utility, and applications of the data
generated through sequencing technologies, as well as interpretive challenges, make protection
of research participants and patients at the increasingly blurry boundary between genomic
research and clinical care especially complex. Federal agencies tasked with overseeing evolving
2

genomic technologies face the unenviable task of regulating a rapidly moving target . As a
result, regulations may lag behind the application of genomic technologies and prove imperfect
mechanisms for oversight when applied across diverse use cases.

As recipients of NIH funding, NSIGHT Consortium research is subject to oversight by the
Department of Health and Human Services’ (DHHS) Office for Human Research Protection
3

(OHRP) under the Common Rule . DHHS houses the FDA, which derives the authority to
regulate medical devices from the 1938 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and subsequent
amendments and is tasked with ensuring that tests constituting medical devices are both safe
4

and effective .

Within FDA, the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) is

responsible for regulating the manufacture of in vitro diagnostic devices that are sold in the
United States, including NGS tests, which are considered a type of medical device under Title 21

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

of the US Code (USC) section 321. The CDRH issues Investigational Device Exemptions (IDE) to
permit the clinical evaluation of investigational devices prior to marketing approval and to
concomitantly protect the health and safety of clinical research subjects. However, research
studies of diagnostic devices have historically been exempt from the IDE regulations unless the
reviewing Institutional Review Board (IRB) has previously determined that a study involves a
significant risk device. In addition, much of genomic medicine research involves questions that
are focused on the results of genomic sequencing, where the actual “device” used to generate
sequencing data is less important than understanding what clinicians and patients do with the
information. Therefore, while the full scope of a genomic medicine research project may
inevitably involve the generation of sequencing data on a research participant, the intent of the
research may not be to validate a test for clinical marketing, but rather to use sequencing
technology as a starting point from which to ask broad questions, for example about the
ethical, legal, and social implications of genetic findings.

Although the IDE regulation has been in place for over four decades, the FDA’s role in the
oversight of genomics research continues to evolve as genomic sequencing is increasingly being
applied across a variety of patient populations and healthcare settings.

The Secretary’s

Advisory Committee on Genetic Testing first called for FDA involvement in the oversight of
5

genetic testing in 2008 . Nonetheless, many researchers are not aware of the FDA role in
clinical research or the FDA’s categorization of genomic sequencing as a medical device that
6

would require FDA oversight and evaluation to allow for its use in medical research .

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

In addition, research testing where patient-specific results are reported from a laboratory, and
those results will be or could be used “for the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of any
disease or impairment of, or the assessment of the health of, human beings” are subject to
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) certification (Title 42 Code of Federal
Regulations). CLIA is overseen by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), which,
like the FDA, is part of the Department of Health and Human Services. The CLIA program in each
state is overseen by the respective Department of Health or Public Health. The objective of the
CLIA program is to ensure accurate and reliable laboratory test results.

The FDA defines a Laboratory Developed Test (LDT) as an in vitro diagnostic test that is
manufactured by and used within a single laboratory (i.e. a laboratory with a single CLIA
certificate). LDTs are also sometimes called in-house developed tests, or “home brew” tests.
Similar to other in vitro diagnostic tests, LDTs are considered “devices,” and are therefore
subject to regulatory oversight by the FDA. When a laboratory develops a test system such as
an LDT in-house without receiving FDA clearance or approval, CLIA allows the return of test
results following establishment of certain performance specifications relating to analytical
validity for the use of that test system in the laboratory’s own environment (see 42 CFR
493.1253(b)(2). This analytical validation is limited, however, to the specific conditions, staff,
equipment and patient population of the particular laboratory, so the findings of these
laboratory-specific analytical validations are not meaningful outside of the laboratory that did
the analysis. Unlike the FDA, whose review of analytical validity is done prior to the marketing
of the test system, a laboratory’s analytical validation of LDTs is reviewed by CLIA during its

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

routine biennial survey – after the laboratory has already started testing. Many clinical
laboratories utilize the College of American Pathologists (CAP's) Laboratory Accreditation
Program to help meet CLIA requirements. Unlike the FDA regulatory scheme, the CLIA program
does not address the clinical validity of any test. Thus, the two agencies’ regulatory schemes are
different in focus, scope and purpose, but they are intended to be complementary.

Oversight of genomic testing used in NIH-sponsored research
In genomic clinical research, the IDE process is focused on the analytical validity of the genomic
test and is designed to protect the interests of research participants whose clinical care may be
impacted by the results of the genomic test. Research projects that do not return genomic test
results to research participants or their physicians are exempt.

Studies that use a second

“medically established” procedure to confirm the results of the genomic test may also be
exempt, but only if they are being used to confirm a variant for which the diagnostic
4

interpretation is incontrovertible . For non-exempt studies, FDA has two classifications of risk:
non-significant risk (NSR) and significant risk (SR). The risk determination process focuses on
the relative risks posed to the study participants, and the investigator conducting the research
makes an assessment of risk that is communicated in an IRB protocol submitted to their IRB.
The IRB decides if the study is exempt, NSR, or SR, and the reason for the classification is
described in detail. Studies that are determined to be SR require the investigator to submit an
IDE application to the FDA before beginning their project, and the IDE application must be
approved by the FDA prior to the enrollment of participants.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

FDA Involvement with the NSIGHT consortium
Shortly after the NIH announcement of the NSIGHT awards in late 2013, the Principal
Investigators (PI) of the four NSIGHT research groups were informed that they were required to
submit a 510(k) Pre-Submission to an IDE application (“Pre-Sub”) for premarket review prior to
review by the local IBR, despite a contradictory FDA statement that a Pre-Sub was entirely
7,8

voluntary on the part of the applicant . Subsequently, each of the research groups embarked
on an interactive and arduous review process with FDA before beginning enrollment. This
entailed correspondence at great length via email, letter, telephone and videoconference with
FDA representatives about the submission of the Pre-Sub and, in the case of the NC NEXUS
study at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, led to ongoing FDA oversight and
interactions after the full IDE submission was approved (Fig. 1). The following sections detail
the unique “devices” and the concomitantly unique experiences of the four studies while
navigating the unfamiliar and unexpected regulatory oversight of the FDA.

METHODS

Experiences of NSIGHT investigators with FDA
Children’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO/Rady Children’s Institute for Genomic Medicine,
San Diego, CA
Children’s Mercy Hospital (CMH) submitted a Pre-Sub in March 2014 for the first study iteration
(NSIGHT1), a partially blinded randomized control trial (RCT) of rapid whole genome sequencing
(WGS) plus standard tests versus standard tests alone.

9-14

The participants were families with

an infant aged <4 months in a regional neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) or pediatric intensive

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

care unit (PICU) with an illness of suspected genetic etiology. The primary end-point was the
rate of etiologic diagnosis within 28 days of test order.

The device comprised innovative methods for making a rapid diagnosis of a simple genetic
disease, including deep phenotyping, rapid whole genome sequencing (rWGS), rapid primary,
secondary and tertiary sequence analysis, diagnostic interpretation, confirmatory testing,
reporting results, and provision of inpatient precision medicine guidance. Most of the device
elements had previously been inspected by CLIA and CAP and been found compliant, including
rWGS performed at the CMH CLIA laboratory under local IRB research protocols.

10

Unpublished
12,13

data regarding the diagnostic and clinical utility of rWGS was included in the Pre-Sub.

The FDA’s initial review of the CMH study was received on April 28, 2014, and requested
additional information regarding maximum blood draws in neonates, and regarding verbal
provisional return of diagnostic results prior to confirmation by an orthogonal method. The
study clarified that the latter was limited to NICU and PICU infants with life-threatening
conditions in whom the molecular diagnosis was associated with a specific treatment that
would have a high likelihood of improving outcomes. The potential harm of delayed reporting
and institution of specific treatment (1-2 weeks for confirmatory testing) was asserted to be
greater than that of a false positive result in this patient population, and had been
substantiated by an unpublished case example where returning a verbal, provisional diagnosis
had likely saved that infant’s life. Of note, all diagnoses were confirmed prior to final reporting.
The FDA determined on May 8, 2014 that the study was NSR and did not require an IDE.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

In June 2016, upon transfer of the award from CMH to the Rady Children’s Institute for
Genomic Medicine (RCIGM), a second RCT (NSIGHT2), comparing the clinical utility of singleton
and trio rWGS with that of singleton and trio rapid whole exome sequencing (WES) was
initiated. A number of the device elements differed between CMH and Rady. The RCIGM
laboratory had previously been inspected by CLIA and CAP and been found compliant, including
rWGS. The FDA was contacted regarding whether another Pre-Sub was required for the new
enrollment site and clinical laboratory, and about interim changes to the software and
14

hardware components of the device that improved analytic performance.

The FDA

determined that another Pre-Sub was not necessary since the risk determination had not
changed materially.

“NBSeq” study at the University of California, San Francisco
The NBSeq project, as described in the Pre-Sub submitted in January 2014, was designed to
evaluate the potential application of WES in newborn screening (NBS) using 1) deidentified
archived dried blood spots (DBS) to ascertain metabolic disorders currently screened for in the
state of California, and 2) identified archived DBS, obtained with parental consent, from
individuals with an immunodeficiency disorder not identified by current NBS. The deidentified
DBS research was not subject to FDA oversight, as no results would be returned. In the
immunodeficiency cohort, the NBSeq project proposed to use WES to identify variants
potentially associated with the child’s immune disorder. Parents provided informed consent for
testing. The NBSeq investigators also initially planned to explore certain pharmacogenomic

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

(PGX) variants as “secondary” findings, and offer parents the option to receive those results.
The team also sought to capture prospectively the decision process, including parental
reactions to results and opinions regarding the value to their family of WES.

The device was considered to be DNA extraction and exome sequencing using the Illumina
HiSeq 2500 system, with clinical confirmation prior to return of results. Interesting PGX variants
identified via WES would be confirmed in a CLIA-certified commercial laboratory using a costeffective LDT on a clinically routine genotyping platform and only validated results would be
shared with parents who had consented to receive results.

Initially, the FDA indicated that the NBSeq project would be a SR study, despite the routine use
of the intended confirmatory PGX test in clinical practice to guide medical decisions, because
the commercial CLIA-certified method neither used Sanger sequencing nor furnished specific
validation data required by the FDA for research studies. An SR determination would have
required the study to adopt a much more expensive PGX genotyping method to perhaps render
it acceptable to the FDA, to submit a full IDE application, or to change the protocol, eliminating
the plan to return PGX results as a secondary finding. In April 2015, the NBSeq investigators
decided to eliminate the PGX arm of the research and the FDA subsequently deemed that the
study was exempt from IDE regulations.

“BabySeq” - Brigham Women’s Hospital and Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA and
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

In their February 2014 Pre-Sub, the BabySeq project described their “Exome Sequencing Test”
as falling within the remit of currently described CLIA LDTs, and therefore exempt from
regulation as a medical device. The BabySeq project was an RCT designed to investigate the
potential impact of genomic information on future care and on the ELSI of returning genomic
information, including carrier status, to families and health care providers. A cohort of healthy
newborns and a cohort of sick newborns were randomized to a control arm (conventional NBS
results and a detailed family history) or an experimental arm (genomic sequencing in addition
to conventional NBS and a detailed family history). Surveys of parents and physicians assessed
attitudes and preferences, health care utilization, health behaviors and intentions, decisional
satisfaction, and psychosocial impact on the family.

The device description included routine clinical specimen collection and DNA extraction,
genomic sequencing on an Illumina MiSeq Sequencer, sequence variant annotation and
interpretation utilizing industry standard software and following the American College of
Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) and Association of Molecular Pathologists (AMP)
15

professional guidelines.

Orthogonal confirmation of positive results would utilize independent

sequencing on an Ion Torrent Proton Sequencer or by traditional Sanger methods, and Droplet
Digital PCR (ddPCR) confirmation of potential copy number variants would be performed in
CLIA/CAP compliant clinical diagnostic laboratories. Board certified genetic counselors in
conjunction with a study physician would return results to participants.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

In May 2014, the FDA responded that the “Test", though developed and validated in the same
way as other LDTs, did not qualify as NSR because neither the NGS nor the ddPCR orthogonal
confirmation had prior FDA approval and due to the undefined nature of the thousands of
genes being queried, it was not possible to anticipate in advance the medical conditions and
treatment decisions that would be encountered.

In December 2014, after extensive deliberation, consultation with hospital regulatory experts,
and protocol approval by local IRBs, the BabySeq study team submitted an addendum to the
initial Pre-Sub that included several key changes and clarifications: 1) all variants found by NGS
would be confirmed by Sanger sequencing; 2) only genes with definitive or strong evidence to
cause pediatric onset conditions (but not adult onset conditions as originally proposed) would
be adjudicated and included in reports; and 3) only variants meeting ACMG/AMP criteria for
pathogenicity would be reported. In addition, due to cost constraints, with the added
requirement for Sanger sequencing confirmation, reporting of blood typing results was dropped
from the protocol. The FDA rendered a final determination that the BabySeq program
represented an NSR device study on February 23, 2015 based on the three previous factors and
the clarification that result disclosure would be conducted via appropriate physician and
genetic counselor interactions.

“NC NEXUS” - University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
The NC NEXUS project submitted the Pre-Sub in January 2014 describing the study as an
embedded two-arm, parallel group, RCT of two cohorts of children: one cohort with a condition

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

recently diagnosed through standard NBS and one cohort of newborns identified during a
16

healthy pregnancy . Parents of both cohorts were consented to learn the results of an “NGSNBS” panel of medically actionable conditions comparable to those detected by current NBS
17

screening , and also to be randomized to have the ability to request additional genomic
findings (“Decision Arm”) or not (“Control Arm). Recruitment of both healthy and diagnosed
cohorts facilitated the study of parental decision-making and a novel evaluation of the potential
ability of NGS-NBS to enhance and augment current NBS.

Initially the NC NEXUS investigators defined the device as including the exome sequencing
methods, bioinformatics pipeline, and variant calling software, as well as confirmation of
variants using Sanger sequencing in a CLIA-certified clinical laboratory and reporting by a boardcertified molecular pathologist. However, several weeks after receiving the Pre-Sub, FDA
reviewers requested an addendum to the Pre-Sub describing the ELSI arm of the device,
including specifics about the electronic decision aid being developed to assist parents in making
18

decisions about exome sequencing in their child , the populations to be studied, the genes to
be analyzed, and the types of variants that would be reported.

After extensive correspondence between UNC investigators and FDA reviewers, FDA indicated
that a primary concern was that the “Decision Arm” would have the option of learning
additional results from the exome sequencing data that would include pathogenic variants in
genes associated with adult onset medically actionable conditions. Although the NC NEXUS

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

study noted that board certified generic counselors and clinical geneticists would conduct visits
for informed consent and return of results, FDA’s concerns were not completely offset.

The FDA expressed additional concerns, including how to define a “gold standard” negative
result and whether extensive validation of the device had been conducted. Since one of the
aims of the study was to evaluate the performance of exome sequencing in a screening context,
no such validation had been performed. In addition, NC NEXUS investigators noted that the
main scientific goals were to study parental decision-making about genomic findings in
newborns and children, and not to validate a test that would subsequently be offered as a
clinical service or marketed and commercialized. Eventually, the FDA was convinced that
developing an appropriately validated negative result would require a much larger study and
was outside the scope of the NC NEXUS study.

On August 28, 2014, the FDA concluded that the NC NEXUS study was SR and required a full IDE
submission prior to beginning recruitment and enrollment. At this time, the NC NEXUS PIs
chose to submit a full IDE rather than significantly alter their research proposal. Development
of all the study materials that were required by the IDE, including protocol workflows,
recruitment materials, consent forms, reporting forms, on-line decision aid tools, and the list of
genes that would be included in the study, were part of the project and allowed to proceed;
however, recruitment and enrollment of study participants was stalled pending FDA approval of
the IDE, which was finally received on December 22, 2015.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

RESULTS
Protecting human participants who are enrolled in research studies involving significant risk
medical devices is a critically important role of the FDA. However, determining whether the
level of risk warrants an IDE application to FDA and, possibly, future FDA oversight is the
responsibility of the project investigator’s IRB. Despite a clear statutory requirement that the
investigator’s IRB should make the risk determination, the FDA pre-emptively requested PreSubs from the NSIGHT investigators and made risk determinations, which for some projects
necessitated profound changes to their funded study proposals, before the protocols were
submitted to the local IRBs. Because of this atypical sequence of risk determination and a lack
of specific guidelines regarding the risk determination criteria, the NSIGHT consortium engaged
in a lengthy and arduous process of understanding unfamiliar FDA procedures and attending to
compliance. NSIGHT researchers ultimately identified several common elements within our
unique study designs which we believe served as the basis for the FDA’s risk determinations.

Elements of Risk Determination
The FDA’s accumulated experience with IDE submissions for other medical devices informed
the development of an internal rubric that is applicable across different studies; however, the
specific details of the criteria for risk determination for genomic sequencing studies have not
yet been articulated to our knowledge. Though the four studies had unique designs and clinical
contexts, all had proposed to investigate the application and performance of NGS approaches
in newborns and children (per the mission of the consortium), and all had originally planned to
return results to study participants in order to study the downstream implications of doing so.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Through the collective experience of the consortium, we identified four factors we believe
contributed the greatest impact in the FDA’s risk determination: 1) method of orthogonal
confirmation; 2) method of return of results; 3) population to whom results are returned; and
4) specific types of results being returned.

Confirmatory testing methods varied for each of the studies because the NSIGHT consortium
was established for the purpose of investigating the application and performance of NGS
(exome or genome sequencing) in the diagnosis and screening of newborns and children.
Historically, Sanger sequencing has been the “gold standard” and it was made clear that other
methods, such as confirmation of potential copy number variants using ddPCR as initially
proposed by the BabySeq project, were deemed unacceptable without prior extensive and costprohibitive validation. Subsequent studies have shown that Sanger sequencing is subject to the
same amplification and repeat-based artifacts as NGS and is not necessary for confirmation of
19–21

all NGS results.

The FDA also scrutinized the method by which results would be returned to the participants.
Studies that utilized a genetic counselor, clinical geneticist, and/or study physician in the return
of results were deemed of lower risk than studies that provided results without counseling.
However, the FDA communicated that genetic counseling, while considered to be a mitigating
factor, was not sufficient in and of itself to make a determination of NSR. Research studies in
which results are returned to participants by other methods are construed as posing increased
risk, presumably due to the chance for misunderstanding.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Though the mandate of the NSIGHT consortium was to investigate the applications and efficacy
of genomic sequencing in infants and children, the return of results in those populations
appeared to play a major role in the risk determination. In particular, the FDA considered
whether the results were being returned in a population already affected with certain health
conditions (eg. seriously ill NICU patients) or those who were healthy. In the FDA’s view, return
of results in the healthy population conferred a higher level of risk that could not be mitigated
by the precautions that are in place as part of routine medical care. The fact that the research
participants were children also appeared to increase the overall level of risk.

The FDA was also interested in the inherent risks to returning different types of diagnostic and
public health screening results. The Rady Children’s Institute/CMH study was designed to
investigate the efficacy of analyzing and returning genomic diagnostic results, which had been
shown to have demonstrable benefits and an overall low risk of harm, to critically ill newborns
11,22

in the NICU and PICU

. Conversely, the BabySeq, NBSeq, and NC NEXUS studies proposed to

examine the application and efficacy of genome-scale sequencing in the context of returning
public health screening results to the parents of healthy newborns. Both the BabySeq and NC
NEXUS studies originally proposed to return results for conditions with likely childhood onset as
well as adult onset. These results were categorized in terms of the gene-disease pairs that
would be analyzed for possible return of results in the study, as well as the interpretive
classifications of variants that would be returned (e.g. pathogenic, likely pathogenic, variant of

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

uncertain significance). Each NSIGHT group defined their return of results protocols differently,
depending on the aims of the study, which in turn influenced the risk determination.

Considering these factors together, we can draw some conclusions about the FDA’s risk
determination process for the NSIGHT Consortium studies. The FDA appeared to consider
returning diagnostic results to parents of infants or children with an existing health condition to
be lower risk than returning secondary findings or primary screening results to parents of
asymptomatic newborns. Additionally, returning results to parents of infants or children that
are related to childhood onset conditions is considered lower risk than returning results related
to adult onset conditions; this is likely due to the FDA’s interpretation of ethical guidance
23,24

regarding the use of genetic tests in minors.

A further layer of complexity in the risk

assessment was the intersection between the interpretation of variants (the criteria that would
be used and the credentials of the individuals responsible), the classes of variants that would be
returned (e.g. pathogenic variants versus variants of uncertain significance) and the clinical
context in which those results would be disclosed (diagnostic findings versus screening). The NC
NEXUS study, which included the return of results related to adult onset conditions in healthy
newborns, was deemed to be SR. The BabySeq study was deemed to be NSR once it altered its
protocol and agreed to only report variants associated with pediatric onset conditions and only
in genes with “definitive” or “strong” levels of evidence for association with disease.

In the FDA’s interpretation of risk, it seems that the nature of the risk (as defined by the above
criteria) is the defining characteristic, and not the likelihood that any harms would actually

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

occur. In the NC NEXUS and BabySeq studies the populations are small and the potential
genetic conditions identified are rare. Therefore, there was a very small a priori chance that any
given condition would be identified and therefore returned. However, the very low likelihood
did not mitigate the risk.

Impact of Risk Determination
All four sites were significantly impacted by the mandatory Pre-Sub process, including delayed
submission and review by IRBs, and onset of clinical enrollment that resulted in decreased
enrollment and the alteration of originally planned protocols, as a result of the unexpected
demand on researchers’ limited resources to interpret and navigate the FDA requirements.
Ultimately, NBSeq and BabySeq substantially curtailed their study design and protocols, to the
detriment of the entire consortium-wide research directive, in order to avoid the subsequent
resource-intensive IDE submission process. The NBSeq study investigators ultimately eliminated
the PGX aspect of their study due to a lack of resources to generate an FDA compliant Pre-Sub,
to avoid further delay in the conduct of the research, and the proportionally small number of
families expected to be studied as part of the PGX project.

The BabySeq study made several substantive modifications to their originally proposed and
funded protocol. Due to FDA requirement for Sanger confirmations, it became financially and
logistically unfeasible to return non-medically critical findings, such as minor blood group
antigens and PGX findings, so the region of interest and scope of the study was effectively
constrained. The study also proceeded without the initial aim to confirm smaller copy number

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

variants by ddPCR. The restriction on returning results only for pediatric onset or actionable
conditions led to a dilemma later on when an infant was found to harbor a maternally inherited
adult-onset cancer risk allele, necessitating an urgent protocol amendment and FDA
notification.

25

Furthermore, the lengthy regulatory delay, with the loss of over 12 months of

funded time blocked to recruitment, contributed to the diminished enrollment of only 316 of
26

the proposed 480 newborns prior to the study end date.

The SR determination levied against the NC NEXUS study, and the subsequent decision by the
study PIs to submit a full IDE application rather than substantially alter their research aims and
protocol, delayed the NC NEXUS study by more than 12 months, negatively impacted
recruitment and enrollment of participants and added substantial unanticipated costs. The
analysis was restricted to small variants that could be confirmed by Sanger sequencing, rather
than the original plan of analyzing both small variants and predicted copy number variants
based on depth of coverage analysis, due to the complications of determining and validating a
confirmatory test strategy acceptable to the FDA. Of note, this meant that the diagnostic yield
of the research exome was intentionally restricted by the investigators due to the challenges of
FDA oversight. Following approval of the NC NEXUS IDE more than 2 years after the initial
notice of award, there were numerous unanticipated administrative requirements that
impacted the UNC study in major and minor ways, such as: 1) changes to the original patient
consent forms; 2) changes to the original plans for how “negative” screening reports would
appear; 3) hiring an independent data monitor consultant to review study data on a regular
basis; 4) regular reporting through IDE annual reports; and 5) study protocol addenda that had

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

to be submitted to the FDA prior to implementation (either 5-day notices of minor procedural
changes or more detailed supplemental applications for changes such as modifications to the
exome capture protocol or to have the ability to enroll parents of children with variants of
unknown significance in order to perform family segregation studies).

In contrast, the NSR determination for the Rady/CMH study was considered beneficial by the
PIs in several ways. Firstly, the process of risk determination by the FDA was helpful, providing a
different, more analytically rigorous perspective that helped inform the subsequent IRB
protocol. Likewise, the CMH IRB found the NSR determination by the FDA to be helpful in their
review of what was considered a highly innovative protocol, particularly from an ELSI
standpoint. Finally, when the study moved from CMH to Rady, with testing at a different
laboratory and with different “device” components, notification by the FDA that the “device”
did not require an additional Pre-IDE submission was helpful in accelerating review by the Rady
IRB.

DISCUSSION
Clinical genomic research is funded and regulated by many federal, state and local
(institutional) agencies. As evidenced by the NSIGHT program, the boundaries of oversight by
these agencies are not always apparent to researchers or sister agencies, and may conflict with
one another. We found that the basis for risk assessments and prioritization of areas of concern
with regard to novel genomic technologies varied considerably between the NIH, FDA, CMS
(CLIA), and local IRBs. Different stakeholders worked in tandem, but their efforts were isolated

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

from each other and this uncoordinated regulation of the NSIGHT consortium resulted in an
average delay of approximately 12 months, additional cost and drain on resources, and change
in Specific Aims in two of the four studies. Given the typical 4-5 year duration of NIH-funded
research, such delays curtailed enrollment, which weakened the statistical power of studies and
decreased the likelihood that Specific Aims were achieved. If delays had resulted in
corresponding risk reduction, they would have been viewed as justifiable, but this was not the
case for any of the four studies.

While FDA reviewers with appropriate backgrounds may potentially provide deeper expertise
with cutting-edge genomic technologies than local IRB reviewers, the transition from evaluating
analytic validation to evaluating clinical genomic analyses proved to be a steep learning curve
for several FDA reviewers, with clear evidence that the interaction with the NSIGHT groups
provided a great deal of insight into this field. Unfortunately, turnover among the FDA review
teams resulted in the need for frequent re-education by the NSIGHT investigators. This
experience clearly demonstrates that clinical researchers, funding agencies, the general public,
local IRBs, and government oversight agencies (i.e. FDA, CMS and CDC) would benefit from a
27,28

more integrated systems approach to oversight (Fig. 2)

.

Most NIH research involves ongoing methods development and refinement during the period
of award. This is particularly true of studies involving NGS platforms. During the period of
NSIGHT awards the underpinning technology platforms have evolved considerably. For
example, sequencers manufactured by Illumina Inc., an industry standard, have evolved from

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

the HiSeq 2000 to the HiSeq 2500, then HiSeq 4000 and finally the NovaSeq 6000, with different
quality, throughput and turnaround time. Similar improvements have occurred in the analysis
software used to call variants (including greater ability to identify structural and copy number
variations and even triplet repeat expansions), and the data sources that allow molecular
geneticists to determine which variants are clinically relevant. A significant problem with the
FDA assessments that occurred at the beginning of studies is that they occurred as a “one off”
for a project, and were not well designed to react to such advances in knowledge or changes in
technology during the typical 5-year duration of a project. Furthermore, FDA practices also
evolved during the period, as evidenced by recent reversals of FDA decisions regarding direct29

to-consumer genetic testing . It would seem that IRBs and CMS (through CLIA) oversight
mechanisms are better attuned to the tempo of change in biomedical research, with their
typical requirement for annual re-approval of protocols and change control mechanisms,
respectively.

Based on the collective experiences of the NSIGHT investigators, we propose an integrated
approach to the oversight of clinical research using genomic testing, with the short-term goal of
protecting research participants’ health while maintaining the long-term goal of improving
population health through scientific and clinical discoveries that begins with NIH. We propose
that NIH Institutes (and other federal funding agencies) discuss large, new programs with
oversight agencies before their implementation, as currently occurs within NIH Institute
Councils. Resultant feedback from federal stakeholder agencies, such as CMS and FDA, would
assist in drafting and refinement of new program requests for applications (RFA) for clinical

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

genomic research, and with the goal of identifying and addressing boundary issues that were
likely to create conflicts or impede programmatic goals or timelines. In addition to the
development of RFAs, the relevant oversight agencies would disseminate guidance to
investigators considering responses to RFAs or work with NIH staff to include guidance in the
RFAs. Such guidance would outline the role that the FDA might play in each particular RFA and
assist in determinations such as whether the IDE application pre-approval submission process is
mandatory, highly recommended (but optional), or not necessary. In addition, to determine
whether FDA oversight is needed for NIH funded genomics clinical research, policies should be
established that address more clearly the level of involvement and follow-up required. This
could build upon the NSIGHT experience with regard to the level of oversight based on the
population under investigation (e.g. adult versus pediatric, healthy versus acutely ill) and the
maturity of the genomic technologies, or devices, to be used. Research teams could then use
this information as they design studies in response to RFAs.

This approach would enable

research teams to proactively address identified issues and include funds, expertise and time in
proposals to address FDA oversight. During peer review, funding decision making, and upon
issuance of an award, the reviewers, the research team and the relevant funding and oversight
agencies would then have a clear understanding of the involvement of FDA, and can proceed
with IDE pre-submission application and/or IRB protocol submission to their IRB. This approach
will also avoid the need to change research protocols after favorable peer review and awarding
of funds.

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Genomic technologies, including both hardware and software, evolve extremely rapidly, and
the potential benefits and harms of exploratory use of novel technologies in clinical research
can be extremely difficult to estimate in the absence of data. Therefore, expert consensus
guidance is helpful in such determinations but is often limited to extrapolation based on
previous experience. When genomic findings are confirmed by an effective orthogonal method,
technical false positives can be minimized. Interpretation of the clinical significance of the
finding by a qualified practitioner (molecular genetics or cytogenetics) lessens the chance of a
clinical false positive. Disclosure to participants via a method that would be deemed standard of
care for that type of result should reduce concerns about misunderstanding. Thus, if each of
these three features are present, the original technology used to derive the result should be of
lesser importance with respect to “positive” findings that are being disclosed to participants.
On the other hand, a significant challenge with new technologies is the ability to detect relevant
genetic variants compared to other alternatives. Validating a “negative” result becomes
extremely difficult, if not impossible in the case of genome-scale sequencing, when the new
technology has no equal comparator. For research projects that are not focused on analytical
validation, therefore, it may be extremely challenging to provide the types of validation data
that would normally be expected by a regulatory agency such as the FDA. One solution to this
problem would be to create a new type of targeted NIH research program specifically designed
to generate scoping data for novel genomic technologies with regard to, for example, analytic
performance or public perception of risk. Results of such evaluations would provide a highly
valuable reference framework for investigators and regulatory agencies that would greatly
improve the efficiency of review and implementation.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

In conclusion, the FDA has authority under 21 CFR 812.20 to regulate NIH-funded clinical
research. The FDA exercised this authority in the NHGRI/NICHD NSIGHT program, utilizing the
IDE mechanism to evaluate the relative benefits and harms of the human participants research
protocols developed by the four grantees, but the RFAs did not address these regulatory
aspects. We propose a systems approach that is a coordination between NIH and FDA when
planning funding opportunities with the goal of understanding whether the proposed effort will
likely require interaction with the FDA. Awareness of the scope of a potential FDA interaction
would allow for appropriate budgeting and adjustment of timelines to account for the
clearance of potential FDA hurdles. Communication with FDA will enable NIH to provide clearer
guidelines to investigators as they design their study, while coordination with NIH will enable
FDA to establish a consistent process of review. Provision by the FDA of IDE protocol templates
specific to projects that include disclosure of genomic sequencing results, would greatly
facilitate researchers’ ability to comply with any regulatory oversight. Here also exists a need
for clarification of policies with regard to the potentially conflicting, overlapping oversight of
clinical research by local IRBs, NIH, FDA, and state CLIA programs, particularly in light of shifting
priorities. The NSIGHT experience highlights the importance of NIH leadership and identifies
areas of collaboration and planning that would facilitate successful genomic medicine projects.

By establishing a value-added partnership between academic institutions, NIH, FDA and the
general public, we can identify our shared responsibilities and goals.

With a shared

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

responsibility and collective systems approach to oversight of genomic research in the future,
we may be able to accelerate the adoption of genomics for patient care and public health.

Competing Interests: L.V.M., A.M.B., P.B.A. I.A.H., F.C., J.S.B., R.B.P., C.M.P., K.C, I.A.H., A.H.B.
and S.F.K. declare no competing interests.
S.E.B. received research support at UC Berkeley from TATA Consultancy Services

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The NSIGHT consortium was funded by National Institute of Health grants U19HD077693,
U19HD077632, U19HD077627, and U19HD077671. The Newborn Screening Translational
Research Network is funded through a contract from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (HHSN275201800005C). The authors wish to
acknowledge the contributions made to NSIGHT by current and former NHGRI and NICHD
Directors Dr. Eric Green, Dr. Teri Manolio, Dr. Alan Guttmacher, and Dr. Diana Bianchi, Program
Officers Dr. Anastasia Wise, Dr. Tiina Urv, and Dr. Melissa Parisi, and Scientific Program Analysts
Brenda Iglesias, Ellen Howerton, and Cecelia Tamburro.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
L.V.M., S.K., J.S.B., A.M.B., R.B.P, C.M.P., and F.C. contributed to conceptualizing the study and
drafting the initial manuscript. P.B.A., I.A.H., and A.H.B contributed to substantive review and
revision of the manuscript; L.V.M., J.S.B. and K.C. contributed to the design of the figures
A.H.B. drafted and I.A.H. contributed to the description of the BabySeq site experience.

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

L.V.M., J.S.B. and C.M.P. drafted the description of the NC NEXUS study. F.C., B.K. and S.E.B
drafted the description of the NBSeq study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

REFERENCES
1.

Berg, J. S. et al. Newborn sequencing in genomic medicine and public health. Pediatrics

139, (2017).
2.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. IVD Regulatory Assistance > Clinical Laboratory
Improvement Amendments (CLIA). (2018). at
https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/IVDRegulatoryAssista
nce/ucm124105.htm>

3.

Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects (’Common Rule'). 45 CFR part 46, at
<https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/regulations/common-rule/index.html>

4.

FD&C Act Chapter V: Drugs and Devices. Sec. 355-1 - Risk evaluation and mitigation
strategies. at
https://www.fda.gov/regulatoryinformation/lawsenforcedbyfda/federalfooddrugandcosm
eticactfdcact/fdcactchaptervdrugsanddevices/default.htm>

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

5. Ferreira-Gonzalez, A. et al. US system of oversight for genetic testing: a report from the
Secretary’s Advisory Committee on Genetics, Health and Society. Per Med 5, 521–528
(2008).
6. National Human Genome Research Institute. Points to Consider in Assessing When an
Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) Might be Needed. Points to Consider Regarding the

Food and Drug Administration’s Investigational Device Exemption Regulations in the Context
of Genomics Research (2017). at <https://www.genome.gov/27561291/points-to-considerin-assessing-when-an-investigational-device-exemption-ide-might-be-needed/>
7. FDA guidance document (April 6, 2012), FDA and Industry Procedures for Section 513(g)
Requests for Information under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, Retrieved June
11, 2019 from https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidancedocuments/fda-and-industry-procedures-section-513g-requests-information-underfederal-food-drug-and-cosmetic.
8.

Requests for Feedback on Medical Device Submissions: The Pre-Submission Program and
Meetings with Food and Drug Administration Staff. (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services Food and Drug Administration, 2017). at
<https://www.fda.gov/downloads/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidance
documents/ucm311176.pdf>

9.

Petrikin, J. E. et al. The NSIGHT1-randomized controlled trial: rapid whole-genome
sequencing for accelerated etiologic diagnosis in critically ill infants. NPJ Genom. Med. 3, 6
(2018).

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

10. Dinwiddie, D. L., Saunders, C. J. & Farrow, E. G. Structured Genome-Scale Variant and
clinical Data Reporting for Meta-Analysis in an era of Genomic Medicine. Journal of

Genomes … (2013).
11. Saunders, C. J. et al. Rapid whole-genome sequencing for genetic disease diagnosis in
neonatal intensive care units. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 154ra135 (2012).
12. Soden, S. E. et al. Effectiveness of exome and genome sequencing guided by acuity of
illness for diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorders. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 265ra168 (2014).
13. Willig, L. K. et al. Whole-genome sequencing for identification of Mendelian disorders in
critically ill infants: a retrospective analysis of diagnostic and clinical findings. Lancet Respir.

Med. 3, 377–387 (2015).
14. Miller, N. A. et al. A 26-hour system of highly sensitive whole genome sequencing for
emergency management of genetic diseases. Genome Med. 7, 100 (2015).
15. Richards, S. et al. Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a
joint consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical Genetics and
Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology. Genet. Med. 17, 405–424 (2015).
16. Milko, L. V. et al. Evaluating parents’ decisions about next generation sequencing for their
child in the NC NEXUS (North Carolina Newborn Exome Sequencing for Universal
Screening) study: a randomized controlled trial protocol. Trials
17. Milko, L. V. et al. An Age-Based Framework for Evaluating Genome-Scale Sequencing
Results in Newborn Screening. J. Pediatr. (2019). doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2018.12.027
18. Lewis, M. A. et al. Supporting parental decisions about genomic sequencing for newborn
screening: the NC NEXUS decision aid. Pediatrics 137 Suppl 1, S16–23 (2016).

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

19. Strom, S. P. et al. Assessing the necessity of confirmatory testing for exome-sequencing
results in a clinical molecular diagnostic laboratory. Genet. Med. 16, 510–515 (2014).
20. Beck, T. F., Mullikin, J. C., NISC Comparative Sequencing Program & Biesecker, L. G.
Systematic Evaluation of Sanger Validation of Next-Generation Sequencing Variants. Clin.

Chem. 62, 647–654 (2016).
21. Mu, W., Lu, H.-M., Chen, J., Li, S. & Elliott, A. M. Sanger Confirmation Is Required to Achieve
Optimal Sensitivity and Specificity in Next-Generation Sequencing Panel Testing. J Mol

Diagn 18, 923–932 (2016).
22. Dinwiddie, D. L. et al. Molecular diagnosis of infantile onset inflammatory bowel disease by
exome sequencing. Genomics 102, 442–447 (2013).
23. Committee on Bioethics. Ethical issues with genetic testing in pediatrics. Pediatrics 107,
1451–1455 (2001).
24. Committee on Bioethics, Committee on Genetics, The American College of Medical
Genetics (ACMG) & Social Ethical and Legal Issues Committee. Ethical and policy issues in
genetic testing and screening of children. Pediatrics 131, 620–622 (2013).
25. Holm, I. A. et al. Returning a Genomic Result for an Adult-Onset Condition to the Parents of
a Newborn: Insights From the BabySeq Project. Pediatrics 143, S37–S43 (2019).
26. Ceyhan-Birsoy, O. et al. Interpretation of Genomic Sequencing Results in Healthy and Ill
Newborns: Results from the BabySeq Project. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 104, 76–93 (2019).
27. Trochim, W. M., Cabrera, D. A., Milstein, B., Gallagher, R. S. & Leischow, S. J. Practical
challenges of systems thinking and modeling in public health. Am J Public Health 96, 538–
546 (2006).

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

28. Leischow, S. J. et al. Systems thinking to improve the public’s health. Am J Prev Med 35, S
196–203 (2008).
29. Goodin, T. FDA allows marketing of first direct-to-consumer tests that provide genetic risk
information for certain conditions. (2017). at <https://www.fda.gov/news-events/pressannouncements/fda-allows-marketing-first-direct-consumer-tests-provide-genetic-riskinformation-certain-conditions>

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1: Comparative timelines of FDA interactions and decision making with the 3 sites (Rady,
BWH/BCH/BCM and UCSF) that were determined to be Non-Significant Risk (NSR) and with the
remaining site (UNC) in which Significant Risk (SR) was determined. The phases of FDA - NSIGHT
interaction were: IDE Pre-submission, in which all sites participated and submission of Pre-sub
addenda, if needed by FDA; Risk determination; and ongoing FDA oversight for the NC NEXUS
study (UNC). FDA-initiated activities are shown below the axis for each site, where as NSIGHT
site-initiated activities are indicated above the axis for each site.

Figure 2: Transition from the traditional framework to a systems approach for oversight of
clinical research. A. Traditional oversight involves sequential, uncoordinated actions by various
agencies. Principal investigators (PIs) seek general public well-being by applying for funding
from NIH to perform clinical genomic research. Public announcements of awards and research
projects resulted in FDA awareness of NIH-funded research and FDA expression of concerns of
risk assessment, benefits and harms, and clinical utility. Local IRBs and state CLIA requirements
provided independent oversight. B. A proposed model of collaborative, transparent, collective
research oversight in which the six entities involved (PIs, NIH, FDA, local IRBs, CLIA and the

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

General Public) communicate effectively with regard to benefits and harms. The solid centered
blue is the ”sweet spot”.

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001370; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

