medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Word Count: 4,000 including all headers, from Introduction through Conclusion section
Authors: Mary K. Irvine1 (mirvine@health.nyc.gov), Bruce Levin2 (bl6@columbia.edu), McKaylee
Robertson3 (McKaylee.Robertson@sph.cuny.edu), Katherine Penrose1 (kpenrose04@yahoo.com),
Jennifer Carmona1 (jcarmona@health.nyc.gov), Graham Harriman1 (gharriman@health.nyc.gov), Sarah
Braunstein1 (sbraunstein@health.nyc.gov) Denis Nash3 (Denis.Nash@sph.cuny.edu)
Corresponding: Mary K. Irvine1 (mirvine@health.nyc.gov), 42-09 28th St., Fl. 22 Queens, NY 11101;
Phone: (347) 396-7712
Affiliations: 1. Bureau of HIV (BHIV), New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
(DOHMH); New York, NY USA; 2. Department of Biostatistics, Mailman School of Public Health (MSPH),
Columbia University (CU); New York, NY USA; 3. Institute for Implementation Science in
Population Health (ISPH), Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy, City University of New
York (CUNY); New York, NY USA.
Title: PROMISE (Program Refinements to Optimize Model Impact and Scalability based on Evidence): A
cluster-randomized, stepped-wedge trial assessing effectiveness of the revised versus original Ryan
White Part A HIV Care Coordination Program for patients with barriers to treatment
Key Words: care coordination, HIV viral suppression, stepped-wedge trial, implementation science,
practice-based research
Abstract (300 words, including headers)
Introduction: Growing evidence supports combining social, behavioral and biomedical strategies to
strengthen the HIV care continuum. However, combination interventions can be resource-intensive and
challenging to scale up. Research is needed to identify intervention components and delivery models
that maximize uptake, engagement and effectiveness. In New York City (NYC), a multi-component Ryan
White-funded medical case management intervention called the Care Coordination Program (CCP) was
launched at 28 agencies in 2009 to address barriers to care and treatment. Effectiveness estimates
based on >7,000 clients enrolled by April 2013 and their controls indicated modest CCP benefits over
‘usual care’ for short- and long-term viral suppression, with substantial room for improvement.
Methods and analysis: Integrating evaluation findings and CCP service-provider and communitystakeholder input on modifications, the NYC Health Department packaged a Care Coordination Redesign
(CCR) in a 2017 request for proposals. Following competitive re-solicitation, 17 of the original CCPimplementing agencies secured contracts. These agencies were randomized within matched pairs to
immediate or delayed CCR implementation. Data from three nine-month periods (pre-implementation,
partial implementation and full implementation) will be examined to compare CCR versus CCP effects on
timely viral suppression (TVS, within four months of enrollment) among individuals with unsuppressed
HIV viral load newly enrolling in the CCR/CCP. Based on estimated enrollment (n=824) and the preimplementation outcome probability (TVS=0.45), the detectable effect size with 80% power is an odds
ratio of 2.90 (relative risk: 1.56).
Ethics and dissemination: This study was approved by the NYC Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene Institutional Review Board (IRB, Protocol 18-009) and the City University of New York Integrated
IRB (Protocol 018-0057) with a waiver of informed consent. Findings will be disseminated via
publications, conferences, stakeholder meetings, and Advisory Board meetings with implementing
agency representatives.
Trial registration: Registered with ClinicalTrials.gov under identifier: NCT03628287, Version 2, 25
September 2019; pre-results.
1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

ARTICLE SUMMARY
Strengths and limitations of this study:
• The PROMISE trial, conducted in real-world service settings, leverages secondary analyses of
programmatic and surveillance data to assess the effectiveness of a revised (CCR) versus original
HIV care coordination program to improve viral suppression.
• To meet stakeholder expectations for rapid completion of the CCR rollout, the study applies a
stepped-wedge design with a nine-month gap between implementation phases, prompting use
of a short-term (four-month) outcome and a brief (five-month) lead-in time for enrollment
accumulation.
• Randomization is performed at the agency level to minimize crossover between the intervention
conditions, since service providers would otherwise struggle logistically and ethically with
simultaneously delivering the two different intervention models to different sets of clients,
especially given common challenges related to reaching agreement on clinical equipoise.1-3
• The use of agency matching, when followed by randomization within matched pairs, offers
advantages akin to those of stratified random assignment: increasing statistical power in a
situation where the number of units of randomization is small, by maximizing equivalency
between the intervention and control groups on key observable variables, thus helping to
isolate the effects of the intervention.3
• In addition, nuisance parameters are removed through the conditional analytic approach, which
accounts and allows for the unavoidably imperfect matching of agencies and arbitrary variation
of period effects across agency pairs.4
INTRODUCTION
Successful HIV treatment at the individual level requires consistent adherence to antiretroviral
therapy (ART) resulting in sustained suppression of HIV-1 viral load (VL) in plasma to levels below the
detection limit of HIV RNA tests used by healthcare providers. At the population level, viral suppression
(VS) is the key to the dual goals of improving health and survival among people with HIV (PWH) and
preventing HIV transmission. A growing consensus among researchers supports the blending of
evidence-based social, behavioral and biomedical strategies (i.e., ‘combination interventions’) to
address barriers to ART use and adherence.5-10 However, combination interventions can be resourceintensive to deliver and challenging to translate to new and diverse organizational settings.11 Research is
needed to systematically inform the selection of intervention components and service delivery
approaches that can maximize program uptake, engagement, and effectiveness at scale in a range of
practice environments.
In New York City (NYC), a multi-component Ryan White Part A–funded medical case management
intervention known as the HIV Care Coordination Program (CCP) was launched in late 2009 to meet the
needs of individuals with suboptimal HIV care outcomes or new HIV diagnoses. By late 2013, an NYC
Health Department-City University of New York (CUNY) research partnership had secured funding for
the “CHORDS” (Costs, Outcomes and Real-word Determinants of Success in HIV Care Coordination)
study of CCP effectiveness (R01 MH101028). Early findings of increased care retention12 led the CDC to
include the CCP in their Compendium of Evidence-based Interventions.13 Observational studies with a
rigorously selected usual-care comparison group14 have shown positive CCP effects on short-term VS
(Relative risk [RR] = 1.32, 95% CI:1.23-1.42),15 as well as durable VS (DVS) (RR: 1.16, 95% CI: 1.04-1.29),16
among PWH without previous evidence of VS. However, substantial room for improvement remains:
over one-third of clients drop out of the program in the first year;12,16 and a minority of clients without
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

previous evidence of VS achieve VS (43%)15 or DVS (21%).16 In addition, some of the original CCP design
features have curbed client and provider engagement: a rigid system of program tracks has impeded
service intensity adjustment based on client need (i.e., differentiated care17,18); a complex
reimbursement model has diverted staff time and attention to maintaining agency cash flow; and a
requirement for weekly visits over a three-month “induction period” for new clients has reportedly
deterred eligible PWH from enrolling and discouraged staff from suggesting the CCP for PWH perceived
as unable to meet that commitment.19
After several years of CCP implementation, the NYC Health Department and the local Ryan White
Part A community Planning Council outlined a set of program modifications in response to the identified
implementation barriers19 and the evolving epidemiologic data and intervention literature, including
findings from the CHORDS research collaboration.15,16 Program revisions were integrated into the Health
Department’s late-2017 request for proposals (RFP) initiating a competitive selection process for future
NYC Care Coordination service delivery contracts. This RFP also outlined plans for agency-level
randomization to an early or delayed start of the revised model, as part of an experimental evaluation of
its effectiveness.
This paper describes the experimental protocol for the study known as PROMISE (Program
Refinements to Optimize Model Impact and Scalability based on Evidence), which continues the NYC
Health Department-CUNY research partnership initiated with CHORDS. Our purpose is to inform
practice-driven intervention research, particularly in the context of generating evidence for the
optimization of safety-net service delivery strategies. The overarching goal of PROMISE is to investigate
the impact and implementation of empirically driven course corrections to an already effective
intervention model. We will test the combined effect of intervention modifications in a clusterrandomized controlled trial applying a cross-sectional, stepped-wedge design to the rollout of the
revised model in previously funded, re-awarded CCP provider agencies. Drawing upon an
implementation science framework and RE-AIM20,21 principles, we posit that the model revisions will
reduce logistical and administrative barriers to service delivery and increase program engagement
(among staff and clients), reach, fidelity and effectiveness. Specifically, we hypothesize that a higher
proportion of PWH with unsuppressed VL at enrollment in the Care Coordination revised (CCR) program
will achieve timely VS, as compared to PWH with unsuppressed VL at enrollment in the original CCP
during the same period.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS
Participants, intervention, and outcomes
Study setting
Of the original 28 agencies funded to deliver the CCP since December 2009, 17 secured funding
under the 2017-2018 re-solicitation, including a range of organization types (public and private
hospitals, community health centers and community-based social-service organizations). Together, the
17 re-awarded agencies covered all NYC boroughs/counties and a collective caseload of more than 2,000
active CCP clients as of the end of March 2018 (agency median: 96, inter-quartile range [IQR] 82-181).
Study sites are listed at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03628287. Agencies assigned to delayed
CCR implementation received contract extensions to continue service delivery under the original CCP,
while awaiting their transition to new/CCR contracts.
Eligibility criteria (for clients and sites)
PWH eligible for the trial analysis of CCR intervention effects include those newly enrolled in the CCP
or CCR and having unsuppressed VL (HIV RNA ≥200 copies/mL) as of their latest test in the year prior to
enrollment or having no VL test result reported to surveillance in the year prior to enrollment (presumed
out of care14). To allow four months of VL outcome observation per enrollee prior to the start of the next
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

transition (so that each outcome measure represents a single implementation phase), the trial-eligible
enrollment window for each nine-month implementation period is restricted to the first five months. The
trial excludes newly awarded (CCP-naïve) agencies and includes only the 17 re-awarded agencies, which
could be assigned to continue CCP delivery uninterrupted or begin CCR delivery in the initial
implementation phase.
Intervention (CCR) and control (CCP) conditions
The CCP has been described previously.12,22,23 The control condition is the site-level continuation of
CCP model delivery, while the intervention condition is a site-level change to deliver the CCR. Sites’ ability
to begin CCR delivery hinges on reimbursement for CCR services and approaches, and on receipt of Health
Department trainings related to programmatic changes. Study assignments have been maintained
through the scheduling of agencies for CCR trainings and contract starts (tied to the change in
reimbursement).
Specific program revisions24 (added, changed or removed components) and their anticipated benefits
are displayed in Table 1. Major additions include a training and set of tools for baseline and quarterly
assessment and counseling around client HIV self-management capacity;25 allowance of video chat as a
delivery mode for certain services, such as directly observed therapy (DOT); and optional iART26,27
(“immediate” ART: ensuring that the client has a filled prescription within 4 days of either enrollment or
diagnosis). Changes include the replacement of per-member-per-day reimbursement with a fee-forservice reimbursement model that accounts for resource demands, such as staff travel to and from clients’
homes, and offers higher rates for meeting performance standards (e.g., same-day prescription
fulfillment). Other changes include greater emphasis and guidance on identifying and recruiting
individuals with documented clinical need (e.g., unsuppressed VL). Some CCP requirements (i.e., induction
period, enrollment tracks) were selected for removal in favor of flexibility for client-centered/
differentiated care.17,18
Individual clients may switch from one of the 17 sites to another, potentially changing their
intervention condition. However, based on intent to treat, clients count toward the trial only in their first
enrollment during the study period. Clients in the trial may access other interventions within CCP/CCR
settings or other agencies where they receive services. The NYC HIV-related services landscape includes
many provider agencies and funding sources beyond those that can be tracked by any single entity; it is
not feasible to prohibit simultaneous receipt of other interventions that may affect the study outcome.
Outcome measurement
To assess the clinical benefit of the programmatic revisions differentiating the CCR from the CCP, we
will analyze client-level, surveillance-based laboratory test data.14 The outcome, timely VS (TVS), is defined
as VL <200 copies/mL on the last VL test reported to the NYC HIV surveillance registry in the four months
following CCP/CCR enrollment (TVS=1). Consistent with our prior CCP work,12,14,15,22 those without any VL
measure during follow-up will be considered not to have achieved VS (TVS=0), given their lack of
documented clinical monitoring since their last unsuppressed VL.
Timeline
Figure 1 illustrates the three nine-month periods used in the stepped-wedge design: Period 0, with
CCP at all 17 agencies and no CCR; Period 1, representing CCR implementation only at sites randomized
to an early start (and thus encompassing the months of simultaneous operation of the CCP and the
CCR); and Period 2, representing CCR implementation at all 17 sites.
Recruitment
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Beyond standard contract startup deliverables based on early program enrollment milestones, no
specific incentives have been used to encourage recruitment. As informed consent has been waived for
this trial, analyses will include all eligible enrollments in CCP/CCR services at any of the 17 study sites.
Assignment of interventions
Randomization
Though the unit of analysis for TVS is the individual, the unit of randomization is the Care Coordination
provider agency (i.e., cluster). Characteristics and study arm assignments of the 17 agencies are shown in
Table 2. Agencies were matched and randomized within pairs (including one case in which two smaller
agencies were matched to a larger one). Matching accounted for characteristics plausibly related to the
TVS outcome: agency type, primary location/borough and program size (measured via a combination of
CCP caseload at time of re-award and award amount). While randomization could not feasibly be stratified
by each of these variables, the lead analyst suggested pairs maximizing similarity on these variables.
Pairings were finalized with input from other team members knowledgeable about the programs/agencies
involved. The lead analyst used a random number generator in Excel to determine agency assignments
within pairs, and assignments were communicated as contract conditions in the notifications of awards.
Blinding
Blinding was not feasible for this study. Assignments were transparent to implementing agencies,
study team members and interested stakeholders, since contracts are publicly available information.
Data collection, management, and analysis
Data collection
As with prior studies of CCP effectiveness,12,14-16,22 the outcome measure for clients in both study
arms will be derived from the NYC HIV surveillance registry (“the Registry”), a population-based data
source of electronically reported longitudinal laboratory (VL, CD4) records on all diagnosed NYC
PWH.28,29 Use of the Registry allows near 100% ascertainment of VS for PWH in NYC HIV medical care,
regardless of specific NYC medical provider, and for periods extending before and after program
enrollment or discontinuation.
Each client’s CCP/CCR enrollment agency and start date will be determined from a database of
contractually required Ryan White Part A provider reporting to the Health Department, the Electronic
System for HIV/AIDS Research and Evaluation (eSHARE). These program reporting-based measures are
available (non-missing) for all CCP/CCR clients and all implementing agencies. Program data collection
forms are located on the NYC Health Department website
(https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/health/health-topics/aids-hiv-care-coord-tools.page).
Data management and quality assurance
All data for the trial are entered as part of established, legally or contractually required reporting,
and are protected according to CDC physical and electronic data security and confidentiality policies.30
Health Department staff clean and freeze surveillance datasets on a quarterly basis, and conduct
matches of program to surveillance data semi-annually, with human review of each near-match by two
independent analysts and a separate “tie-breaker” when the analysts’ determinations differ. Details on
the deterministic matching algorithm have been previously described.31 Through the match, participants
are assigned a unique record number used in merging surveillance and programmatic data for analytic
datasets, which are stripped of all personal identifiers prior to analysis and stored on the most secured
drives on the Health Department network. eSHARE data quality is checked by Health Department
analysts at the time of each monthly extraction. For purposes of payment, provider agencies also review
draft extracts and fill in any missing enrollment and services data monthly.
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Statistical analysis for the matched-pairs stepped-wedge trial
Analysis overview and rationale. We will apply an innovative, fully conditional analysis that, in
addition to allowing for arbitrary period effects, allows for arbitrary within-pair site differences. The
analysis plan is based on the exact, conditional distribution theory of non-central multiple
hypergeometric distributions and their convolutions,4 which will enable us to estimate and test the
effect of the revised intervention as a single parameter defined below. The conventional statistical
analysis proposed for cross-sectional stepped-wedge designs (i.e., with independent samples of clients
enrolled at each transition step)32 assumes a mixed model with random cluster effects and fixed period
effects, but this is not appropriate for our matched-pairs stepped-wedge trial. For one, the matching of
pairs is under the investigators’ control and so should be conditioned upon. Second, the generalized
linear mixed model has limitations, such as a gratuitous and unverifiable assumption of normal
distribution for random effects and poor variance estimation performance in small samples (of clusters),
even with robust variance estimation, such that jackknifing must be used. However, the following exact
analysis avoids those problems by conditioning out the nuisance parameters.
Analysis approach and assumptions. As shown in Table 3, for each pair of sites, we will produce two
2x3 tables (one table per site in pair), cross-classifying the number of TVS and non-TVS outcomes in
Period 0 (with original CCP but no CCR implementation), Period 1 (first transition, with CCR only at sites
assigned to an early start), and Period 2 (second transition, with CCR at all sites). For identification
purposes, we refer to “Site 1” within a matched pair as the site randomized to switch in Period 1 (early
start) and “Site 2” as the site randomized to switch in Period 2 (delayed start). We begin by assuming
the following logistic regression model for the three binomial outcomes: the logit of the probability of
TVS for a given site, period and intervention (CCR versus original CCP) equals an intercept representing
an arbitrary, pair-specific log odds on TVS for Site 2 in the pair, plus an arbitrary log odds ratio (LOR) for
Site 1 versus Site 2 in the pair (allowing for imperfectly matched sites), plus two arbitrary pair-specific
LORs for Period 1 and Period 2 effects relative to Period 0, plus one structural LOR of interest, the global
intervention effect (non-existent in Period 0, applicable to Site 1 in Period 1, and applicable to both sites
in Period 2). The exponent of this last parameter is the target of statistical inference, namely, the odds
ratio (OR) for TVS versus non-TVS comparing the CCR to the CCP. A key assumption is that any site
effects apply in each period and any period effects apply to each site, independent of the intervention
effect (i.e., that there are no site-by-intervention or period-by-intervention interactions). This
assumption will be tested and the model elaborated if needed. Note that under the key assumption, the
constant site and period effects are allowed to vary arbitrarily from one matched pair to the next.
Estimating the CCR intervention effect. Next, by conditioning on the marginal totals within each site
(numbers of eligible clients enrolled in each period and total numbers of TVS and non-TVS outcomes for
each site), the joint distribution of the numbers of TVS outcomes for Site 1 by period becomes a noncentral multiple hypergeometric distribution with only three parameters (the period LORs and the
intervention LOR); i.e., the conditional distribution does not depend on the nuisance site parameters. By
further conditioning on the sum of TVS outcomes across the two sites in each period, the fully
conditional joint distribution depends on only one parameter, the intervention effect; i.e., the fully
conditional distribution depends neither on the nuisance site effects nor on the nuisance period effects.
In fact, the sufficient statistic for the intervention LOR in the fully conditional likelihood function is
simply the number of TVS outcomes from Site 1 in Period 1. It is then straightforward to calculate the
marginal distribution of this outcome as a function of the intervention effect. Therefore, we will
calculate that distribution for each of the 8 matched pairs (including the case of two programs jointly
matched to a third) and convolute those distributions to obtain the sampling distribution of the sum of
sufficient statistics. Once we obtain the fully conditional sampling distribution of the sufficient statistic
as described above, we will report the conditional maximum likelihood estimate of the intervention LOR
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

with an exact, test-based 95% confidence interval. The test of the null hypothesis at the two-tailed 0.05
significance level will be based on the exact two-tailed P-value (using the point probability definition),4
and will form the primary outcome analysis. In sensitivity analyses, we will also report the Wald, Score
and Likelihood Ratio test results, which should be close to each other, given expected client numbers
per site per period and the level of TVS from baseline CCP data.
Sample size
For the planning of the study, we used April 2012 – June 2014 CCP data to provide a set of marginal
totals and proportions of TVS in 9 matched pairs of sites. We then prepared a simulation study with
10,000 replications to estimate the power of the primary test of intervention effect. For any given
simulation replication, each site within the nine matched pairs was randomly assigned to transition at
Period 1 or Period 2 (with independent randomizations per replication). For the site and period effects,
we used the actual past Period 0 CCP data for the two sites to provide the within-pair site effect and the
(randomly selected) second site’s TVS proportions in Period 1 and Period 2 to provide the period effects.
We then applied a given intervention effect to Site 1 in Period 1 and to both sites in Period 2, for a set of
plausible TVS proportions. For each such replication, we recorded the results of the exact conditional
analysis described above. The pre-randomization power of the primary test was estimated as the
proportion of exact two-tailed P-values ≤0.05.
The resulting detectable effect size (80% power with exact Type I error rate ≤0.05 two-tailed) was an
OR of ~2.15. Since odds ratios overstate risk ratios (RRs) when the outcome proportion is common, to
aid in interpretation, Table 4 indicates what detectable revised-CCP TVS proportions and RRs would
correspond to various base proportions. The final two columns indicate what the power would have
been for various other intervention-effect ORs. In summary, the planned study had a detectable OR of
2.15, corresponding to RRs between 1.37 and 1.53. Power estimates ranged between ~73% and 85% for
true ORs between 2.00 and 2.25, respectively.
Table 5 provides the corresponding detectable effect size and power values given current actual,
post-randomization numbers of eligible enrollees for Periods 0 (N=169) and 1 (N=389), a conservative
estimate of eligible enrollees for Period 2 (N=266), and assumed TVS proportions based on actual
proportions for Period 0. The table reflects lower enrollments than planned and the randomization of
eight rather than nine matched pairs. Because the randomization of sites within pairs has already been
set, the simulations for Table 5 condition on this fact; i.e., early- and late-implementing sites are
considered fixed as randomized. The post-randomization power is somewhat greater than the prerandomization power, and this partially offsets the decrease in power due to lower-than-expected
enrollments. The detectable effect size (80% power with exact Type I error rate ≤0.05 two-tailed) is
currently an OR of 2.90, corresponding to RRs between 1.49 and 1.74. Power estimates now range
between ~76% and 83% for true ORs between 2.75 and 3.00, respectively.
Patient and public involvement
Starting in 2016, the local HIV Planning Council (comprising practitioners, patients and researchers),
as well as Care Coordination service providers not on the Council, co-developed the revised intervention
model with Health Department representatives. The plan for this trial was communicated to the
Planning Council co-chairs, who provided letters of support in September 2017 after receiving the
proposal aims. During a September 2017 public ‘town hall’ meeting to discuss the redesign and resolicitation, Health Department staff described the intent to use phased implementation with random
assignments for a side-by-side comparison of the two models. The approach was further outlined in the
December 2017 RFP, which incorporated community feedback. The community was not involved in the
methods for agency matching and randomization, due to timing and potential conflicts of interest. Once
awarded, the study team engaged six implementing service agencies as study partners and began
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Advisory Board meetings with those partners, who will advise on dissemination of findings and have
contributed to instrument design and recruitment planning for the relevant parts of the larger study.
There is no recruitment or primary data collection specifically for the trial.
Monitoring
The Health Department will oversee data monitoring and protocol compliance. No more than
minimal risk is attached to study participation, which involves receipt of one model or another similar
model of support services, rather than any medical device or treatment. As the intervention is delivered
by contracted agency staff, and the analysis is based on secondary data sources, study investigators
have no direct contact with human subjects for the purpose of the trial. To enroll in NYC HIV Care
Coordination services, participants sign a consent form that covers the uses of data applicable to this
trial. Given the determination of minimal risk and the routine nature of secondary analyses of merged
programmatic-surveillance data as part of Health Department evaluation activities, the study team will
not convene a Data Safety and Monitoring Board or conduct audits.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION
This trial was approved by the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene Institutional Review
Board (IRB) under protocol number: 18-009, and the CUNY Integrated IRB under protocol number: 0180057, and is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (Identifier NCT03628287). The trial was granted a waiver of
informed consent in accordance with 45 CFR 46.116(d), based on its reliance on secondary data analysis.
Any changes to the trial eligibility criteria, outcome measures or analysis plans would be mutually
agreed upon between the CUNY and Health Department Principal Investigators, vetted with the
PROMISE Advisory Board, and submitted to the IRB as protocol modifications. We anticipate no changes
that would affect CCR enrollment at this stage.
The full IRB protocol and statistical code will be made available by the investigators upon request.
Due to legal restrictions (New York Public Health Law Article 21, Title III) and the confidential nature of
HIV surveillance data, the study team cannot release a de-identified individual-level public-use dataset.
NYC Health Department staff retain sole custody of the merged study datasets and are available to assist
external researchers with any inquiries. Requests can be sent via email to hivreport@health.nyc.gov.
Results will be reported in accordance with the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials extension
to cluster-randomized trials.33 We will disseminate results of this study through scientific conference
presentations, peer-reviewed publications, and meetings with key stakeholders. Locally, results will be
communicated annually at Health Department-convened meetings with CCR provider agencies, semiannually in PROMISE Advisory Board meetings, and approximately semi-annually at public HIV Planning
Council meetings. The investigators have also been sharing this work with NIH leadership,34 the Research
Synthesis and Translation Team of the CDC Prevention Research Branch,35 and interventionists and
researchers in other jurisdictions (e.g., Seattle-King County).
Conclusion
Phasing in intervention implementation within a one-year period and using random agency
assignment (within pairs) to early or delayed implementation offers a means of rigorously evaluating a
set of changes to a major public-services program, while ensuring fair and uninterrupted access to
program benefits in the eligible population. Intentionally staggered starts can also offer advantages in
terms of managing the practical demands (e.g., trainings, technical assistance and administrative work)
of a large-scale program rollout. Through robust health department-university partnerships that include
joint planning of research in advance of key policy or practice initiatives, locally important research
questions can be answered without substantially slowing the pace of desired change, and with methods
that support knowledge generation and generalizability. In this case, NYC’s experience with
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

implementing course corrections to a complex evidence-based HIV care intervention will yield findings
that can valuably inform multiple jurisdictions’ efforts to advance progress along the HIV care
continuum and ultimately end the epidemic.
Author contributions: MI is the health department (DOHMH) Principal Investigator and led the
conception of the overall study and the writing of the R01 proposal. BL (CU) led the conception of the
matched cross-sectional stepped-wedge design and wrote the detailed statistical analysis plan. BL, MR
(CUNY), KP (DOHMH) and DN (CUNY) contributed substantively to the study design and analysis plan,
conducted analyses, and provided tables/figures. JC (DOHMH) contributed centrally to the Care
Coordination Redesign, wrote the RFP for the re-solicitation of service delivery contracts – which
functioned as a blueprint for the CCR model, oversaw technical assistance and training to CCR providers,
and facilitated communications with several provider agencies partnering on the study. GH (DOHMH)
contributed to the Care Coordination Redesign, oversaw Health Department communications with the
local HIV Planning Council regarding this trial, and engaged health department leadership in approving
the integration of a cluster-randomized, stepped-wedge trial design into the structure for the Care
Coordination re-solicitation and timing of contract starts. SB (DOHMH) oversaw the preparation of all
HIV surveillance-based datasets and developed relevant surveillance data use agreements. DN is the
university-based Principal Investigator and shares responsibility for the conceptualization and oversight
of the overall study and this trial, serves as the primary contact with the grant funding agency, and
guides dissemination. MI drafted the manuscript, and all authors (MI, BL, MR, KP, JC, GH, SB, and DN)
revised it for critically important intellectual content and provided final approval of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), grant number R01
MH117793 (Project Officer Christopher M. Gordon, cgordon1@mail.nih.gov) and by a Health Resources
and Services Administration (HRSA) Ryan White Part A grant (HA89HA00015) covering HIV program
delivery, quality improvement and administration (Project Officer Sera Morgan, SMorgan@hrsa.gov).
The NIH and HRSA are not involved in the study design, conduct or products, nor in the decision to
submit this work for publication.
Competing interests: All authors confirm no conflicts.
Acknowledgements: The authors are indebted to Ryan White Part A HIV Planning Council members and
to Care Coordination service providers, quality management specialists, and clients, for their invaluable
and ongoing contributions to real-world program implementation, evolution and evaluation. We also
wish to thank Kent Sepkowitz for his keen eye and helpful critiques of drafts, and Levi Waldron, Beau
Mitts, Julie Myers, and Bisrat Abraham for their involvement in the earlier effectiveness R01 study,
CHORDS (Costs, Health Outcomes, and Real-world Determinants of Success in HIV Care Coordination).
Lastly, we wish to recognize Sarah Kulkarni, whose skills, instincts, intellect and grant management
contributions have been essential to both the CHORDS and PROMISE studies of Care Coordination.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Tables and Figures
Figure 1. Stepped-wedge design with three implementation periods.

Table 1. Revisions expected to improve uptake, fidelity, engagement, effectiveness and reach/impact
Added Components
SelfUse of video iART
managechat tools
(optional)
ment
(optional)
assessment

Eligibility
criteria

Changed
Payment
structure

Removed
Rigid
program
tracks

Uptake (provider)

X

Fidelity (provider )

X

X

Engagement (client)

X

X

Effectiveness

X

X

X

Reach/impact

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 2. Agency characteristics, pairings and study arm assignments

Agency
ID

Award
Typical
increased >20%
(prior)
from prior year? Caseload

Pair

Phase
(study
arm)

1

1

1

2

2
2
3

1
2
1

3

2

4

1

Manhattan

Public Hospital
Public Hospital
Private Hospital
Community Health
Center
Community Health
Center
Community Health
Center

4

2

Borough

Type of Site
CBO/no clinical
services
CBO/no clinical
services

21

Yes

84

1

No

101

20

Yes

109

14
28

No
Yes

151
87

24

No

96

25

No

62

9

No

78

23

No

228

Manhattan

Private Hospital

5

1

18

No

220

13
11
5
4

Yes
Yes
No
No

82
82
202
181

2
1
2
1
2

Yes

77

8

1

16

No

63

8

1

2

No

184

Private Hospital
Public Hospital
Public Hospital
Private Hospital
Private Hospital
CBO/no clinical
services
Community Health
Center
Community Health
Center

5
6
6
7
7

8

Manhattan
Bronx
Queens
Bronx
Manhattan
Staten
Island

8

2

Bronx
Bronx
Brooklyn
Brooklyn
Brooklyn
Brooklyn
Manhattan

Brooklyn
Manhattan

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 3. Illustration of 2x3 tables cross-classifying TVS and non-TVS outcomes by period, for the
estimation of the CCR intervention effect.

Site 1 in pair i
(adopts CCR
in Period 1)

Site 2 in pair i
(adopts CCR in
Period 2)

Pair i totals

Period 0

Period 1

Period 2

Total

TVS

Xi10

Xi11

Xi12

Xi1+

No TVS

Ni10 – Xi10

Ni11 – Xi11

Ni12 – Xi12

Ni1+ – Xi1+

Total

Ni10

Ni11

Ni12

Ni1+

TVS

Xi20

Xi21

Xi22

Xi2+

No TVS

Ni20 – Xi20

Ni21 – Xi21

Ni22 – Xi22

Ni2+ – Xi2+

Total

Ni20

Ni21

Ni22

Ni2+

TVS

Xi+0

Xi+1

Xi+2

Xi++

No TVS

Ni+0 – Xi+0

Ni+1 – Xi+1

Ni+2 – Xi+2

Ni++ – Xi++

Total

Ni+0

Ni+1

Ni+2

Ni++

Note: The red font indicates the two 2×3 tables in site pair i. The blue font indicates the margins upon
which the analysis will condition. Margins fixed by summing or subtracting other fixed margins (e.g.,
Ni1+ and Xi++) are indicated in purple font.

Table 4. Power calculations for the Care Coordination Redesign
effect on TVS (as originally planned)
Reference
P [TVS]

Detectable
Risk ratio at
P [TVS]
Detectable P [TVS]
for True OR=2.15
0.35
0.537
1.53
0.40
0.589
1.47
0.45
0.638
1.42
0.50
0.683
1.37
nb: Average P[TVS] among all sites in all
periods = 0.437. Monte Carlo standard error
for power values is less than 0.5%.

True Power
OR
(%)
2.25
2.20
2.15
2.10
2.05
2.00

84.8
83.4
80.4
78.1
75.6
72.8

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 5. Power calculations for the Care Coordination Redesign
effect on TVS (as currently estimated)
Reference
P [TVS]

Detectable
Risk ratio at
P [TVS]
Detectable P [TVS]
for True OR=2.90
0.35
0.610
1.74
0.40
0.659
1.65
0.45
0.704
1.56
0.50
0.744
1.49
nb: Average P[TVS] among all sites in base
period = 0.465. Monte Carlo standard error
for power values is less than 0.5%.

True Power
OR
(%)
3.00
2.95
2.90
2.85
2.80
2.75

82.8
81.1
80.6
78.7
77.8
75.8

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

13.
14.
15.
16.

Featherstone K, Donovan JL. Random allocation or allocation at random? Patients' perspectives of
participation in a randomised controlled trial. BMJ (Clinical research ed) 1998;317:1177-80.
Robinson EJ, Kerr C, Stevens A, Lilford R, Braunholtz D, Edwards S. Lay conceptions of the ethical
and scientific justifications for random allocation in clinical trials. Social Science & Medicine
2004;58:811-24.
Heard K, O’Toole E, Naimpally R, Bressler L. Real world challenges to randomization and their
solutions. . Boston, MA: Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab; 2017 April 2017.
Fleiss JL, Levin B, Paik MC. Statistical methods for rates and proportions. 3rd Edition ed: John
Wiley & Sons; 2013.
Simoni JM, Amico KR, Smith L, Nelson K. Antiretroviral adherence interventions: translating
research findings to the real world clinic. Curr HIV/AIDS Rep 2010;7:44-51.
International Advisory Panel on HIV Care Continuum Optimization. IAPAC Guidelines for
Optimizing the HIV Care Continuum for Adults and Adolescents. Journal of the International
Association of Providers of AIDS Care (JIAPAC) 2015;14:S3-S34.
Morin SF, Kelly JA, Charlebois ED, Remien RH, Rotheram-Borus MJ, Cleary PD. Responding to the
National HIV/AIDS Strategy - Setting the Research Agenda. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2011.
Remien RH, Bauman LJ, Mantell J, et al. Barriers and facilitators to engagement of vulnerable
populations in HIV primary care in New York City. Journal of acquired immune deficiency
syndromes (1999) 2015;69:S16.
Kushel M, Colfax G, Ragland K, Heineman A, Palacio H, Bangsberg D. Case management is
associated with improved antiretroviral adherence and CD4+ cell counts in homeless and
marginally housed individuals with HIV infection. Clinical Infectious Diseases 2006;43:234-42.
Celentano DD, Lucas G. Optimizing treatment outcomes in HIV-infected patients with substance
abuse issues. Clinical Infectious Diseases 2007;45:S318-S23.
Irvine M, Wilkes A, O'Donnell L, et al. Lessons from the New York City translation of a care
coordination program: Science-based Translation of Effective Program Strategies (STEPS) to Care.
2019 National HIV Prevention Conference: Getting to No New Infections. Atlanta, Georgia: CDC;
2019.
Irvine MK, Chamberlin SA, Robbins RS, et al. Improvements in HIV care engagement and viral load
suppression following enrollment in a comprehensive HIV care coordination program. Clinical
infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America
2015;60:298-310.
HIV Care Coordination Program: Evidence-Informed for Retention in HIV Care. 2015. (Accessed
Nov 22 2015, at http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/prevention/research/compendium/cdc-hivHIVCCP_EI_Retention.pdf.)
Robertson MM, Waldron L, Robbins RS, et al. Using Registry Data to Construct a Comparison
Group for Programmatic Effectiveness Evaluation: the New York City HIV Care Coordination
Program. American Journal of Epidemiology 2018;187:1980–9.
Nash D, Robertson MM, Penrose K, et al. Short-term effectiveness of HIV care coordination among
persons with recent HIV diagnosis or history of poor HIV outcomes. PLoS One 2018;13:e0204017.
Robertson MM, Penrose K, Irvine MK, et al. Impact of an HIV Care Coordination Program on
Durable Viral Suppression. JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes 2019;80:46–
55.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31.
32.
33.
34.

Grimsrud A, Bygrave H, Doherty M, et al. Reimagining HIV service delivery: the role of
differentiated care from prevention to suppression. Journal of the International AIDS Society
2016;19.
The International AIDS Society. (Accessed September 14, 2017, at
http://www.differentiatedcare.org/.)
Macias S, Estem K, Carmona J. Challenges to caseload management in Ryan White Part A funded
NYC Care Coordination Programs. National Conference on Social Work and HIV/AIDS.
Washington, D.C. 2018.
Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health impact of health promotion
interventions: the RE-AIM framework. Am J Public Health 1999;89:1322-7.
RE-AIM. 2017. (Accessed September 27, 2017, at http://re-aim.org/.)
Irvine MK, Chamberlin SA, Robbins RS, Kulkarni SG, Robertson MM, Nash D. Come as you are:
Improving care engagement and viral load suppression among HIV care coordination clients with
lower mental health functioning, unstable housing, and hard drug use. AIDS and behavior
2017;21:1572-9.
HIV Care Coordination. New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. (Accessed
August 18, 2017, at https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/health/health-topics/aids-hiv-carecoord.page.)
NYCDOHMH. Ryan White Part A Care Coordination Program for New York City: Supplement to the
request for proposals. New York, NY: Public Health Solutions, Inc.; 2017.
Macias S, Seabrook T, Carmona J, et al. Assessing and building HIV self-management skills.
Institute for Healthcare Improvement Summit on Improving Patient Care. National Harbor, MD:
Institute for Healthcare Improvement 2020.
Koenig SP, Dorvil N, Dévieux JG, et al. Same-day HIV testing with initiation of antiretroviral therapy
versus standard care for persons living with HIV: A randomized unblinded trial. PLoS Med
2017;14:e1002357.
Pilcher CD, Ospina-Norvell C, Dasgupta A, et al. The effect of same-day observed initiation of
antiretroviral therapy on HIV viral load and treatment outcomes in a US public health setting.
JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes 2017;74:44-51.
Fordyce J, Forlenza S, Makki M, et al. 25 years of HIV in New York City: lessons from surveillance. J
Urban Health 2001;78:669-78.
Nash D, Ramaswamy C, Manning S. Implementation of named HIV reporting--New York City, 2001.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2004;52:1248-52.
CDC. Data Security and Confidentiality Guidelines for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, Sexually Transmitted
Disease, and Tuberculosis Programs: Standards to Facilitate Sharing and Use of Surveillance Data
for Public Health Action. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; 2011.
Drobnik A, Pinchoff J, Bushnell G, et al. Matching HIV, tuberculosis, viral hepatitis, and sexually
transmitted diseases surveillance data, 2000-2010: identification of infectious disease syndemics
in New York City. Journal of Public Health Management and Practice 2014;20:506-12.
Hussey MA, Hughes JP. Design and analysis of stepped wedge cluster randomized trials.
Contemporary clinical trials 2007;28:182-91.
Campbell MK, Piaggio G, Elbourne DR, Altman DG. Consort 2010 statement: extension to cluster
randomised trials. BMJ : British Medical Journal 2012;345:e5661.
Irvine MK, Nash D, Team CPS. Practice-driven Research to Evaluate and Optimize an HIV Care
Coordination Intervention. Strengthening the Impact of Community Health Workers on HIV Care
and Viral Suppression in the US. Bethesda, MD: NIH; 2019.
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012427; this version posted November 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

35.

Robertson MM, Penrose K, Nash D, et al. HIV Care Coordination improves short-term care
engagement and viral suppression among people without any evidence of HIV medical care for at
least 12 months Fast-Track Cities 2019. London, England: International Association of Providers of
AIDS Care (IAPAC); 2019.

16

