medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial

Self-blaming emotions in major depression: a randomised
pilot trial comparing fMRI neurofeedback training with selfguided psychological strategies (NeuroMooD)

Tanja Jaeckle1, Steven C.R. Williams2, Gareth J. Barker2, Rodrigo Basilio3, Ewan
Carr4, Kimberley Goldsmith4, Alessandro Colasanti1, Vincent Giampietro2 ,
Anthony Cleare1, Allan H. Young1, Jorge Moll3 and Roland Zahn1,*

1

Department of Psychological Medicine, Centre for Affective Disorders
2

Department of Neuroimaging
4

Department of Biostatistics

Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, United
Kingdom
Cognitive and Behavioral Neuroscience Unit and Neuroinformatics Workgroup, D’Or
Institute for Research and Education (IDOR) – Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
3

*Corresponding author
Dr Roland Zahn
Centre for Affective Disorders
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience (IoPPN), King's College London
Main Building, PO72
16 De Crespigny Park
London SE5 8AF
e-mail: roland.zahn@kcl.ac.uk

Key words: real-time fMRI, fMRI neurofeedback, clinical trial, guilt, major depressive
disorder, anger, subgenual cingulate cortex, subgenual cortex, BA 25, anterior temporal
lobe, social cognition, psychotherapy, cognitive behavioural therapy

Short Title: NeuroMooD trial
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial

Abstract
Background: Overgeneralised self-blame and worthlessness are key symptoms of major
depressive disorder (MDD) and were previously associated with self-blame-selective
changes in connectivity between right superior anterior temporal lobe (rSATL) and
subgenual frontal areas. In a previous study, remitted MDD patients successfully
modulated guilt-selective rSATL-subgenual cingulate connectivity using real-time
functional magnetic resonance imaging (rtfMRI) neurofeedback training, thereby
increasing their self-esteem. The feasibility and potential of using this approach in
symptomatic MDD were unknown.
Methods: This single-blind pre-registered randomised controlled pilot trial tested the
clinical potential of a novel self-guided psychological intervention with and without
additional rSATL-posterior subgenual cortex (SC) rtfMRI neurofeedback, targeting selfblaming emotions in insufficiently recovered people with MDD and early treatmentresistance (n=43, n=35 completers). Following a diagnostic baseline assessment, patients
completed three self-guided sessions to rebalance self-blaming biases and a posttreatment assessment. The fMRI neurofeedback software FRIEND was used to measure
rSATL-posterior SC connectivity, while the BDI-II was administered to assess depressive
symptom severity as a primary outcome measure.
Results: Both interventions were demonstrated to be safe and beneficial, resulting in a
mean reduction of MDD symptom severity by 46% and response rates of more than 55%,
with no group difference. Secondary analyses, however, revealed a differential response
on our primary outcome measure between MDD patients with and without DSM-5
defined anxious distress. Stratifying by anxious distress features was investigated,
because this was found to be the most common subtype in our sample. MDD patients
without anxious distress showed a higher response to rtfMRI neurofeedback training
compared to the psychological intervention, with the opposite pattern found in anxious
MDD. We explored potentially confounding clinical differences between subgroups and
found that anxious MDD patients were much more likely to experience anger towards
others as measured on our psychopathological interview which might play a role in their
poorer response to neurofeedback. In keeping with the hypothesis that self-worth plays a
key role in MDD, improvement on our primary outcome measure was correlated with
increases in self-esteem after the intervention and this correlated with the frequency with
which participants employed the strategies to tackle self-blame outside of the treatment
sessions.
Conclusions: These findings suggest that self-blame-selective rtfMRI neurofeedback
training may be superior over a solely psychological intervention in non-anxious MDD,
although further confirmatory studies are needed. The self-guided psychological
intervention showed a surprisingly high clinical potential in the anxious MDD group
which needs further confirmation compared versus treatment-as-usual. Future studies
need to investigate whether self-blame-selective rSATL-SC connectivity changes are
irrelevant in anxious MDD, which could explain their response being better to the
psychological intervention without interfering neurofeedback.
https://doi.org/10.1186/ISRCTN10526888

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial

Introduction
Recent findings confirm cognitive models (Abramson, Seligman &
Teasdale, 1978) highlighting the importance of overgeneralised self-blaming
emotions for major depressive disorder (MDD) vulnerability (Green, Moll,
Deakin, Hulleman, & Zahn, 2013; Zahn et al., 2015a; Zahn et al., 2015b). Using
fMRI, abnormal functional connectivity between the right superior anterior
temporal lobe (rSATL) and the anterior subgenual cingulate cortex was found to
be associated with overgeneralised self-blaming emotions in remitted MDD
(Green, Lambon Ralph, Moll, Deakin & Zahn, 2012). Increased functional
connectivity in remitted MDD between the rSATL and posterior subgenual cortex
(SC) predicted risk of future major depressive episodes (MDEs) over the
subsequent year (Lythe et al., 2015). Whereas Sato et al. (2013) provided the
technical proof-of-concept that changes in selective functional connectivity can be
detected and fed back to healthy control (HC) participants during fMRI scanning,
a recently completed double-blind, randomised clinical trial confirmed that fMRI
neurofeedback can successfully train remitted MDD patients in rebalancing
abnormal brain connectivity patterns (Zahn et al., 2018).
Real-time fMRI neurofeedback is a training method that provides the
individual with near real-time information about changes in neural activity to
facilitate self-regulation of brain function, cognition and behaviour (Stoeckel et
al., 2014; Thibault, Lifshitz, & Raz, 2016). It is a recent and less widely used
experimental approach, yet using this technique, it has been demonstrated that
individuals learn quickly to gain voluntary control over the activation and
connectivity of specific brain regions (Sulzer et al., 2013; Weiskopf, 2012). Only
a few studies to date have administered rtfMRI neurofeedback in patients with

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial

depression (Young et al., 2017a; Young et al., 2018a; Young et al., 2018b; Yuan
et al., 2014; Zotev, Phillips, Yuan, Misaki, & Bodurka, 2014; Zotev et al., 2016),
and even fewer studies investigated the use of rtfMRI neurofeedback as a
therapeutic intervention strategy in MDD (Linden et al., 2012; Mehler et al., 2018;
Young et al., 2017b; Young et al., 2014). Linden et al.’s (2012) pioneering study
applied rtfMRI neurofeedback training targeted at increasing activation in brain
areas involved in the processing of positive emotions, i.e. the ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex and insula, whereas Young et al. (2014) used neurofeedback
training to enhance amygdala response during the recall of positive
autobiographical memories. Both studies assessed whether the rtfMRI
neurofeedback interventions would have a significant effect on symptom severity
in MDD as assessed with the 17–item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression
(Linden et al., 2012) and Profile of Mood States (POMS) depression ratings
(Young et al., 2014). Although both studies delivered promising results and found
significant reductions in symptom severity, it is noteworthy that they lacked
randomisation and employed only small sample sizes (n=8 vs n=8 controls
(Linden et al., 2012) and n=14 vs n=7 controls (Young et al., 2014)).
A more recently published study by Young et al. (2017a) was the first
randomised rtfMRI neurofeedback trial in MDD, investigating medication-free
individuals allocated to moderately sized groups (n=19 vs n=17 controls).
Similarly, to the authors’ previous research approach (Young et al., 2014), rtfMRI
neurofeedback was used to increase the individual’s amygdala hemodynamic
response to positive autobiographical memories. Symptom reduction was assessed
using the Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS). Young et al.
(2017a) observed a significant symptom reduction in patients allocated to the

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial

active neurofeedback group compared to a minimal response in the control
neurofeedback group. Contrary to Young et al.’s results (2017a), another
randomised controlled rtfMRI neurofeedback trial conducted by Mehler et al.
(2018) did not find differences between the active and control rtfMRI
neurofeedback MDD group. Interestingly, both rtfMRI neurofeedback groups
successfully upregulated targeted brain areas and reduced their depression
symptoms by more than 40%. Further, patients’ symptoms remained stable at a
follow-up assessment six weeks after trial completion (Mehler et al., 2018).
It is noteworthy that most previous clinical rtfMRI neurofeedback studies
focussed on investigating remission from depressed states rather than early
treatment resistance or recurrence risk. Apart from recent work conducted by
Mehler et al. (2018), to our knowledge, no rtfMRI neurofeedback intervention has
been developed to this date which aims to reduce symptoms in MDD patients who
have only insufficiently responded to standard treatment, a clinical predictor of
recurrence risk in MDD. It has not been explored yet if the clinical benefits of
rtfMRI neurofeedback as a therapeutic tool are more profound in those patients
who only insufficiently respond to standard treatment, which is the reason why
the NeuroMooD trial was conducted in early treatment-resistant MDD patients.
Given that self-blame-selective hyper-connectivity between the rSATL and the
posterior SC (Brodmann Area [BA] 25) predicted recurrence risk in MDD (Lythe
et al., 2015), this was used as our target in the rtfMRI neurofeedback intervention
in the current trial.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial

NeuroMooD trial: aims and objectives
Building on previous research findings as outlined above and grounded in
the need for novel intervention strategies in the treatment of early treatmentresistant MDD, this research investigated and compared two novel approaches.
Specifically, this clinical trial examined the clinical benefits of a novel
rtfMRI neurofeedback protocol in current and insufficiently remitted MDD,
aiming at self-blame-selective neural connectivity abnormalities between the
rSATL and the posterior SC. The therapeutic effects of this rtfMRI neurofeedback
intervention were compared to the proposed benefits of a newly designed, selfguided psychological intervention. Clinically, both interventions aimed at
alleviating symptoms of depression, and effectively reducing self-blaming
emotions, in addition to improving the sense of self-worth. Moreover, specific to
the rtfMRI neurofeedback condition, the aim was to determine whether rtfMRI
neurofeedback training effects on excessive self-blame and depressive symptoms
were associated with the normalisation (i.e. decrease) of self-blame-selective
hyper-connectivity between the rSATL and the posterior SC (BA 25).
Hypotheses
The following hypotheses were investigated:
Pre-registered Main Hypothesis 1: Patients undergoing rtfMRI neurofeedback
training will show reduced depressive symptoms, decreased self-blame and
increased self-worth when compared with the psychological intervention group.
Specific Secondary Hypothesis 2: Patients undergoing rtfMRI neurofeedback
training will show decreased self-blame-selective hyper-connectivity between the
rSATL and the posterior SC post-treatment compared to pre-treatment (one of our
pre-registered secondary outcome measures).
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial

Specific Secondary Hypothesis 3: Decreased self-blame-selective hyperconnectivity between the rSATL and the posterior SC region is associated with a
reduction in depressive symptoms in MDD.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

Methods
This clinical proof-of-concept trial received ethical approval from the
NHS Health Research Authority, NRES Committee London – Camberwell St
Giles (REC reference: 15/LO/0577) and was pre-registered on the ISRCTN
registration database (ISRCTN10526888). The single research site was the
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King’s College London.
Researchers involved in the conduction of this clinical trial affirm that
study procedures complied with the ethical principles, standards and national and
institutional guidelines for clinical trials and research involving human subjects
and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008.

Trial design
A single-blind, randomised controlled trial design was used, and
participants allocated to two distinct treatment arms, each comprising three
intervention visits (visits 2, 3 & 4). Regardless of the intervention group,
treatment sessions were scheduled 7-13 days apart, depending on the participants’
availability.
Feasibility and effectiveness of both interventional approaches were
compared by measuring the change in clinical outcomes between pre-treatment
(visit 1) and post-treatment assessments (visit 5).
One intervention condition implemented three sessions of a self-guided
psychological intervention that consisted of cognitive reappraisal techniques,
modified from cognitive therapy (Beck, Rush, Shaw &Emery, 1979) and related
approaches. Assigned to the second intervention condition, the rtfMRI treatment

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

group, participants were asked to apply the same self-guided psychological
strategies during three sessions of rtfMRI neurofeedback training, targeting
rSATL-posterior SC correlation.
Initially the NeuroMooD study was designed to compare three treatment
arms, investigating the treatment effects of rtfMRI neurofeedback with an active,
cathodal and a sham transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) intervention.
Specifically, the original single-blind, randomised controlled design compared
three sessions of the rtfMRI neurofeedback treatment as described above with
three sessions of right superior temporal lobe cathodal tDCS plus self-guided
psychological intervention and three sessions of sham right superior temporal lobe
tDCS plus self-guided psychological intervention. Due to funding reasons, the
original trial design had to be modified, and the data of 6 randomised participants,
that had already been collected, were discarded.

Randomisation method
The randomisation of trial participants was performed by an automatised
online system, set up by the Clinical Trials Unit, King’s College London. The
randomisation process implied a stratified block design with randomly varying
block sizes, deploying two stratification factors: gender (female/male) and
baseline scores of the primary outcome measure, the Beck Depression InventoryII (BDI-II; Beck, Steer & Brown, 1996). Baseline scores classified participants
based on designated BDI-II categories of symptom severity as follows: BDI-II
scores below 14 points indicating minimal depression, BDI-II scores between 14
and 28 points comprising mild and moderate depression and BDI-II scores of 28
points or higher, implying severe depressive symptoms. Participants were
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

informed about their allocated treatment group upon completion of the baseline
clinical and neuropsychological testing on their pre-treatment assessment (visit 1).

Recruitment and reimbursement of participants
The recruitment/randomisation phase consisted of a total of 15 months,
from September 2016 to December 2017. Trial adverts were posted primarily
online, further recruitment strategies entailed the dissemination of study adverts
via university and institutional recruitment circulars, as well as presenting to selfhelp groups at scheduled member meetings.
Participants received compensation for the time taken to participate in the
study in the form of high street gift vouchers or shopping vouchers.
Reimbursement was appointed on a pro-rata basis on the final day of
participation: vouchers worth £10 for the pre-trial assessment session (visit 1),
vouchers worth £20 per treatment session (3 x £20 = £60 for visit 2, visit 3 and
visit 4). Additional vouchers worth £30 for the final follow-up session (visit 5).

Inclusion criteria
Recruitment for this clinical trial was targeted at patients suffering from
recurrent MDD according to diagnostic criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association [APA],
2013), with a minimum of one past MDE of at least a two months duration. At
baseline assessment (visit 1), patients either currently experienced an MDE or
had insufficiently recovered, presenting with significantly impairing or bothering
symptoms, despite not fulfilling MDE criteria anymore. It was required that
remaining symptoms would be significant in severity, classified as a psychiatric
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

status rating of three (i.e. significant symptoms) or four (i.e. major symptoms) on
the Longitudinal Interval Follow-up Interview (LIFE; Keller et al., 1987) over
the past two weeks prior baseline assessment and randomisation. Further, MDD
patients needed to be stable in symptoms for at least six weeks before
randomisation to minimise the risk of including spontaneous remitters.
Importantly, MDD patients were required to have shown an only
insufficient response to at least one psychological intervention (e.g. cognitive
behavioural therapy) or antidepressant medication before their enrolment in the
study or were not amenable to these standard forms of treatment. MDD patients
could only be included if they were not currently undergoing psychotherapeutic
treatment. Antidepressant medication was no exclusion criterion, but patients
needed to be on a stable dose for at least six weeks without improvement before
their participation and were asked to remain on this dose throughout the study.
Lastly, participants needed to be aged 18 years or older, right-handed (to ensure
homogenous responses to the right hemispheric treatment target), and be
proficient in English, so that reliable responses on newly developed secondary
outcome measures could be collected.

Exclusion criteria
To ensure safety and minimise potential health risks, participants needed
to be excluded if they presented with greater than a low risk of suicidality,
violence or current self-harming behaviour. Additionally, participants presenting
with a current MDE lasting more than 12 months were excluded.
Additional exclusion criteria were defined as follows:
i.

Standard MRI contraindications, i.e. non-removable ferromagnetic devices
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

or implants due to the possible dangerous effects of the MRI magnet upon
metal objects in the body
ii.

History of manic or hypomanic episodes, of schizophreniform symptoms
or schizophrenia, or substance abuse

iii.

History of neurological disorders such as seizures, loss of consciousness
following brain injury or medical disorders affecting brain function, blood
flow or metabolism

iv.

History of learning disabilities, major medical, developmental or relevant
other axis-I disorders

v.

Prior specialist diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), antisocial or borderline personality disorder

vi.

Significant impairment of psychosocial functioning before the last MDE
indicating the possibility of a comorbid personality disorder

vii.

Current intake of benzodiazepines, GABAergic or benzodiazepine
receptor agonists

viii.

Current recreational drug use

ix.

Past violence or current aggressive impulses

x.

Impairments of vision or hearing which cannot be corrected during the
treatment sessions

xi.

Pregnancy

Assessment and evaluation of participants: eligibility assessment
The participant selection process commenced with a telephone-based
screening of volunteers for inclusion and exclusion criteria after they gave oral
informed consent, they then provided written informed consent after passing the
pre-screening stage. During the recruitment phase, a total of 311 volunteers
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

interested in participating in the study were screened over the phone, and 71
volunteers attended the initial baseline assessment (visit 1). Following diagnostic
and clinical evaluation, ultimately, N=43 participants were randomised into the
study, of which n=35 participants completed this clinical trial.
Assessment and evaluation of participants: clinical assessment
The diagnostic, clinical and cognitive assessment comprised standardised,
validated measures that have been used extensively in psychiatric research.
Summary of standard clinical and cognitive instruments:
i.

Structured Clinical Interview (SCID) for DSM-5 (First, 2015)

ii.

AMDP Psychopathology Interview questions on depression (Faehndrich &
Stieglitz, 1997; Zahn et al., 2015b)

iii.

Longitudinal Interval Follow-Up Evaluation (LIFE; Keller et al., 1987)

iv.

Clinical Global Impression (CGI) Scale (Busner & Targum, 2007)

v.

Beck Depressive Inventory (BDI-II; Beck et al., 1996)

vi.

Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS; Montgomery &
Åsberg, 1979)

vii.

Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (QUIDS-SR16; Rush et
al., 2003)

viii.

Hypomania Checklist-16 (Forty et al., 2010)

ix.

Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (Rosenberg, 1965)

x.

Profile of Mood States (POMS) Scale (McNair, Lorr & Dropplemen,
1971)

xi.

MINI International Neuropsychiatric Interview (module on suicidality
only; Sheehan et al., 1998)

xii.

Psychiatric Family History Screen (Weissman et al., 2000)
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

xiii.

Life Events Questionnaire (Brugha & Conroy, 1985)

xiv.

Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ; Bernstein & Fink, 1998)

xv.

Altman Self-Rating Mania Scale (Altman, Hedeker, Peterson & Davis,
1997)

xvi.

Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination (ACE-III; Hsieh, Schubert, Hoon,
Mioshi & Hodges, 2013) in patients >50 years only

In addition to the abovementioned scales and measures, clinical evaluation
of participants further entailed a non-structured clinical interview, as well as the
documentation of the patient’s medical history and in females the day in their
menstrual cycle. Furthermore, age at onset, episode duration(s), and total illness
duration was recorded, along with details about the course of illness, i.e. number
of episodes and medication history.

Additional experimental neuropsychological testing
Supplementary to clinical and cognitive assessments, participants were
asked to provide ratings of autobiographical memories associated with feelings of
self-blame and other-blame. Moreover, additional experimental tasks developed
by our research group were administered, designed to explore neurocognitive
aspects of implicit self-contempt biases and self- and other-blaming emotions:
i.

A modified short version of the value-related moral sentiment task
(VMST; Zahn et al., 2015a): this computerised task investigates emotions
related to self-blame (i.e. guilt, shame, self-contempt, self-disgust, selfdirected anger) versus blaming others (indignation, anger, contempt or
disgust towards others). Preceded by the description of hypothetical
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

scenarios of social behaviours of the participants themselves and their best
friends, participants are instructed to select the emotion they are most
likely to experience. We added items related to action tendencies
(Roseman, Wiest & Swartz, 1994), previously validated in an unpublished
study. The following action tendencies were measured: creating distance
from self, hiding, apologising, creating distance from friend, verbally or
physically attacking/punishing friend or no action/other action. For this
trial report we only focus on the pre-registered secondary outcome
measure of agency-incongruent self-blaming emotions, so the percentage
of other-agency trials where shame, guilt, or self-disgust/contempt were
experienced. This was chosen because unpublished analyses of previous
data showing a correlation of rsATL-posterior SC connectivity for selfblame vs. other-blame and agency-incongruent self-blaming emotions on
the full version of the VMST (Lythe et al., 2015).
ii.

Brief Implicit Association Test (BIAT; Sriram & Greenwald, 2009): this
computerised task using Inquisit Software (www.millisecond.com) was
developed by our research group by RZ and Dr Karen Lythe in
collaboration with Profs Rüsch and Bodenhausen. It is an indirect measure
of self-contempt bias, evaluating the association of contempt or disgust
with oneself relative to others. The task design is based on similar tests
that have been validated to measure implicit self-esteem (Greenwald &
Farnham, 2000).

iii.

A modified version of the social knowledge differentiation task (Green et
al., 2013): this computerised, neuropsychological test examines the
participant’s ability to access differentiated social conceptual knowledge

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

when instructed to appraise hypothetical scenarios of social behaviour of
different contexts of agency (self-agency vs other-agency). The task was
modified by restricting the original task to 30 items, focussing on
negatively valenced scenarios only. This was not a pre-registered
secondary outcome measure and the results will be reported in a separate
paper.
iv.

Social agency inference task (SAIT): Specifically developed for this
research project, this computerised task assesses whether changes in the
perception of social agency underpin self-blaming biases in MDD. This
task was not a pre-registered secondary outcome measure and will be
reported in a separate paper.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

Pre-registered outcome measures
Outcome measures comprised self-rated and observer-rated scales and
assessments along with fMRI connectivity analyses as specified below. Observerrated outcomes were assessed by a senior psychiatrist (R.Z. or A.C. in his
absence) who was blinded to the treatment group allocation of participants
throughout the trial.

Primary outcome measure
The primary outcome measure was defined as the reduction of depressive
symptoms between pre-treatment visit 1 and post-treatment visit 5 (7-13 days
after final treatment session) as assessed with the BDI-II.

Secondary outcome measures
In addition to the primary outcome measure, the following secondary
outcome measures had been pre-registered before the begin of the trial:
i.

Reduction of depressive symptoms between pre-treatment visit 1 and posttreatment visit 5 (7-13 days after final treatment session) as assessed with
MADRS

ii.

Reduction of self-rated depressive symptoms between pre-treatment visit 1
and post-treatment visit 5 (7-13 days after final treatment session) as
assessed with QUIDS-SR16

iii.

Reduction of self-rated depressive symptoms between pre-treatment visit 1
and post-treatment visit 5 (7-13 days after final treatment session) as
assessed with POMS depression-dejection subscale

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

iv.

Increase in self-worth between pre-treatment visit 1 and post-treatment
visit 5 (7-13 days after final treatment session) as assessed with Rosenberg
Self-Esteem Scale

v.

In the rtfMRI neurofeedback group: decrease in post vs pre-training
rSATL–posterior SC correlation for self-blame relative to blaming others
between the first and last treatment session (i.e. at the start of visit 2 and at
the end of visit 4), using fMRI as measured by regression coefficients for
the time series, as extracted by the software FRIEND (Functional Realtime Interactive Endogeneous Neuromodulation and Decoding; Basilio et
al., 2015; Sato et al., 2013)

vi.

Reduction in implicit self-blaming bias between pre-treatment visit 1 and
post-treatment visit 5 (7-13 days after final treatment session) as assessed
with BIAT (subcategories contempt–anger and contempt–anxiety)

vii.

Reduction in agency-incongruent self-blame between pre-treatment visit 1
and post-treatment visit 5 (7-13 days after final treatment session) as
assessed with the short version of the VMST

viii.

Self- and observer-rated clinical global impression at post-treatment visit 5
(7-13 days after final treatment session) as assessed with the CGI-Scale

ix.

Withdrawal rates throughout the trial and separately for the period after the
first treatment session until post-treatment visit 5 (7-13 days after final
treatment session)

x.

Adverse events throughout the trial and separately for the period after the
first treatment session until post-treatment visit 5 (7-13 days after final
treatment session)

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

xi.

Reduction in self-rated self-blame as assessed with the mean of self-blame
ratings of two guilt-specific autobiographical events obtained prior the first
(visit 2) and after final treatment session (visit 4)

xii.

Reduction in observer-rated self-blame as assessed with the Moral
Emotion Addendum to the AMDP as the sum of all self-blaming emotion
scores at baseline (visit 1) and post-treatment at visit 5 (7-13 days after
final treatment session)

Intervention procedures
Both interventions, the psychological intervention as well as the rtfMRI
neurofeedback training, consisted of three individual treatment sessions,
scheduled 7-13 days apart, and involved equivalent preparation processes prior to
the first treatment session (see participant timing in Supplementary Table 1).
Before the first intervention session, participants were asked to provide
two cue words, prompting them to remember two autobiographical events that
would cause them to experience strong feelings of self-blame and guilt. Also,
participants provided two cue words reminding them of life events where they
experienced substantial feelings of indignation or anger towards other people
while feeling low levels of self-blame.
Before and after each treatment session, participants rated the intensity of
evoked self-blame and indignation feelings on a Likert-type scale from 0 to 10.
Moreover, they rated (from 0 to 10) how successful they felt in the emotional
training during the intervention and estimated the percentage of time (0-100%)
that they were able to focus during the session.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

Concluding each treatment session, the participant’s suicide risk was
assessed using the MINI International Neuropsychiatric Interview suicidality
module, focussed on the time period since the previous study appointment. In
addition, the severity of depressive symptoms was monitored and assessed with
the BDI-II. Participants were excluded if they showed a suicide risk greater than
low on the MINI and as judged by R.Z., or if their depressive symptoms had
worsened, as reflected in an increase of 10 points or more on the BDI-II compared
to the baseline score prior randomisation. In such an instance, the protocol
requested to un-blind the leading senior psychiatrist of the NeuroMooD trial
(R.Z.), who discussed treatment recommendations with the patient if requested.
By doing so, participants were assisted in accessing standard treatment options
swiftly.

Psychological intervention
In the psychological intervention group, the cue words provided by
participants of this treatment arm were programmed into a timed presentation
format and played back to them during each treatment session. To help
participants manage their feelings of self-blame constructively, they were
instructed to use specific, self-guided psychological strategies. Participants were
suggested to use the following strategies to help them manage their feelings, yet
they could also develop their own strategies:

i.

Think about why you might not have been in control over the outcome of
the event.

ii.

Think about why you might not be responsible for the outcome of the
event.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

iii.

Think about why the consequences for others might not be so bad.

iv.

Think about making up for things or apologising.

v.

Think about the other person forgiving you.

vi.

Think about forgiving yourself.

These strategies were based on (1) attribution theory which highlights the
importance of locus of control for self-blame (Abramson et al., 1978), on (2)
omnipotent responsibility associated with depressogenic forms of guilt (O'Connor,
Berry, Weiss, & Gilbert, 2002), on (3) neurocognitive models of self-blame,
implicating representations of future consequences as important to guilt-proneness
(Zahn R, de Oliveira-Souza & Moll, 2013), on (4) the associations of reparative
action tendencies with adaptive forms of guilt (Tangney, Stuewig, & Mashek,
2007), as well as on (5) the focus on forgiveness and self-kindness as thematised
in compassion-focused therapy (CFT; Gilbert, 2009a, 2009b; Gilbert & Procter,
2006).
The intervention consisted of four parts. In the first and the fourth part,
participants were asked to only think about the autobiographical events triggered
by their cue words, without using any strategies to manage their feelings of selfblame. Before the second and third part of the intervention, participants were
instructed to start using one or more self-guided strategies when seeing their guilt
cue words to manage their feelings of self-blame constructively.
Participants were given the following instructions before the treatment
session was started:
’At the beginning and end of the session, you will have to think about the selfblame and anger events when shown your cue words. In between, you will be
asked to keep thinking about the self-blame event while trying to use one or

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

more strategies that best help you to cope with the self-blaming feeling. When
numbers are presented on the screen, you will have to subtract seven from the
number displayed.’

In the first and fourth part of the presentation, participants were shown
their guilt, and their indignation cue words, parts two and three only contained the
patient’s guilt cue words and no indignation provoking cue words. Parts 1 and 4
were 408 seconds in length, including emotional blocks (guilt and indignation)
and subtraction blocks, plus a 30-second reminder of task instructions. Parts 2 and
3 consisted of a time sequence of 424 seconds each, containing guilt cue words
and subtraction blocks, in addition to the display of instruction slides for 60
seconds. Consequently, the intervention part of each treatment session was
completed after approximately 30 minutes.
The order of the displayed cue words and numbers was as follows:
Part 1 of the intervention: instruction to only think about the
autobiographical events without using psychological strategies → number → guilt
cue word 1 → number → indignation cue word 1 → number → guilt cue word 1
→ number → indignation cue word 1 → number → guilt cue word 2 → number
→ indignation cue word 2 → number → guilt cue word 2 → number →
indignation cue word 2.
Part 2 of the intervention: instruction to keep thinking about the events,
while trying to use psychological strategies to cope with self-blaming feeling →
number → guilt cue word 1 → number → guilt cue word 1 → number → guilt
cue word 2 → number → guilt cue word 2.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

Part 3 was equal to part 2 of the intervention. Part 4 of the intervention
was identical to Part 1.
The mental subtraction blocks served as a distraction from the emotional
load of the participants’ thought processes and to separate each emotional block.
Self-blame cue words were presented in blue colour on a black background;
indignation cue words appeared in red on black background and numbers were
presented in yellow.
In both treatment groups, participants were instructed to implement the
psychological strategies in their everyday lives and to use them in-between
treatment visits whenever feelings of self-blame would arise. The frequency of
use was recorded at the next treatment visit. Participants were instructed to
continue using the strategies until the final assessment visit (visit 5).
Real-time fMRI neurofeedback intervention
The rtfMRI neurofeedback intervention aimed at targeting hyperconnected brain correlation patterns between the rSATL seed and the posterior SC
region of interest (ROI) for self-blame vs. blaming others, identified as a
signature of vulnerability to MDD (Lythe et al., 2015).
Analogous to the psychological intervention group, and before the first
neurofeedback training session, participants were asked to decide on specific
autobiographical memories that would evoke strong feelings of self-blame and
other-blame when prompted by previously defined cue words. The self-blameevoking scenarios had to involve the participant as the main agent of the scenario.
The other-blaming scenarios had to involve another person acting. To evaluate
whether a change occurred in the attribution of blame, ratings on these events
were obtained before and after each scanning session. Instructions were given
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

through the MRI intercom, participants, however, responded with a button box to
prevent extensive head movement while being in the scanner.

Analogous to the psychological intervention group, each of the three
rtfMRI neurofeedback sessions contained a paradigm of four runs, whereby the
following procedure applied:

Figure 1| fMRI session design

The first and fourth run (204 volumes each; 408 seconds duration) were
identical and served to determine pre- and post-neurofeedback effects. They
constituted of rtfMRI data acquisition runs, consisting of four self-blame (guilt)
blocks (15 volumes each) and four other-blame (indignation) blocks (15 volumes
each), interspersed with eight mental subtraction condition blocks (10 volumes
each). As mentioned earlier, during the subtraction blocks, participants were
asked to mentally subtract seven from a 3-digit number (e.g. 101, 102).
While run 1 measured the correlation coefficient of self-blaming emotions
relative to other-blaming emotions (indignation), training effects on such
correlations were assessed in run 4.
During the neurofeedback training runs (run 2 and 3), an upward and
downward moving thermometer scale was displayed to provide visual feedback
on how successful participants were in modifying their brain correlation patterns
between the rSATL and the posterior SC region ROI. The thermometer scale

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

appeared in the form of a colour bar that could reach different levels. Participants
were instructed to think about the particular autobiographical scenario triggered
by the display of the previously agreed cue word and to try and bring up the level
to the top of the thermometer scale by using choosing a psychological strategy
from the list they had been provided with before the scanning session.
Runs 2 and 3 (212 volumes each; 424 seconds duration) were identical and
consisted of four guilt blocks (42 volumes per block), interspersed with four
mental subtraction condition blocks (10 volumes each).
Similar to the psychological intervention group, mental subtraction blocks
were used to divert participants from the emotionally charged autobiographical
memories, in addition to minimising resting-state activity in the posterior SC
region (Bado et al., 2014).

Real-time fMRI neurofeedback method
The rtfMRI neurofeedback software FRIEND (Basilio et al., 2015; Sato et
al., 2013) was used in the file version 1.0.0.257 (Supplementary Figures 1&2).
FRIEND has previously been validated for correlation feedback in patients with
MDD (Zahn et al., 2018).
A detailed description of methodological specifications of FRIEND as a
rtfMRI neurofeedback tool is provided by Sato et al. (2013) and Zahn et al.
(2018). In the NeuroMooD trial, FRIEND provided ROI-based rtfMRI
neurofeedback alongside executing fundamental pre-processing steps of fMRI
data in real-time. Facilitated by native FSL codes, FRIEND performed motion
correction using MCFLIRT, spatial smoothing with Gaussian Kernel (FWHM =
6mm) and GLM calculation (Zahn et al., 2018).
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

Signal-level normalisation was performed by subtracting the mean value
of the voxels signals within the ROI over the entire preceding subtraction
condition block from the current echo-planar images belonging to the guilt or
indignation condition block, which minimises local signal trends (Zahn et al.,
2018).
The rSATL ROI (consisting of the same region used as a seed region in
our previous studies (Green et al., 2012)) and posterior SC ROI (consisting of the
BA 25 cluster whose self-blame-selective hyper-connectivity was associated with
recurrence risk (Lythe et al., 2015)) were pre-defined, warped from MNI space
into subject space and ultimately back-transformed into native space, using
inverse transformation algorithms of FSL FLIRT (affine, 12 parameters). During
run 1, 50% of the most activated voxels were selected in the native space ROI,
contrasting the activation between guilt vs subtraction in the rSATL ROI, while
contrasting guilt vs indignation in the posterior SC ROI. These voxels were used
to extract the average signal for the subsequent rtfMRI neurofeedback training.
The first five volumes of each emotional block were discarded due to high
correlations guided by a decrease in time series after subtraction conditions (Zahn
et al., 2018).
Thermometer levels, as displayed in the neurofeedback training runs, were
calculated from the participant’s correlation patterns with a delay of six seconds.
Once the first ten time points had been acquired to compute a correlation
coefficient, the thermometer was updated every two seconds as soon as a new
time point had been collected (i.e. each acquired volume).
FRIEND used a moving target correlation algorithm over a sliding time
window of the last ten volumes, updated every two seconds, hence for each

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

acquired volume. The minimum of the thermometer display was calculated based
on the minimum value of the last 10 Pearson correlation coefficients, whereas the
maximum of the thermometer was calculated based on the maximum value of the
last ten correlations.
Image acquisition
Image acquisition was carried out on an MR750 3.0T MR system (General
Electric), using a hyperbolic secant (HS) excitation pulse, optimised for
orbitofrontal and inferior temporal regions, minimising signal dropout (Wastling
& Barker, 2015). A 32-channel head coil was chosen to support an optimal signalto-noise ratio. Functional image acquisition was obtained in the AC-PC plane, top
to bottom, using a T2*-weighted echo-planar imagining EPI (BOLD) sequence
(TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, matrix = 64x64, FOV = 211 mm, flip angle = 73°,
voxel size = 3x3x3 mm; slice thickness =3 mm, slice gap = 0.3 mm, 36 slices).
Auto shimming was applied before starting each experimental run, acquiring four
additional volumes which were automatically discarded, accounting of T1
equilibration effects. High-resolution anatomical images were acquired with a
magnetisation–prepared rapid gradient echo (MP-RAGE) sequence (TR = 7.3 sec,
TE = 3.0 sec, matrix = 256 x 256, FOV = 270 mm, slice thickness = 1.2 mm, 196
slices).
Clinical images were acquired on the first day of treatment (visit 2) using
an FRFSE (2 mm thickness, 72 slices) and FLAIR sequence (4 mm thickness, 36
slices) and checked for anatomical brain abnormalities after the treatment session
by a radiologist at the Centre for Neuroimaging Sciences, King’s College London,
independent of additional, internal checks completed by the NeuroMooD study
team.
27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

While being in the MRI scanner, the participant’s head motion was
restricted using padding and heart rate measurements recorded via a finger pulse
sensor. A mirror fitted to the head coil allowed MDD patients to view visual
stimuli presented during image acquisition, i.e. autobiographical cue words and
the visual feedback thermometer, as stimuli were projected to a screen located
behind the participant’s head. Verbal instructions were communicated via the
MRI intercom, participants, however, were instructed to respond using a button
box placed in their hands to avoid incidental head movement.

Statistical power and offline analyses
Statistical power was calculated using G*POWER software and required a
sample size of n=34 participants to achieve 85% power at p=.05, 2-sided (t-test).
This calculation was based on a conservatively estimated effect size (d=1.06)
lower than the effect size (d=1.5) reported in a previous rtfMRI neurofeedback
study in MDD (Linden et al., 2012). The enrolment target consisted of n=45 MDD
patients, including a 20% drop-out rate of 9 participants. Hence, this trial aimed to
conclude with n=36 MDD study completers, above n=34 as needed per power
calculation.
Given that this clinical trial was conducted as a pilot study to test
feasibility, the performed power calculation is of limited value as it is based on
effect sizes which may have been inflated due to small sample sizes. To determine
precise effect sizes, a feasibility study is needed which should include at least 70
participants (i.e. 35 participants per group) when estimating the pooled standard
deviation for continuous outcomes in randomised controlled trials (Teare et al.,
2014). Furthermore, based on guidelines posited by the National Institute for
28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

Health Research, feasibility studies should not intend to be based on standard
power calculations (Teare et al., 2014). These strict guidelines, however, have not
been adhered to by any neurofeedback study in MDD so far, due to the difficulty
of obtaining funding for such large studies at an early stage of development.

Ultimately, n=43 participants were randomised into the study, whereby
n=22 MDD patients were allocated to the fMRI neurofeedback group and n=21 to
the psychological intervention group. A sum of 8 participants withdrew or was
excluded during the duration of the trial, leading to a final of n=35 datasets for the
analysis of the primary outcome measure (BDI-II). Further details about
participant numbers and withdrawal rates are reported in Supplementary Figure 3.

Statistical

analyses

used

IBM

SPSS

Statistics

24

(https://www.ibm.com/analytics/spss-statistics-software). Group level analyses of
primary and secondary outcomes, comparing pre- and post-treatment effects (visit
1 vs visit 5), were obtained using the constrained longitudinal analysis model
(cLDA; Coffman, Edelman & Woolson, 2016) after seeking statistical advice
(K.G., E.C.), the alpha-level was set to p=.05, two-tailed.

As in our previous paper (Zahn et al., 2018) at the individual subject level,
linear regression coefficients for the slope of z-transformed ATL signal timecourse as the predictor of z-transformed SC signal time-course in each condition
(self-blame, indignation/anger) in the pre- and post-training acquisition as the
outcome variables were derived from a general linear model for each subject by
modelling the interaction of z-transformed ATL signal time-course with two
factors: condition (guilt, indignation) and time (pre-, post-training). The ztransformation was undertaken to obtain standardised regression coefficients.
29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

Cohen’s d effect sizes were computed for each regression coefficient using the
formula: 2 x t-value/square root of degrees of freedom (df; Rosenthal & Rosnow,
1991).
Where cLDA was inapplicable, intervention group comparisons were
performed using non-parametric tests. A repeated measures ANOVA was chosen
in the analysis of regression coefficients for z-transformed rSATL and posterior
SC signals in the guilt and indignation conditions. Transforming the data into ztransformed values allowed for receiving standardised regression coefficients.
Secondary data analyses of the anxious distress subtype of MDD were conducted
using univariate GLM analysis. As analyses were either hypothesis-driven or
exploratory (secondary outcome measures in the feasibility trial), p-value
adjustments to correct for multiple comparisons were not carried out (Feise,
2002).

Brief Implicit Association Test design and analyses
The Brief Implicit Association Test (BIAT) measures implicit associations
between two categories compared with another pair using two blocks of 20
stimuli each (16 used for the analysis). Participants were asked to press a left or
right button depending on their categorisation of a word appearing on the screen.
The Contempt vs. Anxiety (non-focal category) BIAT presented words falling
into self or other categories and contempt or anxiety categories. In Block 1: one
response key had to be pressed if the word was either a synonym of contempt or
of self, and the other key had to be pressed if it was either a synonym of anxiety
or other. In Block 2, the assignment to the response keys was reversed with one
key for contempt or other and one key for anxiety or self. The BIAT literature
shows that people are faster during the block in which the pairing of categories to
30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

one key is congruent with their implicit association biases towards one pair of
categories relative to the other pair of categories. The contempt vs. anger (nonfocal category) BIAT used the same design, but anxiety was replaced by anger as
a category. We computed D scores using the optimised scoring algorithm (Nosek,
2005, May 27) as response time means for Block 2 – means Block 1 / standard
deviation across blocks. This means that participants with stronger biases towards
associating contempt with self were expected to show faster responses in Block 1
and thus more positive BIAT D scores. Unlike other BIATs, we used self-agency
and other-agency rather than just self and other (please see Supplementary
Methods). Due to an undetected technical error in the set-up of the BIAT, we used
“Participant” and “Friend” instead of the first names of participants and friends
which may limit the validity of the results.

NeuroMooD protocol violations
Minor violations of the NeuroMooD protocol occurred during the duration
of this study due to difficulties in scheduling participants’ treatment and final
assessment visits. Modified schedules had to be arranged for individual
participants who were unable to attend study visits within the preferred interval of
7 to 13 days between appointments due to time constraints. Also, limited
availability of fMRI scanning slots at the MRI facilities of the Centre for
Neuroimaging Sciences, King’s College London, affected MDD patients allocated
to the rtfMRI neurofeedback group, occasionally causing a delay in the scheduling
of treatment visits. As this issue became apparent early in the study, treatment
visits for the psychological treatment group were scheduled in intervals
comparable to those of the rtfMRI neurofeedback group. Ultimately, no
significant difference was found between treatment groups regarding the total
31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

number of days included in the study (t=1.21, df=33, p=.237, two-tailed),
considering the period from randomisation (visit 1) until trial completion (visit 5).
On average, it took rtfMRI neurofeedback participants 40 days (SD=9.18) to
complete the NeuroMooD trial. Similarly, participants randomised to the
psychological intervention group participated on average for 37 days (SD=7.37).

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

Clinical characteristics of participants
Table 1| Clinical characteristics of intervention groups
PSYCHOLOGICAL

NEUROFEEDBACK

(n=16)
th

(n=19)

25 =2 50 =4.5,

25 =3 50th=4,

75th=13.75

75th=8

range: 2-66

range: 1-110

Current MDE

9

10

Partially remitted

7

9

Anxious Distress

4

11

Melancholic Features

1

2

Melancholic Features + Anxious Distress

3

2

Atypical Features

0

1

Atypical Features + Anxious Distress

1

0

None

7

3

Psychotropic medication

10

10

Antidepressant (therapeutic dose)

9

9

Of which SSRI

6

6

2

3

Past PTSD with residual symptoms

2

3

Past PTSD fully remitted

0

1

Current Social Anxiety Disorder

1

2

Past Social Anxiety Disorder

0

2

Past Anorexia Nervosa

0

1

Number of previous MDEs (percentiles)

th

th

MDD DSM-5 subtype

Current medication

Life-time co-morbidity
Current Persistent Depressive Disorder of
the dysthymic subtype

Participants in the psychological intervention and rtfMRI neurofeedback groups did not differ on
median numbers of previous episodes despite higher percentiles in the psychological intervention
group (U=145, p=.832, two-tailed). MDE = major depressive episode, MDD = major depressive
disorder, SSRI = selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, SNRI = serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor, PTSD = posttraumatic stress disorder; M = mean, SD = standard deviation, [M-M] =
Minimum-Maximum. In the rtfMRI neurofeedback group, one participant was suspected of
displaying symptoms of autism spectrum disorder; one participant showed symptoms of attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder during childhood, one participant reported past heavy alcohol and
substance use.

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Methods

Table 2| Demographic characteristics of intervention groups
PSYCHOLOGICAL

NEUROFEEDBACK

M;SD;[Min-Max]

M;SD;[Min-Max]

Age in years

37.63;9.74;[22-55]

36,74;11.04;[20-59]

Years of education

18.06;2.52;[13-22]

16.95;3.15;[11-23]

Participants of both treatment groups did not differ in age (t=-2.50, df=33, p=.804) or years of
education (t=-1.14, df=33, p=.262). In the psychological intervention group, 17/22 were female
(77%) and 17/21 in the neurofeedback group (81%, Contingency Coefficient=.05, p=.77, n=43).

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Results

Results
Pre-registered primary outcome measure
A significant improvement, irrespective of treatment group, was found on
the pre-registered primary outcome measure, the BDI-II (Beck et al., 1996). A
comparison of BDI-II score means pre- and post-treatment showed an overall
reduction of 46.07%, which corresponds to a baseline assessment (N=43) of
M=29.14 points (SD=8.66) and M=15.71, (SD=9.75) on the final assessment day
(n=35). CLDA estimated the effect of time as a post-treatment BDI-II score mean
of M=13.39, SE=2.74, df=75, t=4.89, p<.001, 95% CI [7.93,18.85], with a strong
effect size of Cohen’s d=1.13. Contrary to the hypothesis, however, the analysis
demonstrated no effect of intervention group on the primary outcome measure.
The cLDA model revealed a difference in mean of diff=.07 points on the BDI-II
(SE=3.17, df=75, t=.02, p=.984, 95% CI [-6.26,6.3], Cohen’s d=.00) in the
psychological intervention group (n=16; M=15.75, SD=9.75) compared with the
rtfMRI

neurofeedback

group

(n=19;

M=15.68,

SD=10.02).

Thus,

the

psychological intervention was shown to be of equal effect in reducing depressive
symptoms compared with the rtfMRI neurofeedback training as assessed with the
BDI-II (Figure 2).

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Results

Figure 2| Pre- vs post-treatment comparison in score means on the BDI-II for the psychological
intervention (n=16) and rtfMRI neurofeedback training group (n=19). The cLDA model estimates
a common baseline BDI-II score across treatment groups (N=43). Both interventions were shown
to be of equal effect with 56.25% treatment responders in the psychological intervention group vs
57.89% treatment responders in the rtfMRI neurofeedback group. Treatment response was defined
as an improvement of ≥50% on the defined outcome measure.

Pre-registered secondary outcome measures
Measures of depression, self-esteem and self-blame
Intervention group comparisons on pre-registered secondary outcome
measures are presented in Tables 3, 4 and 5. In both intervention groups, there
were significant improvements on measures of depressive symptoms, including
the QUIDS-SR16 and the depression-dejection subscale of the POMS. Similarly,
participants of both intervention groups showed a substantial reduction in
symptoms on the MADRS on trial completion compared with baseline. Clinical
global impression scales indicated a median of 2 in both groups when judged by
36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Results

the blinded observer (i.e. much improved) and 2.5 when self-rated in the
Psychological Intervention Group and 2 in the Neurofeedback group. Moreover,
MDD patients’ self-esteem increased significantly post- vs pre-treatment,
regardless of the intervention group they had been allocated to. There was a clear
reduction in self-blaming emotions in both groups based on the autobiographical
memory ratings and when assessed by the blinded rater using a semi-structured
interview designed to assess these emotions (Table 5; Zahn et al., 2015b).
Nevertheless, and inconsistent with the a priori hypothesis, the rtfMRI
neurofeedback intervention was not found to be superior over the psychological
intervention on any of the pre-registered secondary outcome measures.
Interestingly, there was also a change in implicit biases for contempt relative to
anger, but none for contempt relative to anxiety, such that after the intervention,
particularly in the solely psychological group, there was a reduced self-contempt
bias relative to self-anger. This is in keeping with research suggesting that anger
can be more adaptive as it is associated with the attribution of being able to
change something and tackle it than contempt which has been associated with
stable attributions of not being able to change someone’s character (Fischer &
Roseman, 2007).

Adverse events and withdrawal rates
Adverse event and withdrawal rates were pre-registered as additional
secondary outcome measures. Notably, rtfMRI neurofeedback training as well as
the solely psychological treatment were found to be safe and feasible forms of
intervention. No significant differences emerged regarding adverse events or
withdrawal rates throughout the trial following randomisation or specifically,
37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Results

between the first treatment session and trial completion (Table 4). Overall, six
adverse events were reported following randomisation, three occurring at a time
point subsequent to the first treatment session. A possible relationship with the
study has been suspected in four of the overall six adverse events throughout the
trial, while no relationship was observed in one case and a probable relationship
was assumed in one other instance. In the latter case, the participant reported
transient insomnia lasting one night after his first rtfMRI neurofeedback session.
All adverse events were mild and constituted of two withdrawals and one
incident of exclusion from the study. The participant was excluded on the day of
the first treatment session, after having been randomised to the psychological
intervention group, as the patient presented with symptoms of depression that had
worsened by 10 points on the BDI-II between baseline assessment and first
intervention day. In addition, one adverse event occurred prior to randomisation
and had no relation with the study. The participant’s result on the ACE-III was
suggestive of a neurological condition, and further referral to a cognitive
assessment service was recommended.
Throughout the trial, seven participants withdrew their consent and ended
their participation in the study, four prior to the first day of intervention and three
at different time points following their first treatment session. In the former
instance, participants reported to not feel well enough to participate or to
experience time-related challenges that would make it impossible to attend the
five scheduled study appointments. In the situation of participants withdrawing
after their first treatment session, they described family or financial reasons for
their decision. As aforementioned, transient insomnia in the night following the

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Results

first rtfMRI neurofeedback session was cause for one MDD patient to discontinue
trial participation.

Real-time fMRI neurofeedback group: rSATL–posterior SC connectivity
post- vs pre-intervention
As a further secondary outcome measure, specific to the rtfMRI
neurofeedback intervention group, functional connectivity between the rSATL
and the posterior SC was measured for self-blame relative to blaming others, postvs pre-intervention. Change in functional connectivity was assessed by calculating
Cohen’s d effect sizes for regression coefficient means for time series pre- and
post-rtfMRI neurofeedback training. As predicted, a significant training-induced
reduction in connectivity between the rSATL and posterior SC was detected in the
guilt condition relative to indignation, as reflected in a significant time x condition
interaction in a repeated measures ANOVA (Table 6). Inconsistent with the
prediction, this decrease was not found to be significant for the guilt condition
itself (t=-.89, df=17, p=.387; n=18), the mean difference between conditions was 1.27 with a 95% confidence interval between -.43 and .18. Interestingly, as guiltspecific connectivity successfully reduced relative to indignation post-treatment,
indignation-related connectivity between the rSATL and posterior SC was
observed to increase with a mean difference of .09 post- vs pre-rtfMRI
neurofeedback training (Figure 3; Table 6). This finding, however, was not
significant itself (t=.68, df=17, p=.504, 95% CI [-1.76,3.43].

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Results

Figure 3| Relative change in functional connectivity between rSATL and posterior SC in the guilt
and indignation condition, measured as Cohen’s D for regression coefficient means for time series
pre- and post-rtfMRI neurofeedback training, comparing the first and final treatment session.

In addition to applying the CLDA model, the intention-to-treat (ITT)
approach was chosen and compared with the per-protocol analyses, using the
Pearson Chi-Square test to analyse the association between intervention group and
treatment response on the primary outcome measure (BDI-II). The ITT analysis
includes data of all randomised participants regardless of their adherence or
withdrawal subsequent to randomisation (Fisher et al., 1990). Here, participants
who withdrew from the study or did not complete the trial were treated as nonresponders. No relationship was found between intervention group and treatment
response χ2(1, N=43)=.029, p=.864. The estimated treatment effect is considered
40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Results

to be conservative in ITT analysis and caution is raised in terms of ITT’s
susceptibility to type II errors (for a review see Gupta, 2011). Contrary to the ITT
analysis, the per-protocol analysis risks to falsely present a treatment effect (type I
error). It excludes participants who withdraw after randomisation and disregards
data of those who do not complete the study. The per-protocol analysis may lead
to significant reductions in statistical power by affecting the overall sample size
(Gupta, 2011). Using this analysis, no association between intervention group and
treatment response was found χ2(1, N=35)=.046, p=.830. The results of these
additional analyses confirm findings based on the cLDA model and were contrary
to our predictions.
Throughout all treatment sessions and active neurofeedback runs,
participants were able to successfully bring down the level of guilt-associated
correlations reflected in an average neurofeedback thermometer level around
~50% (Supplementary Figure 4). This is remarkable considering that FRIEND
implements a moving target algorithm potentially making it more difficult to
control the neurofeedback thermometer as connectivity between the rSATLposterior SC successively reduces with training.
A repeated measures ANOVA was conducted to investigate differences in
rSATL-posterior SC functional connectivity pre- vs post-intervention in the guilt
vs indignation condition over the course of all three treatment sessions. This
analysis approach was chosen to contrast the two psychological conditions and
thereby control for non-specific correlations, which make up a large fraction of
the signal when considering each condition in isolation. While a significant main
effect was found for pre- vs post-intervention (F(1,17)=4.5, p=.049, Wilks’
Lambda=.79, ηp²=.21), there was only a trendwise interaction between session

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Results

and pre- vs post-interventional rSATL- posterior SC connectivity (F(2,16)=2.79,
p=.091, Wilks’ Lamda=.74, ηp²=.26). Pre- and post-interventional connectivity
measures and their change over the course of all three neurofeedback training
sessions are displayed in Supplementary Figure 5. This shows that guilt
connectivity was indeed reduced after the neurofeedback training relative to
indignation in concordance with our main analysis. It appears that most of this
training effect occurred already after the first session (Session A), but this
observation was only supported by a trendwise interaction between session and
intervention effect.
Exploratory secondary data analysis
Major depressive disorder with and without anxious distress
Based on the primary finding of equally strong treatment responses in both
intervention groups, subsequent exploratory data analyses of clinical subtypes of
MDD investigated differences in the response of MDD patients with and without
anxious distress. A univariate GLM showed a significant interaction between
treatment group and anxious distress features (F(1,30)=4.98, p=.033, ηp²=.14).
This interaction was due to a better response to the neurofeedback-enhanced
intervention in non-anxious (83% of patients halving their BDI-II scores) vs.
anxious patients (46%) and a better response to the solely psychological
intervention in anxious (75%) vs. non-anxious (38%) patients. There was no
significant main effect of the MDD anxious/non-anxious subtype (F(1,30)=.78,
p=.782, ηp² =.003), nor a main effect of treatment group (F(1,30)=0, p=.989, ηp²
=0; Figure 4).

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Results

Figure 4| The results of a secondary analysis are displayed which stratified our primary outcome
by anxious distress features, the most frequent major depressive disorder (MDD) subtype in our
trial (n=21 out of n=35, Structured Clinical Interview for DSM5). Plotted are post-treatment BDIII estimated marginal means of MDD patients with and without anxious distress in both treatment
groups (fMRI neurofeedback group: n=19; psychological intervention group: n=16). Covariates
appearing in the model are evaluated at the estimated baseline BDI-II value of 28.6 points.

In Supplementary Table 2, we also explored baseline differences between
randomised anxious and non-anxious distress subtype MDD patients on clinical
and demographic measures to determine whether our stratified analysis could
have been confounded by other clinical differences. There was no difference on
demographic variables, number of previous episodes, or baseline BDI-II scores, or
current effective antidepressant medication. Between completers, there was also
no difference in engagement with the therapeutic strategies. As one would predict
43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Results

from the association of anxiety and irritability/anger in DSM-5 diagnostic criteria
for anxiety disorders such as generalised anxiety disorder and posttraumatic stress
disorder, we found higher levels of current anger towards others in the anxious
compared

with

the

non-anxious

MDD

group

as

measured

on

our

psychopathological interview. Interestingly, there was no subtype difference in
the sum of self-blaming emotions score computed as a secondary outcome
measure using this interview. There were only 8 of 43 patients (19%) who did not
experience at least one self-blaming emotion (self-directed anger, selfcontempt/disgust, shame or guilt, or a combination of shame and guilt) to a
bothering degree, but this absence of self-blaming emotions was not associated
with anxious distress, on the contrary, there was a trend towards anxious distress
patients showing more consistent self-blaming emotions on our interview. This
indicates that both self- and other-blaming emotions were prominent in the
anxious distress subtype.

Change in connectivity on fMRI, self-esteem and engagement in treatment
Based on previous findings, where measures of self-esteem correlated with
changes in functional connectivity between the rSATL and the anterior subgenual
cingulate after rtfMRI neurofeedback training (Zahn et al., 2018), non-parametric
correlation analyses were conducted to explore this pattern in the rtfMRI
neurofeedback group (Table 7). Notably, no such correlation was found, a change
in connectivity between the rSATL and the posterior SC in guilt relative to
indignation was not associated with an increase in self-esteem in the patient
group. Interestingly, however, improvement in depression scores correlated with
an increase in self-esteem. Similarly, a positive correlation was found between
44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Results

increased self-esteem and engagement in treatment as assessed by the summed
frequency of use of treatment-specific psychological strategies throughout the
study in both intervention groups.

45

Table 3| Intervention group comparisons on pre-registered secondary outcome measures
MEASURE
PREPOSTcLDA EFFECT OF TIME
[sample size]
INTERVENTION
INTERVENTION
PSYCH&NFB
M

SD

PSYCH
M

SD

NFB
M

SD

BASELINE vs. FINAL
diff
[df]
7.27
[75]

SE

cLDA EFFECT OF GROUP

PSYCH vs. NFB

p

95%
t
d
diff
SE
p
95%
t
d
CI
[df]
CI
MADRS
22.84
6.97
15.56 6.38 14.37 6.55
1.98 .00*
3.33
3.68
.85
1.19 2.29 .60 -3.37
.52
.12
[PRE: 43; POST: 35]
to
[75]
to
11.22
5.76
QUIDS-SR16
16.79
6.53
10.88 6.53 10.16 4.41
5.92 1.67 .00*
2.58
3.53
.82
.72 1.94 .71 -3.15
.37
.09
[PRE: 43; POST: 35]
[75]
to
[75]
to
9.25
4.58
POMS 2 Depression10.91
4.47
7.81
4.59
7.21
5.67
3.09 1.41 .03*
.29
2.20
.51
.60 1.63 .71 -2.65
.37
.09
Dejection Scale
[75]
to
[75]
to
[PRE: 43; POST: 35]
5.90
3.85
Rosenberg
20.60
3.49
24.19 4.15 24.58 5.26 -3.59 1.20 .00*
-5.98
-2.97
-.69
-.39 1.40 .78 -3.17 -.28 -.06
Self-Esteem Scale
[75]
to
[75]
to
[PRE: 43; POST: 35]
-1.18
2.39
Implicit Self-Blame
.00
39.00
-.28
.36
-.05
.39
.29
.11 .01*
.06
2.53
.59
-.23
.13 .08
-.49
-1.8 -.42
Contempt-Anger
[73]
to
[73]
to
[PRE: 41; POST: 35]
.51
.03
Implicit Self-Blame
.32
38.00
.24
.42
.24
.47
.08
.12
.50
-.16
.68
.16
.00
.13 .98
-.27
-.03 -.01
Contempt-Anxiety
[70]
to
[70]
to
[PRE: 38; POST: 35]
.32
.26
Agency-Incongruent
15.25
16.85
10.76 14.97 10.23 17.59 4.48 4.88 .36
-5.25
.92
.21
.53 5.66 .93 -10.7
.09
.02
Self-Blame
[75]
to
[75]
to
[PRE: 43; POST: 35]
14.21
11.80
*=significant at p=.05, 2-sided. Between-group Cohen’s d scores were computed from t-values and degrees of freedom (Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1991) of the differences
between groups. Mean differences and 95% confidence intervals were taken from cLDA models for differences between post- vs pre-training. Implicit self-blame was
measured using the BIAT. Agency-incongruent self-blame was measured using the modified version of the VMST. PSYCH = psychological intervention group, NFB =
rtfMRI neurofeedback group. CI = confidence interval, M = mean, SD = standard deviation, SE = standard error, diff = difference of means, df = degrees of freedom, d =
Cohen’s d.

46

Table 4| Intervention group comparisons on pre-registered secondary outcome measures (cont.)
MEASURE [sample
MANNASYMP.
EXACT
MEDIAN
RANGE
size]
WHITNEY
SIG.
SIG.
U
PSYCH
NFB
PSYCH
NFB

MINIMUM

PSYCH

Observer-Rated CGI
129.00
.376
.461
2.00
2.00
2.00
3.00
2.00
Post-Intervention
[35; NFB: 19; PSYCH: 16]
Participant-Rated CGI
139.50
.658
.683
2.50
2.00
4.00
4.00
1.00
Post-Intervention
[35; NFB: 19; PSYCH: 16]
Withdrawal Rates
218.50
.635
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
throughout trial
[43; NFB: 22; PSYCH: 21]
Withdrawal Rates after
221.00
.582
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
first treatment session
[43; NFB: 22; PSYCH: 21]
Adverse Events
208.00
.352
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
throughout trial
[43; NFB: 22; PSYCH: 21]
Adverse Events after first
219.50
.527
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
treatment session
[43; NFB: 22; PSYCH: 21]
Asymp. Sig.= 2-tailed; Exact Sig.= 2*(1-tailed Sig.). PSYCH = psychological intervention group, NFB = rtfMRI neurofeedback training group.

MAXIMUM

NFB

PSYCH

NFB

2.00

4.00

5.00

1.00

5.00

5.00

0.00

1.00

1.00

0.00

1.00

1.00

0.00

1.00

1.00

0.00

1.00

1.00

47

Table 5| Intervention group comparisons on pre-registered secondary outcome measures (cont.)
MEASURE
PREPOST[sample size]
INTERVENTION
INTERVENTION
PSYCH
NFB
PSYCH
NFB
Md

Min

Max

Md

Min

Max

Md

Min

Max

Md

Min

NON-PARAMETRIC COMPARISONS
BETWEEN-GROUP
FOR POST-PRE
Max

Chi-square
Median
Test
.12

n

POST vs. PRE

p

Wilcoxonn
p
Standardiz
ed
Participant-Rated
8.5
7.0 10.0 8.5
4.5 10.0 5.0
2.0
9.0
4.0
1.0
9.0
34
.73
-4.84
35
<.0001
Self-Blame
(reduced in
[PRE:39; POST:35]
32/35)
Observer-Rated
2.0
.0
7.0
2.0
.0
7.0
1.0
.0
4.0
1.0
.0
5.0
.02
35
.90
-3.97
35
<.0001
Self-Blame
(reduced in
[PRE:43; POST:35]
27/35)
Participant-rated self-blame scores are based on the mean of two autobiographical events per subject; Observer-rated self-blame was defined as per trial register as the sum of
all self-blaming emotion scores (guilt/shame, self-directed anger, and self-disgust/contempt/hate/loathing, each of these 3 emotion scores is scored on a scale from 0=absent,
1=mild/minimal, 2=moderate, 3=overgeneralised and severe, resulting in a minimum sum score of 0 and maximum sum score of 9) are based on the moral emotion
addendum of the AMDP Psychopathology Interview questions on depression (Faehndrich & Stieglitz, 1997); Zahn et al., 2015b). PSYCH = psychological intervention group,
NFB = rtfMRI neurofeedback group. Mdn = Median, Min = Minimum, Max = Maximum, df = degrees of freedom.

Table 6| Post-training vs pre-training comparison of pre-registered secondary outcome measure rSATL – posterior SC connectivity on fMRI
MEASURE [sample size]
PREPOSTREPEATED MEASURES ANOVA
TRAINING
TRAINING
NFB
M
.29

NFB
SD
.54

M
.16

TIME
SD
.37

F
.29

CONDITION
p
.87

F
.43

TIMExCONDITION

P
.52

F
p
Guilt: rSATL-SC regression
6.40
.02*
coefficient: Cohen’s d
Indignation: rSATL-SC
.15
.46
.24
.25
regression coefficient: Cohen’s d
*=significant at p=.05, 2-sided. NFB = rtfMRI neurofeedback group, rSATL-SC = right superior anterior temporal lobe - posterior subgenual cortex. n=18 with complete
data.

48

Table 7| Secondary correlation analyses

Spearman's rho

Rosenberg difference score [post-pre] Correlation
Coefficient

rSATL-SC connectivity,
rSATL-SC connectivity,
Rosenberg difference BDI-II reduction in Frequency of strategy difference in Cohen's d, guilt difference in Cohen' s d,
score [post-pre]
percent [post-pre]
use since visit 2
vs indignation[post-pre]
guilt [post-pre]
**
*
1.000
0.197
0.225
-.702
.385

Sig. (2-tailed)
N
BDI-II reduction in percent [postpre]

Correlation
Coefficient
Sig. (2-tailed)
N

Frequency of strategy use since visit 2 Correlation
Coefficient
Sig. (2-tailed)
N
rSATL-SC connectivity, difference in Correlation
Cohen's d, guilt vs indignation [post- Coefficient
pre]
Sig. (2-tailed)
N
rSATL-SC connectivity, difference in Correlation
Cohen' s d, guilt [post-pre]
Coefficient
Sig. (2-tailed)
N

0.000

0.022

0.434

0.370

35

35

35

18

18

-.702**

1.000

-0.241

-0.182

-0.214

0.164

0.470

0.394

0.000
35

35

35

18

18

.385*

-0.241

1.000

0.260

0.048

0.022

0.164

0.298

0.850

35

35

35

18

18

0.197

-0.182

0.260

1.000

.472*

0.434

0.470

0.298

0.048

18

18

18

18

18

0.225

-0.214

0.048

.472*

1.000

0.370

0.394

0.850

0.048

18

18

18

18

18

**Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). *Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). Difference scores were computed by subtracting post- vs pretreatment scores.

49

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Discussion

Discussion
Discussion of main findings
This single-blind, randomised, controlled pilot trial investigated the
clinical potential of a novel rtfMRI neurofeedback protocol compared to the
therapeutic effects of a newly designed self-guided psychological intervention in
early treatment-resistant MDD. It was hypothesised that patients randomised to
the rtfMRI neurofeedback group show a reduction in depressive symptoms and
self-blame while exhibiting an increase in self-worth compared to the
psychological intervention group. Furthermore, it was proposed that patients
undergoing rtfMRI neurofeedback training show a decreased functional
connectivity between the rSATL and the posterior SC post-treatment compared to
pre-treatment. Decreased functional connectivity between the rSATL and
posterior SC region was predicted to be associated with a reduction in depressive
symptoms in the rtfMRI neurofeedback group.
The results demonstrated that both interventions were safe, with no
relevant adverse events occurring in either group. There was a strong effect size
for patients’ improvement on self-rated and observer-rated depression measures
with response rates above 55% in both intervention groups. Thus, the safety and
overall clinical benefits of the rtfMRI neurofeedback intervention in MDD is in
keeping with previous studies (Linden et al., 2012, Mehler et al., 2018, Young et
al., 2014, Young et al., 2017a). This is particularly remarkable as the NeuroMooD
protocol asked participants to engage with negative rather than positive emotions,
opposed to previous studies (Linden et al., 2012, Mehler et al., 2018, Young et al.,
2014, Young et al., 2017a). Contrary to the first hypothesis, no difference was

50

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Discussion

found between the rtfMRI neurofeedback and the psychological intervention
group on the primary outcome measure (BDI-II). The second prediction was
confirmed as the rtfMRI neurofeedback training resulted in a decrease in
functional connectivity between the rSATL and the posterior SC for guilt relative
to indignation. Contrary to the third hypothesis, no relationship was found
between connectivity changes and the changes in depressive symptoms after three
sessions of rtfMRI neurofeedback training.
Various considerations need to be taken into account as to why no group
differences were found on primary and secondary outcome measures. One
possibility might be that the improvements observed in both intervention groups
were due to spontaneous remission or placebo-like effects instead of being the
result of the experimental treatment. This is possible, yet unlikely to be the only
explanatory factor for this finding as the placebo response rate in MDD is
generally found to be lower, usually around 30% (Walsh, Seidman, Sysko
&Gould, 2002), well below the >55% response rate demonstrated in both
treatment groups in the NeuroMooD trial. Furthermore, the NeuroMooD protocol
aimed at minimising the risk of including spontaneously remitting patients by
including MDD patients only if they were stable, i.e. with no improvement, in
symptoms for at least six weeks before randomisation into the study, and by
restricting inclusion to patients with early treatment-resistance and recurrent
MDD. Lastly, the frequency of how often participants used the psychological
strategies between treatment visits was found to positively correlate with an
increase in self-esteem in both intervention groups, which further argues against
spontaneous remission as the sole explanation for the observed findings. Another
possible explanation why rtfMRI neurofeedback did not show superiority over the

51

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Discussion

psychological intervention might be because the rtfMRI neurofeedback
intervention provided no added value in reducing symptoms of depression in early
treatment-resistant MDD compared with the strong effects of the self-guided
psychological intervention. While this explanation cannot be ruled out, the
secondary data analysis suggests that rtfMRI neurofeedback training is superior to
the psychological intervention in the non-anxious distress subtype of MDD. This
finding will, however, require further confirmation in future studies.
The observed rtfMRI neurofeedback training-induced reduction in
functional connectivity between the rSATL and the posterior SC for guilt relative
to indignation demonstrates that MDD patients were able to successfully modulate
their brain connectivity as guided by the rtfMRI neurofeedback signal. The lack of
association between functional connectivity changes and improvement in the
severity of depressive symptoms is in keeping with the limited clinical benefit in
the rtfMRI neurofeedback group overall. Considering that the majority of MDD
patients in the rtfMRI neurofeedback group were of the anxious distress subtype,
the neural fMRI target may be irrelevant for the anxious distress subtype of MDD;
a hypothesis that needs to be examined in future larger studies.

Limitations
The following potential limitations of the NeuroMooD trial need to be
considered: firstly, the study might have been underpowered and, therefore,
unable to detect a clinically meaningful difference between the two intervention
groups. Nevertheless, the effect sizes for non-superiority of the rtfMRI
neurofeedback group were so small, that even a large sample would have been
unable to find differences between groups. Furthermore, the trial’s sample size
52

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Discussion

was comparable to other randomised clinical trials investigating rtfMRI in MDD
(Mehler et al., 2018; Young et al., 2017a). Our secondary data analyses stratifying
for subtype were limited by not being pre-registered and by the relative scarcity of
non-anxious MDD patients and thus need reproducing in a larger sample.
Contrary to previous rtfMRI neurofeedback studies in MDD (Young et al.,
2014, Young et al., 2017a) that included medication-free patients, around half of
MDD patients in each group participating in the NeuroMooD trial were taking
antidepressant medication. Despite the possibility that antidepressant medication
may have negatively impacted on the participants’ performance during the rtfMRI
neurofeedback training, Linden et al.’s, (2012) pioneering rtfMRI neurofeedback
study targeted a sample on stable antidepressant medication comparable to
NeuroMooD and demonstrated the superiority of the rtfMRI neurofeedback
relative to the control condition. Finally, and opposite to Young et al. (2017a), the
NeuroMooD study was limited by lacking a rtfMRI neurofeedback control arm,
which was deliberate in order to probe its clinical usefulness against a cheaper
intervention. Had we found rtfMRI superiority over the control intervention, this
would have led to some difficulties in ruling out non-specific placebo-like effects
of neurofeedback. The fact that there was no superiority of rtfMRI overall in our
study, suggests that being in a scanner environment itself did not have strong
Placebo-like effects. Furthermore, control neurofeedback interventions are
difficult to design and interpret. Young et al. (2017a) used the left intraparietal
sulcus signal in the control neurofeedback condition which is not relevant for
recalling positive emotions, the task given to participants. This mismatch between
neurofeedback signal and psychological instructions could have contributed to the
inferiority of the control intervention.

53

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroMooD trial - Discussion

Conclusion
Both NeuroMooD interventions were demonstrated to be safe and resulted
in a reduction in symptom severity of 46% and a treatment response of more than
55% in the study sample of current and insufficiently remitted, early treatmentresistant MDD. Although a contribution of placebo-like and non-specific effects
cannot be ruled out, it is likely that the self-guided psychological intervention has
had additional specific therapeutic effects. Our secondary data analysis suggests
that self-blame-selective rtfMRI neurofeedback training is of superior benefit in
non-anxious MDD patients compared with the solely psychological intervention,
which needs further confirmation in a larger sample.

Acknowledgements
We are very grateful to all participants of this study and their time and effort. We
are also grateful to our funders: the NARSAD independent investigator award to
RZ awarded by the Brain & Behavior Research Foundation, the IoPPN at King’s
College London as well as the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental
Health at the South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust. The views
expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the
NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care. We are grateful to Dr Karen
Lythe, Professor Galen Bodenhausen, and Professor Nicolas Rüsch for their
important contribution to the design of the BIAT task.

54

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E., & Teasdale, J. D. (1978). Learned helplessness in
humans: critique and reformulation. J Abnorm Psychol, 87(1), 49-74.
Altman, E. G., Hedeker, D., Peterson, J. L., & Davis, J. M. (1997). The Altman
Self-Rating Mania Scale. Biological Psychiatry, 42(10), 948-955.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
Bado, P., Engel, A., de Oliveira-Souza, R., Bramati, I. E., Paiva, F. F., Basilio, R., . . . Moll,
J. (2014). Functional dissociation of ventral frontal and dorsomedial default mode
network components during resting state and emotional autobiographical recall.
Human Brain Mapping, 35(7), 3302-3313. doi:10.1002/hbm.22403
Basilio, R., Garrido, G. J., Sato, J. R., Hoefle, S., Melo, B. R., Pamplona, F. A., . . . Moll, J.
(2015). FRIEND Engine Framework: a real time neurofeedback client-server system
for neuroimaging studies. Front Behav Neurosci, 9, 3. doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2015.00003
Beck, A. T., Rush, A., Shaw, B., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive Therapy of
Depression. New York: The Guilford Press.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for the Beck
Depression Inventory- San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Bernstein, D. P. & Fink, L. (1998). Childhood Trauma Questionnaire. A
retrospective self report. Manual. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation,
Harcourt Brace & Company.
Brugha, T., & Conroy, R. (1985). Categories of Depression: Reported Life Events
in a Controlled Design. British Journal of Psychiatry, 147(6), 641-646.
doi:10.1192/bjp.147.6.641
Busner, J., & Targum, S. D. (2007). The clinical global impressions scale:
55

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

applying a research tool in clinical practice. Psychiatry (Edgmont), 4(7), 28-37.
Coffman, C. J., Edelman, D., & Woolson, R. F. (2016). To condition or not condition?
Analysing 'change' in longitudinal randomised controlled trials. BMJ Open, 6(12),
e013096. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-013096
Faehndrich, E., Stieglitz, R.D., 1997. Das AMDP-System, Manual zur
Dokumentation psychiatrischer Befunde, 6th ed. Hogrefe Verlag, Goettingen.
Feise, R. J. (2002). Do multiple outcome measures require p-value adjustment?
BMC Med Res Methodol, 2, 8.
First, M. B. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for the DSM (SCID). In R. L.
Cautin & S. O. Lilienfeld (Eds), The Encyclopedia of Clinical Psychology.
Chichester: Wiley. doi:10.1002/9781118625392.wbecp351
Fischer, A. H., & Roseman, I. J. (2007). Beat them or ban them: the characteristics and social
functions of anger and contempt. J Pers Soc Psychol, 93(1), 103-115.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.93.1.103
Fisher, L. D., Dixon, D. O., Herson, J., Frankowski, R. K., Hearron, M.S., Peace,
K. E. (1990). Intention to treat in clinical trials. In K. E. Peace (Ed.), Statistical issues
in drug research and development (pp. 331-350). New York: Marcel Dekker.
Forty, L., Kelly, M., Jones, L., Jones, I., Barnes, E., Caesar, S., Fraser, C., Gordon-Smith, K.,
Griffiths, E., Craddock, N. & Smith, D. J. (2010). Reducing the Hypomania Checklist
(HCL-32) to a 16-item version. J Affect Disord, 124(3), 351-356.
Gilbert, P. (2009a). An Introduction to compassion focused therapy. Advances in
Psychiatric Treatment,15, 199-208.
Gilbert, P. (2009b). The Compassionate Mind. London: Constable-Robinson.
Gilbert P. & Procter S. (2006). Compassionate mind training for people with high

56

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

shame and self-criticism: A pilot study of a group therapy approach. Clinical
Psychology and Psychotherapy,13, 353-379.
Green, S., Lambon Ralph, M. A., Moll, J., Deakin, J. F., & Zahn, R. (2012). Guilt-selective
functional disconnection of anterior temporal and subgenual cortices in major
depressive

disorder.

Arch

Gen

Psychiatry,

69(10),

1014-1021.

doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2012.135
Green, S., Moll, J., Deakin, J. F., Hulleman, J., & Zahn, R. (2013). Proneness to decreased
negative emotions in major depressive disorder when blaming others rather than
oneself. Psychopathology, 46(1), 34-44. doi:10.1159/000338632
Greenwald, A. G., & Farnham, S. D. (2000). Using the implicit association test to measure
self-esteem and self-concept. J Pers Soc Psychol, 79(6), 1022-1038.
Gupta, S. K. (2011). Intention-to-treat concept: A review. Perspect Clin Res, 2(3),
109-112. doi:10.4103/22293485.83221
Hsieh, S., Schubert, S., Hoon, C., Mioshi, E., & Hodges, J. R. (2013). Validation
of the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination III in Frontotemporal Dementia and
Alzheimer's Disease. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 36(3-4), 242-250.
doi:10.1159/000351671
Keller, M. B., Lavori, P. W., Friedman, B., Nielsen, E., Endicott, J., McDonald-Scott, P., &
Andreasen, N. C. (1987). The Longitudinal Interval Follow-up Evaluation. A
comprehensive method for assessing outcome in prospective longitudinal studies.
Arch Gen Psychiatry, 44(6), 540-548.
Linden, D. E., Habes, I., Johnston, S. J., Linden, S., Tatineni, R., Subramanian, L., . . .
Goebel, R. (2012). Real-time self-regulation of emotion networks in patients with
depression. PLoS One, 7(6), e38115. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0038115

57

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lythe, K. E., Moll, J., Gethin, J. A., Workman, C. I., Green, S., Lambon Ralph, M. A., . . .
Zahn, R. (2015). Self-blame-Selective Hyperconnectivity Between Anterior Temporal
and Subgenual Cortices and Prediction of Recurrent Depressive Episodes. JAMA
Psychiatry, 72(11), 1119-1126. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.1813
McNair, D., Lorr, M., Dropplemen, L. (1971). Edits manual: Profile of mood
states. San Diego: Educational and Industrial Testing Services.
Mehler, D. M. A., Sokunbi, M. O., Habes, I., Barawi, K., Subramanian, L., Range, M., . . .
Linden, D. E. J. (2018). Targeting the affective brain-a randomized controlled trial of
real-time

fMRI

neurofeedback

in

patients

with

depression.

Neuropsychopharmacology. doi:10.1038/s41386-018-0126-5
Moll, J., Weingartner, J. H., Bado, P., Basilio, R., Sato, J. R., Melo, B. R., . . . Zahn, R.
(2014). Voluntary enhancement of neural signatures of affiliative emotion using
FMRI neurofeedback. PLoS One, 9(5), e97343. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0097343
Montgomery, S. A. & Asberg, M. (1979). A new depression scale designed to be
sensitive to change. Br J Psychiatry, 134, 382-389.
Nosek, B. (2005, May 27). SAS MACRO FOR SCORING THE IMPLICIT ASSOCIATION
TEST.

Retrieved

from

http://projectimplicit.net/nosek/papers/scoringalgorithm.sas.txt
O'Connor, L. E., Berry, J. W., Weiss, J., & Gilbert, P. (2002). Guilt, fear, submission, and
empathy in depression. J Affect Disord, 71(1-3), 19-27.
Roseman, I. J., Wiest, C., & Swartz, T. S. (1994). Phenomenology, behaviors, and
goals differentiate discrete emotions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
67(2), 206-221. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.67.2.206
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

58

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (1991). Essentials of behavioral research: Methods and data
analysis (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw Hill.
Rush, A. J., Trivedi, M. H., Ibrahim, H. M., Carmody, T. J., Arnow, B., Klein, D.
N., Markowith, J.C., Ninan, P. T., Kornstein, S., Manber, R., Thase, M. E., Kocsis, J.
H., & Keller, M. B. (2003). The 16-Item Quick Inventory of Depressive
Symptomatology (QIDS), clinician rating (QIDS-C), and self-report (QIDS-SR): a
psychometric evaluation in patients with chronic major depression. Biol Psychiatry,
54(5), 573-583.
Sato, J. R., Basilio, R., Paiva, F. F., Garrido, G. J., Bramati, I. E., Bado, P., . . . Moll, J.
(2013). Real-time fMRI pattern decoding and neurofeedback using FRIEND: an FSLintegrated BCI toolbox. PLoS One, 8(12), e81658. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0081658
Sheehan, D. V., Lecrubier, Y., Sheehan, K. H., Amorim, P., Janavs, J., Weiller,
E., Herqueta, T., Baker, R. & Dunbar, G. C. (1998). The Mini-International
Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a structured
diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM-IV and ICD-10. J Clin Psychiatry, 59 Suppl
20, 22-33.
Sriram, N., & Greenwald, A. G. (2009). The Brief Implicit Association Test. Exp Psychol,
56(4), 283-294. doi:10.1027/1618-3169.56.4.283
Stoeckel, L. E., Garrison, K. A., Ghosh, S., Wighton, P., Hanlon, C. A., Gilman, J. M., . . .
Evins, A. E. (2014). Optimizing real time fMRI neurofeedback for therapeutic
discovery

and

development.

Neuroimage

Clin,

5,

245-255.

doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2014.07.002
Sulzer, J., Haller, S., Scharnowski, F., Weiskopf, N., Birbaumer, N., Blefari, M. L., . . .
Sitaram, R. (2013). Real-time fMRI neurofeedback: progress and challenges.
Neuroimage, 76, 386-399. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.03.033

59

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Tangney, J. P., Stuewig, J., & Mashek, D. J. (2007). Moral emotions and moral behavior.
Annu Rev Psychol, 58, 345-372. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.56.091103.070145
Teare, M. D., Dimairo, M., Shephard, N., Hayman, A., Whitehead, A., & Walters,
S. J. (2014). Sample size requirements to estimate key design parameters from
external pilot randomised controlled trials: a simulation study. Trials, 15, 264.
doi:10.1186/1745-6215-15-264
Thibault, R. T., Lifshitz, M., & Raz, A. (2016). The self-regulating brain and neurofeedback:
Experimental

science

and

clinical

promise.

Cortex,

74,

247-261.

doi:10.1016/j.cortex.2015.10.024
Walsh, B. T., Seidman, S. N., Sysko, R., & Gould, M. (2002). Placebo response in studies of
major depression: variable, substantial, and growing. JAMA, 287(14), 1840-1847.
Wastling, S. J., & Barker, G. J. (2015). Designing hyperbolic secant excitation pulses to
reduce signal dropout in gradient-echo echo-planar imaging. Magn Reson Med, 74(3),
661-672. doi:10.1002/mrm.25444
Weiskopf, N. (2012). Real-time fMRI and its application to neurofeedback. Neuroimage,
62(2), 682-692. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.009
Weissman, M. M., Wickramaratne, P., Adams, P., Wolk, S., Verdeli, H., & Olfson, M.
(2000). Brief screening for family psychiatric history: The family history screen.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 57(7), 675-682. doi:10-1001/pubs.Arch Gen
Psychiatry-ISSN-0003-990x-57-7-yoa8214
Young, K. D., Misaki, M., Harmer, C. J., Victor, T., Zotev, V., Phillips, R., . . . Bodurka, J.
(2017a).

Real-Time

Functional

Magnetic

Resonance

Imaging

Amygdala

Neurofeedback Changes Positive Information Processing in Major Depressive
Disorder. Biol Psychiatry, 82(8), 578-586. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.03.013

60

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Young, K. D., Siegle, G. J., Misaki, M., Zotev, V., Phillips, R., Drevets, W. C., & Bodurka, J.
(2018a). Altered task-based and resting-state amygdala functional connectivity
following real-time fMRI amygdala neurofeedback training in major depressive
disorder. Neuroimage Clin, 17, 691-703. doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2017.12.004
Young, K. D., Siegle, G. J., Zotev, V., Phillips, R., Misaki, M., Yuan, H., . . . Bodurka, J.
(2017b). Randomized Clinical Trial of Real-Time fMRI Amygdala Neurofeedback for
Major Depressive Disorder: Effects on Symptoms and Autobiographical Memory
Recall. Am J Psychiatry, 174(8), 748-755. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.16060637
Young, K. D., Zotev, V., Phillips, R., Misaki, M., Drevets, W. C., & Bodurka, J. (2018b).
Amygdala real-time functional magnetic resonance imaging neurofeedback for major
depressive disorder: A review. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci, 72(7), 466-481.
doi:10.1111/pcn.12665
Young, K. D., Zotev, V., Phillips, R., Misaki, M., Yuan, H., Drevets, W. C., & Bodurka, J.
(2014). Real-time FMRI neurofeedback training of amygdala activity in patients with
major

depressive

disorder.

PLoS

One,

9(2),

e88785.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0088785
Yuan, H., Young, K. D., Phillips, R., Zotev, V., Misaki, M., & Bodurka, J. (2014). Restingstate functional connectivity modulation and sustained changes after real-time
functional magnetic resonance imaging neurofeedback training in depression. Brain
Connect, 4(9), 690-701. doi:10.1089/brain.2014.0262
Zahn, R., De Oliveira-Souza, R., & Moll, J. (2013). Moral Emotions. In J. Armony & P.
Vuilleumier (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Human Affective Neuroscience (pp.
491-508).

Cambridge:

Cambridge

University

Press.

doi:10.1017/CBO9780511843716.027
Zahn, R., Lythe, K. E., Gethin, J. A., Green, S., Deakin, J. F., Workman, C., & Moll, J.

61

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(2015a). Negative emotions towards others are diminished in remitted major
depression. Eur Psychiatry, 30(4), 448-453. doi:10.1016/j.eurpsy.2015.02.005
Zahn, R., Lythe, K. E., Gethin, J. A., Green, S., Deakin, J. F., Young, A. H., & Moll, J.
(2015b). The role of self-blame and worthlessness in the psychopathology of major
depressive disorder. J Affect Disord, 186, 337-341. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2015.08.001
Zahn, R., Weingartner, J. H., Basilio, R., Bado, P., Mattos, P., Sato, J. R., De Oliveira-Souza,
R., & Moll, J. (2018). Blame-rebalance fMRI neurofeedback in major depressive
disorder: A randomised proof-of-concept trial. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Zotev, V., Phillips, R., Yuan, H., Misaki, M., & Bodurka, J. (2014). Self-regulation of human
brain activity using simultaneous real-time fMRI and EEG neurofeedback.
Neuroimage, 85 Pt 3, 985-995. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.04.126
Zotev, V., Yuan, H., Misaki, M., Phillips, R., Young, K. D., Feldner, M. T., & Bodurka, J.
(2016). Correlation between amygdala BOLD activity and frontal EEG asymmetry
during real-time fMRI neurofeedback training in patients with depression.
Neuroimage Clin, 11, 224-238. doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2016.02.003.

62

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Materials
Supplementary Methods
Brief Implicit Association Test Design and Analysis
The self-contempt Brief Implicit Association Test (BIAT), an experimental measure
developed by R.Z. and Dr Lythe in collaboration with Prof Rüsch and Prof Bodenhausen,
was employed as an indirect measure of self-contempt biases, evaluating the association of
contempt or disgust with oneself relative to others. Further, we included an established BIAT
(Sriram & Greenwald, 2009) used to assess implicit self-esteem. The rationale for the
development of this computerised task was based on the endeavour to measure self-contempt
biases without the participants’ awareness of what the task captures. This strategy is meant to
prevent distortions in the participants’ response. The task design is based a similar test, the
Implicit Association Test (IAT; Greenwald, McGhee & Schwartz, 1998), which has been
validated to measure implicit self-esteem (Greenwald & Farnham, 2000).
The BIAT uses complementary pairs of categories and attributes which the participant
needs to classify. The speed in which participants respond is reflective of the strength of the
association within the two pairs of categories that are paired on the same response key
(Greenwald & Farnham, 2000; Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998). Specifically,
participants are instructed to decide with a response if two sets of items match an associated
category-attribute pair and are asked to give a different response should the item pairs not
match (Greenwald & Farnham, 2000). Participants respond as quickly as possible by pressing
left and right keys on a computer keyboard (Greenwald & Farnham, 2000). As
aforementioned, the automatic association between a category (e.g. self) and an attribute (e.g.
contemptuous) is assessed by calculating differences in speed between two conditions. In
condition 1, words indicative of ‘self’, i.e. the participant, and words relating to contempt
share the same response key (i.e. require the pressing of the right-side key). In condition 2,

63

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

words that address the ‘self’ (i.e. the participant) and words that relate to anxiety share the
same response key (here, the left key needs to be pressed).
The BIAT consists of two experimental tasks that assess implicit self-contempt,
whereby the categories consist of self-agency, other-agency, contempt and a non-focal
category which is either anxiety or anger. In the implicit self-esteem task, the categories ‘self’
and ‘other’ are attributed to ‘good’ (positive valence) and ‘bad’ (negative valence).
Greenwald et al. (2002) emphasise that this task design, due to its use of complementary pairs
of concepts and attributes, is limited to measuring the relative strength of pairs of associations
rather than the absolute strength of single associations. The authors conclude, however, that
the task is meaningful in practice due to the opposing, yet complementary quality of many
socially meaningful categories, i.e. good and bad (Greenwald et al., 2002; Greenwald &
Farnham, 2000).
BIAT

data

was

exported

(https://www.millisecond.com/products/Inquisit3/)

and

from
analysed

Inquisit
with

SPSS

3
24

(https://www.ibm.com/analytics/spss-statistics-software). Scoring algorithms and analyses
strategies were based on the improved scoring algorithm created by Nosek (2005, May 27).
Trials with an error rate of higher 30% of 32 trials were excluded from the analyses;
similarly, trials, where more than 10% of participant responses had a latency of less than 300
milliseconds, were excluded. Self-contempt bias was measured by subtracting the mean value
of latency for the category ‘self and contempt’ (16 trials) minus the mean value of the latency
for the category ‘other and contempt’ (16 trials), divided by the standard deviation of latency
computed for all 32 trials. Hereby, a more positive total score is understood as being
indicative of a higher degree of self-contempt.
The Contempt vs. Anxiety BIAT consisted of four categories: Self-agency, Otheragency, Contempt, [Anxiety] as non-focal category. In Block 1, participants pressed the left

64

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

key for “Participant acts” OR “Contempt”. They pressed the right key for everything else. In
Block 2, they had to press the left key for “Friend acts” OR “Contempt” and pressed the right
key for everything else. Stimuli presented for categorisation were: ”Participant acts”,
“Participant does”, “Participant makes”, “Participant causes” as examples of Self-agency.
The same stimuli, but with the best friend’s name were used for other-agency. “Hate”,
“disgust”, “contemptuous”, “contempt” were used as examples of the Contempt category.
“Anxiety”, “anxious”, “fear”, “scared” were used as examples of the Anxiety category. The
Contempt vs. Anger BIAT was constructed in the same way, only replacing Anxiety with the
Anger category and using “anger”, “angry”, “fury”, “furious” as examples for categorisation.

65

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Results
Supplementary Table 1| Trial schedule chart
Initial
Patient
Contact

[email &
phone]
Oral informed
consent
Introduction
to the clinical
trial
Assessment of
eligibility
Written
informed
consent
Clinical &
neuropsychological
assessment
Psychological
Intervention
only
rtfMRI
neurofeedback
training
Mood
assessment
Risk
assessment

Pre-Trial
Assessment
Visit 1

Treatment
Session
Visit 2

Treatment
Session
Visit 3

Treatment
Session
Visit 4

Post-Trial
Assessment
Visit 5

[day 0]

[1-13 days
after visit
1]

[7-13 days
after visit
2]

[7-13 days
after visit
3]

[7-13 days
after visit
4]

✓
✓
✓

✓
✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

66

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Table 2| Comparison of anxious and non-anxious distress subgroups
Measure

Anxious MDD

Non-anxious

Statistic

Significance

MDD
Years of education

17.3±2.6

17.3±3.4

t=0.02

.98

Age

38.6±10.2

34.2±8.4

t=-1.4

.16

Gender

22/28 female

12/15 female

CC=.02

.91

(79%)

(80%)

3.5

5

Median

.74

Number of previous MDEs
(median)

Test
ꭓ2=.11

Current antidepressant

15/28 (53.6%)

7/15 (47.7%)

CC=.07

.67

t=-.7

.46

medication at therapeutic dose (n)
BDI-II at Baseline
Frequency of therapeutic

29.9±9.6

27.8±6.8

9.1±2.5

7.6±3.1

t=-1.4

.17

AMDP Anxiety (n)

19/28 (67.9%)

5/15 (33.3%)

CC=.32

.03

AMDP Anger towards others (n)

10/28 (35.7%)

0/15 (0.0%)

CC=.37

.008

Sum of self-blaming emotions

2.5

2

Median

.76

strategy use (m)

Test

score (median)

ꭓ2=.09
Any self-blaming emotion (n)

25/28 (89.3%)

10/15 (66.6%)

CC=.27

.07

Anxious distress features were defined on the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM5 for the current episode.
MDE = major depressive episode, MDD = major depressive disorder, BDI-II = Beck Depression Inventory-II;
m = mean, ± = standard deviation, [M-M] = Minimum-Maximum. CC=Contingency Coefficient in Crosstab
statistics. The frequency of therapeutic strategy use relied on completion and was collected in all n=35
completers (n=21 anxious MDD, n=14 non-anxious MDD). All other measures were collected at baseline in all
randomised patients (n=43, n=28 with and n=15 without anxious distress). Baseline psychopathological
measures (AMDP anxiety and anger towards others) were based on binarising scores for the past two weeks into
0=absent or mild or 1=moderate or severe as previously (Zahn et al., 2015b). The sum of self-blaming emotions
score on the AMDP was based on our secondary outcome measure as described above. The any self-blaming
emotion measure was based on identifying patients who had no self-blaming emotion to a moderate degree on
the moral emotion addendum to the AMDP (i.e. no self-directed anger, shame, guilt, or self-disgust/contempt).
Significance reflects 2-sided p-values or approximate significance for Contigency Coefficient statistics.

67

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 1: Display of the interface of the rtfMRI neurofeedback software FRIEND during a
data acquisition run (Basilio et al., 2015; Sato et al., 2013). During acquisition runs (run 1 and 4), participants
are presented with their guilt and indignation/anger cue words. Cue words refer to autobiographical memories of
events that trigger patients to experience feelings of self-blame or indignation/anger. During these runs,
participants are solely thinking about these events and are not using any psychological strategies to manage
associated feelings of self-blame. In-between the emotional conditions, participants are presented with numbers
which cue them to perform mental subtractions from a number displayed at the screen. The right panel displays
what the participant sees in the scanner, the left panel displays motion parameters and percent signal change in
the regions of interest.

68

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 2: Display of the interface of the rtfMRI neurofeedback software FRIEND during a
neurofeedback training run. In the scanner, participants are presented with their individualised guilt cue words
or subtraction blocks. In the guilt condition, a thermometer display containing a moving colour bar appears and
represents visual feedback of the patient’s functional connectivity patterns in real-time. During the rtMRI
neurofeedback runs (run 2 and 3), participants are asked to bring up the level of the thermometer by using
psychological strategies when thinking about autobiographical guilt-evoking events. The colour bar rises if
functional (hyper-)connectivity between the rSATL and posterior SC successfully decreases.

69

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 3| Consort Trial flow diagram
Phone screened for eligibility
E

(n=311)

N
R

Assessed for eligibility at visit 1

O

(n=71)

L

Excluded (n=28)

M

▪ Not meeting inclusion criteria
(n=28)
▪ Declined to participate (n=0)
▪ Other reasons (n=0)

E
N
T

Randomised (n=43)

ALLOCATION
Allocated to rtfMRI NF intervention
(n=22); ‘Intervention’ refers to a
minimum of 1of 3 allocated treatment
sessions
▪ Received allocated intervention
(n=21)
▪ Did not receive allocated intervention
(n=1; withdrew before visit 2 because
of feeling too unwell to participate)

Allocated to psychological intervention
(n=21)
▪ Received allocated intervention
(n=18)
▪ Did not receive allocated intervention
(n=3; 2 withdrawals before visit 2
because of feeling too unwell to
participate, 1 withdrawal before visit
2 due to time constraints)

FOLLOW-UP
Lost to follow-up (n=0)

Lost to follow-up (n=0)

Discontinued intervention (n=2; 2
withdrawals after visit 2, 1 due to
familial reasons, 1 due to occurrence
of insomnia after rtfMRI NF session)

Discontinued intervention (n=2; 1
exclusion after visit 2 due to worsening
of symptoms; 1 withdrawal after visit 3
due to financial reasons)
ANALYSIS

Analysed (n=19)

Analysed (n=16)

Excluded from analysis of primary
outcome measure (n=0)

Excluded from analysis of primary
outcome measure (n=0)

70

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 4| Neurofeedback Success: Thermometer Scale Position
THERMOMETER VALUE MEANS OF
NEUROFEEDBACK RUNS IN EACH SESSION
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
Session A
Run 2

Session A
Run 3

Session B
Run 2

Session B
Run 3

Session C
Run 2

Session C
Run 3

Supplementary Figure 4| NF participants were successful in controlling the neurofeedback thermometer on
average with positive feedback around the 50% mark of the thermometer scale (0-100% range). Participants’
neurofeedback success occurred already in the first session and was stable throughout further sessions with a
slight drop in the final active run. FRIEND’s moving target algorithm means that after successfully reducing
rSATL-posterior SC connectivity, it could be increasingly difficult to further successfully reduce it in
subsequent training runs.

71

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 4| Functional connectivity changes over training sessions

Supplementary Figure 5| Change in functional connectivity between rSATL and posterior SC in the guilt vs
indignation condition, measured as Cohen’s D for regression coefficient means with standard errors for time
series pre- and post-rtfMRI neurofeedback training in n=18 participants plotted for each neurofeedback session.

72

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004309; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary References

Basilio, R., Garrido, G. J., Sato, J. R., Hoefle, S., Melo, B. R., Pamplona, F. A., . . . Moll, J.
(2015). FRIEND Engine Framework: a real time neurofeedback client-server system
for neuroimaging studies. Front Behav Neurosci, 9, 3. doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2015.00003
Greenwald, A. G., Banaji, M. R., Rudman, L. A., Farnham, S. D., Nosek, B. A., & Mellott,
D. S. (2002). A unified theory of implicit attitudes, stereotypes, self-esteem, and selfconcept. Psychol Rev, 109(1), 3-25.
Greenwald, A. G., & Farnham, S. D. (2000). Using the implicit association test to measure
self-esteem and self-concept. J Pers Soc Psychol, 79(6), 1022-1038.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. (1998). Measuring individual
differences in implicit cognition: the implicit association test. J Pers Soc Psychol,
74(6), 1464-1480.
Nosek, B. (2005, May 27). SAS MACRO FOR SCORING THE IMPLICIT ASSOCIATION
TEST. Retrieved from http://projectimplicit.net/nosek/papers/scoringalgorithm.sas.txt
Sato, J. R., Basilio, R., Paiva, F. F., Garrido, G. J., Bramati, I. E., Bado, P., . . . Moll, J.
(2013). Real-time fMRI pattern decoding and neurofeedback using FRIEND: an FSLintegrated BCI toolbox. PLoS One, 8(12), e81658. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0081658
Sriram, N., & Greenwald, A. G. (2009). The Brief Implicit Association Test. Exp Psychol,
56(4), 283-294. doi:10.1027/1618-3169.56.4.283
Zahn, R., Lythe, K. E., Gethin, J. A., Green, S., Deakin, J. F., Young, A. H., & Moll, J.
(2015b). The role of self-blame and worthlessness in the psychopathology of major
depressive disorder. J Affect Disord, 186, 337-341. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2015.08.001

73

