medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Obstetrical safety indicators for preventing hospital harms: a scoping review protocol
Conway A, Reszel J, Walker MC, Grimshaw JM, Dunn SI.
Author affiliations:
1.
2.

Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (Conway A, Dunn Sl)
Better Outcomes Registry & Network (BORN), Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario - Ottawa Children's
Treatment Centre (CHEO-OCTC), Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (Conway A, Dunn Sl, Reszel J, Walker MC)
3. Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (Reszel, J)
4. Clinical Epidemiology Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (Grimshaw JM,
Walker MC)
5. School of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (Grimshaw JM,
Walker MC)
6. Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (Grimshaw JM)
7. School of Nursing, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (Dunn Sl)
8. Obstetrics, Maternal and Newborn Investigations (OMNI) Research Group, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (Walker MC)
9. Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Newborn Care, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(Walker MC)
10. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. (Walker MC)
Correspondence to: Dr. Aislinn Conway; aislinnconway@gmail.com
Abstract
Introduction
Optimizing the safety of obstetric patient care is a primary concern for many hospitals. Identifying performance
indicators that measure aspects of patient care processes related to preventable harms can present opportunities to
improve health systems.
In this paper, we present our protocol for a scoping review to identify performance indicators for obstetric safety.
We aim to identify a comprehensive list of obstetric safety indicators which may help reduce the number of
preventable patient harms, to summarize the data and to synthesize the results.
Methods and analysis
We will use the methodological framework described by Arksey and O’ Malley and further expanded by Levac. We
will search multiple electronic databases such as Medline, Embase, CINAHL and the Cochrane Library as well as
websites from professional bodies and other organisations, using an iterative search strategy. We will include
indicators that relate to preventable harms in the process of obstetric care.
Two reviewers will independently screen titles and abstracts of search results to determine eligibility for inclusion.
For records where eligibility is not clear, the reviewers will screen the full text version. If reviewers’ decisions
regarding eligibility differ, a third reviewer will review the full text record. Two reviewers will independently extract
data from records that meet our inclusion criteria using a standardized data collection form. We will narratively
describe quantitative data, such as the frequency with which indicators are identified, and conduct a thematic
analysis of the qualitative data. We will compile a comprehensive list of patient safety indicators identified during
our scoping review and organise them according to concepts that best suit the data such as the Donabedian model

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

or the Hospital Harm Framework. We will discuss the implications of the indicators for future research, clinical
practice and policy making.
We will report the conduct of the review using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and MetaAnalyses extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA ScR) Checklist.
Ethics and Dissemination
The sources of information included in this scoping review will be available to the public. Therefore, ethical review
for this research is not warranted. We will disseminate our research results using multiple modes of delivery such as
a peer-reviewed publication, conference presentations and stakeholder communications.
Keywords

Obstetrics, patient safety, performance indicators, prevention, hospital harms, scoping review,
protocol.

Strengths and limitations of this study
1. We will use systematic methods to conduct and report this scoping review based on established methods
introduced by Arksey and O’ Malley and further developed by Levac.
2. We will report the conduct of the review using guidance from the PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews
(PRISMA-ScR).
3. We will limit the focus of this review to patient safety indicators from English language resources aimed at
health system processes in developed countries.
4. We will not assess the risk of bias or certainty of the evidence in the included records because this is a
scoping review to identify potential obstetrical safety indicators.
5. After the scoping review, we will present the identified indicators to key informants in a consensus process
to create a shortlist that may not be suitable for inclusion in a future obstetrical safety dashboard for BORN
(Better Outcomes Registry and Network) Ontario. BORN collects and safeguards data, and shares information
to improve the delivery of maternal, neonatal and child healthcare across the province.

Introduction:
An aim of healthcare delivery is to avoid preventable harm to patients. However, human limitations and the
complex nature of health care systems are contributing factors that make errors an expected phenomenon (1). A
systematic review by Nabhan and colleagues found that the most frequently used definition of preventable harms is
“presence of an identifiable, modifiable cause of harm” (2). Preventable harms that occur during hospital stays are
also known as hospital harms, patient safety incidents, hospital adverse events or hospital errors. The Canadian
Institute for Health Information (CIHI ) defines hospital harms as the “rate of acute care hospitalizations with at least
one occurrence of unintended harm during a hospital stay that could have been potentially prevented by
implementing known evidence-informed practices” (3).
In 2000, the Institute of Medicine in the United States published a ground-breaking report To Err is Human: Building
a Safer Health System (4) which raised awareness around errors in healthcare processes and their negative impact
on patient morbidity and mortality. In 2004, the results of the Canadian Adverse Events Study showed that
according to the sample of 3745 non-psychiatric, non-obstetric adult patient charts reviewed, the rate of
preventable adverse events was 2.8% (95% confidence interval [CI], weighted, 2.0 – 3.6) and the mortality rate from
preventable adverse events was 0.66% (95% CI, weighted, 0.37%–0.95%) (5). Since then, the Canadian Patient
Safety Institute (CPSI) reported that patient harm is Canada’s third highest cause of death. Preventable harms occur
in one out of every 18 hospital visits and resulting treatments costs CAD$2.75 billion annually (6). Regarding the field
of obstetrics, the most recently published hospital harm results from the Canadian Institute for Health Information
(CIHI) and the Canadian Patient Safety Institute (CPSI), (7) during the fiscal year 2017 – 2018, reported 5566
incidences of obstetric trauma caused by health care or medication-associated conditions and 4242 incidences

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

caused by procedure-associated conditions. They also reported that during the same period, 670 incidences of
obstetric hemorrhage were caused by health care or medication associated conditions and 960 incidences were
caused by procedure associated-conditions. In addition, 855 birth trauma incidences were caused by health care or
medication-associated conditions and 1417 incidences were caused by procedure-associated conditions.
Certain harms require exploration of each patient case to assess whether the harm is potentially preventable, and
others are more obviously preventable, such as fatal medication doses (8) or wrong-site surgeries. The Hospital
Harm Framework classifies harms into 4 categories: health care/medication-associated conditions; health care
associated infections; patient accidents; and procedure-associated conditions (9).
Several studies have shown strategies that have successfully reduced preventable patient harm. Existing research
has shown that making patient safety central to the delivery of care can lead to system-level improvements. In the
United States, Pettker and colleagues implemented a comprehensive obstetric patient safety program which led to
reductions in adverse outcomes and litigation cases, and improvements in staff perceptions of safety and
improvements in the safety climate, (10–12). Also in the United States, the California Maternal Quality Care
Collaborative [CMQCC] California has identified a correlation between the work of perinatal quality collaboratives
(PQCs) and a 50% reduction in maternal mortality rates in the state of California (13).
Audit and feedback interventions may help to prevent patient harm. The Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI)
Framework for Safe, Reliable and Effective Care identifies processes of improvement and measurement as a part of
the health care learning system (14). In the UK, an ethnographic study of a maternity unit with an excellent record
for patient safety found that staff partly attributed its success to a maternity dashboard which facilitated audit and
feedback (15). The Better Outcomes Registry & Network (BORN Ontario) developed a dashboard of six key clinical
performance indicators to measure data relating to the quality of maternal and newborn patient care in Ontario,
Canada (16–18). In a pilot study, a quality improvement project focusing on one of the indicators identified by
BORN, led to a welcome and significant reduction in the rate of elective repeat caesarean sections (ECRS) in low risk
women at less than 39 weeks’ gestation (19). In an interrupted time series study that evaluated postimplementation effectiveness of the maternal newborn dashboard, the researchers found that it led to
improvements in four of the six key indicators (20). A systematic review by Ivers and colleagues (21) found that
audit and feedback can lead to small improvements in the practice of care delivery by health care professionals. In a
rapid review, Anthony and colleagues found that audit and feedback in combination with other obstetrical safety
initiatives may reduce maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality (22).
It is necessary to identify patient safety indicators to ensure the effectiveness of future audit and feedback
strategies. Hearnshaw and colleagues have highlighted the need for useful audit review criteria that are developed
or selected using systematic methods (23,24). However, in the field of obstetrics, it is currently unclear which
indicators relate to, or have the potential to improve obstetric safety. In this scoping review, we want to contribute
to the improvement of obstetric patient safety by identifying indicators as the starting point of an approach to harm
reduction.
The term indicator is generally understood to mean a measure that provides information on health service delivery
across organisations which enables tracking and comparison of performance over time. In a paper first published in
1966, Donebedian identified three types of measures of quality which can be used to evaluate the process of care at
the patient-healthcare provider level; outcome measures; process measures and structure measures (25). A fourth
type, balancing measures, relate to positive or negative phenomenon which happen as an unintended consequence
of a change (14).
Many desirable criteria for measuring the quality of care delivered by a health system have been proposed in the
literature. Kessner and colleagues (26) suggested using tracers which are a set of specific health conditions or
activities. They identified the following criteria for tracers: having the potential to be positively impacted by health
care activities, clearly definable and easily diagnosable, have a level of prevalence that leads to data collection

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

adequate for statistical analysis, having a demonstrable potential to improve health conditions, relate to processes
involving prevention, diagnosis, treatment or rehabilitation, and contextual influences should be understood.
Janakariaman and Ecker listed their ideal criteria for measures as: easily definable and observable; important to
patients and health care professionals; identifies areas where improvements are needed and uses accessible data
(27).
A systematic review by Saturno-Hernández and colleagues found that despite the existence of a large number of
indicators for monitoring obstetric care, they were lacking in scientific rigor and many are not suitable for
implementation (28). They used the following desirable criteria for indicators: presenting a full description, clearly
based on explicit evidence, reliable, and feasible (confirmed by pilot testing).
Although it is likely that indicators have the potential to improve patient safety there are no consistent standards for
measuring obstetric patient safety. When deciding on indicators it is extremely important to understand what you
want to measure and how it can be measured effectively. In order to use obstetric safety indicators as part of a
harm reduction strategy they should resonate with health care professionals.
Quality and safety indicators are closely linked and sometimes used interchangeably. However, safety indicators are
a sub-type of quality indicators. For this review, we will use the definition of patient safety indicators used by
Kristensen and colleagues i.e. measures that directly or indirectly monitor preventable hospital harms (29). For
these indicators it is important to map indicators to goals which are actionable. In the field of obstetric patient
safety, there is a need to identify indicators which measure the aspects of care that relate to preventable harms
caused by medical errors. This can be challenging because it is not always clear which indicators should be used and
there are variations in practice and outcomes across hospitals, regions etc.
It is important to note that some safety indicators may be judged as avoidable depending on the patient case.
Therefore, we will focus on obstetric safety indicators that relate to the prevention of harms that are at least partly
potentially avoidable to patients.
The aim of our review will be to scope the body of relevant literature (30) to identify a comprehensive list of
potential obstetric safety indicators which can help reduce preventable patient harms. The objectives of the scoping
review are to search for and identify records discussing indicators that can optimize obstetrical safety, to summarize
the data and to synthesize the results. This scoping review is being undertaken to inform which indicators will be
included in a patient safety dashboard from BORN Ontario.
Methods and analysis:
We will undertake a scoping review to systematically map the available literature on performance indicators
relevant to the reduction of preventable harms within the purview of obstetric safety. We will use the PRISMA
extension for scoping reviews PRISMA ScR Checklist (31) to guide the reporting of the scoping review. We will use
the scoping study framework introduced by Arksey and O’ Malley (32) and the recommendations later developed by
Levac (33) to guide our methods. We will follow all six suggested stages as described below.
Stage 1: Identifying the research question
Through consultation with the author team we defined the concepts, target population and type of indicators of
interest, and iteratively developed the main research question for the scoping review. We ensured that it aligned
with the purpose and scope of the review and the expected outcome (a comprehensive list of relevant indicators).
This question is: According to the available literature, what are the obstetrical safety indicators related to processes
of care for low risk births that aim to reduce preventable hospital harms?
For the purposes of this review, we will use the Southern Ontario Obstetrical Network (SOON) definition of a lowrisk birth target population namely, nulliparous pregnant individuals, singleton gestation with cephalic presentation,
who deliver at 37 weeks of gestation or more (34). SOON has also specified exclusion criteria shown in the table in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Appendix 2. The term ‘fetal anomalies’ featured in the SOON definition is an umbrella term for multiple anomalies.
Therefore, we will use the list of major sentinel congenital anomalies (see Appendix 3) that was developed in 2017
by BORN Ontario and OCAC (Ontario Congenital Anomalies Committee) as an additional tool during screening.
Stage 2: Identifying relevant studies
The search strategy will be drafted by one of the authors who has trained as an information specialist (AC) and
developed iteratively based on consultation with the author team and at least one other library and information
professional. We will aim to be as comprehensive as possible while considering resource constraints (such as time)
to avoid large volumes of search results. We will search electronic databases such as Medline (Ovid), Embase Classic
+ Embase 1947 to 2019 (Ovid), CINAHL (EBSCO), the Cochrane Library via www.cochranelibrary.com. We will search
for grey literature resources such as those identified in the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health
(CADTH) grey literature checklist Grey Matters: a practical tool for searching health-related grey literature (35). We
will also search relevant websites of professional bodies or organisations such as the Society of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC)(36), Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG)(37), Royal
Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RANZCOG) (38) and American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) (39) etc. We will contact individuals or groups to source additional material
if deemed appropriate.
We will use both thesauri terms (such as MeSH, Emtree and CINAHL headings) and free text terms as well as
Boolean operators and field limiters (where appropriate), to build our search. We will report our conduct of the
search including information such as: each database or source of information; dates of the searches; applied limits
or filters; the number of records found (for each database or source of information) and search terms from at least
one electronic database. We will undertake reference searching and citation searching for records which meet our
inclusion criteria.
See Appendix 1 for our currently proposed search strategy for Medline which may be further developed before it is
implemented. It will be tailored according to the functionality of each database or other resource we search.
Stage 3: Selecting studies
Two reviewers will undertake a test of interrater reliability to increase the likelihood of reliable screening. We will
select 50 records and screen them for inclusion. We will calculate Cohen’s kappa (40). We may revise the inclusion
and exclusion criteria if indicated. When we have achieved a 0.80 or higher level of agreement between raters, we
will independently conduct three phases of screening. Firstly, we will screen the titles and abstracts of records that
are not randomized trials to determine eligibility for inclusion against the agreed inclusion and exclusion criteria
using screening software (Covidence). Secondly, we will screen 30 randomised trials to see if they identify additional
indicators. If this step is not useful, we will not screen the remaining randomised trials. Thirdly, two reviewers will
independently screen the full-text records for which it was not clear whether they met inclusion criteria in the
previous screening phase. If there is disagreement regarding the inclusion of a record(s), another reviewer will
assess the full text. We will undertake interrater reliability testing after every 1,000 records screened.
Records will be selected using the following inclusion criteria:
•
•
•
•
•
•

one or more indicator is proposed or in use to prevent harm and improve obstetric safety
specifies or includes a low risk birth population
in-hospital settings
care during the period from admission to discharge from hospital following birth
indicators that can be improved or are controllable
feature a level of measurability/auditability

We will include any type of primary study and most other record types discussing indicators such as reports,
guidance documents and discussion papers, with the exception of conference papers. We will not exclude sources
based on the year they were made available or published, or on their publication status (published or unpublished).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

We will only include English language records due to resource restrictions for translation services. We will exclude
records focusing on indicators specifically designed for use within underdeveloped or developing world settings
because our indicators should be applicable to a developed country (Canada).
We will present an adapted PRISMA flow diagram (41) to document the number of records identified, screened,
assessed for eligibility, and included or excluded. We will document the main reasons why records were excluded.
Stage 4: Charting the data
We will identify variables that are relevant and develop a standardized data collection form (15). Two reviewers will
independently carry out data extraction for each included record. Initially, we will independently extract data from
five randomly-selected, included records and compare the extracted data for consistency. The form may be
iteratively developed throughout the charting process. Data items will include:















indicator source (bibliographic information)
study design and/or record format
country of origin
type of indicator (outcome/process/structure/balancing)
indicator name
indicator definition
numerator
denominator
measurement properties (tools, instruments etc.)
the population that is targeted by the indicator; maternal, fetal or infant following birth (or a combination)
the timeframe covered by the indicator; admission for birth including care during labour, during birth,
during the postpartum period prior to discharge from hospital
category of hospital harm being addressed
whether indicator relates to a desirable or undesirable event
evidence-based indicator (yes/no/unclear)

Stage 5: Collating, summarizing and reporting results
As recommended by Levac, we will divide this final stage into three parts: analysis of data; reporting of results and
discussion of the implications of the results for research, practice and policy (33).
1.

2.

3.

We will produce descriptive numerical summaries through analysis of the quantitative data, such as the
frequency with which indicators are identified. The qualitative data will be uploaded to NVivo software and
thematic analysis will be conducted.
We will report our results by compiling a comprehensive list of patient safety indicators identified during
our scoping review and organizing them according to concepts that best suit the data such as the
Donabedian model or categories within the Hospital Harm Framework.
We will further explore the implications of the indicators for further research, on clinical practice within
obstetric units and how policy analysts or policy-makers may find the results useful.

Stage 6: Consultation
This stage is presented as optional by Arksey and O’ Malley (32) and Levac and colleagues argue that it should be
considered a necessary element of the methodological framework. Data from our scoping review will be fed into a
future consensus process. This scoping review is the first in a multi-step approach to inform the development of a
core set of indicators. It is unclear which measures will be considered important to stakeholders so the results of the
research will be disseminated to a panel of experts in a consensus process. They will prioritize indicators and we will
produce a shortlist with the potential to inform the development of a future obstetrical safety dashboard in the
Ontarian health system. As an electronic audit and feedback system, the dashboard could be used to capture,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

monitor and report surveillance data entered by health care professionals, and aim to contribute to improvements
in obstetric safety.
Ethics and Dissemination
This scoping review will not require ethical approval because included sources are or can be made available to the
public (42).
This research will be disseminated with the intention of reaching a wide audience through the use of multiple
modes of delivery such as stakeholder engagement, publication(s) in a peer-reviewed journal and conference
paper(s).
Authors’ contributions
In consultation with all authors, AC wrote the first draft which SID and JR reviewed. JMG and MCW reviewed a
second draft. All authors contributed to the planning and writing of this protocol and approved submission of the
final manuscript to the publishing journal.
Funding
AC is the recipient of a Health Systems Impact Fellowship co-funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
Institute of Health Services and Policy Research (CIHR-IHSPR) and the Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario (CHEO)
Research Institute.
Competing interests
The authors declare that there are no competing interests.

References
1.

Pettker CM, Grobman WA. Obstetric Safety and Quality. Obstet Gynecol. 2015;126(1):196–206.

2.

Nabhan M, Elraiyah T, Brown DR, Dilling J, LeBlanc A, Montori VM, et al. What is preventable harm in
healthcare? A systematic review of definitions. BMC Health Serv Res. 2012;12:128.

3.

Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI). Indicator Library - Hospital Harm [Internet]. Available from:
http://indicatorlibrary.cihi.ca/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=10453027

4.

Institute of Medicine. To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System. National Academies Press; 2000. 443
p.

5.

Baker GR, Norton PG, Flintoff V, Blais R, Brown A, Cox J, et al. The Canadian Adverse Events Study: The
incidence of adverse events among hospital patients in Canada. Can Med Assoc J. 2004;170(11):1678–86.

6.

Institute CPS. Awareness of the Patient Safety Crisis in Canada [Internet]. [cited 2019 May 7]. Available from:
https://www.patientsafetyinstitute.ca/en/toolsresources/Awareness-of-the-Patient-Safety-Crisis-inCanada/Pages/Awareness-of-the-Patient-Safety-Crisis-in-Canada-2019-04-23.aspx

7.

Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI). Hospital harm results, 2014–2015 to 2017–2018 [Internet].
2019 [cited 2019 May 7]. Available from: Canadian Institute for Health Information, hospital harm results
www.cihi.ca/sites/default/files/document/hospital-harm-data-tables-april2019-en-web.xlsx

8.

van Doormaal JE, van den Bemt PMLA, Mol PGM, Zaal RJ, Egberts ACG, Haaijer-Ruskamp FM, et al.
Medication errors: the impact of prescribing and transcribing errors on preventable harm in hospitalised
patients. Qual Saf Heal Care. 2009 Feb 1;18(1):22 LP – 27.

9.

Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI). Hospital Harm Indicator: General Methodology Notes
[Internet]. 2019. Available from:
http://indicatorlibrary.cihi.ca/display/HSPIL/Hospital+Harm?_ga=2.120753928.1423793767.1563286199-

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

954873353.1555606353&preview=/10453027/15564910/Hospital Harm Indicator General Methodology
Notes.pdf
10.

Pettker CM, Thung SF, Norwitz ER, Buhimschi CS, Raab CA, Copel JA, et al. Impact of a comprehensive
patient safety strategy on obstetric adverse events. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2009;200(5):492.e1-492.e8.

11.

Pettker CM, Buhimschi CS, Lockwood CJ, Thung SF, Illuzzi JL, Funai EF, et al. A comprehensive obstetric
patient safety program reduces liability claims and payments. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2014;211(4):319–25.

12.

Pettker CM, Thung SF, Raab CA, Donohue KP, Copel JA, Lockwood CJ, et al. A comprehensive obstetrics
patient safety program improves safety climate and culture. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2011 Mar;204(3):216.e1216.e6.

13.

Main EK. Reducing Maternal Mortality and Severe Maternal Morbidity. Clin Obstet Gynecol.
2018;61(2):319–31.

14.

Frankel A, Haraden C, Federico F, et al. A Framework for Safe, Reliable, and Effective Care. White Pap
Cambridge, MA Inst Healthc Improv Safe Reliab Healthc. 2017;1–32.

15.

Liberati EG, Tarrant C, Willars J, Draycott T, Winter C, Chew S, et al. How to be a very safe maternity unit: An
ethnographic study. Soc Sci Med. 2019;223(July 2018):64–72.

16.

Sprague AE, Dunn SI, Fell DB, Harrold J, Walker MC, S. K, et al. Measuring Quality in Maternal-Newborn Care:
Developing a Clinical Dashboard. J Obstet Gynaecol Canada [Internet]. 2013;35(1):29–38. Available from:
http://www.journals.elsevier.com/journal-of-obstetrics-and-gynaecologycanada/%0Ahttp://ovidsp.ovid.com/ovidweb.cgi?T=JS&PAGE=reference&D=emed14&NEWS=N&AN=20160
444985%0Ahttp://ovidsp.ovid.com/ovidweb.cgi?T=JS&PAGE=reference&D=medl&NEWS=N&AN=23343794
%0Ahtt

17.

Dunn S, Sprague AE, Grimshaw JM, Graham ID, Taljaard M, Fell D, et al. A mixed methods evaluation of the
maternal-newborn dashboard in Ontario: dashboard attributes, contextual factors, and facilitators and
barriers to use: a study protocol. Implement Sci [Internet]. 2015 Dec 4;11(1):59. Available from:
http://implementationscience.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13012-016-0427-1

18.

Reszel J, Dunn S, Sprague A, Graham I, Grimshaw J, Peterson W, et al. Use of a maternal newborn audit and
feedback system in Ontario: A collective case study. BMJ Qual Saf.

19.

Dunn S, Sprague AE, Fell DB, Dy J, Harrold J, Lamontagne B, et al. The use of a quality indicator to reduce
ERCS for low-risk women before 39 weeks gestation. 2013. p. 306–16.

20.

Weiss D, Dunn SI, Sprague AE, Fell DB, Grimshaw JM, Darling E, et al. Effect of a population-level
performance dashboard intervention on maternal-newborn outcomes: An interrupted time series study.
BMJ Qual Saf. 2018;27(6):425–36.

21.

Ivers N, Jamtvedt G, Flottorp S, Young J, Odgaard-Jensen J, French S, et al. Audit and feedback : effects on
professional practice and healthcare outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;(6):1–217.

22.

Antony J, Zarin W, Pham B, Nincic V, Cardoso R, Ivory JD, et al. Patient safety initiatives in obstetrics: a rapid
review. BMJ Open. 2018 Jul 6;8(7):e020170.

23.

Hearnshaw H, Harker R, Cheater F, Baker R, Grimshaw G. A study of the methods used to select review
criteria for clinical audit. Health Technol Assess (Rockv). 2002;6(1):1–87.

24.

Hearnshaw HM. Are audits wasting resources by measuring the wrong things? A survey of methods used to
select audit review criteria. Qual Saf Heal Care. 2003;12(1):24–8.

25.

Donabedian A. Evaluating the quality of medical care. Reprinted 1966 article. Milbank Q. 2005;83(4):691–
729.

26.

Kessner DM, Kalk CE, Singer J. Assessing health quality - the case for tracers. NEJM New Engl J Med.
1973;288:189–94.

27.

Janakiraman V, Ecker J. Quality in obstetric care: Measuring what matters. Obstet Gynecol.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

2010;116(3):728–32.
28.

Saturno-Hernández PJ, Martínez-Nicolás I, Moreno-Zegbe E, Fernández-Elorriaga M, Poblano-Verástegui O.
Indicators for monitoring maternal and neonatal quality care: A systematic review. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth. 2019;19(1):1–11.

29.

Kristensen S, Mainz J, Bartels. Establishing a Set of Patient Safety Indicators - Safety Improvement for
Patients in Europe [Internet]. 2007. Available from: http://www.zdravstvokvaliteta.org/attachments/article/18/Patient_safety_indicator_development.pdf

30.

Munn Z, Peters MDJ, Stern C, Tufanaru C, McArthur A, Aromataris E. Systematic review or scoping review?
Guidance for authors when choosing between a systematic or scoping review approach. BMC Med Res
Methodol. 2018;18(1):1–7.

31.

Tricco AC, Lillie E, Zarin W, O’Brien KK, Colquhoun H, Levac D, et al. PRISMA extension for scoping reviews
(PRISMA-ScR): Checklist and explanation. Ann Intern Med. 2018;169(7):467–73.

32.

Arksey H, O’Malley L. Scoping studies: Towards a methodological framework. Int J Soc Res Methodol Theory
Pract. 2005;8(1):19–32.

33.

Levac D, Colquhoun H, O’Brien KK. Scoping studies: advancing the methodology. Implement Sci. 2010;5(69).

34.

Provincial Council for Maternal and Child Health. Safe Administration of Oxytocin Standardizing practice to
promote safe induction and augmentation of labour [Internet]. 2019. Available from:
https://www.pcmch.on.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/PCMCH-Safe-Administration-of-Oxytocin.pdf

35.

Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health. Grey Matters: a practical tool for searching healthrelated grey literature [Internet]. 2019. Available from: https://www.cadth.ca/resources/findingevidence/grey-matters

36.

The Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada. Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of
Canada (SOGC) [Internet]. Available from: https://www.sogc.org

37.

Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG)
[Internet]. 2019 [cited 2019 May 7]. Available from: https://www.rcog.org.uk/

38.

The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Royal Australian and
New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists [Internet]. 2019. Available from:
https://ranzcog.edu.au

39.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
2019; Available from: https://www.acog.org

40.

Mchugh ML. Interrater reliability : the kappa statistic. Biochem Medica. 2012;22(3):276–82.

41.

Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG. Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and MetaAnalyses: The PRISMA Statement. PLoS Med. 2009 Jul 21;6(7):e1000097.

42.

Interagency Advisory Panel on Research Ethics (PRE). Tri-Council Policy Statement: Ethical Conduct of
Research Involving Humans, 2nd edition (TCPS 2). Article 2.2 [Internet]. 2014. Available from:
http://www.pre.ethics.gc.ca/eng/policy-politique/initiatives/tcps2-eptc2/chapter2-chapitre2/#ch2_en_a2.2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Appendix 1: Search strategy for Medline (Ovid)
#

Search terms

1

(Safety or performance or quality or quality-of-care or adverse or sentinel event*).ti,ab,kw.

2

(indicator* or measur* or standard* or feedback or audit or assurance or assessment or metric* or benchmark or
evaluat* or scorecard* or dashboard* or analytics or tool* or toolkit* or criteri* or instrument* or scale* or screen*
or list* or checklist*).ti,ab,kw.

3

((Safety or performance or quality or quality-of-care or adverse or sentinel event*) adj3 (indicator* or measur* or
standard* or feedback or audit or assurance or assessment or metric* or benchmark or evaluat* or scorecard* or
dashboard* or analytics or tool* or toolkit* or criteri* or instrument* or scale* or screen* or list* or
checklist*)).ti,ab,kw.

4

(audit adj2 feedback).ti,ab,kw.

5

chart review.ti,ab,kw.

6

exp Quality Indicators, Health Care/

7

exp Health Status Indicators/

8

exp "Outcome and Process Assessment (Health Care)"/

9

"Quality of Health Care"/st

10 Benchmarking/
11 exp Clinical Audit/st
12 Quality Improvement/st
13 or/3-12
14 (obstetric* or maternity or maternal or labour or labor or perinatal or childbirth or child birth or intrapartum or birth
or parturition).ti,ab,kw.
15 parturition/
16 natural childbirth/
17 term birth/
18 exp Labor, Obstetric/

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

19 Delivery, Obstetric/
20 or/14-19
21 (prevent* or avoid* or reduc* or decreas*).ti,ab,kw.
22 (harm* or error* or complication* or "sentinel event*" or adverse or bleed* or "blood loss" or hemorrhag* or
haemorrhag* or trauma or infect* or wound* or dehiscence or fall* or "early onset sepsis" or "early-onset sepsis" or
morbidity or mortality or death or injury* or fault or hazard* or toxic* or poison* or "side effect*" or reaction* or
chemically-induced or drug-induced or lethal or fatal or contraindicat*).ti,ab,kw.
23 Obstetric Labor Complications/pc [Prevention & Control]
24 Patient Harm/pc [Prevention & Control]
25 exp Diagnostic Errors/pc [Prevention & Control]
26 Medication Errors/pc [Prevention & Control]
27 Cross Infection/pc [Prevention & Control]
28 ((prevent* or avoid* or reduc* or decreas*) adj3 (harm* or error* or complication* or "sentinel event*" or adverse or
bleed* or "blood loss" or hemorrhag* or haemorrhag* or trauma or infect* or wound* or dehiscence or fall* or "early
onset sepsis" or "early-onset sepsis" or morbidity or mortality or death or injury* or fault or hazard* or toxic* or
poison* or "side effect*" or reaction* or chemically-induced or drug-induced or lethal or fatal or
contraindicat*)).ti,ab,kw.
29 or/23-28
30 13 and 20 and 29
31 limit 30 to english language

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Appendix 2: Southern Ontario Obstetrical Network (SOON) low-risk birth definition.

Source: Provincial Council for Maternal and Child Health. Safe Administration of Oxytocin: Standardizing practice to
promote safe induction and augmentation of labour. 2019. Available at: https://www.pcmch.on.ca/wpcontent/uploads/2019/09/PCMCH-Safe-Administration-of-Oxytocin.pdf

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Appendix 3: Major sentinel congenital anomalies list

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19012153; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Source: list jointly created by BORN Ontario and the OCAC (Ontario Congenital Anomalies Committee) in 2017.

