medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ethnicity and Acculturation: Asian American Substance Use from Early Adolescence to
Mature Adulthood

Zobayer Ahmmad, MS1; Daniel E. Adkins, PhD1,2
1
2

Department of Sociology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
Department of Psychiatry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT

Compliance with Ethical Standards: All authors (i.e., Zobayer Ahmmad and Daniel E. Adkins)
declare they have no conflicts of interest.

Acknowledgments: We thank the Consortium of Families and Health Research (C-FAHR) at
the University of Utah for providing access to the data. We are grateful to Bethany G Everett for
editorial input. This research uses data from Add Health, a program project directed by Kathleen
Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris
at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with
cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Special acknowledgment is
due to Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara Entwisle for assistance in the original design.
Information on how to obtain the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website
(http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received from grant P01-HD31921
for this analysis.

*Corresponding author: Email: zubi.ahmmad@utah.edu. 380 S 1530 E, Salt Lake City, UT
84112, USA. Office: (801)-2439834.

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Research on Asian American substance use has, to date, been limited by monolithic conceptions
of Asian identity, inadequate attention to acculturative process, and a disproportionate focus on
the adolescent developmental period. This study addresses these limitations by longitudinally
investigating disparities in substance use, including tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, and a range of
illicit drugs, from early adolescence (~15) into mature adulthood (~40) using five waves of the
National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health). Add Health’s ample
statistical power (Asian N=1583, obs=7915) allowed disaggregated study of the most populous
Asian American ethnic groups including Chinese, Filipino, Korean, Vietnamese, Asian Indian,
and Japanese, as well as subjects identifying as multiple Asian ethnicities (i.e., multiethnic) and
multiracial Asians. The potential mediating role of acculturative factors (e.g., nativity, parental
nativity, familial language use) on the observed ethnic disparities was also examined. Results
indicate significant variation across Asian ethnicities, with the lowest probability of substance
use among Chinese and Vietnamese, and the highest among multiethnic and multiracial Asians.
Acculturative factors (e.g., English language use, nativity) were strongly associated with
increased substance use, and mediated some, but not all, of the observed ethnic disparities. This
study demonstrates how the model minority stereotype masks significant ethnic disparities in
Asian American substance use and argues that a considerable proportion of the observed ethnic
variation appears to be due to diverse family ties speeding transition toward US cultural norms,
away from the relatively salubrious norms of Asian nations of origin.

Keywords: Asian Americans, Population health, Substance use, Cannabis use, Social
epidemiology, Risk behavior

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Recent research into the social epidemiology of substance use in contemporary America has
generated important insights into the impact of substance abuse (particularly alcohol and
opioids) on US life expectancy and social disparities in morbidity and mortality within the US
population (Case and Deaton 2015, Ruhm 2017, Ruhm 2018). Such research has greatly
advanced our understanding of the relationship of substance use to morbidity and mortality
patterns, particularly among non-Hispanic White Americans (Geronimus et al. 2019, Shanahan
et al. 2019). However, knowledge regarding the social epidemiology of substance use among
other racial/ethnic groups, particularly Asian Americans (AAs) remains limited. This is in spite
of notable recent growth and increasing diversity in the AA population (Cook et al. 2015,
Saraiya et al. 2019). While it is established that AAs exhibit a relatively healthy substance use
profile in aggregate (Martell, Garrett and Caraballo 2016), studies disaggregating AA
ethnicities have suggested the presence of high risk Asian subgroups (Cook et al. 2015, Saraiya
et al. 2019, Thai, Connell and Tebes 2010). For instance, Korean and Japanese ethnicities
appear to have substantially higher rates of alcohol consumption than other AA ethnicities
(Iwamoto, Takamatsu and Castellanos 2012, Tosh and Simmons 2007). Moreover, the
prevalence of cigarette smoking among Koreans in the US was 20% in 2013, a rate comparable
to other high risk US demographic groups (Martell, Garrett and Caraballo 2016).

Extant research on substance use among AAs has primarily focused on tobacco and alcohol
use, with few studies examining illicit substance use (e.g., cannabis, opioids, and illicit
stimulants) (Cochran et al. 2007, Hong et al. 2011, Liu and Iwamoto 2007, Saraiya et al. 2019,
Yoo et al. 2010). The small body of research examining illicit substance among AA ethnicities
has indicated the presence of significant ethnic variation. For instance, cross-sectional studies

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

have shown AA ethnic variation in illicit substance use rates with Filipino, Japanese, and
Korean ethnicities reporting more use than their Asian peers (Ryabov 2015, Saraiya et al.
2019). Similarly, using data from Waves 1 and 3 of the National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health, Ryabov (2015) found that substance use rates, especially the use of illicit
drugs, vary widely across major Asian ethnicities in adolescence and the transition to adulthood
(e.g., Filipino origin youth exhibit higher prevalence of illicit drugs than East Asian peers
(Ryabov 2015)).

Despite notable demographic growth among AAs identifying as multiethnic (e.g., Vietnamese
and Chinese) and multiracial (e.g., Vietnamese and White), to date, very little research has
examined substance use among these increasingly common ethnic identities. Additionally,
existing studies offer minimal sociocultural explanation for substance use disparity across
Asian ethnicities (Dunbar et al. 2018, Price et al. 2002, Wong, Klingle, and Price 2004). To
address these shortcomings, we analyze five waves of the National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health) to assess patterns of substance use disparities among
AAs, and explore to what extent these disparities are explained by variation in acculturation to
US norms. Further, we also map developmental patterns in AA substance use, going beyond
cross-sectional data (and longitudinal data limited to a single developmental period) to describe
longitudinal AA ethnic variation in substance use from early adolescence (age ~12) to mature
adulthood (age ~40). The wide age range of Add Health allows detailed description of
longitudinal AA substance use patterns, revealing persistent disparities across AA ethnicities,
and unique developmental patterns among AAs relative to other US racial/ethnic groups.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Background
Diverse sociodemographic profiles of Asian Americans
The Asian population is the fastest growing of all racial/ethnic groups in the US, driven by
consistently high immigration and relatively high fertility rates (López, Ruiz and Patten 2017).
The size of the Asian population more than doubled (from 11.9 million to 20.4 million)
between 2000 and 2015 (López, Ruiz and Patten 2017). Among the 19 national origins that
comprise 94 percent of US Asian population, the largest groups are Indian, Chinese, and
Filipino origin. Along with demographic and underlying sociocultural heterogeneity, there is
also marked socioeconomic inequality within the AA population, despite the general perception
of Asians in the US as high achieving (Lee 2015). Monolithic conceptions of AA identity,
combined with the model minority stereotype, has serve to mask socioeconomic inequality
across AA individuals and ethnicities. For instance, recent estimates suggest that Asians who
are in the top 10% of the income distribution earn >10x more than Asians who are in the
bottom decile (Kochhar and Cilluffo 2018). Moreover, there are substantial ethnic difference
across AA income deciles, with South and East Asian ethnicities exhibiting socioeconomic
advantage relative to other AA, particularly Southeast Asian, ethnicities (Cook et al. 2017).
Given the continuing demographic, cultural, and economic diversification of the AA
population, scholars have called for increased attention to ethnic-specific health and health
behavior patterns (Yoo, Le and Oda 2013).

Demographic literature indicates that marriage between two Asian ethnicities, as well between
Asians and other racial/ethnic groups is rising (Lee and Bean 2004, Qian and Lichter 2011). As
a result, there is an increasing number of individuals identifying multiple Asian ethnicities

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(e.g., Vietnamese and Chinese), and individuals identifying as multiracial (e.g., Japanese and
White). Despite this growth in the number of multiethnic and multiracial Asian individuals,
there is virtually no research investigating the patterns and prevalence of substance use among
these groups, as they are frequently (mis)classified as mono-ethnic and/or mono-racial. This
failure to consider multiethnic and multiracial Asian identities may confound inferences
regarding the relationships of ethnicity and substance use. Thus, we give considerable emphasis
to multiethnic and multiracial AAs, along with the surveyed mono-ethnic Asian identities.

Acculturation and substance use
Acculturation refers to post-immigration changes in immigrant individuals’ way of life,
including changes in physical, psychological, and cultural traits due to continuous exchange with
the new sociocultural environment (Le, Goebert and Wallen 2009). Behavioral changes that take
place during acculturation remain a primary focus in immigrant health literature (Abraído-Lanza,
Chao and Florez 2005). Sociologists have theorized that behavioral changes such as the adoption
of regular alcohol consumption or transitioning to fast food culture are largely influenced by the
length of US residence—that is, the longer the duration of residence in the US, the greater the
extent of behavioral changes (Yoo, Le and Oda 2013). Previous research indicates that English
language use, particularly in personal conversation, is associated with behavioral risk-taking
such as heavy drinking and abuse of prescription drugs (Bersamira et al. 2017, Park et al. 2014).

Research on AA substance use, mainly alcohol consumption and tobacco use, has commonly
examined the effects of acculturation—which is typically measured by nativity, language use,
duration of stay in the US. Previous research has shown that acculturation predicts increased

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

substance use (Becerra et al. 2013, Iwamoto et al. 2016, Le, Goebert and Wallen 2009, Lui and
Zamboanga 2018), suggesting acculturation as a risk factor for AA health and health behavior
(Le, Goebert and Wallen 2009). For instance, research using the National Latino and Asian
American Study (NLAAS) found that nativity, generational status in the US, and language use
were positively associated with alcohol consumption, cannabis, cocaine, and other drug use
(Bersamira et al. 2017). A systematic literature review of 31 studies on the relation between
acculturation and alcohol consumption found that acculturation is a primary mediator of
hazardous drinking behavior among AAs (Lui and Zamboanga 2018). However, it is unclear
what roles acculturation may play among multiethnic and multiracial Asians, who are may be
subject to unique acculturative processes.

Empirical research examining the effects of acculturation on substance use among AA
adolescents born into immigrant families is lacking. However, family is clearly a primary
influence promoting the retention of heritage culture among immigrants and children of
immigrants. It is documented that Asian-born parents disproportionately actively socialize their
children in heritage values and culture, with special emphasis on adolescent behavioral
conformity to rules and norms (Nelson et al. 2015). This suggests highly acculturated AAs (3+
generation, multiracial) may be at greater behavioral risk, as they lack the buffering
socialization associated with immigrant (or child of immigrant) status. Support for such
acculturation effects come from a recent, large meta-analysis (N = 68,282) demonstrating that
attachment to Asian heritage culture is negatively associated with alcohol consumption (Lui
and Zamboanga 2018). Thus, we consider parental nativity as well as respondents’, an

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

especially important distinction for ethnic groups comprised primarily of recent immigrants
(i.e., Chinese) (Le and Kato 2006, Telzer, Gonzales and Fuligni 2014).

It has also been noted that peer homophily among AA immigrants may buffer against risk
behavior. For instance, analysis of early waves of Add Health indicates that having close
friends from similar ethnic background and nativity status is protective against illicit drug use
among AAs, suggesting a salubrious influence for immigrant social network ties (Ryabov
2015). To tap the role of acculturation in personal relationships, we include a measure of
English use in personal conversations in this analysis.

Developmental variation in substance use
Another limitation of in the social epidemiology of substance use literature is overreliance on
cross-sectional data and adolescent samples. This is a notable limitation, as it is well
established that substance use and misuse is not evenly distributed across age. Previous
research has suggested that, at the population level, substance use patterns are characterized by
a sharp rise in late adolescence and young adulthood, followed by a decline in mature
adulthood (i.e., 30s) (Fothergill et al. 2016, Merline et al. 2004). Analysis of longitudinal data
is therefore essential, particularly so among AAs, as previous research has also shown that AAs
may show atypical patterns of externalizing behaviors (and internalizing traits) during
adolescence and the transition to adulthood, as they tend to experience particularly restrictive
family environments in adolescence, and then acculturate to mainstream US society in young
adulthood (Adkins et al. 2009, Hahm et al. 2014). Findings from a study on substance use
among Asian and Pacific Islander (API) sexual minority support that the association between

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sexual minority status and substance use did not emerge until young adulthood (Hahm et al.
2008), suggesting young adulthood as a period of fuller expression of AA behavioral
preferences. Thus, exiting from parental supervision during adulthood may lead unique
developmental patterns of substance use among AAs. To address this gap in the literature, we
model developmental trends in substance use across AA ethnicities.

Research questions
This study investigates substance use variations across AA ethnicities, including multiethnic
and multiracial AAs, and examines potential mediation of ethnic disparities by acculturation
status. Additionally, it describes ethnic variation in developmental patterns of substance use
from adolescence to mid-adulthood (ages ~15-40) using Waves 1-5 of the National
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health. Specific hypotheses include:

Hypothesis 1: AA groups with weaker attachment to traditional Asian norms due to (a) diverse
family composition (i.e., multiethnic and multiracial Asians), and (b) longstanding residence in
the US (i.e., Japanese) will be more likely to use all four substance use outcomes (tobacco,
alcohol, cannabis, and illicit substances).

Hypothesis 2: The relationship between ethnicity and substance use and tobacco use will be
substantially mediated by acculturative factors, including nativity generational status and
English language use in personal settings.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Hypothesis 3: The prevalence of substance use will peak in young adulthood (~age 25) in this
longitudinal, contemporary cohort of AAs.

Materials and Methods
Data
Data for the project come from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health
(Add Health) Wave 1-Wave 5. Add Health is a large, nationally representative, longitudinal
study that began in 1994, now including five waves of data spanning 28 years of data collection.
Add Health collected detailed information on environmental, behavioral, and biological
information (Entzel and Udry 2009). Wave 1 of Add Health study surveyed about 90,000
adolescents across 80 high schools and 52 middle schools throughout the United States. Out of
the total sample, a subsample of 20,747 students and their parents filled out an in-depth home
interview survey. Wave 2 of Add Health was completed in 1996, containing only the students
who were in 8th-12th grades (excluding senior students) (N=14,738). A sample of 15,197 young
adults and their partners (ages 18-26) responded in Wave 3 survey. Wave 3, which was
completed in 2001, reclaimed the senior students in Wave I. Wave 4 collected data from 15,701
adults (ages 24-32). Wave 5 of Add Health study released approximately 3,000 cases (ages 3242).

Add Health (over)sampled 1585 Asians in Wave 1, following up 1089, 1195, 1060, in Waves 2,
3, and 4, respectively. Add Health also surveyed Asian ethnic background, allowing respondents
to reply to multiple ethnic categories including Chinese, Filipino, Japanese, Asian Indian,
Korean, Vietnamese, and “Asian (Other)”. Add Health also allowed respondents to identify

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

multiple racial/ethnic categories. There are a substantial number of Asians who also identified
themselves as White, African American, or Hispanic ethnicity, which are categorized as
“multiracial Asian” here, including N=224, 165, 165, and 161, in Waves 1, 2, 3, and 4,
respectively. We use the term “multiethnic Asian” to refer to respondents who identified as ≥2
Asian ethnic identities (e.g., Japanese and Filipino). There are N=125, 91, 102, and 90
multiethnic Asians in the Waves 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively (see Table 2 for further ethnicity
sample size data). Add Health has released 3000 total observations from Wave 5, including 227
Asian individuals, which are also analyzed here.

Measures
Due to cultural differences in Asian nations of origin, and segmented assimilation in the US,
there is reason to suspect different ethnic patterns depending on the substance (e.g., relatively
high Korean and Filipino smoking rates) (Iwamoto et al. 2016, Tosh and Simmons 2007, Yoo
et al. 2010). Thus, we adopt a comprehensive approach to assaying substance use, examining 4
outcomes: tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, and illicit substances.

Tobacco, alcohol, and cannabis use
Dependent variables come from Wave 1 to Wave 5 of Add Health. Information on tobacco
smoking, alcohol consumption, and cannabis use were asked in each of the 5 waves of data
collection. Specifically the items used here are: 1) has the subject ever smoked cigarettes
regularly (at least 1 cigarette every day for 30 days); 2) does the subject regularly consume
alcohol (≥1-2 days per week), and 3) has the subject consumed cannabis in the past year.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Illicit substance use
We adopt a latent approach to measure use of illicit substances, defined as all surveyed
substances, except tobacco and alcohol. Thus, the latent illicit substance use includes the four
questions on cannabis, methamphetamine, cocaine, and other hard drugs: 1) in the past year if
someone has tried cannabis, 2) if someone has used crystal meth, and 3) if someone has tried
cocaine, and 4) tried LSD, speed, ice, heroin, or controlled prescription drugs (e.g., opioids,
stimulants, benzodiazepines). The questions on methamphetamine use were not asked in Waves
1 and 2. The composition of the “other hard drugs” category varied slightly across waves (e.g.,
included inhalants only in Wave 1 and 2). A confirmatory factor analysis was used to estimate a
single standardized latent variable, using the four individual substance as indicator variables. Fit
was adequate (RMSEA<0.08). Factor scores were output using standard regression scoring.
Standardized factor scores are used in inferential analyses, and the factor score is rescaled to
range 0-1 in visualizations, to increase comparability to the dichotomous outcomes. In this 0-1
rescaling, a value of 0 indicates no illicit substance use, and a 1 indicates use of all queried illicit
substances.

Ethnicity
A primary objective of the current study is to examine substance use variation across Asian
ethnic groups, to unveil the heterogeneity masked by the model minority stereotype. Fortunately,
Add Health oversampled key Asian ethnicities including Japanese, Filipino, Chinese,
Vietnamese, Indian, and Korean. Information on racial/ethnic identity was derived from a set of
questions querying whether the subject identifies as Asian and, if so, which Asian ethnicities.
Response options to the item included Japanese, Filipino, Chinese, Vietnamese, Asian Indian,

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and Korean, as well as “Other” (i.e., Asian, ethnicity not specifically queried). The “Other”
Asian category includes respondents identifying any Asian country other than the six countries
explicitly specified, likely yielding a heterogeneous group consisting substantially of individuals
of Pakistani and Southeast Asian (e.g., Cambodian, Hmong, Thai) descent. Additionally, some
respondents identified as more than one Asian ethnicity (e.g., Japanese and Korean), which we
categorize as “multiethnic Asians.” Finally, some individuals of Asian descent also identified as
multiracial (e.g., Asian and white), which we categorize as “multiracial Asian”.

Sociodemographics
Models also include a set of household SES measures for parental education and household
income assessed at Wave 1. We used the parental questionnaire to ascertain the educational
attainment of the sampled residential parent (typically the mother) and current partner (typically
the father). Parental educational attainments were averaged across parents when more than one
was reported. Household income was ascertained from the parental questionnaire and included
all sources of income from the previous year (measured in thousands of dollars) and is logged
(Adkins et al. 2009).

Acculturation
Measures of acculturation include respondents’ nativity status, parental nativity status, and
language use preference in private/familial settings. Information on whether someone is US born
or not and if their parents are US born or not come from Wave I. We create three generations
based on respondents’ and their parents’ nativity status. Generation 1 includes foreign-born
respondents (parents also foreign-born), generation 2 includes US-born children with at least one

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

foreign-born parent. Generation 3 consists of US-born children with US-born parents. We also
include a measure of use of the English/non-English language use in the home from Wave I and
Wave 2. Question on English language use in Wave 3 was slightly different, in which it asks
what language they use with their family and close friends. Table 2 presents information on the
generational status and English use in private/familial settings.

Statistical Analysis
Descriptive visualizations
The intersecting effects of ethnicity and acculturation on substance use patterns is a primary
interest of this project. We visualize these relationships in Figure 1 using a series of bar graphs
ordering ethnicities by mean substance use rate and visualizing the association of nativity
generation to substance use within each ethnicity. While the primary purpose of this visualization
is to describe the overall ethnic and nativity generation patterns in substance use, we also report
the results of a secondary analysis in the figure, denoted by asterisks above the bars. Specifically,
these asterisks denote that nativity generation was significantly associated with substance use
within that ethnicity. These significance tests were based on generalized mixed models
predicting substance by nativity, adjusting for clustering of observations within subjects. Here
we must caution against over-interpreting these significance tests, which are essentially 2-way
interactions (ethnicity*nativity) and the current sample is modestly powered for this analysis in
some ethnicities, particularly Asian Indians (N=31, obs=155) and Japanese (N=42, obs=210).

Given the well-documented patterns in substance use rates across developmental periods (e.g.,
elevated rates during late adolescence and young adulthood), we include a visualization of Asian

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ethnic differences in substance use across the age range (ages ~15-40) in Figure 2. We restrict
this investigation to strictly descriptive (i.e., non-inferential) visualization of ethnic variation of
age patterns of substance use in this sample, as the sample is not adequately powered to assess
higher order interactions (e.g., age2×ethnicity), particularly for the smaller ethnic subsamples.
Thus, we visualize smoothed mean levels of substance use in by ethnicity, over age, and leave
inferential tests of these differences to future research in larger samples. Specifically, we
visualize the age patterns of the four outcomes across Asian ethnicities using median spline plots
(i.e., cubic regression splines with cross-median knots), specifying four knots to smooth age-byethnicity bins with small cell sizes (Royston and Sauerbrei 2007).

Inferential analyses
Primary inferential analyses examine four outcomes using generalized linear mixed models to
jointly analyze the Asian subsample across waves 1-5 of Add Health (N=7915). Three of the four
outcomes are dichotomous: (a) ever daily tobacco smoking (at least a month), (b) regular alcohol
consumption (≥1-2 per week), and (c) smoking cannabis in the past year; thus, these 3 outcomes
use a logistic link function. The last outcome, (d) illicit substance use, is a continuously
distributed factor score; thus, it was analyzed with an identity (linear) link function. All models
specified a subject-level random intercept to account for the multilevel data structure in which
observations are nested within subjects. Among other desirable properties, this approach corrects
standard errors and coefficients for nonindependence of observations within subjects (Gelman
and Hill 2006). We did not employ the fixed effects estimator here, because the predictors of
primary interest, ethnicity and nativity generation, are time invariant, and, thus, not suitable for
that estimator.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Each of the four outcomes followed the same sequence of three model specifications. In Model 1
of the sequence, the outcome was predicted with only the ethnicity dummies, which categorize
Asian ethnicities into eight mutually exclusive groups. Thus, the first model assesses
unconditional differences in substance use across Asian ethnic groups. Model 2 of the sequence
includes the ethnic indicators from Model 1 and adds controls for other sociodemographic
variables—age, age2, gender, parental education, and household income. Model 3 included all
variables from Model 2, as well as the measures of acculturation (i.e., nativity generation 1 (ref),
2, and 3, and use of English in personal conversation) to assess potential mediation of Asian
ethnic differences by acculturation factors. Results are reported as coefficients (i.e., logged odds
ratios in the case of the logistic models) with t statistics in parenthesis. Given that our analysis is
limited to Asian ethnicities only, the analysis is, by design, not nationally representative.
Considering this along with the observation that, due to the oversampled nature of Asian
subsample in Add Health, using person weights may diminish inferential efficiency (Bollen et al.
2016), our primary analyses are unweighted. Sensitivity analysis adjusting for school-based
PSUs and region strata did not affect substantive results. All analyses performed using Stata
15.1.

Missing data
Missing data is an ubiquitous issue longitudinal survey data (Kline, Andridge and Kaizar 2017),
and is present to a modest degree in the current analysis (see Appendix 1 for missingness
summary). Conventional listwise deletion (i.e., complete case analysis) methods for addressing
missing data are known to, on average, increase bias in coefficients under missing at random

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(MAR) assumptions, and to weaken statistical power (White, Royston and Wood 2011). To
avoid these potential biases and maximize statistical power, we handle missingness using
multiple imputations by chained equations (MICE) method for the full sample (N=20,774).
MICE is a statistical approach to impute values for the missing data based on distributions of the
observed data, using MCMC iterative methods. This is a well-established, validated approach to
multiple imputation, which preserves the distributions (i.e., continuous, count, ordinal,
categorical) of the imputed variables. The performance of MICE has been demonstrated
equivalent to the conventional multivariate normal multiple imputation method (Lee and Carlin
2010). As no data on “language spoken in intimate settings” was collected in waves 4 and 5, we
averaged the dichotomous answers to that question from waves 1-3 to derive estimates for these
later waves. All multiple imputation analyses included a conservative 30 imputations (MI=30)
(von Hippel 2018).

Results
Descriptive analyses
Table 1 shows the summary statistics of the full analysis sample. The average age of the
respondents is 25.3, with a minimum of 12 years and a maximum of 43 years. Almost half of the
respondents are women (48%). Among mono-ethnic Asian ethnicities, Filipino ethnicity consists
of 35% of the sample, followed by Chinese at 7%. Multiracial and multiethnic Asians comprise
14% and 8% of the sample, respectively. The proportion of responses reporting daily smoking
tobacco, regularly drinking alcohol, and using cannabis in the past year, averaged across waves,
are 34%, 62%, and 41%, respectively. The percent of the sample identifying as generation 1
(foreign-born) is 35%, generation 2 (US-born, parents foreign-born) is 31%, and generation 3

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(US-born, parents US-born) is 34%. Two thirds of observations (67%) reported the use of
English in personal conversation.

<Table 1 about here>

Table 2 presents generational status across Asian ethnicities from Wave 1. Among Asian
ethnicities, Vietnamese have the highest percentage of first-generation (54%), followed by
Filipino (49%), and Korean (48%). Notable, the vast majority of Japanese subjects were third
generation (81%). Multiethnic Asians (66%) and multiracial Asians (51%) were also majority
third generation. Almost half (46%) of Asian Indians were second generation.

<Table 2 about here>

Figure 1 reports descriptive analyses of mean tobacco, alcohol, cannabis use, and illicit
substance use across Asian ethnicities and nativity generations. The ethnicities are ordered in
ascending substance use prevalence. There are notable substance use variations across Asian
ethnicities. Multiethnic and multiracial Asians are shown to generally have higher rates of
substance use, and Chinese and Vietnamese the lowest rates substance use, among the Asian
ethnicities. The figure supports expectations of relatively elevated smoking and drinking among
Japanese and Korean ethnicities. Cannabis use is considerable (>30%) among all US-born
groups (i.e., generations 2 and 3), except Chinese and Vietnamese. Further, there is a clear
visual trend in Figure 1 of increasing substance use across nativity generations, consistent with
the inferential results discussed below, with more native generations generally exhibiting

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

higher substance use rates. Results of tests for association of substance use to nativity
generations within each ethnicity are reported by asterisks above the bars. These results
indicate that Filipino and multiethnic Asians demonstrate consistent, significant increase in
substance use among more nativity generations. It is important to note the modest statistical
power to test the Asian Indian, Japanese, and Vietnamese ethnicities for this within ethnicity
secondary analysis; thus, these results should be considered primarily descriptive.
<Figure 1 about here>

Figure 2 visualizes smoothed substance use means by age and Asian ethnicity for tobacco,
alcohol, cannabis, and illicit substances. Due to some small age-ethnicity cells, we use median
splines (with four knots) to smooth means over age (Wegman and Wright 1983). Asian
ethnicities vary in terms of growth and decline in rates of substance use as the subjects age
from ~15-40. We observe some general age trends that are fairly consistent across ethnicities.
For instance, the age pattern of ever regular tobacco use indicates a marked increase in the
teens and early 20s and then a stabilization thereafter. Conversely, current regular alcohol use
increases in the teens and 20s, then stabilizing in the early 30s, before increasing again in the
late 30s. Cannabis use in the past year is characterized by linear increase across age, perhaps in
line with liberalizing attitudes toward the substance during the assessed period. Finally, illicit
substance use showed marked curvilinear growth and decline, peaking around age 30 and then
declined sharply to low levels in all groups by age 40. Ethnic differences largely mirror the
results in Figure 1, with Chinese and Vietnamese ethnicities typically at the lowest levels
across the age range, and multiethnic and multiracial Asians at the ethnicities highest levels.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

One exception to this is alcohol use, for which Chinese ethnicity exhibits approximately mean
levels among Asian ethnicities.

<Figure 2 about here>

Inferential analyses
Table 3, Models 1-3 examine ever daily tobacco use across Asian ethnicities (with Chinese
ethnicity as referent). Model 1 shows that the unconditional rate of regular tobacco use varies
substantially across Asian American ethnicities, with the highest likelihood of substance use
among multiracial Asians (β =2.29; p<0.001), and individuals who identified as multiethnic
Asian (β=2.47; p<0.001). Compared to the Chinese referent, Korean (β =1.90; p<0.001), Filipino
(β =1.59; p<0.001), Japanese (β =1.69; p<0.01), and “Other” Asian ethnicities (β =2.06;
p<0.001) have a higher unconditional probabilities of regular tobacco use. In Model 2 (Table 3),
we control for sociodemographic variables such as age, age squared, sex, and parental SES. Age
and sex show independent effects on tobacco use in the expected direction. For instance, females
are significantly less likely to smoke (β =-1.05; p<0.001) than males. All ethnic differences were
substantively unchanged by covariate adjustment. In Model 3 (Table 3), we consider mediation
of ethnic disparities by the acculturation variables—generational status (first (referent), second,
and the third nativity generation), and English use in personal conversation. Generational status
and English use in personal conversation appear to moderately attenuate the coefficients for
high-risk groups from Model 2: multiethnic Asian (reduced by ~20%), multiracial Asian
(reduced by ~20%), and “Other” Asian category (reduced by ~12%) compared to Model 2, but
do not reduce these effects of nonsignificance. Controlling for acculturation factors does reduce

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the Japanese coefficient to nonsignificance, yielding support for mediation via acculturation.
Additionally, acculturation variables show strong, independent effects on tobacco use. Second
and third generation Asians, as well as Asians who use English in personal conversation, have
significantly increased probability of tobacco use (p<0.001).

<Table 3 about here>
Table 3, Models 4-6 examine current regular alcohol consumption (≥1-2 drinks weekly) across
Asian ethnicity (with Chinese ethnicity as referent). Unlike smoking, there is little ethnic
heterogeneity in terms of drinking, with only multiracial Asian having a higher likelihood of
drinking (β=0.56; p<0.01), and “Other Asian” ethnicity having a lower likelihood of drinking
(β=-0.31; p<0.05) than Chinese. These 2 ethnic differences remain significant with covariate
adjustment (i.e., Table 3, Model 6). Age and sex show independent effects on regular alcohol use
in the expected direction. Parental household income shows positive association to regular
alcohol use (β=0.36; p<0.001). Inclusion of acculturation variables in Table 3, Model 6
attenuated the coefficient size of multiracial Asian category by 31%, but that coefficient remains
significant (p<0.01).
In Table 4, Models 1-3, we examine cannabis use in the past year across Asian ethnicities. The
findings resemble those found on tobacco use—there exists considerable variability in cannabis
use among Asian ethnicities. The high-risk groups in cannabis use include multiracial (β =1.74;
p<0.001) and multiethnic (β =1.46; p<0.001) Asians, compared to Chinese referent. Filipino (β
=0.67; p<0.001), Japanese (β =0.89; p<0.05), and “Other” Asian (β =75; p<0.01) categories are
also significantly more likely to use cannabis than Chinese ethnicity. In Table 4, Model 2, we
adjust for sociodemographic variables. Parental household income has positive and independent
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

effects on cannabis use (β=0.49; p<0.001), and females are less likely to use cannabis than males
(β =-0.82; p<0.001). Unlike the other 3 outcomes, the age 2 coefficient was not significant for
cannabis use, indicating that the prevalence of cannabis use increases roughly linearly across the
examined age range (~15-40). We examine the effects of acculturation variables in Model 3.
Acculturation variables have strong, independent effects (p<0.001) in the expected direction,
with more acculturation associated with higher probability of cannabis use. There is also some
evidence that acculturation partially mediates the increased risk among high-risk ethnicities. The
inclusion of the acculturation measures attenuated the effect sizes of ‘Other’ Asian, multiethnic
Asian, and multiracial Asian by 24%, 23%, and 23%, respectively. Notably, controlling for
sociodemographics and acculturation variables reduced the Japanese effect to nonsignificance,
lending additional support for mediation via acculturation.
<Table 4 about here>
In Table 4, Models 4-6, we examine illicit substance use, using a factor score estimated from
cannabis, methamphetamine, cocaine, and other illicit drug use. Although illicit substance use is
relatively uncommon across Asian ethnicities, there are highly significant increased probability
of illicit substance use among multiracial (β=0.25; p<0.001) and multiethnic (β=0.22; p<0.001)
Asians relative to the Chinese referent. Parental education and childhood household income
show no significant effect on illicit substance use, whereas age, age2 and sex have large,
independent effects in the expected direction. Acculturation variables nominally mediate the
relationship between ethnicity and illicit substance use among the two high-risk groups,
multiethnic (24% reduction from Model 5) and multiracial Asians (20% reduction from Model
5). Interestingly, among the 3 generations, only the third generation appears to have an
independent effect on illicit substance use (β=0.09; p<0.05). As with the other outcomes, use of
22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

English in personal conversation is strongly positively associated with illicit substance use
(β=0.10; p<0.001).

Discussion
This research contributes towards an improved understanding of substance use by 1)
disaggregated investigation of substance use across AA ethnicities, including those identifying as
multiethnic or multiracial; 2) individually examining a full range legal and illicit substances, 3)
investigating the mediating effects of acculturation on AA ethnic disparities in substance use,
and 4) examining longitudinal patterns of substance use from early adolescence to mature
adulthood. We find strong supports for Hypothesis 1— AA ethnicities at high risk for substance
use are characterized by high levels of acculturation, indicated by low proportion of
immigrants/first generation, and multiethnic/multiracial family structures. Relatedly, we find
partial support for Hypothesis 2, as adjusting for acculturative factors explained some, but not
all, of the observed ethnic disparities. Finally, we found little support for Hypothesis 3, as
substance use in this longitudinal AA cohort appears to peak at later ages than those predicted by
population-level research in contemporary US cohorts.

Multiethnic and multiracial Asian Americans
Multiracial and multiethnic AAs exhibited consistent disadvantage in substance use rates across
the range of substances studied. The findings on multiracial AAs were robust across all analyses
conducted. Our findings regarding high rates of substance use among multiracial AAs is novel,
though there exist some findings on multiracial youth (not Asians) being at greater risks of
alcohol consumption (Choi et al. 2006) and illicit substance use (Subica and Wu 2018).
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Underlying determinants of this high propensity of substance use among multiracial Asians is
likely a high degree of acculturation. Although we have not tested the effects of psychological
aspects, stress due to discordance between Asian and US culture, as well as racial/ethnic stigma
and discrimination (Brown 2018), likely contribute to the relatively high propensity for
substance use observed for multiracial AAs.
Similarly, Asians who reported multiethnic Asian backgrounds exhibited a significantly higher
probability of substance use, in 3 of the 4 substances studied than the mono-ethnic AA groups.
This finding, in part, reflects the effect of greater acculturation, as multiethnic AAs are more
frequently native-born and English language users. Indeed, in the current study, 66% of
multiethnic Asians consists of the third generation, and 88% use English in personal
conversation (see Table 2). It also seems reasonable to speculate that interethnic marriage may
facilitate faster acculturation to US culture, eroding the presence of each parent’s protective
heritage culture in ways not captured by English usage and personal and parental nativity.

Acculturation and ethnicity
We found partial support for Hypothesis 2. Acculturation measures appear to partially mediate
the relationship between ethnicity and substance use, with pronounced and consistent mediation
for multiracial and multiethnic Asians. However, analyses indicate that the likelihood of
substance use and illicit substance use linked to ethnicity cannot be fully explained by
acculturation. It is also noteworthy that distinguishing multiethnic and multiracial Asians from
individual Asian ethnic categories may have weakened the influence of acculturation measures,
relative to previous studies, as multiethnic and multiracial Asians are the most acculturated
groups (see Table 2 and Figure 1).
24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Tobacco smoking as an East Asian cultural feature?
Findings on smoking are statistically significant across the board, suggesting a significant
variation of smoking prevalence among Asian groups. As illustrated in the descriptive findings
shown in Figure 1, multiethnic Asians and multiracial Asians are at the highest risk among AA
groups in terms of smoking. Even adjusting for relatively high acculturation, multiethnic and
multiracial Asians still show a significantly higher probability of smoking than subjects of
Chinese ethnicity. Additionally, rates of smoking are notably high among those of Korean
ethnicity, who, despite having a high proportion of immigrants, still have significantly higher
smoking rates than Chinese. Elevated smoking rates are also seen for Japanese, Filipino, and
“Other” Asian ethnicities relative to the Chinese referent. Perhaps the high prevalence in tobacco
smoking across most of East and Southeast Asia may explain the observed elevation for these
ethnicities (WHO 2015). The findings on smoking lend support to previous findings on the
relationship between Asian ethnicity and problem drinking (Cook et al. 2015).

Variation in age patterns of Asian American substance use
We found minimal support for Hypothesis 3, which predicted that, consistent with existing
literature, substance use would peak during late adolescence and early adulthood (~age 25).
Instead, we have found unique age patterns of substance use across each of the studied
substances, tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, and illicit substances. As shown in Figure 2, for a
majority of substances (except tobacco, which peaks around age 25), the peak level of
consumption is substantially later. For instance, cannabis use increasing roughly linearly across
the entire period (ages ~15-40); thus exhibiting the highest rates, somewhat surprisingly, at age

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

~40. Conversely, illicit substance use is shown to peak around age 32, before declining sharply.
Alcohol exhibited two maxima, the first around age 25, and a second at the end of the age range,
age ~40. Strong and consistent effects in age squared coefficients across all outcomes, except
cannabis, confirm the curvilinear growth of substance use among Asians. Thus, contrary to the
established perception that substance use is particularly prevalent among adolescents and young
adults, these data show a more complex pattern lending minimal support for the hypothesis of
disproportionate substance use in adolescence or the transition to adulthood. Future research will
be needed to determine in this pattern is limited to Asian American ethnicities (Hahm et al. 2008,
Iwamoto et al. 2015), as well as disentangle to influences of age/period/cohort on the observed
patterns.

Limitations and future directions
Notwithstanding the current study’s contributions, it was characterized by various limitations.
For instance, substance use measures in the study are based on self-reports; a notable, and
common, limitation in substance use survey research, as respondents tend to underreport
substance use, due to social desirability bias (Ryabov 2015). Another limitation prevalent in
longitudinal studies spanning multiple developmental stages is measurement inconsistency
across waves, notably present here in the “illicit substance use” measure. Although we employed
multiple imputation methods to address missingness in data, we could not account for complete
missingness of individual measures. For instance, measures on methamphetamine were absent in
2 waves. However, various sensitivity analyses suggests that these minor data inconsistencies
have not substantively influenced our findings. Another limitations is the heterogeneous time
period of the four substance use outcomes (e.g., ever regular smoker, current regular alcohol use,

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cannabis use in the past year), which was necessitated by data limitations in Add Health. Lastly,
small cell size in Asian Indian and Japanese respondents yielded large standard errors, limiting
our ability to make statistical inferences for these groups. Future research into the social
epidemiology substance abuse would benefit from collecting larger AA cohorts, and from
considering intersectional variation across gender, ethnicity, sexuality, and acculturation status.

Conclusion
This study indicates significant substance use disparities across Asian ethnicities, with the lowest
probability of substance use among Chinese and Vietnamese, and the highest among multiethnic
and multiracial Asians. Moreover, acculturative factors (e.g., English language use, nativity, and
parental nativity) were strongly associated with increased substance use, and mediated some, but
not all, of the observed ethnic disparities. This research demonstrates how the model minority
stereotype may masks significant ethnic disparities within the Asian American population, and
argues that a considerable proportion of the observed ethnic disparities in substance use stem
from diverse family ties speeding transition to US cultural norms, away from the relatively
salubrious norms of sending Asian nations.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Abraído-Lanza, Ana F., Maria T. Chao and Karen R. Florez. 2005. "Do Healthy Behaviors Decline with
Greater Acculturation?: Implications for the Latino Mortality Paradox." Social science & medicine
61(6):1243-55.
Adkins, D. E., V. Wang, M. E. Dupre, Ejcg van den Oord and G. H. Elder. 2009. "Structure and Stress:
Trajectories of Depressive Symptoms across Adolescence and Young Adulthood." Social Forces
88(1):31-60.
Becerra, Monideepa B., Patti Herring, Helen Hopp Marshak and Jim E. Banta. 2013. "Association
between Acculturation and Binge Drinking among Asian-Americans: Results from the California
Health Interview Survey." Journal of Addiction 2013. doi: 10.1155/2013/248196.
Bersamira, Clifford S., Yu-An Lin, Keunhye Park and Jeanne C. Marsh. 2017. "Drug Use among Asian
Americans: Differentiating Use by Acculturation Status and Gender." Journal of Substance Abuse
Treatment 79:76-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jsat.2017.06.002.
Bollen, Kenneth A., Paul P. Biemer, Alan F. Karr, Stephen Tueller and Marcus E. Berzofsky. 2016. "Are
Survey Weights Needed? A Review of Diagnostic Tests in Regression Analysis." 3(1):375-92. doi:
10.1146/annurev-statistics-011516-012958.
Brown, Tyson H. 2018. "Racial Stratification, Immigration, and Health Inequality: A Life CourseIntersectional Approach." Social Forces 96(4):1507-40. doi: 10.1093/sf/soy013 %J Social Forces.
Case, Anne and Angus Deaton. 2015. "Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among White NonHispanic Americans in the 21st Century." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
112(49):15078. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1518393112.
Choi, Yoonsun, Tracy W. Harachi, Mary Rogers Gillmore and Richard F. Catalano. 2006. "Are Multiracial
Adolescents at Greater Risk? Comparisons of Rates, Patterns, and Correlates of Substance Use

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and Violence between Monoracial and Multiracial Adolescents." American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry 76(1):86-97. doi: 10.1037/0002-9432.76.1.86.
Cochran, Susan D., Vickie M. Mays, Margarita Alegria, Alexander N. Ortega and David Takeuchi. 2007.
"Mental Health and Substance Use Disorders among Latino and Asian American Lesbian, Gay,
and Bisexual Adults." Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 75(5):785-94. doi:
10.1037/0022-006X.75.5.785.
Cook, Won Kim, Katherine J. Karriker-Jaffe, Jason Bond and Camillia Lui. 2015. "Asian American Problem
Drinking Trajectories During the Transition to Adulthood: Ethnic Drinking Cultures and
Neighborhood Contexts." American journal of public health 105(5):1020. doi:
10.2105/AJPH.2014.302196.
Cook, Won Kim, Winston Tseng, Christina Tam, Iyanrick John and Camillia Lui. 2017. "Ethnic-Group
Socioeconomic Status as an Indicator of Community-Level Disadvantage: A Study of
Overweight/Obesity in Asian American Adolescents." Soc Sci Med 184:15-22. doi:
10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.04.027.
Entzel, P. and J. R. Udry. 2009. "The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health: Research
Design [Www Document]."
Fothergill, Kate, Margaret E. Ensminger, Elaine E. Doherty, Hee-Soon Juon and Kerry M. Green. 2016.
"Pathways from Early Childhood Adversity to Later Adult Drug Use and Psychological Distress: A
Prospective Study of a Cohort of African Americans." Journal of Health and Social Behavior
57(2):223-39. doi: 10.1177/0022146516646808.
Gelman, A. and J. Hill. 2006. Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models:
Cambridge University Press.
Geronimus, A. T., J. Bound, T. A. Waidmann, J. M. Rodriguez and B. Timpe. 2019. "Weathering, Drugs,
and Whack-a-Mole: Fundamental and Proximate Causes of Widening Educational Inequity in Us
29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Life Expectancy by Sex and Race, 1990-2015." Journal of Health and Social Behavior 60(2):22239. doi: 10.1177/0022146519849932.
Hahm, Hyeouk, Judith Gonyea, Christine Chiao and Luca Koritsanszky. 2014. "Fractured Identity: A
Framework for Understanding Young Asian American Women’s Self-Harm and Suicidal
Behaviors." Race and Social Problems 6(1):56-68. doi: 10.1007/s12552-014-9115-4.
Hahm, Hyeouk Chris, Frank Y. Wong, Zhihuan Jennifer Huang, Al Ozonoff and Jieha Lee. 2008.
"Substance Use among Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders Sexual Minority Adolescents:
Findings from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health." Journal of Adolescent
Health 42(3):275-83. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2007.08.021.
Hong, Jun Sung, Hui Huang, Bushra Sabri and Johnny S. Kim. 2011. "Substance Abuse among Asian
American Youth: An Ecological Review of the Literature." Children and Youth Services Review
33(5):669-77. doi: 10.1016/j.childyouth.2010.11.015.
Iwamoto, Derek, Stephanie Takamatsu and Jeanett Castellanos. 2012. "Binge Drinking and AlcoholRelated Problems among U.S.-Born Asian Americans." Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority
Psychology 18(3):219-27. doi: 10.1037/a0028422.
Iwamoto, Derek, C. W. Lejuez, Erica Hamilton and Margaux Grivel. 2015. "Model Minority Stereotype,
Psychological Distress, Substance Use among Asian-American Young Adults." Pp. e146-e46, Vol.
146.
Iwamoto, Derek Kenji, Aylin Kaya, Margaux Grivel and Lauren Clinton. 2016. "Under-Researched
Demographics: Heavy Episodic Drinking and Alcohol-Related Problems among Asian Americans."
Alcohol research : current reviews 38(1):17.
Kline, David, Rebecca Andridge and Eloise Kaizar. 2017. "Comparing Multiple Imputation Methods for
Systematically Missing Subject-Level Data." Research Synthesis Methods 8(2):136-48. doi:
10.1002/jrsm.1192.
30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Kochhar, Rakesh and Anthony Cilluffo. 2018. "Income Inequality in the Us Is Rising Most Rapidly among
Asians.”." Pew Research Center report, Social and Demographic Trends, July 12.
Le, Thao, Deborah Goebert and Judy Wallen. 2009. "Acculturation Factors and Substance Use among
Asian American Youth." The Journal of Primary Prevention 30(3):453-73. doi: 10.1007/s10935009-0184-x.
Le, Thao N. and Tomoko Kato. 2006. "The Role of Peer, Parent, and Culture in Risky Sexual Behavior for
Cambodian and Lao/Mien Adolescents." Journal of Adolescent Health 38(3):288-96. doi:
10.1016/j.jadohealth.2004.12.005.
Lee, Jennifer and Frank D. Bean. 2004. "America's Changing Color Lines: Immigration, Race/Ethnicity,
and Multiracial Identification." Annu. Rev. Sociol. 30:221-42.
Lee, Jennifer. 2015. The Asian American Achievement Paradox, Edited by M. Zhou: New York : Russell
Sage Foundation.
Lee, Katherine J. and John B. Carlin. 2010. "Multiple Imputation for Missing Data: Fully Conditional
Specification Versus Multivariate Normal Imputation." American Journal of Epidemiology
171(5):624-32. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwp425 %J American Journal of Epidemiology.
Liu, William Ming and Derek Kenji Iwamoto. 2007. "Conformity to Masculine Norms, Asian Values,
Coping Strategies, Peer Group Influences and Substance Use among Asian American Men."
Psychology of Men & Masculinity 8(1):25-39. doi: 10.1037/1524-9220.8.1.25.
López, Gustavo, Neil G. Ruiz and Eileen Patten. 2017. "Key Facts About Asian Americans, a Diverse and
Growing Population." Pew Research Center. Accessed February 9:2018.
Lui, P. Priscilla and Byron L. Zamboanga. 2018. "Acculturation and Alcohol Use among Asian Americans:
A Meta-Analytic Review." Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 32(2):173-86. doi:
10.1037/adb0000340.

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Martell, Brandi N., Bridgette E. Garrett and Ralph S. Caraballo. 2016. "Disparities in Adult Cigarette
Smoking--United States, 2002-2005 and 2010-2013." Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
65(30):753. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6530a1.
Merline, Alicia C., Patrick M. O'Malley, John E. Schulenberg, Jerald G. Bachman and Lloyd D. Johnston.
2004. "Substance Use among Adults 35 Years of Age: Prevalence, Adulthood Predictors, and
Impact of Adolescent Substance Use." The American Journal of Public Health 94(1):96. doi:
10.2105/AJPH.94.1.96.
Nelson, Sarah C., Nazneen F. Bahrassa, Moin Syed and Richard M. Lee. 2015. "Transitions in Young
Adulthood: Exploring Trajectories of Parent–Child Conflict During College." Journal of Counseling
Psychology 62(3):545-51. doi: 10.1037/cou0000078.
Park, So-Youn, Jeane Anastas, Tazuko Shibusawa and Duy Nguyen. 2014. "The Impact of Acculturation
and Acculturative Stress on Alcohol Use across Asian Immigrant Subgroups." Substance Use &
Misuse, 2014, Vol.49(8), p.922-931 49(8):922-31. doi: 10.3109/10826084.2013.855232.
Qian, Zhenchao and Daniel T. Lichter. 2011. "Changing Patterns of Interracial Marriage in a Multiracial
Society." Journal of Marriage and Family 73(5):1065-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1741-3737.2011.00866.x.
Royston, Patrick and Willi Sauerbrei. 2007. "Multivariable Modeling with Cubic Regression Splines: A
Principled Approach." The Stata Journal 7(1):45-70. doi: 10.1177/1536867X0700700103.
Ruhm, C. J. 2017. "Geographic Variation in Opioid and Heroin Involved Drug Poisoning Mortality Rates."
American Journal of Preventive Medicine 53(6):745-53. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2017.06.009.
Ruhm, C. J. 2018. "Drug Mortality and Lost Life Years among Us Midlife Adults, 1999-2015." American
Journal of Preventive Medicine 55(1):11-18. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2018.03.014.
Ryabov, Igor. 2015. "Relation of Peer Effects and School Climate to Substance Use among Asian
American Adolescents." Journal of Adolescence 42(C):115-27. doi:
10.1016/j.adolescence.2015.04.007.
32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Saraiya, T., K. Z. Smith, A. N. C. Campbell and D. Hien. 2019. "Posttraumatic Stress Symptoms, Shame,
and Substance Use among Asian Americans." Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 96:1-11.
doi: 10.1016/j.jsat.2018.10.002.
Shanahan, L., S. N. Hill, L. M. Gaydosh, A. Steinhoff, E. J. Costello, K. A. Dodge, K. M. Harris and W. E.
Copeland. 2019. "Does Despair Really Kill? A Roadmap for an Evidence-Based Answer."
American Journal of Public Health 109(6):854-58. doi: 10.2105/ajph.2019.305016.
Subica, Andrew M. and Li-Tzy Wu. 2018. "Substance Use and Suicide in Pacific Islander, American Indian,
and Multiracial Youth." American Journal of Preventive Medicine 54(6):795-805. doi:
10.1016/j.amepre.2018.02.003.
Telzer, Eva, Nancy Gonzales and Andrew Fuligni. 2014. "Family Obligation Values and Family Assistance
Behaviors: Protective and Risk Factors for Mexican–American Adolescents’ Substance Use."
Journal of Youth and Adolescence 43(2):270-83. doi: 10.1007/s10964-013-9941-5.
Thai, Nghi D., Christian M. Connell and Jacob Kraemer Tebes. 2010. "Substance Use among Asian
American Adolescents: Influence of Race, Ethnicity, and Acculturation in the Context of Key Risk
and Protective Factors." Asian American Journal of Psychology 1(4):261-74. doi:
10.1037/a0021703.
Tosh, Aneesh K. and Patricia S. Simmons. 2007. "Sexual Activity and Other Risk-Taking Behaviors among
Asian-American Adolescents." Journal of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology 20(1):29-34. doi:
10.1016/j.jpag.2006.10.010.
von Hippel, Paul T. 2018. "How Many Imputations Do You Need? A Two-Stage Calculation Using a
Quadratic Rule." Sociological Methods & Research: In press.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124117747303. doi: 10.1177/0049124117747303.
White, Ian R, Patrick Royston and Angela M Wood. 2011. "Multiple Imputation Using Chained Equations:
Issues and Guidance for Practice." Statistics in Medicine 30(4):377-99.

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

WHO, World Health Organization. 2015. Who Global Report on Trends in Prevalence of Tobacco Smoking
2015: World Health Organization.
Yoo, Grace J., Mai-Nhung Le and Alan Y. Oda. 2013. Handbook of Asian American Health: New York :
Springer.
Yoo, Hyung, Gilbert Gee, Craig Lowthrop and Joanne Robertson. 2010. "Self-Reported Racial
Discrimination and Substance Use among Asian Americans in Arizona." Journal of Immigrant and
Minority Health 12(5):683-90. doi: 10.1007/s10903-009-9306-z.

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Tables
Table 1: Descriptive statistics of the analysis sample (MI=30)
Variable

N

min

max

Mean

SD

7915

-0.42

3.64

-0.08

0.75

7915
7915
7915
7915
4749†
7915

0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1

0.26
0.49
0.33
0.05
0.05
0.09

0.44
0.5
0.47
0.22
0.21
0.29

7915
7915
7915
7915
7915
7915
7915
7915
7915

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

0.17
0.35
0.03
0.02
0.06
0.05
0.11
0.08
0.14

0.38
0.48
0.16
0.14
0.23
0.22
0.32
0.27
0.35

7915
7915
7915
7915

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

0.35
0.31
0.34
0.67

0.48
0.46
0.47
0.45

Controls
Age
7915
12
43
25.3
Sex
7915
0
1
0.48
Parental Education (Mean)
7915
-5.5
4.03
0.58
Household Income (Logged)
7915
-2.87 3.27
0.09
†
Note: No information on methamphetamine use was available in the waves 1 & 2.

8.3
0.5
1.93
0.8

Latent Variables
Illicit Hard Drugs
Individual Substances
Smoking
Drinking
Cannabis Use
Cocaine
Methamphetamine
Other Drugs
Race/Ethnicities
Chinese
Filipino
Japanese
Asian Indian
Korean
Vietnamese
Other Asian
Multiethnic Asian
Multiracial Asian
Acculturation Variables
Generation 1
Generation 2
Generation 3
English Use

s

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 2: Distribution of generation status across Asian ethnicities (MI=30)
Generation Status
Generation 1
Race/Ethnicity
Chinese
Filipino

Generation 2

Generation 3

Percent

N

Percent

N

Percent

N

Total N

Total obs

32%

85

29%

77

39%

103

268

1340

49%

272

33%

182

17%

95

551

2755

Japanese

7%

3

13%

5

81%

34

42

210

Asian Indian

29%

9

46%

14

24%

8

31

155

Korean

48%

44

21%

19

30%

27

91

455

Vietnamese

54%

41

31%

24

14%

11

77

385

Other Asian

25%

44

38%

67

37%

66

178

890

Multiethnic

16%

20

18%

23

66%

82

125

625

Multiracial

13%

29

35%

78

51%

113

220

1100

540

1583

7915

Total

547

489

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 3. Generalized linear mixed model coefficients (logistic link) predicting regular tobacco (smoking) and
alcohol use by ethnicity, sociodemographics, acculturative factors across Add Health Waves 1-5 (MI=30)

Ethnicity
Chinese (ref.)
Filipino
Japanese
Asian Indian
Korean
Vietnamese
Other Asian
Multiethnic Asian
Multiracial Asian

Tobacco
(Model 1)

Tobacco
(Model 2)

Tobacco
(Model 3)

Alcohol
(Model 4)

Alcohol
(Model 5)

Alcohol
(Model 6)

-

-

-

-

-

-

1.589***
(5.50)
1.691**
(2.85)
0.538
(0.77)
1.896***
(4.28)
0.278
(0.54)
2.064***
(5.87)
2.471***
(6.34)
2.289***
(6.69)

1.945***
(5.66)
2.055**
(2.78)
0.613
(0.73)
2.566***
(4.68)
0.401
(0.66)
2.629***
(6.10)
3.278***
(6.69)
3.086***
(7.28)

2.018***
(5.74)
1.420
(1.94)
0.516
(0.62)
2.730***
(5.00)
0.710
(1.13)
2.326***
(5.37)
2.621***
(5.36)
2.465***
(5.85)

-0.00907
(-0.08)
0.305
(1.17)
0.0821
(0.28)
0.100
(0.51)
-0.392
(-1.85)
-0.307*
(-2.01)
0.307
(1.79)
0.560***
(3.92)

-0.178
(-1.21)
0.120
(0.37)
-0.0278
(-0.08)
0.154
(0.63)
-0.309
(-1.18)
-0.324
(-1.77)
0.439*
(2.10)
0.703***
(4.06)

-0.190
(-1.29)
-0.0862
(-0.27)
-0.0858
(-0.24)
0.199
(0.82)
-0.212
(-0.81)
-0.433*
(-2.37)
0.218
(1.03)
0.483**
(2.72)

0.863***
(14.64)
-0.013***
(-12.86)
-1.057***
(-4.61)
-0.0791
(-1.14)
0.271
(1.46)

0.866***
(14.67)
-0.013***
(-12.89)
-0.998***
(-4.39)
-0.0915
(-1.33)
0.0694
(0.36)

0.518***
(14.56)
-0.008***
(-11.44)
-0.341***
(-3.58)
0.0478
(1.60)
0.363***
(4.45)

0.519***
(14.66)
-0.008***
(-11.49)
-0.325***
(-3.43)
0.0409
(1.37)
0.296***
(3.52)

Sociodemographics
Age
Age squared
Female
Parental Education
Household Income
Acculturative factors
1st gen (immigrant) (ref.)
2nd gen (child of immigrant)
3rd gen +
English use
Intercept
Random intercept variance
N
Obs
t statistics in parentheses
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001

-3.886***
(-14.42)
9.531***
(9.91)
1583
7915

-17.19***
(-18.22)
17.73***
(8.15)
1583
7915

-

-

1.076***
(3.56)
1.435***
(4.59)
0.760***
(3.38)
-18.33***
(-18.65)
16.34***
(8.19)
1583
7915

0.281*
(2.09)
0.367*
(2.59)
0.331**
(2.97)
-8.131***
(-17.23)
1.612***
(10.08)
1583
7915

-0.108
(-1.08)
1.003***
(9.54)
1583
7915

-7.742***
(-16.67)
1.667***
(10.23)
1583
7915

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 4. Generalized linear mixed model coefficients predicting cannabis use (logistic link) and illicit substance use
(linear/identity link) by ethnicity, sociodemographics, acculturative factors across Add Health Waves 1-5 (MI=30)

Ethnicity
Chinese (ref.)
Filipino
Japanese
Asian Indian
Korean
Vietnamese
Other Asian
Multiethnic Asian
Multiracial Asian

Cannabis
(Model 1)

Cannabis
(Model 2)

Cannabis
(Model 3)

Illicit subs
(Model 4)

Illicit subs
(Model 5)

Illicit subs
(Model 6)

-

-

-

-

-

-

0.678***
(3.60)
0.887*
(2.30)
0.836
(1.91)
0.504
(1.74)
-0.320
(-0.89)
0.752**
(3.29)
1.459***
(5.70)
1.738***
(7.74)

0.697**
(2.98)
0.745
(1.58)
0.890
(1.63)
0.698
(1.94)
-0.148
(-0.32)
1.031***
(3.57)
1.898***
(6.00)
2.226***
(7.97)

0.704**
(2.98)
0.341
(0.73)
0.720
(1.34)
0.822*
(2.35)
0.0572
(0.13)
0.775**
(2.69)
1.448***
(4.47)
1.745***
(6.13)

0.0887*
(2.37)
0.189*
(2.18)
0.190*
(1.99)
0.111
(1.76)
0.0248
(0.37)
0.0952
(1.92)
0.275***
(4.84)
0.296***
(6.48)

0.0715
(1.90)
0.165
(1.90)
0.182
(1.91)
0.126*
(2.00)
0.0395
(0.59)
0.0967
(1.94)
0.282***
(4.97)
0.307***
(6.68)

0.0645
(1.68)
0.102
(1.16)
0.167
(1.77)
0.134*
(2.16)
0.0656
(0.97)
0.0674
(1.34)
0.215***
(3.69)
0.245***
(5.21)

0.204***
(5.27)
-0.001
(-1.91)
-0.828***
(-5.66)
0.0465
(0.99)
0.487***
(3.83)

0.204***
(5.28)
-0.001
(-1.90)
-0.783***
(-5.46)
0.0375
(0.80)
0.330*
(2.61)

0.101***
(12.34)
-0.002***
(-10.61)
-0.106***
(-4.20)
-0.00289
(-0.37)
0.0441
(1.89)

0.102***
(12.38)
-0.002***
(-10.63)
-0.103***
(-4.08)
-0.00527
(-0.67)
0.0275
(1.14)

Sociodemographics
Age
Age squared
Female
Parental Education
Household Income
Acculturative factors
1st gen (immigrant) (ref.)
2nd gen (child of immigrant)
3rd gen +
English use
Intercept
Random intercept variance
N
Obs
t statistics in parentheses
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001

-1.822***
(-11.07)
2.994***
(10.02)
1583
7915

-6.118***
(-11.72)
4.854***
(10.12)
1583
7915

-

-

0.999***
(4.35)
0.983***
(4.48)
0.590***
(3.55)
-7.041***
(-12.91)
4.438***
(10.03)
1583
7915

0.0435
(1.18)
0.0904*
(2.26)
0.102***
(3.55)
-1.675***
(-15.32)
0.135***
(23.17)
1583
7915

-0.200***
(-6.50)
0.137***
(23.32)
1583
7915

-1.579***
(-14.87)
0.141***
(23.51)
1583
7915

38

Figures
Figure 1: Bar graphs showing mean tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, and illicit substance use across Asian ethnicities and immigrant generations. For
each substance, ethnicities are ordered in ascending mean substance use prevalence. Asterisks indicate statistical significance of nativity effects on
substance use prevalence, within each ethnicity (using random intercept generalized linear mixed model). (MI=30)

Alcohol (current regular use)

Alcohol

** *

.6

.6

Tobacco (ever regular use)

Tobacco

.4
0

0

.2

.2

.4

** * ***
123

123

hi
ne
se
C

123

123

123

123

123

123

Cannabis

123

123

123

123

.6

Illicit substances (latent)

**

*

*

0

0

.2

.2

.4

* * ***

.4

123

Illicit substances

.6

Cannabis use (past year)

123

Fi
lip
in
o
M
ul
tie
th
ni
As
c
ia
n
In
di
an
Ko
re
an
Ja
pa
ne
se
M
ul
tir
ac
ia
l

123

Vi
et
na
m
es
O
e
th
er
As
ia
n
C
hi
ne
se

123

Ko
re
an
M
ul
tir
ac
ia
l

123

Vi
et
na
m
es
As
e
ia
n
In
di
an
Ja
pa
ne
se
M
ul
tie
th
ni
O
c
th
er
As
ia
n
Fi
lip
in
o

123

123

ia
n

123

123

123

123

123

123

123

123

123

se
Vi
et
na
m
es
O
e
th
er
As
ia
n
Fi
lip
in
o
Ja
pa
ne
se
Ko
re
an
As
ia
n
In
di
an
M
ul
tie
th
ni
c
M
ul
tir
ac
ia
l

123

C
hi
ne

123

In
di
an
M
ul
tie
th
ni
c
M
ul
tir
ac
ia
l

123

lip
in
o

123

Fi

123

As

123

Ko
re
an

123

Vi
et
na
m
es
e
C
hi
ne
se
Ja
pa
ne
se
O
th
er
As
ia
n

123

Source: The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health, Waves 1-5

39

Figure 2: Smoothed substance use means by age and Asian ethnicity for tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, and illicit substances (median splines with 4
knots). Variable Y axes used to maximize acuity. (MI=30)
Tobacco
Tobacco (ever regular use)
0
.1 .2 .3 .4 .5

Alcohol (current regular use)
.2
.4
.6
.8
1

Alcohol

15

20

25

Age

30

35

40

15

20

Cannabis

25

Age

30

35

40

35

40

0

0

Cannabis (past year)
.2
.4
.6
.8

Illicit Substances (latent)
.05 .1 .15 .2 .25

Illicit substances

15

20

25

Age

30

35

40

15

20

25

Age

Chinese

Filipino

Japanese

Indian

Vietnamese

Other Asian

Multiethnic

Multiracial

30

Korean

Source: The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health, Waves 1-5

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002048; this version posted July 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Appendix 1: Missing data in the sample
Full Sample
Asian Sample Only
Variables
Missing
% Missing
N
Missing
%Missing
N
Missing in Substance Use indicators, W1
Smoking
87
0.43%
20,275
35
2.21%
1,585
Drinking
71
0.35%
20,275
32
2.02%
1,585
Marijuana Use
338
1.67%
20,275
61
3.85%
1,585
Cocaine Use
346
1.71%
20,275
59
3.72%
1,585
Other Drugs
344
1.70%
20,275
61
3.85%
1,585
Missing in Substance Use indicators, W2
Smoking
6,043
29.81%
20,275
532
33.56%
1,585
Drinking
6,086
30.02%
20,275
536
33.82%
1,585
Marijuana Use
6,133
30.25%
20,275
540
34.07%
1,585
Cocaine Use
6,138
30.27%
20,275
542
34.20%
1,585
Other Drugs
6,129
30.23%
20,275
542
34.20%
1,585
Missing in Substance Use indicators, W3
Smoking
5,608
27.66%
20,275
407
25.68%
1,585
Drinking
5,651
27.87%
20,275
412
25.99%
1,585
Marijuana Use
5,594
27.59%
20,275
403
25.43%
1,585
Cocaine Use
5,585
27.55%
20,275
403
25.43%
1,585
Meth Use
5,588
27.56%
20,275
403
25.43%
1,585
Other Drugs
5,593
27.59%
20,275
404
25.49%
1,585
Missing in Substance Use indicators, W4
Smoking
5,083
25.07%
20,275
561
35.39%
1,585
Drinking
5,098
25.14%
20,275
561
35.39%
1,585
Marijuana Use
5,169
25.49%
20,275
565
35.65%
1,585
Cocaine Use
5,152
25.41%
20,275
565
35.65%
1,585
Meth Use
5,142
25.36%
20,275
565
35.65%
1,585
Other Drugs
5,149
25.40%
20,275
565
35.65%
1,585
Missing in Substance Use indicators, W5
Smoking
16,915
83.43%
20,275
1,368
86.31%
1,585
Drinking
16,905
83.38%
20,275
1,366
86.18%
1,585
Marijuana Use
16,932
83.51%
20,275
1,368
86.31%
1,585
Cocaine Use
16,928
83.49%
20,275
1,368
86.31%
1,585
Meth Use
16,934
83.52%
20,275
1,367
86.25%
1,585
Other Drugs
16,902
83.36%
20,275
1,366
86.18%
1,585
Missing in English use, W1-W3
English Use Wave 1
29
0.14%
20,275
29
1.83%
1,585
English Use Wave 2
6,036
29.77%
20,275
532
33.56%
1,585
English Use Wave 3
5,577
27.51%
20,275
401
25.30%
1,585
Missing in Sociodemographics, W1
Generational Status
702
3.46%
20,275
269
16.97%
1,585
Race/Ethnicity
52
0.26%
20,275
52
3.28%
1,585
Mean Parental Education
759
3.74%
20,275
129
8.13%
1,585
Household Income (Logged)
5,582
27.53%
20,275
1,081
68.13%
1585
Sex
31
0.15%
20,275
31
1.95%
1585
Age
46
0.22%
20,275
38
2.40%
1,585
Note: No data were collected for Language use variables in Waves 4 & 5, imputed these as the average of the data available in previous waves.

41

