medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Home Use of a Wireless Intracortical BrainComputer Interface by Individuals With
Tetraplegia
John D. Simeral*, Senior Member, IEEE, Thomas Hosman, Jad Saab, Sharlene N. Flesher, Marco
Vilela, Brian Franco, Jessica Kelemen, David M. Brandman, John G. Ciancibello, Paymon G. Rezaii,
David M. Rosler, Krishna V. Shenoy§, Senior Member, IEEE, Jaimie M. Henderson§, Arto V.
Nurmikko, Fellow, IEEE, and Leigh R. Hochberg
Abstract—Individuals with neurological disease or injury such
as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, spinal cord injury or stroke may
become tetraplegic, unable to speak or even locked-in. For people
with these conditions, current assistive technologies are often
ineffective. Brain-computer interfaces are being developed to
enhance independence and restore communication in the absence
of physical movement. Over the past decade, individuals with
tetraplegia have achieved rapid on-screen typing and point-andclick control of tablet apps using intracortical brain-computer
interfaces (iBCIs) that decode intended arm and hand movements
from neural signals recorded by implanted microelectrode arrays.
However, cables used to convey neural signals from the brain
tether participants to amplifiers and decoding computers and
require expert oversight during use, severely limiting when and
where iBCIs could be available for use. Here, we demonstrate the
first human use of a wireless broadband iBCI. Based on a
prototype system previously used in pre-clinical research, we
replaced the external cables of a 192-electrode iBCI with wireless
transmitters and achieved high-resolution recording and decoding
of broadband field potentials and spiking activity from people with
paralysis. Two participants in an ongoing pilot clinical trial
performed on-screen item selection tasks to assess iBCI-enabled
cursor control. Communication bitrates were equivalent between
cabled and wireless configurations. Participants also used the
wireless iBCI to control a standard commercial tablet computer to

browse the web and use several mobile applications. Within-day
comparison of cabled and wireless interfaces evaluated bit error
rate, packet loss, and the recovery of spike rates and spike
waveforms from the recorded neural signals. In a representative
use case, the wireless system recorded intracortical signals from
two arrays in one participant continuously through a 24-hour
period at home. Wireless multi-electrode recording of broadband
neural signals over extended periods introduces a valuable tool for
human neuroscience research and is an important step toward
practical deployment of iBCI technology for independent use by
individuals with paralysis. On-demand access to highperformance iBCI technology in the home promises to enhance
independence and restore communication and mobility for
individuals with severe motor impairment. 1

This work was supported in part by NIH-NINDS UH2NS095548; the Office
of Research and Development, Rehab. R&D Service, Department of Veterans
Affairs (N9228C, N2864C, A2295R, B6453R, P1155R); NIH-NIDCD
R01DC009899 and R01DC014034; NIH-NBIB R01EB007401; The Executive
Committee on Research (ECOR) of Massachusetts General Hospital; MGHDeane Institute; DARPA REPAIR; Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute at
Stanford; Larry and Pamela Garlick; Samuel and Betsy Reeves; The Howard
Hughes Medical Institute; Conquer Paralysis Now 004698.
*J. D. Simeral is with the Center for Neurorestoration and Neurotechnology,
Rehabilitation R&D Service, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Providence, RI 02908 USA (CfNN) and with the School of Engineering and the
Robert J. & Nancy D. Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University,
Providence, RI (e-mail: john_simeral@brown.edu).
T. Hosman is with CfNN and the School of Engineering, Brown University.
J. Saab was with CfNN and the School of Engineering, Brown University.
He is now with Insight Data Science, Toronto, Canada.
S. N. Flesher is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University.
M. Vilela was with the School of Engineering, Brown University.
B. Franco was with the Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA. He is now with NeuroPace Inc., Mountain View, CA.
J. Kelemen is with the Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston.
D. Brandman was with the School of Engineering, Brown University. He is
now with the Department of Surgery (Neurosurgery), Dalhousie University,
Halifax, NS, Canada.

J. G. Ciancibello was with the School of Engineering, Brown University. He
is now with the Center for Bioelectronic Medicine at the Feinstein Institute for
Medical Research, Manhasset, NY.
P. G. Rezaii is with the Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University.
D. M. Rosler is with the CfNN and the School of Engineering and the Robert
J. & Nancy D. Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, and also
with the Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital.
K. V. Shenoy is with the Departments of Electrical Engineering,
Bioengineering and Neurobiology, Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, and the
Neurosciences and Bio-X Programs, Stanford, and also with the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University.
J. M. Henderson is with the Department of Neurosurgery and Wu Tsai
Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University.
A. V. Nurmikko is with the School of Engineering, Department of Physics,
and the Robert J. & Nancy D. Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown
University.
L. R. Hochberg is with the Center for Neurorestoration and
Neurotechnology, Rehabilitation R&D Service, Providence VA Medical
Center, and the School of Engineering and the Robert J. & Nancy D. Carney
Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, and the Center for
Neurotechnology and Neurorecovery, Department of Neurology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School.
§
K. V. Shenoy and J. M. Henderson contributed equally to this work.

Index Terms—Brain-computer interface, clinical trial, motor
cortex, neural engineering, wireless transmitter

N

I. INTRODUCTION

disease or injury such as amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, stroke and cervical spinal cord injury can
result in tetraplegia, loss of speech or locked-in syndrome.
Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) are being developed to
EUROLOGICAL

1 by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

restore communication and motor function for individuals
living with profound motor disability. Motor BCIs aim to
provide access to assistive devices by decoding user commands
from electroencephalography (EEG), electrocorticography
(ECoG), or intracortical signals. In ongoing clinical research,
high-performance intracortical BCIs (iBCIs) are being
developed to infer a user’s movement intentions [1]–[8] or
speech [9], [10] from neural activity recorded from one or more
microelectrode arrays implanted in motor areas of cortex. By
imagining natural hand, finger and arm movements, trial
participants with paralysis have achieved reach-and grasp with
robotic and prosthetic limbs [2], [3], [11] and their own
reanimated limb [6], [12], and have demonstrated reliable
cursor control for tablet use [8] and on-screen typing for
communication [4], [7], [13]. Building on steady advances in
point-and-click accuracy, speed [4], [7], [13]–[16] and
consistency [17]–[21], iBCI trial participants at home have
achieved average on-screen point-to-select typing rates over 37
correct characters per minute maintained over days and weeks
[4], [7].
While this progress is promising, one practical limitation of
current iBCIs is their reliance on recording cables that link an
implanted array’s head-mounted titanium connector
(“pedestal”) to the signal processing and decoding computers.
Enabling iBCIs for long-term recording and independent
mobile use at home without technical supervision will require
wireless acquisition of intracortical signals to eliminate
tethering cables to the head. However, wireless recording for
iBCI has yet to be demonstrated in people, in part because
translating the proven cabled system (16 bits per sample at 30
kS/s for each of 96 electrodes per implanted array) to wireless
form presents significant engineering challenges. Although
wireless broadband signal acquisition might not be a design
requirement for some targeted iBCI applications [22], it allows
for investigation of novel iBCI algorithms spanning the full
spectrum of neural activity while supporting a wide range of
fundamental electrophysiological research during untethered
use. With this motivation and the goal of enabling continuous,
independent use of an iBCI, previous work from our team
created a compact, power efficient neurosensor that digitizes
and wirelessly transmits broadband cortical activity from a 96channel chronically implanted microelectrode array [23]–[26].
A battery-powered pedestal-mounted form of that transmitter
was demonstrated in animals during open-loop tasks and free
home-cage behavior [23], [24]. A fully implanted inductivelycharged version was developed and tested in-vivo in non-human
primates [25], [26] and is on a translational path for human use.
Both the external and fully implanted devices were designed
with a relatively high sample rate (20 kS/s per electrode, 12
bits/sample) to support both fundamental human neuroscience
research and investigational signal processing and decoding
methods for high-performance iBCI systems.
Here we report translation of a wireless broadband
intracortical BCI system to human use and evaluate its
performance during use at home by two participants in the
BrainGate pilot clinical trial. The external transmitter
underwent commercial manufacturing and preclinical safety

testing in preparation for human investigational use.
Transmission frequency was configurable such that neural
activity from two 96-channel intracortical arrays could be
recorded simultaneously without interference. Two transmitters
and associated commercial receiver hardware were integrated
into the iBCI real-time signal processing system. Both
participants then used the BrainGate system to complete a series
of cursor-based point-and-dwell assessment tasks [1], [7], [27]
to quantify iBCI performance in cabled and wireless
configurations. We demonstrate that the wireless signals could
be decoded with sufficient quality and reliability to support
spontaneous user-paced point-and-click use of a tablet
computer as reported for previous participants using a cable
connection [8]. To verify wireless function in one
representative iBCI use scenario, one participant completed
dual-array wireless recording over 24 hours of daily activity,
rest and sleep. Finally, we examined the underlying signal
quality and digital sample integrity in the wireless data streams
relative to the cabled system in both benchtop and in-home
evaluations.
II. METHODS
A. Participants
Study participants T5 and T10 were previously enrolled in the
pilot clinical trial of the BrainGate Neural Interface System
(http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00912041). At the
time of this study, T5 was a 63-year-old man with a C4 AIS-C
spinal cord injury (SCI) resulting in tetraplegia. T10 was a 35year-old man with a C4 AIS-A SCI resulting in tetraplegia.
All activities, including use of the wireless devices, were
permitted by the US Food and Drug Administration
(Investigational Device Exemption #G090003) and the
Institutional Review Boards of Partners Healthcare/
Massachusetts General Hospital, Providence VA Medical
Center, Stanford University and Brown University.
For each participant, intracortical neural activity was recorded
from two 96-channel planar silicon microelectrode arrays (4
mm x 4 mm, 1.5 mm electrode length, platinum tips; Blackrock
Microsystems, Salt Lake City, UT) placed in the left (dominant)
precentral gyrus, except participant T10 whose second array
was placed in the middle frontal gyrus.
B. Standard Cabled iBCI System
The cabled BrainGate iBCI used commercial hardware and
software (Blackrock Microsystems) to acquire and record
neural signals. This system included a NeuroPort Patient Cable
connecting each percutaneous head-mounted pedestal to a Front
End Amplifier which applied a hardware filter (0.3 Hz – 7.5
kHz) and digitized signals on each of 96 microelectrodes (30
kS/s, 16 bits per sample). The continuous serial stream of digital
samples was relayed over fiber optic cable to a Neural Signal
Processor (NSP) where they were timestamped and sent out as
UDP packets on a private local area network (LAN). These
“raw” data were stored (without software filtering or downsampling) by Blackrock’s Central Suite software for offline
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

D. Wireless iBCI System
In the wireless recording system (Fig. 1, bottom), each
NeuroPort Patient Cable and Front End Amplifier was replaced
by four components (Blackrock Microsystems): a BWD, one or
more polarized planar antennas (5” x 5”, 3GHz – 4 GHz
reception, PA-333810-NF), a Wireless Receiver (PN9323) and
a Digital Hub (PN6973). The transmitter was designed as a lowpower, short-range (meters) broadband device operating in a
low-use portion of the microwave communications spectrum.
Each BWD digitized neural activity from one array and
transmitted it at 3.3 GHz or 3.5 GHz (configured at time of
manufacture) to the antennas. The corresponding receiver was
manually tuned to the appropriate frequency. Each Digital Hub
relayed the digital data stream to its respective NSP over fiber
optic cable. The NSP, file recording system, and downstream
Assistive Technology hardware and software were unchanged
between the wired and wireless configurations.
The Wireless Receiver supported up to 8 antenna inputs in a
Switched Diversity Single-Input Multiple Output (SIMO)
architecture for improved reception. SIMO provides robust
recovery of a single communication link (one BWD’s
continuous transmission) by allowing multiple antennas (e.g.,
in a home environment) where the signal can be retrieved (i.e.,
multiple outputs of the communication link). The receiver
considered a data frame to be valid on any antenna input when
the expected terminating sync word was detected (“signal
lock”) which was indicated by a blue LED on the front panel.
The sample data in each frame did not include error checking,
so it was possible for bit errors to occur in the data even when
the sync word was detected. SIMO was used to provide a degree
of data checking: when two or more receiver channels reported
lock, the data output by the receiver was taken from a channel
whose contents exactly matched those of another locked
channel.
After preliminary wireless reception testing in the home of
T10, we elected to reduce the physical footprint of the wireless
system by using four (rather than 8) antennas mounted above
and/or behind the user, 1-2 m from the pedestal-mounted
transmitters. A tripod stand behind his bed allowed four
antennas to be positioned near the head and adjusted to achieve
effective angle and polarization orientations (Fig. 2c). For T5,
two antennas were positioned on tables near his wheelchair and
two at the ceiling slightly behind the wheelchair. During setup
for each recording session, we ensured that LEDs on each
receiver consistently indicated signal “lock” for each antenna
input but did not attempt to further optimize the placement of
antennas. As with the wired system, dual-array wireless
recording required two parallel sets of equipment, except that
the SMA cable from each antenna was split and connected to
both wireless receivers. This avoided the need for duplicate
antennas at the cost of splitting the signal power between the
receivers.
To establish compatibility with the downstream data
recording system used for this study, the wireless hardware
(Wireless Receiver / Digital Hub) upsampled the BWD data
stream from 20 kS/s to 30kS/s (via sample-and-hold) and from

Fig. 1. Components of the cabled and wireless systems for dual-array
recording. Pathways for neural signal acquisition differed as shown, but
NSPs and all downstream file recording, signal processing and decoding
hardware and software were the same for both systems.

analysis. Because participants in this study each had two arrays,
the home iBCI included two parallel 96-channel acquisition
systems (Fig. 1, top) that were time-locked by a sync cable
linking the two NSPs.
The raw data packets were also delivered in real-time to
downstream Assistive Technology computers for signal
processing, neural feature extraction and decoding. The
Assistive Technology system included a Super Logics x86
computer (Natick, MA) running the xPC Target real-time
operating system (The Mathworks, Natick, MA) and custom
signal processing and decoding algorithms running in Simulink.
Decoded cursor commands were sent from Simulink to a Dell
laptop (T5) or a Microsoft Surface tablet (T10) over wired
Ethernet, wireless Ethernet (through a 5GHz WiFi router), or
Bluetooth. Bluetooth communication employed our previously
developed circuit board dongle based on BlueSMiRF
technology (SparkFun Electronics, Boulder, CO) that plugged
into the xPC Target computer and presented BrainGate decoder
outputs as standard wireless mouse point and click commands
[8], [28].
C. Pedestal-Mounted Wireless Transmitter (BWD)
The neurosensor deployed here (Fig. 2a, b) was designed from
the outset for translation to human intracortical recording and
in-home BCI applications. Design criteria included a high
digital sampling rate to capture neuronal spiking activity, data
acquisition and transmission over at least 24 hours for use
throughout the day, and lightweight mating to the percutaneous
pedestal that is currently the only interface available for chronic
intracortical microelectrode recording in people (research
only). Details of the design and characterization of the wireless
transmitter have been reported previously for external [23], [24]
and fully implanted [25], [26] forms. The external device was
licensed to Blackrock Microsystems who made minor design
refinements and manufactured it as the “Brown Wireless
Device” (BWD). The BWD applies a hardware filter (1 Hz to
7.8 kHz), digitizes neural activity (20 kS/sec, 12 bits per
sample) on each electrode, applies Manchester encoding and
transmits it to nearby antennas using a custom low-power
protocol. The Manchester encoding provides self-clocking,
reduces link error rate and enhances reliability. In the digital
data stream, a 24-bit “sync word” separates each 50 µs “frame”
of data containing one 12-bit sample from each electrode.
BWDs use a non-rechargeable medical-grade battery (SAFT
LS14250, 3.6 V, 1000 mAh). Pre-clinical device safety
assessments were completed prior to use in the BrainGate trial.
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

F. Neural Decoding Methods
For iBCI cursor tasks, a Kalman filter decoder and a linear
discriminant classifier were used to estimate continuous 2-D
cursor velocity and click state, respectively. After upsampling
in the wireless path (described above), data processing and
decoding algorithms were identical for cabled and wireless
conditions as described next. The signal processing and
decoding algorithms used here have been described in detail
previously [4]. Briefly, signals were downsampled to 15 kS/s
followed by common average referencing. For decoding, two
neural features were then computed for each electrode: spike
rates and spike power. Spike rates were computed from
thresholded spikes. Spike power was estimated as the power in
the high-frequency local field potential (HF-LFP). For both
features, a band pass filter was first applied (250Hz - 5 kHz, 8th
order IIR Butterworth). Spike rates were then computed by refiltering the band-passed data in reverse to provide net zerophase shift [29] before applying a spike threshold at -3.5
standard deviations (computed for each channel from prior
within-day blocks of data). Spike power was computed by
squaring and averaging the band-passed signal. Spike power
and thresholded spike rate features were z-score normalized
using each feature’s mean value and standard deviation
calculated from a previous data block. All features, velocity,
and state estimates were updated every 20 ms.

(a)

(c)
(b)
Fig. 2. Some components of the wireless system. (a) BWD transmitter
(5.2 mm x 4.4 mm) showing battery compartment. Turn-screw disc is
used to attach the device onto a percutaneous pedestal. (b) The BWD
connected to T10’s posterior pedestal (the anterior pedestal is covered
by a protective cap). (c) A two-frequency wireless receiver system in a
four-antenna SIMO configuration as deployed for T10. The output
optical fibers (orange) connect to downstream NSPs.

12 bits per sample to 16 bits per sample (four-bit up-shift). The
upsampled wireless data was then stored in the standard ns5 file
format and processed through the identical signal processing
software as the cabled data. We applied a variety of analyses to
assess the effect of these sample-level transformations on
recorded neural signal content and iBCI decoder function.

G. Decoded Cursor Control in Cabled versus Wireless iBCI
During participant sessions, cabled versus wireless cursor
performance was evaluated using an A/B block design in which
decoder calibration and several back-to-back Grid Task cursor
assessments were completed in the cabled configuration (A)
followed by the same sequence using the wireless system (B).
For each condition, participants first completed a 3-minute long
cursor-based closed-loop calibration task [27] which
automatically computed coefficients of a 2-dimensional
Kalman filter. For tablet control sessions, a discrete “click”
state classifier was also calibrated. Participants commanded
cursor movement and dwell using attempted hand (T10) or
finger (T5) movements. Clicks were commanded using
attempted hand grasp (T10) or attempted thumb tap (T5). After
decoder calibration, several back-to-back Grid Task
assessments were completed [1], [7], [27] to quantify iBCIenabled closed-loop point-and-select performance. Switching
between cabled and wireless configurations involved powering
down the iBCI equipment, removing the NeuroPort Patient
Cables, connecting BWDs to the two pedestals, replacing the
Front End Amplifier fiber-optic cable into the NSP with the
fiber optic cable originating at the Digital Hub, and restarting
the hardware and software. Decoder coefficients were
randomly re-initiated prior to the automatic calibration step that
started each series. In another series on the same or different
day, the entire sequence was reversed to achieve a B/A block
design (wireless first) to balance possible order effects.

E. Overview of Participant Research Sessions
Prior to the first study session with T10, we performed an inhome spectral sweep for potential radio frequency (RF)
interference with a microwave spectrum analyzer (Anritsu). No
detectable sources of interference in the 3.0 – 4.0 GHz band
used by the BWD were found, despite numerous in-home
appliances, medical devices, and a nearby line-of-sight
commercial radio tower.
Participant sessions in this study included T10 trial days
(post-implant day) 307, 349, 350, 355, 361 and T5 trial days
560, 572, 588. Research sessions took place in participants’
homes with oversight by each site’s trained clinical
neurotechnology research assistant (CNRA). T5 completed
study activities seated in a wheelchair in his living room. For
health reasons unrelated to the neural interface system, T10
completed all sessions while reclined in bed. Each participant
completed two sessions in which cursor kinematics were
controlled through decoded neural signals recorded in both the
wired and wireless configurations. Each participant also
completed a third session in which they used decoded pointand-click cursor control to navigate consumer software and web
applications on a tablet computer. Sessions lasted
approximately 3 hours, interrupted as needed by the
participant’s regular nursing and personal care activities. T10
also completed an overnight recording session spanning 24
continuous hours.

H. Grid Task Assessment of iBCI Cursor Control
Decoder performance in wired and wireless conditions was
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

assessed on a series of Grid Tasks (2 minutes each) in which
participants moved the cursor to the indicated target and then
dwelled on the target to select it. The Grid Task consisted of a
6 x 6 grid of adjacent squares in which all points were selectable
as described previously [1], [7], [30]. Dwelling on any target
for 1 second selected it (resulting in a correct or error selection)
after which the next target was shown. Selections continued
uninterrupted until the Grid Task ended. If no target was
selected within 8 seconds then a timeout resulted in an error trial
and the next target was presented. The Grid Task was repeated
several times with brief pauses in between. Task performance
was assessed for each 2-minute task in terms of Percent Correct
target acquisitions (hit rate) and Bitrate quantifying information
transfer (bits per second) as reported previously for this task
[31]. Metrics of cursor control included Trial Duration (average
time to acquire targets including successful dwell time and the
timeout duration for error trials, in seconds), Path Efficiency
(ratio of actual trajectory length from starting point to the target
relative to the straight line path), and Angle Error (the mean
angle between instantaneous trajectory and the direct-to-target
trajectory, in degrees).

period. Between these administered research periods, the
wireless system was configured to continuously record and
store raw neural data for offline analysis. For this first-ever
overnight recording, two CNRAs maintained continuous
monitoring on a rotating schedule. During this time, T10
remained in bed for reasons independent of this study, but he
engaged in his typical daily activities such as eating, watching
television, conversing by phone, direct family interactions, and
sleeping. He received his regular nursing care including
rotations in bed every few hours. Because RF pathway
obstructions were anticipated as caregivers stood or moved
between the transmitter and antennas, and because body
rotations could alter orientation of the two transmitters relative
to each antenna, a second pole of 4 antennas was added for this
overnight study (increasing the number of antennas from 4 to
8). Based on laboratory testing, the battery in each transmitter
was proactively replaced every 10 hours to avoid any possibility
of unanticipated signal loss due to battery drain. (The wireless
transmitter was designed for 48 hours of continuous use per
battery [23]; after this study, a correction to the BWD restored
it to 48+ hours). A video camera captured snapshots of the room
once per minute (with participant permission) to document
activity. File recording software (Cerebus Central File Storage
App, Blackrock Microsystems) automatically split neural data
into contiguous files (with no sample loss) to limit the size of
individual files.
Offline, integrity of the recorded data was analyzed in 5minute segments contiguously across the 24-hour period (288
segments for each array). For visualization, the spectral content
was computed from 0.5 Hz to 100 Hz in each segment. A
“disrupted” segment was one with missing recorded data (e.g.,
brief stops between CNRA sessions and overnight recording),
dropped packets, or pervasive noise (identified as segments in
which the summed spectral power from 40 Hz to 100 Hz
exceeded the 90th percentile of the entire 24 hour period).

I. Wireless iBCI Use of a Tablet Computer
To evaluate whether the wireless neural interface system
could enable individuals with paralysis to achieve reliable
point-and-click control of a computer in their homes, T5 and
T10 used the wireless iBCI for point­and­click control of an
unmodified consumer mobile device (Microsoft Surface Pro
tablet) for web browsing, use of consumer applications, and
typing communication. Cursor control was enabled using our
standard automated decoder calibration, then CNRAs placed
the tablet comfortably in front of the participant and routed the
iBCI decoded cursor and click commands to the tablet [8].
Participants used the tablets in Microsoft Windows 10 “tablet”
mode to navigate the desktop and to start and use different
programs of interest to them. Additionally, T5 was asked to
complete several blocks of typing using Windows Notepad to
provide estimates of typing performance. Although the native
onscreen keyboard offered word prediction, T5 avoided these
and selected all letters, capitalization (“shift” function), spaces
and punctuation explicitly. For each typing block we computed
correct characters per minute (ccpm) as the number of
appropriate character selections including spaces and
punctuation (excluding characters resulting in misspelling,
“shift” selected for capital letters, and delete or backspace key
selections) and dividing by the elapsed time. Detailed analysis
of application use and typing rates were performed through
offline analysis of screen capture recordings.

K. Comparing Cabled and Wireless Signal Fidelity
We conducted a series of A/B experiments to more directly
compare the fidelity of broadband recordings using the standard
96-channel NeuroPort Patient Cable “reference system” and the
96-channel wireless system. We compared noise, bandpass
filtered signals, sorted spike waveforms and unit firing rates.
These tests were performed in the lab and with participants at
home.
Bench Measurements. An initial baseline comparison of
signal fidelity was performed using a single NeuroPort Patient
Cable or BWD transmitter to record well-defined signals from
a Neural Signal Simulator (NSS, Blackrock Microsystems).
Four antennas were placed within three meters and direct lineof-sight of the wireless transmitter to reduce the possibility of
wireless data drops that could confound these baseline
evaluations. The neural signal simulator provided continuous,
well-defined patterns of voltages simulating slow local field
potential oscillations (1 Hz, 3 Hz, 9 Hz and 20 Hz), three
different repeating single-unit action potential waveforms on
each channel, and baseline noise. Several blocks of broadband
data (~5 minutes each) were recorded in consecutive wired and

J. 24-Hour Wireless Recording
T10 completed an overnight in-home study to collect nearly
continuous intracortical data over a 24-hour period. The study
began with a typical CNRA-administered BrainGate research
session in which data were collected during point-and-click
cursor calibration and performance assessment. A similar
research epoch was completed the next day to end the 24-hour
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

wireless configurations and then analyzed offline. Because the
signal simulator generated deterministic spiking patterns, it was
possible to precisely align and compare the continuous raw
recorded signals and spikes (waveforms) across conditions. To
objectively compare spiking units without operator bias [32],
we first applied automated spike-sorting to each data set using
a previously reported algorithm [33] and compared the resulting
sorted unit waveform shapes, spike rates, and SNR measures.
Intracortical Signals. These head-to-head comparisons
evaluated data recorded with T5 and T10 during the closed-loop
point-and-click Grid Tasks recorded in multiple interleaved
cabled (A) and wireless (B) data blocks within each assessment
day. A/B studies were repeated in a different order on separate
days with both participants. As with bench measurements,
comparisons of recorded spiking activity were made after
automated spike sorting.
To compare signal amplitudes across wired and wireless
conditions, we applied an empirical gain adjustment to match
absolute voltages in the recorded signals. Gain stages in the
commercial wireless hardware were designed to achieve the
same theoretical total gain as the wired hardware. However, the
precise cumulative gain in each recording system is sensitive to
normal variability in device fabrication parameters. These
resulted in a small but measurable and consistent gain
difference between wired and wireless recorded signals. We
calibrated absolute voltages by finding the gain multiplier that
minimized differences in the NSS simulated spike waveforms
recorded in the wired and wireless bench tests. Based on these
empirical measurements, we applied a +2.97% amplitude
adjustment to the wireless data for these comparisons.

biologically plausible slew rate (500 µV per 33 µs sample).
These included bit-flips within single samples resulting in a
large voltage excursion that returned to baseline in the
following sample (or next sample after that in the case of
upsample repeats), and large amplitude noise events extending
over many samples before returning to baseline. We examined
the degree to which each event was isolated to individual
channels or observed simultaneously across many electrodes of
the recording array.
III. RESULTS
A. Translation of the Wireless Sensor for Human Studies
The commercialized BWD underwent pre-clinical device
testing in accordance with U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) guidelines. BWD
testing verified safe levels of charge transfer; reliable
sterilization (ANSI/AAM/ISO 10993-7-2008); immunity to
repeated direct and indirect electrostatic discharge (ESD) up to
+/-6kV and +/-8kV, respectively (IEC 61000-4-2). Radio
frequency (RF) transmission power measured well under 1
mW, below the specific absorption rate (SAR) exclusion
threshold of 16 mW (FCC 447498 D01 General RF Exposure
Guidance). The transmitter was operated in high density RF
environments ranging from a major hospital to a metropolitan
city center with no interference from such telecommunicationsrich environments. The FCC granted an Experimental License
to operate the BWD in the 3.3 GHz – 3.8 GHz transmission
band in geographical regions related to the BrainGate trial.
B. Assessment of Wireless Point and Click Cursor Control

L. Digital Sample Integrity

We evaluated if the cabled and wireless iBCI configurations
enabled equivalent kinematic decoding and closed-loop cursor
performance by BrainGate trial participants in their homes. On
each of two days, participants successfully achieved cursor
control using an automated calibration procedure which
generated the Kalman decoder coefficients used in the
subsequent Grid Task assessment blocks. Across two sessions,
T10 completed 172 trials over 6 blocks in the cabled
configuration and 167 trials over 6 blocks in the wireless
configuration. Participant T5 completed two sessions as well
totaling 922 trials over 20 blocks in the cabled configuration
and 1,023 trials over 24 blocks in the wireless configuration.
The percentage of successful target selection was not
significantly different between wired and wireless systems
(Wilcoxon rank sum > 0.05) for either participant (Fig 3a). T5
median success rate was 96.2% versus 97.9% in the cabled and
wireless conditions, respectively. T10 achieved 91.6% and
94.8% in cabled and wireless configurations. Bitrates in the
Grid Tasks were also not significantly different (Fig. 3b)
between cabled and wireless for either participant (Wilcoxon
rank sum > 0.05; T5: 1.58 bps cabled and 1.77 bps wireless;
T10: 1.47 bps for both systems).
These statistics provided one measure per task iteration. We
also quantified cursor control at the resolution of individual
trials (Fig. 3c). Across three metrics (trial duration, path

Transmission data loss is a concern for any wireless system.
Here, wireless data loss occurred whenever the receiver did not
find the expected sync word on any input channel. When this
occurred, the current samples from all 96 electrodes were
invalid and the previous valid frame was inserted into the data
stream. This frame error was detectable in the recorded data as
a back-to-back repeat of the previous 96-channel data sample.
We quantified the number of frame errors in the received 20
kS/s wireless data by examining the 30 kS/s data recordings and
accounting for the expected back-to-back sample repeats from
the upsampling process. The practical effect of wireless data
loss depends not just on the number frame errors but on their
distribution. Individual dropped frames (one 50 µs sample from
each electrode) distributed sparsely throughout the data stream
should be less detrimental to iBCI decoding than contiguous
data loss [22]. We quantified the prevalence of longer intervals
of data loss using the standard Severely Errored Seconds (SES)
metric that reports the number of non-overlapping 1-second
periods in which the proportion of data errors exceeds a
predetermined threshold. Here, a commonly used threshold of
50% found all 1-second periods in which frame errors corrupted
at least 500 ms of the data.
We interrogated the wired and wireless 30 kS/s recorded data
for all instances of voltage changes exceeding a pre-determined
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(b)

(a)

Fig 4. Screen capture of T5’s tablet while he used the iBCI for point-andclick text entry with the built-in on-screen keyboard to search a web site
for music by Melissa Etheridge.

*

several Grid Task assessment blocks, T10 started several
widely-used apps in sequence by selecting the corresponding
app tile on the Windows start menu or desktop. He used the
Microsoft Edge browser, Pandora, the NCAA basketball app,
Skype, YouTube, Gmail and the Weather app (Table 1). T5
used these same apps (excluding NCAA) on his trial day 588,
including typing on the Windows on-screen keyboard to
perform searches (Fig. 4). T5 also typed sufficient spontaneous
text in the Windows Notepad to provide a basic measure of
typing performance. Over 814 seconds (14.6 minutes), T5 typed
196 correct characters; any characters contributing to
misspelling or that T5 subsequently deleted were included in
the elapsed time but not in the character count.

*

(c)
Fig. 3. Metrics comparing closed-loop cursor control in wired (light blue,
left half of each figure) and wireless (dark blue) configurations. (a) Median
target acquisition rates in wired and wireless conditions. Circles indicate the
measure for each iteration of the Grid Task across two sessions for each
participant. (b) Bitrates in wired and wireless conditions (one measure for
each grid task across two sessions for each participant). (c) Three metrics
of cursor control over two days for each participant. Each point shows the
metric computed for an individual trial (one target acquisition). Points are
spread on each X-axis to reveal individual trials. Histograms on the right of
each plot summarize wired and wireless performance.

Table 1. Tablet apps used by T5 during wireless point-and-click control.

App
Pandora
NCAA App
Skype

efficiency, angle error), no significant differences were
observed on either day with T5 or on trial day 361 with T10.
Significant differences were observed only for T10 path
efficiency and angle error on day 355 (Wilcoxon rank sum <
0.05). On this day, the median measures for both path efficiency
(0.74 wired, 0.78 wireless) and angle error (20.7 degrees wired,
18.0 degrees wireless) were better with the wireless system.
While the causes of this slight apparent superiority of the
wireless system are not clear, the wired condition exhibited
more outlier trials with low path efficiency and high angle error
on this day.

YouTube
Gmail
Weather App

Activity
Click to start Pandora in a web browser, select an
artist, click the play button, select the “Thumbs
Up” icon, click Pause, return to desktop
Select app tile on the desktop, select a game
“recap’ icon, select the game video to play
Select the Skype icon in the start menu, select a
contact and start a voice call, talk for 90 s
Start app from the start menu, select on-screen
keyboard icon, type search term, select a video,
select “full-screen” icon, click back to desktop
Click on Inbox icon, select a message and read it
Click through weather forecasts

D. Wireless Acquisition During 24 Hours in the Home
In T10’s 24-hour study, synchronized neural data were
wirelessly recorded two intracortical arrays from 2:22 pm trial
day 349 to 2:22 pm trial day 350. With pre- and post-session
activities, total participant engagement time was 26 hours. Each
array logged 500 GB of broadband data (1 TB for 2 arrays over
24 hours).
We examined the spectral content of the recorded signals for
evidence of transmitted neural activity and/or recording
artifacts. Spectral content of the record across the 24 hours was
evaluated in contiguous 5 minute segments. Results for the

C. Wireless iBCI Use of a Tablet Computer
T5 and T10 each used the wireless iBCI to achieve point-andclick control of a standard consumer Microsoft Surface 2-in-1
tablet computer running the Windows 10 operating system. On
trial day 307, after completing an autocalibration sequence and
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

posterior pedestal (recording from the intracortical array in the
precentral gyrus) are shown in Figure 5. Prominent LFP activity
was observed in bands centered at 10.6 Hz and 19.5 Hz. Clear
changes in the spectral power were evident during the night and
early morning (e.g., in the ~20-40 Hz band) corresponding to
the period when T10 was observed to be sleeping
(approximately 3 am to 9 am).
Over the 24 hours (1,440 min.), wireless recording was
highly reliable. Wireless recording was uninterrupted
throughout most of T10’s activities, including using a head
tracking system to type emails and browse the web, having a
phone conversation, watching TV, talking, eating, sleeping and
more. However, “disruptions” in the form of unrecorded data or
noise were observed in 35 of the 288 five-minute analysis
segments (175 total disruption minutes). A review of the
session logs found that the large majority of data disruptions
(100 minutes) occurred when one or more caregivers were
attending to T11 including rotating or shifting him in bed,
suctioning, and other nursing care (Table 2). During these
periods, caregivers worked in close proximity to the bed
including standing directly between the transmitters and
antennas for several minutes at a time. Data were recorded but
exhibited packet loss which was sometimes accompanied by
substantial noise when the signal was recovered. In other cases,
data flow stopped entirely when transmitters were removed
during battery replacement, bathing and changing. Other
disruptions were unrelated to the wireless components but
rather resulted from technical glitches in the real-time data
filing process. Only 15 minutes of data disruption were not
readily associated with noted activities; these occurred during
sleep between 6:45AM and 7:15 AM.

Fig 5. Spectral content of T10 neural data recorded continuously over 24
hours with the wireless system. X-axis indicates wall-clock time. Dark
vertical bars reflect periods where data was not recorded (e.g.,
transmitters removed) or was severely disrupted (high frame loss).

10 µV more noise with the cable in the LFP-filtered band (Fig.
6c; wired: 166 µV; wireless: 156 µV).
To evaluate the fidelity of spike recording, we applied an
offline automated unsupervised sorting algorithm to recover the
waveform shapes and firing rates on all electrodes. The
simulator’s three unique waveform shapes were all reliably
recovered on all electrodes as indicated by equivalent
waveform sorting templates in wired and wireless conditions.
The firing rates of all units on all 96 channels were identical
(3.6 Hz) and matched the simulated rates, confirming that
action potentials were recorded with the requisite fidelity. The
equivalence of units recovered from wired and wireless data
sets was evident when mean waveforms and their standard
deviation were overlaid (Fig. 7).
F. Wirelessly Recorded Human Intracortical Signals

Table 2. Events associated with disrupted wireless signals over 24 hours.

Total Minutes
100
25
15
15
10
10

In a similar way, we compared human data recorded with
wired and wireless systems during all Grid Tasks. The raw
(unfiltered), LFP-filtered, and spike-filtered signals were
substantially similar across conditions (Fig. 8a). Noise in the
spike-filtered intracortical data was slightly lower than
observed with the simulator. Consistent with the NSS tests,
noise in the spiking band was a few microvolts higher in the
wireless condition (Fig. 8b). Spike waveforms were equivalent
between the recording modalities as demonstrated by
overlaying wired and wireless waveforms for putative single
units (Fig. 8c). We extracted waveforms for spiking units on all
electrodes, applying the same unsupervised algorithm and
parameters to wired and wireless data recorded during Grid
Tasks. Comparable single unit waveforms were extracted
across most electrodes. However, several units were observed
in only one condition or the other. These were usually, but not
always, small amplitude units or waveforms that were
inconsistently split into multiple units. Thus, the population of
extracted units was not identical between wired and wireless
data. However, we also observed similar variability between
Grid Task blocks recorded with the cable alone. Given the
fidelity of recording confirmed in our simulator tests, these
discrepancies
were
most
plausibly attributed
to
nonstationarities in the recorded intracortical signals [17] rather
than failures in the wired or wireless systems.

Activity
Caregivers attending T11 (rotate in bed, suction)
Bathing, dressing (transmitters removed)
Unexplained signal noise during sleep
Glitches in real-time file processing system
Battery changes
File breaks before/after cursor sessions

E. Benchtop Comparison of Cabled and Wireless Recordings
To provide a baseline comparison of the two systems, we
performed benchtop tests in which well-defined simulated
neural signals from the Neural Signal Simulator were recorded
through the cabled and wireless pathways. The NSS generated
continuous broadband data which superimposed noise, lowfrequency oscillations and “action potentials” mimicking three
spiking neurons with distinct waveform shapes. After applying
a spike-band filter and aligning corresponding simulated spike
waveforms, there was a close correspondence between the
signals recorded with the two systems (Fig. 6a). We observed
low overall noise levels in both conditions with a few
microvolts more noise (rms) in the spike band with the wireless
system (Fig. 6b; wired noise: 11.2 µV; wireless: 13.5 µV) and
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(a)

Fig. 7. Mean waveforms of the three simulated neurons as extracted from
one representative electrode recorded by the cabled (red) and wireless
(black) systems. Each unit shows mean (red or black line) +/- s.d. (gray
bands) waveform averaged over a random selection of spikes.

T10’s posterior pedestal and rarely for the anterior pedestal
(fewer than 5 total packet drops per block). In one block,
however, T10’s anterior packet drops occurred with a drop rate
of 4.69%. We attribute differences in the fraction of dropped
packets among blocks to changes in orientation of the
participant (transmitters) relative to the antennas. Although
participants had limited movement, the four antenna
configurations that we used to simplified session setup in the
home may not have provided sufficient simultaneous spatial
coverage for both directions of transmission from two BWDs.

(b)

Table 3. Incidence of wireless data packet drops during Grid Tasks.
Data for simultaneous anterior (Ant) and posterior (Pos) data streams.

(c)
Fig. 6. Comparison of wired and wireless recordings of simulated neural
signals. (a) Waveforms of three different simulated spiking neurons aligned
from bandpass-filtered wired and wireless data. (b) Distribution of noise
across 96 channels filtered for spiking data (250 Hz – 7.5 kHz); baseline
noise was measured after spike events were removed by thresholding.
Triangles indicate median rms values. (c) Distribution of noise across LFP
bands (1 Hz – 250 Hz). T10.2018.04.16 002(1)

ID

# Task
Blocks

Total
Time
(Min)

T5
T10

24
6

47.9
10.3

# Blocks with
% of All Data # of Blocks Total SES
Dropped Packets
Dropped
with SES Time (sec)
Ant
8
6

Pos
24
0

Ant
Pos
0.003 0.416
1.004
0

Ant
0
0

Pos
5
0

Ant
0
0

Pos
10
0

It was noteworthy that during the 2-minute block with high
packet drop, T10 nonetheless acquired 44 of 45 targets and
recorded his highest bit rate in this study (1.791 bps). This could
reflect the fact that, during this block, data from the second
transmitter experienced 0 dropped packets. The performance
impact of packet drops may also relate to whether they are
sufficiently distributed to avoid extended periods of
impoverished neural decoding. To quantify this, we computed
the number of Severely Errored Seconds (SES), any nonoverlapping 1-second period in which half or more of the data
samples were lost. Although packet drops occurred, SES events
were rarely observed, limited to T5’s posterior data stream in 5
blocks with a cumulative total of 10 seconds. During this study,
a total of 6984 wireless data seconds (nearly 2 hours) were
recorded during the Grid Task assessments cumulatively across
both participants and both arrays; 10 of these exhibited SES.

G. Wireless Packet Loss During In-Home iBCI Use
To quantify the incidence of data loss during use of the
wireless system, we inspected all raw 30 kS/s data recorded
from each participant’s two arrays during all Grid Tasks
completed by T5 (24 blocks, 47.9 min) and T10 (6 blocks, 10.3
min) over 2 days each. A “packet drop” occurred when the sync
word delimiting a 50 µs wireless data frame containing a single
sample from all electrodes could not be recovered by the
receiver, resulting in a repeat of all electrodes’ previous digital
values being re-inserted into the receiver’s output stream.
The incidence of dropped packets varied across participants
and pedestal position (Table 3). For each participant, signal
recovery was consistently more successful for one transmitter
(anterior 3.3 GHz for T5, posterior 3.5 GHz for T10) than the
other. For T5, packet drops were observed during 8 of 24 blocks
from the anterior pedestal and during all 24 task blocks from
the posterior pedestal; the proportion of dropped packets was
overall very low (0.003% of all frames, anterior; 0.4163% of all
frames, posterior). No packet drops were ever observed for

H. Bit Level Analysis of Wireless Data
We examined the raw data files for any evidence of bit-level
anomalies in the 30kS/s data upsampled from each transmitter.
These analyses excluded epochs with signal anomalies
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(b)

(c)
(a)
Fig. 8. Human intracortical signals recorded in wired and wireless configurations in the home. (a) Comparison of recorded neural activity on
one electrode (t10.2017.06.05.e24 blocks 6, 7). Top: the “raw” unfiltered neural signal. Middle: low-pass filtered (100 Hz cutoff). Bottom: band
pass filtered for spike extraction (250 Hz – 7.5 kHz). (b) Distribution of residual rms amplitudes from all electrodes on one array after bandpass filtering and removing thresholded spikes for wired (light blue) and wireless (dark blue) recordings. (c) Sample waveforms from two units
sorted from the same electrode shown in (a) and (b). Light blue (wired) and dark blue (wireless) waveforms show substantial similarity.

collected here did not allow concrete identification of the
source(s) of these errors. MSB errors were not observed in the
cable-recorded data.
Because MSB errors were identified in our preliminary work,
this study applied an algorithm to detect MSB-corrupted
samples (briefly, any voltage shift 500 µV or greater within a
single sample, i.e., a 15 µV/µs slew rate) and replace each with
its preceding good sample on that electrode. In this way, the
impact of flip-bit errors was minimized in real-time, prior to
feature extraction and decoding, and in offline analyses.
As expected by design, the recorded wireless data contained
a large proportion of 33 µs data frames that contained perfect
copies of the prior samples on all 96 electrodes. These
“upsample repeats” resulted directly from the sample-and-hold
logic that upsampled the 20 kS/s BWD data to the NSP 30 kS/s
format. Unexpectedly, one or more bits in the upsample repeat
frame occasionally differed from their original value. Although
these anomalies needed to be accounted for during analysis,
they did not otherwise impact wireless performance.

attributed to dropped packets (analyzed above). The wireless
data exhibited occasional instances of large instantaneous
voltage discontinuities. These were biologically implausible
voltage differences between consecutive 33 µs samples caused
by bit flips among the most significant bits (MSBs) of a digital
sample. The corrupt voltage value lasted only one sample (or
two samples when an upsample repeat followed) then returned
to baseline in a single step. These fast single-sample slew rates
were sometimes observed among the lower bits as well, and it
seems probable that lower bits were equally prone to flipping
but the corresponding small voltage fluctuations would
generally have been indistinguishable from baseline activity
(and, presumably, functionally inconsequential). The incidence
of MSB errors was inconsistent across channels and across
blocks. In any given recording, some channels could be
recorded error free while others exhibited rare, or more
frequent, bit errors. Nonetheless, bit errors were observed in
every wireless recording (at a rate of 2.04E-5 to 9.26E-5 per
sample throughout the 30 Grid Task blocks). Another form of
bit flip persisted for three or more samples and recurred
multiple times over a period of tens or hundreds of milliseconds
with seemingly valid sample data in between. These periods of
recurring MSB errors, which we termed “digital noise”,
presented as noisy epochs in the voltage data. Digital noise
events were rare in our Grid Task data but more likely in the
24-hour data. In general, we observed a higher incidence of all
bit errors including digital noise after periods of packet drops
and in association with putative antenna switching events. Bit
errors also appeared to be associated with the upsampling logic
(see below). Bit errors could have been introduced at various
stages of the wireless system such as the BWD analog-to-digital
converter, the wireless link, SIMO antenna switching, and the
clock domain boundary in the upsampling process. The data

IV. DISCUSSION
This study demonstrates the first human use of a broadband
wireless intracortical brain-computer interface. Two human
subjects directed computer cursor movements and click
decoded by an iBCI that acquired and wirelessly transmitted
(previously prototyped as [24]) broadband neural activity from
192 chronically implanted microelectrodes. Across multiple
signal and iBCI performance metrics, the wireless solution
proved to be a thorough replacement for the cabled connection
currently used in chronic human iBCIs studies and fundamental
non-human primate research. Raw neural data were processed
into spike rates and LFP power in the spike band which were
decoded together to yield precise iBCI cursor control. Using the
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

wireless iBCI, study participants achieved communication bit
rates in a Grid Task equivalent to the wired system. Self-paced
cursor control enabled both participants to browse the web and
complete other tablet activities, and one participant used the
wireless interface for free typing. The wireless technology also
enabled continuous recording of intracortical broadband field
potentials and spiking activity from one participant over 24
hours in his home. Untethered recording of intracortical signals
and in-home iBCI use are major steps toward an on-demand
iBCI to provide independent digital communication and
computer access for people with severe motor impairment.
Evaluation of the raw neural signals and spike waveforms
found that signal processing differences in the cabled and
wireless pathways had negligible impact on the quality of the
recorded neural signals. A small increase in baseline noise with
the wireless system was detectable but had no functional
impact. The wireless system did exhibit bit errors which we
were able to mitigate with real-time algorithms. It proved
possible to record broadband intracortical signals in the home
without packet drops, as demonstrated by many data blocks in
which one or the other transmitter exhibited zero packet drops.
Packet drops that did occur were exceedingly rare, indicating
the fundamental reliability of the wireless system. Because
wireless signal recovery is sensitive to plane of transmitter
orientation and distance relative to the position and polarization
orientation of the receiving antennas, we anticipate that packet
drops could be reduced by more optimal placement of the
antennas or by using the full complement of antennas supported
by the receivers. Critically, the fidelity of the broadband neural
signals and iBCI performance were robust to the low incidence
of packet drops that was observed in most blocks. During 24hour in-home recording we found that volitional head
movements and even body rotation by nursing staff generally
did not interrupt the wireless signal. However, someone
standing or working close to the participant’s head could block
transmission entirely, resulting in data loss or “digital noise”
during some periods of nursing care. For this study, we elected
not to modify users’ homes or wheelchair to accommodate
more robustly-placed or permanent antennas. However, these
findings motivate further investigation of optimal antenna
placement in the home.

in monkeys [36]–[38] and in our own BrainGate participants
with tetraplegia [4], [7]. Decoders built on multiunit thresholds
can also be maintained over long periods [4], [7], [39] and
population dynamics may be estimated from multiunit
threshold crossings without spike sorting [40]. An analysis of
iBCI decoding in monkeys and humans proposes that digital
sampling at 1 kHz should be sufficient for iBCI applications
[22]. These approaches could reduce the wireless bandwidth by
roughly an order of magnitude, thereby simplifying the
engineering design constraints for a fully implanted wireless
iBCI or, alternatively, freeing bandwidth to record from
thousands of electrode contacts [41]–[46].
Despite the broadband design requirement, the BWD design
also prioritized low power for long battery life to facilitate users
with disability using the system throughout their day. The low
power design also translates into fewer inductive charging
periods for the fully-implanted version of the BWD (currently
in pre-clinical testing). There are several clear trade-offs,
however, and comparison to other systems is informative. A
pedestal-mounted wireless interface with a commercial WiFi
chipset has been used in an unconstrained non-human primate
[47]. While similar to the BWD in terms of signal sampling and
channel count, the package was relatively large, had high power
consumption and incorporated a cooling fan. A subsequent
commercial device modified from our prototype, Cereplex-W
(Blackrock Microsystems) prioritized slightly lower noise, 16bit 30kS/s sampling, error correction in the wireless link, and
more powerful transmission – with the tradeoff of requiring
much higher power consumption than the BWD and therefore
much shorter operation per battery charge.
Other broadband wireless systems for multielectrode
research have been demonstrated in freely moving primates
[48]–[53] and a growing number of commercial alternatives
support wireless intracortical recording for animal research. To
our knowledge none are yet approved for human use, but
several designs have a level of integration and other design
tradeoffs that could be consistent with future translation. For
any of these systems, engineering and translational challenges
toward chronic human use include pairing the wireless
components to intracranial electrodes suitable for long-term
implantation in people, a small and lightweight package, high
data rates (and/or on-board processing) across many electrodes,
long run time (low power consumption), successful safety
testing and completion of regulatory activities.

A. Design trade-offs
The BWD system deployed in this study prioritized
uncompromising signal fidelity and high electrode count to
facilitate both iBCI applications and fundamental human
electrophysiology research. However, as the field progresses
toward higher and higher electrode counts, technologies for
broadband recording become increasingly challenging and
alternative, lower-bandwidth signal acquisition approaches are
being considered. Design specifications for a wireless targeted
BCI multielectrode acquisition system could be simplified by
limiting signal acquisition to spiking events (with or without
sampled spike waveforms) without broadband data. Although
sorted single-unit activity and threshold crossings contain
distinct information [34], [35], decoding thresholded multiunit
activity rather than sorted units can enable precise iBCI control

B. Comparison to Other Wireless Implanted BCIs
An early wireless broadband BCI demonstrated the ability
for an ALS patient to toggle a binary signal from a single
intracortical electrode [54]. One early ECoG closed-loop
system with 32 subdural electrodes enabled an individual with
tetraplegia [55] to move a cursor to targets by associating four
different visualized movements with four cursor directions.
Although neither wireless nor chronic, this system
demonstrated moderate multidimensional cursor control based
on decoded intracranial signals. A novel approach to
intracranial recording, via electrodes attached to an
endovascular stent [56], is now in clinical feasibility trials. Such
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

systems, while very low bandwidth, may represent an effective
solution for some individuals with severe disability.
Recently, deep brain stimulators (DBS) have served as a
convenient, clinically accepted platform upon which fully
implanted wireless BCIs have been developed [57]–[59]. A
wireless BCI, configured from a bi-directional fully implanted
DBS device (Activa PC+S, Medtronic, Inc.) was used to sample
field potential data (0.8kS/s) from a bipolar pair of chronic
subdural ECoG electrodes in a person with ALS [58]. The
wireless link from the subclavicular transmitter (11.7 kbps) was
more than 1,000x lower bandwidth than one BWD;
nevertheless, this enabled the individual to use the BCI to make
click selections in a commercial scanning letter interface. The
research participant spelled 44 prompted words at a mean rate
of 1.15 correct characters per minute (without letter prediction).
Despite the slow communication rate, the participant reported
satisfaction with the system. In another study, the PC+S system
was used for clinical stimulation and ECoG recording of motorrelated potentials from five patients with Parkinson’s Disease
over the span of a year [59]. Up to 9 minutes of data from two
subdural sites were recorded at a time and then downloaded for
offline analysis. Although no closed-loop study was attempted,
changes in beta and gamma bands were observed during
movement, possibly relevant to a future closed-loop BCI
implementation. The W-HERBS 128-channel ECoG system
with 1kS/s sampling per channel has been developed over many
years but not yet tested in-vivo [60]. An ECoG system
specifically designed for translation, the WIMAGINE® ECoG
neural interface (Clinatec, Grenoble, FR), was recently
demonstrated in an individual with spinal cord injury [61]. Two
devices were placed over bilateral motor cortical areas for
chronic epidural recording. The wireless data link supported
586 samples/second x 32 contacts using external antennas held
near the implants by a custom helmet. Using the BCI to activate
a neural on/off switch, the participant was able to initiate
walking movements of an avatar and an exoskeleton. The
subject also commanded continuous control of bilateral limb
movements of the exoskeleton and was able to steer a powered
wheelchair. We have not yet evaluated the current wireless
system relative to intracortical cabled control of robotic,
prosthetic, or functional electrical stimulation applications [1]–
[3], [11], [12]. However, the higher electrode count and 100x
data rates demonstrated here provide the potential for more
dexterous low-latency wireless motor prostheses. Whether
ECoG BCIs can approach the communication performance
demonstrated here remains to be determined.

referencing computed across a subset of electrodes at high
sample rate (e.g., 500 Hz [16]; 15 kHz [4], [7], [27]) to reduce
noise prior to band pass filtering that could otherwise alias noise
into the features computed for decoding. This technique
computes a common signal from a subset of channels in realtime and applies it to all electrodes prior to computing neural
features for decoding. Here, threshold crossing spike rates were
computed after first applying a non-causal (bidirectional twopass) bandpass filter with a 5 kHz upper cutoff frequency that
has been shown to measurably improve decoding and BCI
cursor performance relative to simple causal thresholding [29].
While we have not yet rigorously established a precise
bandwidth that is necessary or sufficient for iBCI performance
and stability for people with tetraplegia, these current practices
provide a possible reference point for future optimized wireless
BCIs.
D. Future Work
One advantage of recent ECoG or stent-based BCIs relative
to the external wireless system in the current study is that they
are fully implanted with no percutaneous connections. A fullyimplantable version of the BWD [25], [26], modified with a
titanium package and inductive power, has been tested in
animals and is being readied for regulatory testing prior to
potential deployment in human clinical trials. To that end, the
wireless device used in this study incorporates major elements
of the fully implanted design and represents an externallymounted prototype of those core technologies. We have also
demonstrated a prototype battery-powered mobile embedded
decoding system [62]–[64] that integrates with both the
external and fully implanted transmitters and is readily
interfaced with other future electrode technologies with
hundreds or thousands of contacts.
When integrated with stimulation capabilities, human
wireless intracortical systems will offer new opportunities
beyond iBCI [65] in neural sensing and closed-loop
neuromodulation, including the treatment of seizures and
neuropsychiatric disease [66]–[68]. Limitations of this current
generation BWD and its implantable sibling are their
unidirectional communication; neither stimulation nor
impedance testing are currently possible. ASIC chips are being
actively developed to introduce stimulation and impedance
spectroscopy to future generations of this family of wireless
devices.
Looking to the future, features of neural activity beyond
spiking (e.g., high-frequency field potential oscillations, fieldfield phase coherence, spike-field relationships) remain to be
fully explored in people and could one day be leveraged to
enhance iBCI capabilities, performance and robustness. High
resolution intracortical recording – currently only feasible as
part of clinical research endeavors – will facilitate continued
investigation of aspects of neural activity that may be clinically
useful. We anticipate significant advances and paradigm shifts
in neural signal processing, decoding algorithms, and control
frameworks that will advance neural decoding for effective
iBCI and neuromodulation applications. When, how and if
different groups (academic, industry, etc.) should diverge in
their efforts to develop better and clinically viable iBCI systems
is a discussion central to iBCIs’ successful translation.

C. Leveraging Broadband Wireless Recording
While the appropriate recording fidelity for stable, highperformance intracortical BCIs in people remains an active area
of research, recent advances in high-performance iBCIs have
leveraged broadband recording by decoding discrete spike rates
combined with power in high-frequency local field potentials
(HF-LFPs) up to 450 Hz [7], [12], [16] or 5 kHz [4], [27]. This
“hybrid” decoding has contributed to stable high performance
iBCI cursor control [4], [7] and rapid decoder calibration [27].
This and other iBCI studies have incorporated common average
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

V. CONCLUSION

during speech in people with paralysis,” Elife, vol. 8, Dec. 2019.
[10] S. D. Stavisky, F. R. Willett, D. T. Avansino, L. R. Hochberg, K. V.
Shenoy, and J. M. Henderson, “Speech-related dorsal motor cortex
activity does not interfere with iBCI cursor control,” J Neural Eng,
2019. In press.
[11] B. Wodlinger, J. E. Downey, E. C. Tyler-Kabara, a B. Schwartz, M. L.
Boninger, and J. L. Collinger, “Ten-dimensional anthropomorphic arm
control in a human brain−machine interface: difficulties, solutions, and
limitations,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 12, no. 1, p. 016011, Feb. 2015.
[12] A. B. Ajiboye et al., “Restoration of reaching and grasping movements
through brain-controlled muscle stimulation in a person with tetraplegia:
a proof-of-concept demonstration,” Lancet, vol. 389, no. 10081, pp.
1821–1830, Mar. 2017.
[13] D. Bacher et al., “Neural point-and-click communication by a person
with incomplete locked-in syndrome,” Neurorehabil. Neural Repair,
vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 462–71, 2015.
[14] S.-P. P. Kim, J. D. Simeral, L. R. Hochberg, J. P. Donoghue, G. M.
Friehs, and M. J. Black, “Point-and-click cursor control with an
intracortical neural interface system by humans with tetraplegia,” IEEE
Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 193–203, Apr. 2011.
[15] J. D. Simeral, S. P. Kim, M. J. Black, J. P. Donoghue, and L. R.
Hochberg, “Neural control of cursor trajectory and click by a human
with tetraplegia 1000 days after implant of an intracortical
microelectrode array,” J Neural Eng, vol. 8, no. 2, p. 025027, Apr. 2011.
[16] V. Gilja et al., “Clinical translation of a high-performance neural
prosthesis,” Nat. Med., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 1142–1145, Sep. 2015.
[17] J. A. Perge et al., “Intra-day signal instabilities affect decoding
performance in an intracortical neural interface system,” J. Neural Eng.,
vol. 10, no. 3, p. 036004, Jun. 2013.
[18] J. A. Perge et al., “Reliability of directional information in unsorted
spikes and local field potentials recorded in human motor cortex,” J.
Neural Eng., vol. 11, no. 4, p. 046007, Aug. 2014.
[19] M. L. Homer, J. A. Perge, M. J. Black, M. T. Harrison, S. S. Cash, and
L. R. Hochberg, “Adaptive offset correction for intracortical braincomputer interfaces,” IEEE Trans. neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 22,
no. 2, pp. 239–48, Mar. 2014.
[20] B. Jarosiewicz et al., “Virtual typing by people with tetraplegia using a
stabilized, self-calibrating intracortical brain-computer interface,” in
IEEE BRAIN Grand Challenges Conference, Washington, DC, 2014,
vol. 7, no. 313, pp. 1–11.
[21] T. Milekovic et al., “Stable long-term BCI-enabled communication in
ALS and locked-in syndrome using LFP signals,” J. Neurophysiol., vol.
120, no. 1, pp. 343–360, Jul. 2018.
[22] N. Even-Chen et al., “Intracortical neural interface design opportunities
for an order of magnitude power saving,” Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2020. In
press.
[23] M. Yin et al., “An externally head-mounted wireless neural recording
device for laboratory animal research and possible human clinical use,”
in Proceedings of the Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBS, 2013, pp. 3109–
3114.
[24] M. Yin et al., “Wireless neurosensor for full-spectrum electrophysiology
recordings during free behavior,” Neuron, vol. 84, no. 6, pp. 1170–1182,
Dec. 2014.
[25] D. A. Borton, M. Yin, J. Aceros, and A. Nurmikko, “An implantable
wireless neural interface for recording cortical circuit dynamics in
moving primates,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 10, p. 26010, 2013.
[26] M. Yin, D. A. Borton, J. Aceros, W. R. Patterson, and A. V. Nurmikko,
“A 100-channel hermetically sealed implantable device for chronic
wireless neurosensing applications,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst.,
vol. 7, pp. 115–128, 2013.
[27] D. M. Brandman et al., “Rapid calibration of an intracortical brain–
computer interface for people with tetraplegia,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 15,
no. 2, p. 026007, Apr. 2018.
[28] J. Albites Sanabria, “BrainGate-enabled intracortical neural control of
commercial tablet computers by individuals with tetraplegia,” Brown
University, 2016.
[29] N. Y. Masse et al., “Non-causal spike filtering improves decoding of
movement intention for intracortical BCIs,” J. Neurosci. Methods, Aug.
2014.
[30] P. Nuyujukian, J. M. Fan, J. C. Kao, S. I. Ryu, and K. V Shenoy, “A
high-performance keyboard neural prosthesis enabled by task
optimization,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., pp. 1–9, Sep. 2015.
[31] P. Nuyujukian, J. C. Kao, J. M. Fan, S. D. Stavisky, S. I. Ryu, and K. V
Shenoy, “Performance sustaining intracortical neural prostheses,” J.

This study reports important progress in the clinical
translation of an iBCI toward a future assistive medical device
for individuals with paralysis. We demonstrate the first highresolution broadband recording from multiple implanted
microelectrode arrays using a wireless iBCI in human subjects.
Results with two individuals with tetraplegia demonstrate the
viability of a wireless iBCI for real-time control of a point-andselect interface. Characteristics of the BWD recordings were
highly comparable to those of wired recordings. This broadband
wireless system also enables ongoing fundamental research into
cortical processing during every day human behavior to inform
future neuroscience and BCI advancements. This work
overcomes former barriers to in-home mobile independent use
of a promising assistive technology to restore communication
and digital access for individuals with severe speech and/or
motor impairments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank participants T10, T5 and their families and
caregivers; K. Barnabe, M. Bowker, B. Travers and Y.
Mironovas.
Conflict of Interest: The MGH Translational Research Center
has a clinical research support agreement with Neuralink Corp.,
Paradromics, and Synchron, for which LRH provides
consultative input. KVS is a consultant to Neuralink Corp., and
on the Scientific Advisory Boards of CTRL-Labs, Inscopix
Inc., Heal Inc. and Mind X. JMH is a consultant for Neuralink
Corp., Proteus Biomedical and Boston Scientific, and serves on
the Medical Advisory Boards of Enspire DBS and Circuit
Therapeutics.
Disclaimer: The content is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of
the NIH, the Department of Veterans Affairs or the US
Government.
Caution: Investigational Device. Limited by Federal Law to
Investigational Use.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

L. R. Hochberg et al., “Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices
by a human with tetraplegia,” Nature, vol. 442, no. 7099, pp. 164–171,
2006.
L. R. Hochberg et al., “Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using
a neurally controlled robotic arm,” Nature, vol. 485, no. 7398, pp. 372–
5, May 2012.
J. L. Collinger et al., “High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an
individual with tetraplegia,” Lancet, vol. 381, no. 9866, pp. 557–64, Feb.
2013.
B. Jarosiewicz et al., “Virtual typing by people with tetraplegia using a
self-calibrating intracortical brain-computer interface,” Sci. Transl.
Med., vol. 7, no. 313, p. 313ra179, 2015.
T. Aflalo et al., “Decoding motor imagery from the posterior parietal
cortex of a tetraplegic human,” Science (80-. )., vol. 348, no. 6237, pp.
906–910, May 2015.
C. E. Bouton et al., “Restoring cortical control of functional movement
in a human with quadriplegia,” Nature, vol. 533, no. 7602, pp. 247–250,
Apr. 2016.
C. Pandarinath et al., “High performance communication by people with
paralysis using an intracortical brain-computer interface,” Elife, vol. 6,
p. e18554, Feb. 2017.
P. Nuyujukian et al., “Cortical control of a tablet computer by people
with paralysis,” PLoS One, vol. 13, no. 11, p. e0204566, Nov. 2018.
S. D. Stavisky et al., “Neural ensemble dynamics in dorsal motor cortex

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.27.19015727; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Neural Eng., vol. 11, no. 6, p. 066003, Dec. 2014.
[32] F. Wood, M. J. Black, C. Vargas-Irwin, M. Fellows, and J. P. Donoghue,
“On the variability of manual spike sorting,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 912–8, Jun. 2004.
[33] C. Vargas-Irwin and J. P. Donoghue, “Automated spike sorting using
density grid contour clustering and subtractive waveform
decomposition,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 164, no. 1, pp. 1–18, Aug.
2007.
[34] S. Perel et al., “Single-unit activity, threshold crossings, and local field
potentials in motor cortex differentially encode reach kinematics,” J.
Neurophysiol., vol. 114, no. 3, pp. 1500–1512, 2015.
[35] S. Todorova, P. Sadtler, A. Batista, S. Chase, and V. Ventura, “To sort
or not to sort: the impact of spike-sorting on neural decoding
performance.,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 11, no. 5, p. 056005, Aug. 2014.
[36] B. P. Christie et al., “Comparison of spike sorting and thresholding of
voltage waveforms for intracortical brain-machine interface
performance,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 12, no. 1, p. 016009, Mar. 2015.
[37] J. Dai et al., “Reliability of motor and sensory neural decoding by
threshold crossings for intracortical brain–machine interface,” J. Neural
Eng., vol. 16, no. 3, p. 036011, Jun. 2019.
[38] G. W. Fraser, S. M. Chase, A. Whitford, and A. B. Schwartz, “Control
of a brain-computer interface without spike sorting,” J. Neural Eng., vol.
6, no. 5, p. 055004, Oct. 2009.
[39] C. A. Chestek et al., “Long-term stability of neural prosthetic control
signals from silicon cortical arrays in rhesus macaque motor cortex,” J.
Neural Eng., vol. 8, no. 4, p. 045005, Aug. 2011.
[40] E. M. Trautmann et al., “Accurate estimation of neural population
dynamics without spike sorting,” Neuron, vol. 103, no. 2, 2019.
[41] N. A. Steinmetz, C. Koch, K. D. Harris, and M. Carandini, “Challenges
and opportunities for large-scale electrophysiology with Neuropixels
probes,” Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., vol. 50, pp. 92–100, Jun. 2018.
[42] M. M. Maharbiz, R. Muller, E. Alon, J. M. Rabaey, and J. M. Carmena,
“Reliable next-generation cortical interfaces for chronic brain–machine
interfaces and neuroscience,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 1, pp. 73–82,
Jan. 2017.
[43] A. Obaid et al., “Massively parallel microwire arrays integrated with
CMOS chips for neural recording,” bioRxiv, p. 573295, Mar. 2019.
[44] E. Musk and Neuralink, “An integrated brain-machine interface platform
with thousands of channels,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 21, no. 10, p.
e16194, Oct. 2019.
[45] R. M. Neely, D. K. Piech, S. R. Santacruz, M. M. Maharbiz, and J. M.
Carmena, “Recent advances in neural dust: towards a neural interface
platform.,” Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., vol. 50, pp. 64–71, Jan. 2018.
[46] F. Laiwalla et al., “A distributed wireless network of implantable submm cortical microstimulators for brain-computer interfaces,” in 2019
41st Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2019, pp. 6876–6879.
[47] J. A. Fernandez-Leon et al., “A wireless transmission neural interface
system for unconstrained non-human primates,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 12,
no. 5, p. 056005, Oct. 2015.
[48] C. A. Chestek et al., “HermesC: Low-power wireless neural recording
system for freely moving primates,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng., vol. 17, pp. 330–338, 2009.
[49] D. A. Schwarz et al., “Chronic, wireless recordings of large-scale brain
activity in freely moving rhesus monkeys,” Nat. Methods, vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 670–6, Jun. 2014.
[50] H. Gao et al., “HermesE: A 96-channel full data rate direct neural
interface in 0.13 μm CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no.
4, pp. 1043–1055, 2012.
[51] S. Rajangam et al., “Wireless cortical brain-machine interface for
whole-body navigation in primates,” Sci. Rep., vol. 6, p. 22170, Jan.
2016.
[52] J. D. Foster, O. Freifeld, P. Nuyujukian, S. I. Ryu, M. J. Black, and K.
V. Shenoy, “Combining wireless neural recording and video capture for
the analysis of natural gait,” in 2011 5th International IEEE/EMBS
Conference on Neural Engineering, 2011, vol. 2011, pp. 613–616.
[53] J. D Foster et al., “A freely-moving monkey treadmill model,” J. Neural
Eng., vol. 11, no. 4, p. 046020, Aug. 2014.
[54] P. R. Kennedy and R. A. Bakay, “Restoration of neural output from a
paralyzed patient by a direct brain connection,” Neuroreport, vol. 9, no.
8, pp. 1707–1711, 1998.
[55] W. Wang et al., “An electrocorticographic brain interface in an
individual with tetraplegia,” PLoS One, vol. 8, no. 2, p. e55344, Jan.
2013.
[56] T. J. Oxley et al., “Minimally invasive endovascular stent-electrode

[57]
[58]
[59]

[60]
[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]
[66]
[67]
[68]

14

array for high-fidelity, chronic recordings of cortical neural activity,”
Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 320–327, Mar. 2016.
S. Stanslaski et al., “A chronically implantable neural coprocessor for
investigating the treatment of neurological disorders,” IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1230–1245, Dec. 2018.
M. J. Vansteensel et al., “Fully implanted brain–computer interface in a
locked-in patient with ALS,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 375, no. 21, pp.
2060–2066, Nov. 2016.
N. C. Swann et al., “Chronic multisite brain recordings from a totally
implantable bidirectional neural interface: experience in 5 patients with
Parkinson’s disease,” J. Neurosurg., vol. 128, no. 2, pp. 605–616, Feb.
2018.
K. Matsushita et al., “A fully implantable wireless ECoG 128-channel
recording device for human brain–machine interfaces: W-HERBS,”
Front. Neurosci., vol. 12, p. 511, Jul. 2018.
A. L. Benabid et al., “An exoskeleton controlled by an epidural wireless
brain–machine interface in a tetraplegic patient: a proof-of-concept
demonstration,” Lancet Neurol., vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 1112–1122, Dec.
2019.
J. Komar, C. Heelan, J. D. Simeral, and A. V Nurmikko, “A
programmable 192-channel wireless neural signal processing and
decoding platform for wearable mobile applications,” in IEEE BRAIN
Grand Challenges Conference, Washington, DC, 2014.
C. Heelan, J. Komar, C. Vargas-Irwin, J. Simeral, and A. Nurmikko, “A
mobile embedded platform for high performance neural signal
computation and communication,” in IEEE Biomedical Circuits and
Systems Conference (BioCAS). Program 1316., 2015.
C. Heelan, J. Komar, A. Nurmikko, and J. Simeral, “A mobile highperformance intracortical BCI with integrated antenna-receiver,” Progr.
No. 230.06. 2017 Neurosci. Meet. Planner. Washington, DC Soc.
Neurosci. Online., 2017.
S. N. Flesher et al., “Intracortical microstimulation of human
somatosensory cortex,” Sci. Transl. Med., vol. 8, no. 361, pp. 361ra141361ra141, Oct. 2016.
M. Pais-Vieira et al., “A closed loop brain-machine interface for
epilepsy control using dorsal column electrical stimulation,” Sci. Rep.,
vol. 6, no. 1, p. 32814, Dec. 2016.
Y. S. Park et al., “Early detection of human epileptic seizures based on
intracortical microelectrode array signals,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
pp. 1–1, 2019.
E. Greenwald, M. R. Masters, and N. V Thakor, “Implantable
neurotechnologies: bidirectional neural interfaces--applications and
VLSI circuit implementations,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., vol. 54, no. 1,
pp. 1–17, Jan. 2016.

