medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Timing and nature of palliative care discussions are patient-specific according to clinicians:

a qualitative study

Authors:

N Tavares, BSc (Hons) RN,¹²³ KJ Hunt, PhD MSc PGCert BN (Hons) RN,³ N Jarrett, PhD BSc
(Hons) PGCert RN,⁴ T M A Wilkinson, MBBS PhD MA Cantab FRCP²³⁵

¹Solent University,
²NIHR CLAHRC Wessex,
³University of Southampton,
⁴University of Portsmouth,
⁵University Hospital Southampton
Corresponding author’s contact details: Nightingale Building, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University Road, Southampton SO17 1BJ - nct1g14@soton.ac.uk

Word count – 3501

December 2019

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with an unpredictable and
complex disease trajectory. Consequently, most patients are not involved in advance care planning
and do not receive palliative care until the end of life.

Aim: To explore clinicians’ experiences, opinions and recommendations for the timing and nature of
palliative care discussions in COPD.

Design: Qualitative interviews with nurses and doctors that provide direct care to COPD patients.
Setting/Participants: 14 clinicians working across primary and secondary care in the UK were
interviewed.

Results: Participants suggested that those with the appropriate expertize and an established
relationship with patients were best placed to initiate discussions about palliative and future care.
Early, gradual and informed palliative and future care discussions were considered best practice,
however they uncommon occurrence due to service, patient and clinician-related barriers. The
unpredictable disease trajectory and fine balance between providing acute care and discussing
palliative care options were suggested as key greatest barriers for discussions. However, damaging
patient hope was a concern for clinicians and reduced their inclination to discuss palliative care.
Clinicians did not seem to think that patients were ready for discussions, therefore they avoided
broaching the subject leading early in the disease trajectory.

Conclusion: Stand-alone conversations about and near the end of life was described as current usual
practice by clinicians, however individualised early, regular and gradual discussions with patients
about immediate and long-term future plans may make such discussions feel less negative and
ordinary for patients and clinicians.

Keywords: COPD; palliative care; communication; patient-clinician communication; patient-centre
care; qualitative research

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Background
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive and life-limiting illness that causes
breathlessness and chronic cough [1, 2]. COPD patients have a high symptom burden [3, 4] and
these symptoms are managed by means of aggressive and invasive treatments, especially as they
approach the end of life [5]. Palliative care can support these patients holistically and provide care
that focuses on quality of life and effective symptom relief [6]. In order to offer care focused on
patients’ preferences, conversations about future care need to take place [7, 8]. However, the
unpredictability and complexity of COPD prevents the early identification of patients in need of
palliative care [8, 9]. This means that there is often no obvious ‘right time’ to initiate conversations
about end of life and palliative care.
Discussing preferences and creating end of life care plans can ultimately result in improved
experiences at the end of life while reducing patients’ symptom burden [10, 11]. Despite this, most
COPD patients do not get the chance to discuss their preferences until they approach the end of life
[12, 13]. A recent paper has focused on understanding COPD patients’ preferences for palliative and
future care discussions with patients [14]. Clinicians’ opinions about COPD patient preferences for
discussions are currently unknown [12], so this study aimed to explore clinicians’ perspectives on
when and how to initiate and conduct palliative care discussions with COPD patients.

Methods
Design
This paper reports on the third component of a larger study looking at how and when to start
conversations about palliative and end of life care planning in COPD. A systematic literature review
[12] and a qualitative study of patients’ preferences and opinions for the timing and nature of
discussions [14] formed the first components of the study. These two components informed the
design of this study, the recruitment strategy and the interview topic guide (such as patient
perceptions about the lack of expertise in primary care and their preference in delaying these
discussions). Recruitment focused on health professions cited by patients as the preferred person to
discuss palliative care [14].

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Sample
The study used a purposive sample and recruited clinicians who provided direct care to COPD
patients at different stages of their condition. This included practice nurses; general practitioners
(GPs); COPD consultants and COPD specialist nurses. It was postulated that these clinicians worked
in environments where discussions could be held sensitively; and had some training or knowledge
about palliative care in COPD. The inclusion criteria can be found in Table 1.

Table 1 Inclusion criteria for healthcare professionals
Professional background
Practice nurses, GPs, COPD consultants and COPD specialist
Age
Clinical practice
Language
Location

nurses
Aged 18 or over
Clinicians providing direct care to COPD patients
English speaking clinicians
Clinicians working in geographical area of Hampshire

Clinicians were recruited by email or by letter. The NIHR Clinical Research Network (CRN) signposted
primary care clinicians to the study. The CRN informed GP practices about the research study and
requested that clinicians willing to participate contacted the first author. Secondary care clinicians
were signposted to the study by the research department of the hospital where they worked.
Clinicians were sent information about the study and were requested to contact the researcher if
willing to participate. Written informed consent was obtained for all participants.

Data collection
Interviews were audiotaped, lasted 20-45 minutes and followed a semi-structured approach. The
interviews were conducted by the first author (NT1), who had no previous relationship with the
participants. The questions followed a topic guide that focused on exploring clinicians’
understanding about the nature and timing of palliative care discussions and in debating patients’
preferences for these discussions. The exact phrasing of the questions and the scope and depth of
the interview varied on an individual basis.
Individual interviews were undertaken at a time and place convenient to the participant, usually GP
practices and hospital. Data collection was carried out between December 2018 and March 2019
and stopped at data saturation point. Data saturation was judged achieved when no new

1

Clinical Doctoral Research Fellow – Staff Nurse and PhD Student. Training completed on qualitative

interviewing

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

themes/topics were emerging from the interviews with clinicians. The decision to stop data
collection was discussed and agreed within the authorial team.

Data analysis
All interviews were transcribed verbatim and anonymised. Data was managed using qualitative
software Nvivo 11 and analysed using thematic analysis [15, 16]. Transcripts were read several times
and coded. Codes were developed, defined, reviewed and grouped into larger categories of codes
and final themes. All transcripts were analysed by the first author (NT), whilst all the authors
monitored and supervised the transcript analysis, participated in the development of the codes and
themes, contributing to the trustworthiness and methodological quality of the study. The
consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ) were used to report the research
findings [17].

Results
Fourteen clinicians, out of 22 clinicians contacted, participated in the study and their characteristics
are summarised in Table 2.

Table 2 Clinicians’ characteristics
Gender – Male (%)
Mean age in years (SD)
Years in practice (SD)
Number of COPD patients seen a week (SD)
Number of discussions a monthly (SD)
Special interest or training palliative care (%)
Professional background:
• COPD consultants
• COPD specialist nurses
• Practice nurses
• General practitioners

4 (29%)
50 (8.5)
22 (12.5)
17 (8)
3 (5)
6 (43%)
3 (23%)
3 (23%)
4 (27%)
4 (27%)

The analyses yielded 59 deductive codes and 50 inductive codes. The deductive codes focused on
addressing the aim of the study, whereas inductive codes provided context and further information
on clinicians’ thoughts. The combination of the different codes originated 7 categories of which 4
themes emerged, please refer to Table 3.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 3 Categories and themes generated from interviews with clinicians
Categories

Themes

Approaches when discussing palliative

•

Established relationship;

care;

•

Timing informed by prognosis;

•

End of life and end of life care;

•

Individualized approach;

•

Future with COPD;

•

Readiness for discussions.

•

Palliative care;

•

Clinicians starting and conducting

•

discussions;
•

Timing for discussions with patients;

•

Previous discussions with patients

Quotes were selected purposively and unnecessary information or irrelevant pauses were edited out
for clarity and anonymity.

Established relationship and clinician expertise
Healthcare professionals could not pinpoint specific clinicians that should have palliative care
discussions with patients. Instead, most clinicians believed that patients should discuss this with a
well-known clinician, since this was thought to increase trust and familiarity. Participants believed
that some clinicians felt less comfortable when discussing palliative care with patients, since some
patients became emotionally distressed. Despite this, no participant found discussions particularly
difficult for themselves.
When analysing interdisciplinary differences, more medics considered themselves suitable clinicians
to initiate discussion than nurses. Some primary care clinicians believed that hospital clinicians
should take ownership of discussions, since care plans developed in primary care were not always
respected in hospital. Most participants believed that communication skills and knowledge about
COPD, palliative care and services available were essential. Participants’ knowledge and skills
differed across and within professional backgrounds. However, most participants seemed to have
little understanding about palliative care, since they viewed it as end of life care and exclusive of
acute treatments.

Secondary care
Consultants reported regular palliative care discussions with patients in outpatient clinics, especially
on hospital wards. Participants believed that consultants’ medical background; expertise; patient6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

relationship; and regular contact with end-stage patients made them suitable clinicians to start
discussions with patients. COPD specialist nurses had daily discussions with patients and provided
palliative care to patients in the community. Moreover, these clinicians seemed to have a large
knowledge base, the opportunity to build relationships with patients, and offer longer
appointments. However, these clinicians did not always have the confidence to initiate discussions.
I've just been doing that (patient support sessions) depending on the patients. But it
definitely gives me a better amount of time and relationship with patients. (…) I think in
consultant clinics you get to develop a good relationship with patients if you do the same
clinic, which I do. Because you get a caseload of patients and you get to know them.

Primary care
Participants stated that increasingly higher pressure in primary care resulted in shorter
appointments, longer waits and reduced continuity of care. In fact, one practice nurse highlighted
the variation in GP surgery management, which meant that patients were left in a “postcode lottery”
for care. Some nurses and GPs were “thrown in” to COPD clinics with little to no training, so clinician
skill and competency varied greatly across surgeries. Since primary care clinicians managed patients
with different health conditions, some participants believed they possessed a less in-depth
knowledge about COPD.
You can get one practice where the practice nurses are specialists in their own rights.
Because they've done courses, they've done the spirometry course and all of that, and a
COPD course. But then there are COPD nurses out there that have done very little courses
that pick it up as they go along.

(P9, Practice nurse)

GPs felt that their overview of the patient’s medical history provided them with the required tools to
start discussions. However, in contrast to practice nurses, GPs felt less able to build relationships
with patients and had less time for discussions. Despite this, most practice nurses did not discuss
palliative care, since they lacked the necessary training and knowledge. Moreover, practice nurses
only saw patients with milder COPD, who nurses believed did not require palliative care discussions.
I mean it's harder for me now (to build relationships with patients), because I'm only
doing one day a week here. I don't think it's difficult (to build relationships). I mean I
think things have changed in general practice. In that we don't see those patients as
often, as I say the practice nurses do the respiratory reviews and stuff. So they are more
likely to have those conversations.

(P12, GP)

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Timing informed by prognosis
Clinicians had conflicting thoughts about the ideal timing for discussions with patients. Timing was
based on the individual patient and on poor prognosis. Participants found prognostication complex,
so looked for factors that signalled poor prognosis when timing discussions, such starting long-term
oxygen. In general, participants started discussions with patients with an advanced and deteriorating
condition, usually at the end of life.
You can be now very severe (COPD), end stage (COPD), but that end stage could be
weeks,

months,

could

be

years.

We

don't

tackle

or

approach

it

(palliative

care

discussions) with patients, because the trajectory is so unknown and varied. You could be
saying we're going to do this end of life stuff, but they might still be here in 18 months.
We've got loads of them (patients) that you're surprised they're still going, but I wouldn't
be surprised if somebody said “they died”. I'd be like “okay it's sad, but not unexpected.”
(P4, COPD nurse)

In contrast to current practice, most participants believed all patients should be given the
opportunity to start early discussions and that early discussions could reduce the emotional impact
of a late discussion, allowing patients to plan ahead. In fact, due to the complex nature of COPD, one
consultant believed that care should steadily transition from aggressive to more comfortable
treatments/care as disease severity progressed. Moreover, participants recommended regular
discussions with digestible information that increased in depth as the patient’s condition
deteriorated. Annual reviews and pulmonary rehabilitation were considered ideal opportunities to
start discussions and offer education about palliative care.
If it's someone I know well, that’s something (palliative care) I like to broach early on if I
can. If it's someone you can see declining just over a period of time. At least having it
mentioned once or twice, then when you really want to discuss it, it doesn’t feel unusual
to the patient. It feels like it was something you were naturally coming to.

Individualized approach
Although, participants reported that both parties started the discussion, they started discussions
much more often than patients. Participants highlighted that patients and families rarely started
discussions in a direct way, instead they provided cues about their readiness to start discussions. The
lack of discussions started by patients was attributed to their poor understanding about the severity
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

and progressive nature of their condition, and in differentiating between exacerbations and chronic
decline.
I usually start it (the discussion), very rarely you get a patient (to start it). Actually, I
suppose I've had one or two that talked about it in a roundabout way, because a family
member had died of COPD and that sometimes leads to conversations at the start, "I
don't want to be like that person, because they were so breathless at the end." But it's a
minority.

(P3, Respiratory consultant)

Many factors influenced the approach chosen by clinicians when starting discussions with patients,
including their anxiety levels and understanding about their disease severity. Participants’ approach
to starting and conducting discussions varied between direct and indirect. These approaches can be
found in Table 4.

Table 4 Methods used/recommended when discussing palliative care with patients
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Before the
discussion

Starting the discussion
Ask patients to reflect on
the advanced stage of
their condition and
implications for the
future
Explain the severity of the
patient’s condition and
implication for the future
at the start of the
discussion
Start discussions in a
“roundabout way” to
reduce anxiety
Pick up cues on patients’
readiness for discussions

Get to know the
patient –
establish a
healthy and
long
relationship

Unpick patients’ concerns
or fears about
treatments, future or
severity of their illness
Acknowledge
unpredictability of their
condition when starting
discussion
Direct or indirect start of
discussions – open and
honest discussion versus
hope fostering discussion
Primary care continues
discussion if started in
secondary care
Primary can start
discussion if patient was
being seen for another
issue – stable COPD
Offer patients the
opportunity to discuss it

Conducting the
discussion

Concluding the
discussion

Early and gradual,
discussion with
patients as disease
severity worsens

Allow final questions

Discuss and explain
treatment options
and goals of care
Discuss preferences
from generalities to
specifics from place
of care to specific
treatments

Document discussion in
patient’s records and
complete required
forms

Ask open questions
about patients’
preferences for
information about
treatments and care

Feedback outcome of
discussions to other
members of the MDT

Frame discussion
positively – focusing
on what the services
can offer and on
symptom
management
Patient-led
discussion – picking
up cues throughout
discussion
Explore and unpick
fears and concerns
about deteriorating
and end of life; and
discuss an action
plan
Discuss future care
using a framework –
AACP or UCP

In order to limit the
emotional impact of
discussions, conclude
the discussion on a
positive note or with
something cheery.

Provide written
information that
supports discussion

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Some participants felt that starting discussions in a “roundabout way” (indirect approach) reduced
anxiety levels and made discussions more acceptable. This approach was especially used in patients
with increased anxiety and depression levels. The use of strong words, such as “palliative care,”
“death” and “end of life,” were avoided, since these were seen to cause distress and reduced hope.
In contrast, a small proportion of participants believed they should have an open and honest
discussion with patients (direct approach), by providing accurate and direct information about their
advanced condition. Despite the approach chosen, most discussions focused on treatment
withdrawal.
I don't think I would be talking about palliative care with them. I would be talking to
them as an individual and how they feel about what's going to happen? And how do they
feel about dying? I wouldn't probably mention the word palliative, because they wouldn't
understand what that means. But it might come when you're talking about introducing
the palliative care team.

(P9, Practice nurse)

Readiness for discussions
Participants looked for prompts that could help them identify when patients were ready to initiate
discussions. They suggested that patient readiness to discuss palliative care depended on various
factors (Table 5). However, participants’ perception of patients’ readiness also seemed to impact
their own readiness to initiate discussions.
Table 5 Factors associated with readiness for discussions

•

Patient’s older age;

•

Patient’s understanding about COPD and current status of their condition;

•

Patient’s perception about palliative and future care discussions;

•

Patient’s attitude towards death;

•

Patient’s personality;

•

Patient’s or other people’s experiences regarding healthcare;

•

Clinicians’ approach when starting and conducting discussions;

•

Focus of discussion.

Clinicians believed that patients’ understanding about the progressive nature of COPD and their
disease severity impacted patients’ readiness to discuss palliative care and was related to insufficient
information provided to patients throughout their disease trajectory. In fact, some participants had
purposely withheld information about the progressive nature of COPD, for fear that this would
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

emotionally impact patients. However, providing education about the progressive character of COPD
was seen as very important.
I did (talk to patients about palliative care) when they were first diagnosed in a sense.
Because I talked to them about what COPD was and I'd give them the booklet. I tried to
avoid it being an aggressive or progressive disease. I didn't say anything about palliative
care. I would say if you carry on smoking things might worsen, you might end up on
oxygen and things like that.

(P9,

practice nurse)

Discussion
Summary of the findings
This study explored clinicians’ experiences of discussing palliative care with patients. Clinicians felt
that those with a relationship with the patient should start the discussion. Discussions were started
when the end of life was identified, through the recognition of key clinical red flags. In contrast to
current practice, early, gradual and regular discussions with patients were seen as best practice.
Direct or indirect approaches were used when starting and conducting discussions. Whether
discussions came late or early in the relationship or took a direct or indirect approach, the discussion
was tempered by the need to maintain hope and a good relationship, but also to avoid raising false
expectations on what resources were available for patients and what medicine could achieve for
them.

Discussion of findings
Clinicians believed that discussions should ideally be started by clinicians with increased expertise
and good relationships with patients. Therefore, there was no agreement on which clinicians were
the most suitable to discuss this. Previous research has also highlighted a lack of clarity on who’s
responsible for initiating discussing with patients [10]. Although clinical expertise and patientrelationships are paramount when discussing palliative care [18, 19], the lack of a designated
clinician responsible for initiating discussions with patients can lead to nobody starting them.
However, there seems to be a general lack of research exploring the lack of an explicit clinician
responsible for discussing palliative care.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The absence of a designated clinician who is responsible to start palliative care conversations with
patients may result in discussions not being started or being poorly conducted, due to lack of
training and experience on conducting these discussions. Previous research suggested that clinicians
with less expertise are less likely to start and conduct palliative are discussions, since expertise is
dependent on training and in discussions taking place on a regular basis [19]. Specific guidance on
who is responsible to start discussion, and on the timing and approach for palliative care
conversations may facilitate the development and implementation of interventions that can help
improve the frequency and quality of discussions [10]. Thus, guidance may reduce clinicians’
uncertainty regarding the timing and nature of discussions, increase clinicians’ confidence, which
could result in increased willingness and reduced emotional impact of discussions on patients [10].
A recurrent theme from interviews was the challenges faced by primary care. The increasingly large
workload and staff shortages has led to a reduction in the amount and quality of care provided to
patients [20, 21]. Short appointments have also been highlighted in previous studies [22, 23], which
have led to a reduction in direct patient care [24]. GPs found it particularly difficult to build patientrelationships and to find time for discussions, whilst practice nurses lacked the time and knowledge.
As a consequence, the barriers found in primary care prevented the integration of early palliative
care discussions with patients [25]. As a result, patients had to wait until they engaged with
secondary care and their condition deteriorated considerably, before having the opportunity to start
discussions. The integration of discussions could start while a patient’s condition is stable and shortly
after diagnosis [25]. Primary care clinicians felt able to start early conversations if time and training
was provided.
Throughout the interviews there was conflicting opinions about best and current practice for the
timing of discussions. Most participants had a one-off discussion with patients usually at the end of
life, whilst they believed discussions should be started earlier and be held regularly with patients.
Late or lack of discussions have also been reported in other life-limiting conditions, such as heart
failure and chronic kidney disease [26, 27]. Starting discussions late in the disease trajectory seems
to be related to clinicians’ poor understanding of palliative care (confined to the end of life) and to
the difficulty of prognosticating in COPD [28-30]. As an example, the practice nurses interviewed
reported a lack of training and confidence to start discussions. Despite this, a previous study showed
that a proportion of patients would like to discuss palliative care with practice nurses [14]. These
differences in patients’ and clinicians’ perceptions about the timing and nature of palliative care
seem to seriously impact their occurrence. Service rationing, clinician and patient-specific barriers,
such as unpredictable disease trajectory and lack of time [28, 31], were also barriers for early

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

discussions with patients. A change in the current model of care, from stand-alone discussions at the
end of life, to early, gradual and brief discussions throughout the disease trajectory could minimize
these barriers [25, 32].
Interestingly, the importance of social determinants was seldom mentioned by clinicians, despite
being commonly reported in previous research [33, 34]. Low socioeconomic status can negatively
impact patients’ understanding and perception of their condition, reduce their ability to selfmanage, and decrease their ability and willingness to discuss palliative care [33, 35, 36]. Further, low
socioeconomic status were associated with reduced knowledge and power, which are important
factors when accessing and negotiating care [34, 35, 37]. Lack of power and knowledge can lead
patients to devolve all expertise and decision power to clinicians, which limits their participation in
palliative care discussions [38, 39]. Poor understanding and low health literacy seems to be related
to a lack of information provided by clinicians about patients’ condition, especially about their
progress over time [10, 14, 40]. In order to improve access to healthcare, and palliative care in
particular, patients need education, through early and informative discussions about all aspects of
COPD, palliative care and future treatments. Late discussions further reduce patients’ power, since
they will often be at their most vulnerable at the point at which they require palliative care.

Limitations
The first limitation of the study is that most clinicians expressed some interest in palliative care
discussions. This was not the case for two nurses – one practice nurse and one COPD specialist
nurse. Clinicians interested in the topic may feel more confident and comfortable in discussing
palliative care. Interviewing clinicians less interested in discussing palliative care or that found
discussions particularly difficult, could have generated different data. Another limitation of the study
is the lack of ethnic diversity in the sample which prevented any exploration of the impact of
ethnicity on palliative care discussions. This may have been especially important when considering
the spiritually attached to palliative care discussions.

Conclusion
Clinicians believed that a person with increased expertise and an established relationship with the
patient should start palliative care discussions. Various clinician-specific barriers mean that there is
no designated clinician that should start discussions. Current stand-alone discussions are difficult to
time and to conduct appropriately and sensitively, resulting in lack or late discussions with patients.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Instead, discussions should be started from diagnosis, develop over time and information should be
provided gradually. The discussion should be patient-led and patient-centred, focused on patients’
preferences for immediate care and held in a comfortable and private environment. A shift in the
model of care, from stand-alone end of life care conversations to integrating palliative care early in
the disease trajectory, is required.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1.

NICE, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - Quality Standard, D.o.
Health, Editor. 2011, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence.

2.

Department of Health, An Outcomes Strategy for Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and Asthma in England, D.o. Health, Editor.
2011, Department of Health. p. 56.

3.

Miravitlles, M. and A. Ribera, Understanding the impact of symptoms on
the burden of COPD. Respiratory Research, 2017. 18(1): p. 67.

4.

NICE, in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Management of Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease in Adults in Primary and Secondary Care.
2010: London.

5.

Beernaert, K., et al., Referral to palliative care in COPD and other chronic
diseases: a population-based study. Respir Med, 2013. 107(11): p. 17319.

6.

WHO. WHO Definition of Palliative Care. 2016 [cited 2018 June 2018];
Available from: http://www.who.int/cancer/palliative/definition/en/.

7.

NICE, End of life care for adults - Quality Standard, D.o. Health, Editor.
2011.

8.

Curtis, J., Palliative care for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Respiratory Medicine: COPD Update, 2006. 2: p. 86-90.

9.

Whellan, D.J., et al., End-of-life care in patients with heart failure. J Card
Fail, 2014. 20(2): p. 121-34.

10.

Gott, M., et al., Barriers to advance care planning in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Palliative Medicine, 2009. 23(7): p. 642-648.

11.

Houben, C.H.M., et al., Cluster-randomised trial of a nurse-led advance
care planning session in patients with COPD and their loved ones. Thorax,
2019. 74(4): p. 328-336.

12.

Tavares, N., et al., Palliative and end-of-life care conversations in COPD:
a systematic literature review. ERJ Open Research, 2017. 3(2).

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

13.

Houben, C.H.M., et al., Patient-Clinician Communication About End-ofLife Care in Patients with Advanced Chronic Organ Failure During One
Year. Journal Of Pain And Symptom Management, 2015.

14.

Tavares, N., et al., COPD patients’ preferences are to discuss palliative
care plans with their known respiratory clinicians, but to delay
conversations until their condition deteriorates: a qualitative study
[under review]. Palliative Medicine, 2019 [under review].

15.

Braun, V. and V. Clarke, Using thematic analysis in psychology.
Qualitative Research in Psychology, 2006. 3(2): p. 77-101.

16.

Tuckett, A.G., Applying thematic analysis theory to practice: A
researcher’s experience. Contemporary Nurse, 2005. 19(1-2): p. 75-87.

17.

Tong, A., J. Craig, and P. Sainsbury, Consolidated criteria for reporting
qualitative research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist for interviews and
focus groups. International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 2007.
19(6): p. 349-357.

18.

Coyle, N., et al., Discussing Death, Dying, and End-of-Life Goals of Care: A
Communication Skills Training Module for Oncology Nurses. Clinical
journal of oncology nursing, 2015. 19(6): p. 697-702.

19.

Back, A.L., et al., Efficacy of Communication Skills Training for Giving Bad
News and Discussing Transitions to Palliative Care. JAMA Internal
Medicine, 2007. 167(5): p. 453-460.

20.

The King's Fund, Make or break?, in The health care workforce in
England, T.H. Foundation, Editor. 2018.

21.

World Health Organization. The global burden of chronic Programmes
and
Projects
2019
10/03/2019];
Available
from:
https://www.who.int/nutrition/topics/2_background/en/.

22.

Knauft, E., et al., Barriers and facilitators to end-of-life care
communication for patients with COPD. CHEST, 2005. 127(6): p. 21882196.

23.

Aslakson, R.A., et al., Nurse-perceived barriers to effective
communication regarding prognosis and optimal end-of-life care for
surgical ICU patients: a qualitative exploration. Journal Of Palliative
Medicine, 2012. 15(8): p. 910-915.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

24.

Erickson, S.M., et al., Putting Patients First by Reducing Administrative
Tasks in Health Care: A Position Paper of the American College of
PhysiciansPutting Patients First by Reducing Administrative Tasks in
Health Care. Annals of Internal Medicine, 2017. 166(9): p. 659-661.

25.

Hardin, K.A., F. Meyers, and S. Louie, Integrating Palliative Care in Severe
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. COPD: Journal of Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease, 2008. 5(4): p. 207-220.

26.

Barclay, S., et al., End-of-life care conversations with heart failure
patients: a systematic literature review and narrative synthesis. The
British journal of general practice : the journal of the Royal College of
General Practitioners, 2011. 61(582): p. e49-e62.

27.

Mandel, E.I., R.E. Bernacki, and S.D. Block, Serious Illness Conversations
in ESRD. Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology, 2017.
12(5): p. 854-863.

28.

Landers, A., et al., Severe COPD and the transition to a palliative
approach. Breathe (Sheffield, England), 2017. 13(4): p. 310-316.

29.

Crawford, A., Respiratory practitioners' experience of end-of-life
discussions in COPD. British Journal of Nursing, 2010. 19(18): p. 11641169.

30.

Luckett, T., M. Agar, and J. Phillips, Palliative Care in Chronic Illness and
Multimorbidity, in Textbook of Palliative Care, R.D. MacLeod and L. van
den Block, Editors. 2018, Springer International Publishing: Cham. p. 115.

31.

Spathis, A. and S. Booth, End of life care in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: In search of a good death. International Journal of COPD, 2008.
3(1): p. 11-29.

32.

Higginson, I.J., et al., An integrated palliative and respiratory care service
for patients with advanced disease and refractory breathlessness: a
randomised controlled trial. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine, 2014.
2(12): p. 979-987.

33.

Prescott, E. and J. Vestbo, Socioeconomic status and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Thorax, 1999. 54(8): p. 737-741.

34.

Pleasants, R.A., I.L. Riley, and D.M. Mannino, Defining and targeting
health disparities in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. International
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

journal of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 2016. 11: p. 24752496.
35.

Roberts, N.J., R. Ghiassi, and M.R. Partridge, Health literacy in COPD.
International journal of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 2008.
3(4): p. 499-507.

36.

Gauronskaite, R., et al., How COPD patients understand their disease and
what are their future expectations? European Respiratory Journal, 2016.
48(suppl 60): p. PA4342.

37.

Joseph-Williams, N., G. Elwyn, and A. Edwards, Knowledge is not power
for patients: A systematic review and thematic synthesis of patientreported barriers and facilitators to shared decision making. Patient
Education and Counseling, 2014. 94(3): p. 291-309.

38.

Laue, J., H. Melbye, and M.B. Risør, Self-treatment of acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease requires more
than symptom recognition – a qualitative study of COPD patients’
perspectives on self-treatment. BMC Family Practice, 2017. 18(1): p. 8.

39.

Simon, J., Attitudes of Hungarian asthmatic and COPD patients affecting
disease control: empirical research based on Health Belief Model.
Frontiers in Pharmacology, 2013. 4: p. 135.

40.

Gardener, A.C., et al., Support needs of patients with COPD: a systematic
literature search and narrative review. International journal of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, 2018. 13: p. 1021-1035.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.28.19013417; this version posted December 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Authorship declaration

All authors participated in the different components of the reaserch study.

Funding

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or notfor-profit sectors’.

Declaration of interest

The Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.

Research Ethics

The study was approved by the Health Research Authority and the Hampshire B Research Ethics
Committee in February 2017 with the following IRAS ID number: 203444.

Data management

All data are kept in the University of Southampton repositories for a minimum of 10 years. For more
information please contact the University’s Data Protection Officer at data.protection@soton.ac.uk.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to all clinicians that took their time to participate in the research study.

20

