medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A CALCIUM-RICH MULTI-MINERAL INTERVENTION TO MODULATE COLONIC
MICROBIAL COMMUNITIES AND METABOLOMIC PROFILES IN HUMANS:
Results from a 90-day trial

Muhammad N. Aslam1*, Christine M. Bassis2, Ingrid L. Bergin3, Karsten Knuver1,
Suzanna M. Zick4,5, Ananda Sen4,6, D. Kim Turgeon6 and James Varani1

Departments of 1Pathology, 2,6Internal Medicine (Divisions of 2Infectious Diseases and
6
Gastroenterology),4Family Medicine,6Biostatistics,
3
The Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine
The University of Michigan Medical School
and
Department of 5Nutritional Science
The University of Michigan School of Public Health
Ann Arbor, MI 48109

*Corresponding author
Muhammad Nadeem Aslam
Department of Pathology
The University of Michigan
1301 Catherine Road/Box 5602
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA
Tel: (734) 936-1897
Email: mnaslam@med.umich.edu

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acknowledgments: This study was supported by NIH grants CA201782 to JV, UL1TR002240 to
the Michigan Institute for Clinical & Health Research and 2 P30 DK089503-06 to the Michigan
Nutrition and Obesity Research Center (MNORC). Metabolomic work was supported by
Pilot/Feasibility Grant from MNORC to IB and MNA. This study also used services at University
of Michigan which were supported by NIH funding (UL1TR002240; KL2TR002241; and
TL1TR002242) to the Michigan Institute for Clinical & Health Research (MICHR). We thank
MICHR, the Michigan Clinical Research Unit (MCRU), the University of Michigan Microbial
Systems Molecular Biology Laboratory and the Regional Comprehensive Metabolomics
Resource Cores (RCMRC) at the University of Michigan for help with various aspects of the
study. We thank our study coordinators (Elaine Brady and Deepa Chandhrasekhar) for their
assistance with the study. We also thank Marigot LTD (Cork, Ireland) for providing Aquamin® as
a gift.

Disclosure of Conflict of Interest: Authors have no financial or personal conflict of interest.

Short Title: Microbial / metabolomic alterations by Aquamin

Keywords: Aquamin, bile acids, colon cancer, colon cancer chemoprevention, calcium, gut
microbiome, short chain fatty acids

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Bile acid abbreviations.
aMCA
bMCA
CA
CDCA
DCA
GCA
GCDCA
GDCA
GHCA
GHDCA
GUDCA
HCA
HDCA
LCA
TaMCA
TbMCA
TCA
TCDCA
TDCA
THCA
THDCA
TLCA
TUDCA
UDCA
wMCA

alpha-Murocholate
beta-Muricholate
Cholate
Chenodeoxycholate
Deoxycholate
Glycocholate
Glycochenodeoxycholate
Glycodeoxycholate
Glycohyocholate
Glycohyodeoxycholate
Glycoursodeoxycholate
Hyocholate
Hyodeoxycholate
Lithocholate
Tauro-alpha-muricholate
Tauro-beta-muricholate
Taurocholate
Taurochenodeoxycholate
Taurodeoxycholate
Taurohyocholate
Taurohyodeoxycholate
Taurolithocholate
Tauroursodeoxycholate
Ursodeoxycholate
omega-Muricholate

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ABSTRACT

Aquamin, a calcium-, magnesium-, and multiple trace element-rich natural product has
polyp prevention efficacy based on preclinical studies. The overall goal of this study was to
determine the safety and tolerability of Aquamin when used as a dietary chemopreventative in
humans. Additionally, we determined the effects of Aquamin on the colonic microbial community
and attendant metabolomic profile. Thirty healthy male and female human participants were
enrolled in a 90-day trial in which the effects of Aquamin (delivering 800 mg of calcium per day)
were compared to those of calcium alone or placebo. Before and after the interventional period,
colonic biopsies and stool specimens were obtained. All 30 participants completed the study
without serious adverse events. There were no changes in liver function markers. Compared to
pretreatment values, intervention with Aquamin led to a reduction in total bacterial DNA and a
shift in the microbial community. Treatment with calcium alone also produced a decline in total
bacteria, but smaller than seen with Aquamin, while no reduction was observed with placebo. In
parallel with microbial changes, a reduction in bile acid levels and a slight increase in the level
of the short chain fatty acid (SCFA) acetate in stool specimens from Aquamin-treated
participants was noted. No change in bile acids or SCFAs was observed with calcium alone or
placebo. We conclude from these studies that Aquamin is safe and tolerable in healthy human
participants and may produce beneficial alterations in the colonic microbial community and the
attendant metabolomic profile.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION

Epidemiological studies have shown an inverse relationship between calcium intake and
colon cancer incidence (1). Experimental studies in animals have substantiated anti-tumor
efficacy in the colon (2) and in vitro studies have provided mechanistic insight into how calcium
influences epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation (3). In spite of these data, interventional
trials with calcium have had only modest success in reducing colon polyp formation, with some
trials demonstrating a reduction in incidence (4,5), while others showing essentially no
protection (6,7) or an increase in incidence of a more-aggressive sessile-serrated colon polyp
phenotype (8). This complicated picture supports the idea that adequate or optimal calcium
intake throughout life may be beneficial, but in a realistic dietary setting, the efficacy of
supplementation by calcium alone may be limited by dietary complexity. Potentially adverse
effects at higher dose levels further complicate the picture (9).

Recent evidence suggests that the anti-neoplastic activity of calcium supplementation
may be enhanced by concomitant inclusion of additional trace minerals along with calcium. This
has been demonstrated in our own studies using Aquamin, a calcium- and magnesium-rich
multi-mineral product obtained from mineralized red marine algae. In two long-term (15-18
month) studies in mice, Aquamin more effectively suppressed colon polyp formation than
calcium alone (10,11). Further, Aquamin was more effective than calcium alone at suppressing
proliferation and inducing differentiation in human colon carcinoma cells in monolayer culture
(12,13), and human adenoma-derived colonoids (14). Thus, Aquamin (as a source of calcium
along with magnesium and additional trace minerals) may, ultimately, prove to be a more
effective dietary colon polyp chemopreventative than calcium alone.
Exact mechanisms by which calcium alone or multi-mineral supplementation exert antineoplastic activity are currently unknown. In addition to direct anti-proliferative and pro5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

differentiating effects on colonic epithelium, beneficial activity may be mediated indirectly
through effects on the gut microbial population and/or changes in gut microbial metabolic
activity. The bacterial community in the gastrointestinal tract plays several important roles that
contribute to health. A “healthy” microbiome is important for food digestion and production of
important metabolites. In addition, a healthy microbial community helps maintain the tissue
barrier, regulates the host immune response and provides protection against pathogen
overgrowth (15). Dysbiosis, especially in the colon, can lead to barrier breakdown and initiate a
chronic inflammatory response. Dysbiosis has been directly linked to inflammatory bowel
diseases and indirectly to the formation of premalignant colon polyps (15-17). In previous
studies in mice, dietary calcium supplementation has been shown to cause a shift in the gut
microbial community in comparison to control (18,19). In another study, Aquamin itself induced
gut microbial changes (20).

Metabolic changes may also be important. At high concentrations, bile acids are
membrane-active agents and can be cytotoxic (21). In addition, certain bacterially-derived
secondary bile acids have carcinogenic properties (22). Alterations in the gut microbial
population can affect bile acid profiles (23). In our own murine study (19), calcium
supplementation altered the gut microbiome and reduced the level of total bile acids and certain
microbially-derived secondary bile acids. In addition to bile acids, gut microbes also produce
short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) (e.g. acetate, propionate and butyrate) in the colon. SCFAs
have demonstrable protective effect against colonic inflammation and carcinogenesis (24).
Thus, a shift in the gut microbial community may affect colon health through alterations in
bacterially-derived metabolites.

Whether similar microbial/metabolomic changes might also be seen in human
participants is not known. To test the feasibility of using dietary Aquamin as an interventional
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

strategy in humans, we conducted a 90-day, FDA-approved pilot study, comparing daily
supplementation with Aquamin to calcium alone and placebo in healthy human participants.
While the primary purpose of this study was to assess Aquamin’s tolerability and safety, we also
evaluated microbial community structure and assessed bile acid, SFCA and eicosanoid profiles
at endpoint in comparison to baseline values in participants from all three groups. Elucidating
the microbial and metabolic changes resulting from intervention is important for identifying
potential mechanisms of action with Aquamin. Identifying measurable alterations in microbial
and metabolomic parameters and determining effect-size with intervention will also be helpful
for determining the necessary sample size going forward in a larger-scale clinical trial. Initial
results from the current study are reported herein.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Aquamin and control interventions. Aquamin is a calcium- and magnesium-rich natural product
obtained from the skeletal remains of red marine algae of the Lithothamnion genus. In addition to
calcium and magnesium, Aquamin contains detectable levels of 72 additional trace minerals
including trace elements from the lanthanide family (essentially all of the minerals accumulated by
the algae from seawater). Aquamin is sold as a food supplement (GRAS 000028) (Marigot Ltd,
Cork, Ireland) and is used in various products for human consumption in Europe, Asia, Australia,
and North America. A single batch of Aquamin-Food Grade® was used for this study. Mineral
composition was established via an independent laboratory (Advanced Laboratories; Salt Lake
City, Utah). Supplement Table 1 provides a complete list of elements detected in Aquamin and
their relative amounts. Calcium carbonate was used for comparison and maltodextrin was used as
placebo.
Study participants. This study was a pilot, double-blind, parallel assignment, randomized
clinical interventional trial in which thirty participants were included. Participants were male or
non-pregnant female, in general good health, but having “an increased risk for colon cancer”
based on i) a personal history of colorectal polyp, early stage (stage I or II) colon cancer treated
by surgical removal without recommendation for adjuvant therapy, or stage III colon cancer
treated with surgery > 5 years prior or ii) a first degree relative diagnosed under the age of 60
with colorectal cancer. Exclusion criteria included history of kidney disease or kidney stones,
Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis, gastrointestinal hemorrhagic disorders, or coagulopathy,
hereditary non-polyposis coli or familial adenomatous polyposis. The participants were recruited
through the Michigan Medicine web portal and by posting flyers in the hospital.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

This clinical interventional trial was conducted with FDA approval of Aquamin as an
Investigational New Drug (IND#118194) and with oversight by the Institutional Review Board at
the University of Michigan Medical School (IRBMED)- IRB#HUM00076276. The study was
registered as an interventional clinical trial with details at Clinicaltrials.gov (study identifier
NCT02647671). All participants provided written informed consent prior to inclusion. This phase
I trial involving human participants was carried out in accordance with recognized ethical
guidelines, for example, Declaration of Helsinki, International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical
Research Involving Human Subjects (CIOMS), the Belmont Report and the U.S. Common Rule.

Study design. Supplement Figure 1 summarizes the study design of this trial in a flowchart.
Briefly, at screening participants were given the NIH Diet History Questionnaire II (DHQ II) a
food frequency questionnaire which includes portion size and dietary supplement questions as a
way to evaluate baseline calcium levels in the past year (25). Participants were also asked
about use of dietary supplements, antibiotics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. No
participants were on antibiotics at or in close proximity to the time of screening. Individuals
ingesting supplements containing calcium and / or vitamin D were required to undergo a twoweek “wash out” period prior to starting and to not use these supplements during the study
participation.

Thirty participants underwent baseline flexible sigmoidoscopy (unprepped; i.e., without
bowel cleansing procedure). Twelve 2.5 mm colonic biopsies were obtained along with two
stool specimens from within the sigmoid colon (20 cm above the anus). Tissue and stool
samples were saved in 10% formalin, cryopreserved for cultures or snap frozen in liquid
nitrogen and saved at -80oC. Blood was drawn for liver function / liver injury markers (total
albumin, bilirubin, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and
alkaline phosphatase (ALKP).
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

After baseline sigmoidoscopy, participants were randomized to one of three groups. Ten
participants were treated daily for 90 days with Aquamin providing 800 mg of calcium per day.
Ten participants received 800 mg of calcium carbonate daily and ten participants received
maltodextrin as placebo. During the interventional period, participants were contacted by study
coordinators on a monthly basis to assess study progress / adherence to the study protocol and
to identify unwanted side effects. Compliance was assessed by capsule log entries and by
counting unused capsules returned at the end of the study.

At the end of the 90-day intervention period (90+5 days), participants again underwent
unprepped flexible sigmoidoscopy and eight colonic biopsies along with two stool specimens
were collected and stored as at baseline. Blood was also taken for the same serum markers as
at baseline. For each of the two time-points, one biopsy and one stool specimen from each
participant was utilized for microbiome analysis and one biopsy and one stool specimen was
utilized for metabolomic analysis. The remaining tissue samples were retained for backup, or
were used for histological, immunohistochemical and proteomic analyses. The results of the
latter analyses will be reported separately.

Microbial analysis. DNA was isolated from colon and stool samples using the Qiagen
MagAttract PowerMicrobiome DNA/RNA kit. Total bacterial DNA levels were estimated using
qPCR with broad-range primers BSF8 (AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG) and BSR357
(CTGCTGCCTYCCGTA), targeting bacterial 16S rRNA genes (26). Each 10 µl qPCR reaction
contained 5 µl PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems by Thermo Fisher
Scientific), 4 µl sample DNA (1:40 dilution) and 0.4 µM of primers. The following cycles were run

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

on a Light Cycler 96 (Roche): 1x(2 min at 50°C, 10 min at 95°C), 40x(15 s at 95°C, 1 min at
60°C). Each sample was run in duplicate.

Microbial community profiles were generated by Illumina MiSeq sequencing of the V4
region of 16S rRNA-encoding genes after amplifying the extracted DNA (27). Samples were
amplified, normalized and sequenced on the MiSeq and analysis was performed using the
MiSeq SOP (28) for the software mothur (v.1.39.0 and v.1.39.5) as described in our earlier
study (19). In case of low bacterial biomass, 3µl of DNA were amplified by touchdown PCR
method [1x(2 min at 95°C), 20x(20 s at 95°C, 15 s at annealing temperature (starts at 60°C,
decreases 0.3°C/cycle), 5 min at 72°C), 20x(20 s at 95°C, 15 s at 55°C, 5 min at 72°C),
1x(10min at 72°C)]. Thirteen samples, including 8/10 post-interventional Aquamin colon
samples, required touchdown PCR (with 40 amplification cycles versus standard PCR with 30
cycles) to achieve sufficient sample amplification for sequencing. After processing, sequences
were binned into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) based on 3% difference in sequence using
the OptiClust method (29). Comparisons between groups included differences in community
structure using OTU-based Yue and Clayton distance metric (θYC) (30). θYC distances were
visualized using principal coordinates analysis (PCoA). Specific OTUs driving community
differences were identified by linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) (31), as was done
in our previous study (19). LEfSe utilizes both statistical significance and effect size (linear
discriminant analysis score, or LDA) to determine the features (OTUs, in this case) that are
differentially abundant between groups (i.e., pre- post differences). Alpha diversity was
assessed by change in the Shannon diversity index from baseline. To evaluate Aquaminassociated microbial community differences in major gut phyla, we sorted the 1000 most
abundant OTUs in each of the baseline and final visit samples into phyla and compared intergroup differences in each of these phyla at endpoint. The DNA isolation and 16S rRNA gene
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sequencing were done by the University of Michigan Microbial Systems Molecular Biology
Laboratory.

Metabolomic analysis. Bile acids, SCFAs and eicosanoid composition were quantified in colon
biopsies and stool specimens from a randomly chosen subset of participants (n=6 per group) at
each time point (pre- and post-intervention). Bile acids were quantified using Liquid
Chromatography-Mass spectrometry (LC-MS) in a two-step solvent extraction (32) as performed
in the Regional Comprehensive Metabolomics Resource Cores (RCMRC) at the University of
Michigan. Supernatants were combined, dried, and re-suspended for LC-MS separation by
reverse-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) and measured by multiple reaction monitoring
(MRM). Sample identification was performed by comparison of retention times and mass to an
in-house library of bile acids. SCFA analysis was performed by the RCMRC by electron
ionization-gas chromatography - mass spectrometry (EI-GCMS) as described recently (33).
Compound identification was performed against a library of known SCFAs. Colon tissue was
also utilized to analyze a profile of eicosanoids. Eicosanoids were extracted and concentrated
using solid phase extraction in colon biopsies. The eluent was dried and re-suspended for LCMS separation by RPLC and measurements by MRM methods (34). Stool specimens were not
analyzed for eicosanoids since these metabolites are not bacterial products. All analytes were
reported as pmol/mg, after normalization to the sample weight.

Statistical analysis. Pre (baseline) vs post (endpoint) comparisons were conducted for each
microbial or metabolomic endpoint for individual participants in each of the three treatment
groups (placebo, calcium, Aquamin). Group means and standard deviations were then
calculated for baseline and endpoint measures. Intergroup differences for normally distributed
continuous data were made by ANOVA followed by pairwise group comparisons with Bonferroni
corrections for multiple comparisons. Microbial community distances were compared by
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

AMOVA (analysis of molecular variance) within the program mothur (v.1.39.0 and v.1.39.5) (35).
For continuous data that failed normality testing intergroup comparisons were made by KruskalWallis ANOVA followed by Mann Whitney-Wilcoxon pairwise comparison. Statistical analyses
were performed using GraphPad Prism (version8) and R computing software (R version 3.5.3
and RStudio Version 1.1.463). Due to a small cohort size, analyses were not adjusted to any
baseline sociodemographic or clinical characteristics or dietary calcium intake.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

RESULTS

Participant characteristics. Thirty-six participants were randomly enrolled. Six subjects were lost
to follow-up prior to intervention and a total of 30 participants (10 per arm) completed the study.
This included of 22 female and 8 male participants. Participants were randomized to study arms
without regard to age or gender (placebo: 4 males and 6 females; calcium: 2 males and 8
females; Aquamin: 2 males and 8 females). Ages ranged from 20-66 years. Compliance
(capsule intake) was 96% across the three groups. Complete Demographic characteristics are
presented in Supplement Table 2. Based on responses to DHQ II, the average dietary calcium
intake (mg/day) values for the three groups at baseline were estimated to be: placebo =
817+245; calcium = 964+412 and Aquamin = 919+545. There were no statistical differences in
calcium intake among the groups.
Safety and tolerability. Self-reported adverse events over the course of study are shown in
Supplement Table 3. All adverse events were minor (i.e., headache, gastrointestinal symptoms)
and did not preclude any individual from completing the study. The number of individuals
reporting adverse events in the Aquamin group was the same as in the placebo group (3 of 10)
while 6 of 10 individuals in the calcium group reported one or more events. No serious adverse
events (defined as necessitating cessation of study participation or medical intervention /
hospitalization) occurred. Serum liver function / liver injury markers are presented in
Supplement Table 4. No significant change in any individual marker was observed over the
course of the study. Likewise, there was no difference among the treatment groups in serum
calcium levels before and after intervention (Supplement Table 4).
Effects on bacterial DNA in colon biopsy and stool specimens. qPCR was used to assess
bacterial 16S rRNA gene levels in colon biopsy and stool specimens as a way to estimate total
bacterial DNA. Figure 1 demonstrates that in both colon biopsy and stool specimens, post14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

treatment Aquamin samples had higher cycle quantification (Cq) values, indicating lower
amounts of total bacterial DNA than at baseline. There was also a decrease in total bacterial
DNA in specimens from calcium-treated participants, although, on average, the decrease was
not as great as that seen with Aquamin. Placebo specimens showed no (average) decline in
DNA content at endpoint.
Alterations in gut microbial communities. To determine if Aquamin altered the
composition of the gut microbiota in the participants, we analyzed bacterial 16S rRNA gene
sequences from colon and stool specimens to explore pre- post-interventional differences. After
sequence processing and exclusion of 2 samples for low sequence counts, a total of 7,081,672
sequences from 118 samples (median: 59233 ± 23618 (SD) sequences/sample; range 2338 114235 sequences/sample) were included in this analysis. Shifts in gut microbial community
composition were assessed by calculating θYC distances between the pre- and postsupplementation communities for each individual. Individual pre- post-distance values, grouped
by intervention, are shown in Figure 2. Colonic microbial communities demonstrated a bigger
shift in the Aquamin-supplemented group than was observed for either the placebo or calciumsupplemented group. The difference between Aquamin and calcium in the colon biopsy
specimens reached the level of statistical significance (p=0.0087). Both figure insets show that
the majority of the Aquamin samples (8 of 10 in colon and 7 of 10 in stool) were above the
median value for all samples.
Figure 3 presents principle coordinates analysis (PCoA) data for all three treatment
groups in both colon and stool specimens. At baseline, there were no significant differences in
the colon bacterial communities (Figure 3A), but following the 90-day intervention period,
microbial communities in the colon biopsies from participants treated with Aquamin segregated
from those in the placebo or calcium groups (Aquamin versus placebo: AMOVA p=0.005 and
Aquamin versus calcium: AMOVA p=0.009). Further, colonic microbial communities from the
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

post-treatment Aquamin biopsy samples segregated from their own baseline communities
(AMOVA p=0.022) (Figure 3B), while there was no difference in pre- vs post-supplementation
communities for placebo- or calcium-treated participants. In contrast to these results in colon
biopsy material, stool sample microbial communities were not different between or within groups
either at baseline or at endpoint (Figure 3C and 3D).
Effects on diversity in microbial communities. Alpha diversity was assessed in both colon and
stool samples. In Aquamin-treated participants, there was a decrease in diversity (Figure 3E
and F). For colon samples, it was significantly low with p=0.0037 as compared to the placebo.
Alterations in the relative abundance of major gut phyla. We assessed alterations in the relative
abundance of individual OTUs representing the major gut phyla to compare inter-group
differences in each of these phyla at endpoint. Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes and Verrucomicrobia
were decreased with Aquamin while Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria were increased (Figure
4). Trends were similar in both colon and stool specimens. Firmicutes OTUs also showed a
drop with calcium intervention (colon biopsies only) but there was little change in the other
phyla. Little change in OTU relative abundance in any of the major phyla was seen with
placebo.
Identification of specific OTUs driving differences. The specific OTUs were identified by LEfSe
to explain the pre- post-supplementation differences with Aquamin treatment. In the Aquamin
supplemented group, 36 OTUs with an LDA score >3 and significance p<0.05 were identified in
colon samples as shown in Tables 1A and 1B. Overall, more genera decreased than increased
after supplementation. Differences between pre- and post-supplementation were driven
principally by an increases in OTUs within the normally less abundant phyla Proteobacteria, and
Actinobacteria, along with three OTUs of phylum Firmicutes. (Tables 1A) and a decrease in
OTUs within the normally higher abundance phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes (Tables 1B). A

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

complete list of altered OTUs in colon and stool samples with an LDA score >2.0 and
significance p<0.05 are presented in Supplement Table 5.
Effects on bile acid concentrations. Alterations in bile acid levels were assessed in stool
samples from Aquamin- and calcium-treated participants in comparison to placebo as shown in
Figure 5. Aquamin treatment resulted in a net decline in total bile acids with the major portion of
this change being in unconjugated forms (the major components of the fecal bile acid pool). The
major unconjugated primary bile acids - i.e., cholic acid (CA) and, particularly, chenodeoxycholic
acid (CDCA) (measured concurrently with deoxycholic acid [DCA]) - were significantly lower in
post-treatment Aquamin stool samples. This was not observed with calcium.
Of the measurable secondary bile acids, taurine-conjugated ursodeoxycholic acid
(TUDCA), measured concurrently with taurohyodexycholic acid (THDCA) was decreased, as
were the muricholic acids (minor secondary bile acid components). Two other unconjugated
secondary bile acids (hyocholic acid [HCA] and hyodeoxycholic acid [HDCA]) were significantly
decreased with Aquamin as compared to placebo. HDCA is a byproduct of gut microbial
metabolism (36), utilizing HCA and muricholic acids after microbial deconjugation and
enzymatic modification. Overall, these Aquamin-associated bile acid changes in stool are
consistent with both a decreased bile acid pool and decreased bacterial conversion of primary
to secondary bile acids. Of interest, these effects were unique to Aquamin. Calcium
supplementation did not show a measurable effect on total fecal bile acids and only HDCA was
significantly decreased.
Bile acid levels were also assessed in colon samples from Aquamin- and calciumtreated groups in comparison to placebo (Supplement Figure 2). Similar trends to those seen
in stool specimens were observed but none of the changes with Aquamin or calcium

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

intervention reached statistical significance in comparison to placebo except HDCA which was
significantly reduced as compared to placebo.
Effects on SCFA concentrations. SCFA levels were assessed in both stool and colon samples.
Apart from a modest (but statistically significant) increase in acetate in stool samples from
Aquamin-treated individuals relative to calcium, no other statistically significant alterations were
observed in either stool (Figure 5D) or colon (Supplement Figure 2) specimens.
Effects on colonic eicosanoid concentrations. There was no significant change from baseline
detected for any eicosanoid apart from an increase in 13S-hydroxy-octadecadienoic acid (13SHODE) in calcium-supplemented colon samples (Supplement Figure 3).

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DISCUSSION

This study demonstrated that 90-day dietary intervention with Aquamin was welltolerated by healthy individuals, and resulted in measurable changes in the colonic microbial
community and the attendant bile acid profile. Although the primary purpose of this small phase
I trial was safety and tolerability rather than efficacy or mechanisms of action, the identification
of Aquamin-associated microbial and metabolomic alterations suggest hypotheses for future
studies investigating potential mechanisms of efficacy. The microbial and metabolomic findings
should also prove useful as biomarkers going forward in a longer-term interventional trial.

The microbial population present in the colon of an individual is sensitive to
environmental influences, especially diet (37,38). Past studies have demonstrated that calcium
(18,19) and Aquamin itself (20) can influence the colonic microbial community in mice. In this
study, we found that Aquamin supplementation in human participants resulted in a decrease in
total colonic microbial DNA and an overall decrease in OTUs within the major gut phyla
Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, with a decrease in gut microbial diversity. Thus the major impact
may simply be a decrease in total gut bacteria. The impact of the decrease in bacteria on
colonic health is unknown at this time but poses interesting questions for future exploration.
Germ-free mice have shown increased resistance to chemical or dietary-induced colon cancers
(39). Since our own previous studies have shown that Aquamin-treated mice have decreased
incidence of colon polyps (10,11) as well as fewer liver tumors (40), the possibility that
Aquamin-associated microbial decreases may play a mechanistic role in these observations
warrants further exploration. Of interest, many of the observations made with samples from
Aquamin-treated participants were not seen in samples from individuals ingesting calcium
alone. This argues that while calcium is the major mineral component in Aquamin, the effects of
Aquamin on the gut microbial community cannot be attributed to calcium alone.
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The changes we observed in the post-Aquamin-treatment specimens are similar to the
effects of broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment, which have been shown to cause a significant
reduction in the proportions of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes and an increase in Proteobacteria
(41). As a follow-up to the observations reported here, it would be informative to assess the
potential anti-microbial activity of Aquamin supplementation directly in a minimum inhibitory
concentration assay. Metals, particularly cations, have previously been utilized as antimicrobial
agents (42). For example, colloidal or nanoparticulate silver and mineral-rich clays are known to
have broad-spectrum anti-microbial effects (43,44). Notably, in our study, the administration of
Aquamin did not result in diarrhea but there was a drop in bacterial diversity in colon samples;
both common adverse effects of broad-spectrum antibiotic use. Thus the anti-microbial effects
of Aquamin may be mild in comparison to antibiotics and may allow some of the benefit of
reduced gut microbial populations (e.g. reduced potentially carcinogenic secondary bile acids).

In parallel with microbial changes, Aquamin administration decreased the levels of total
bile acids and selected primary and secondary bile acids. This finding is consistent with the
decrease in total bacteria and may be potentially beneficial to colon health. At high
concentrations, bile acids are membrane-damaging and cytotoxic (21). In addition, several
secondary bile acids, most notably LCA and DCA (22,23), are known to be carcinogenic.
Although these species could not be individually measured in this study for methodological
reasons, the combination of DCA and CDCA (the primary bile acid precursor of LCA) was
significantly lower in the Aquamin-supplemented group. This suggests that one beneficial effect
of Aquamin supplementation might be through effects on bile acid metabolism. A caveat in the
interpretation of bile acid data is that it is not currently known whether the reduction in gut bile
acid pools is due to altered bacterial composition or, potentially, to a direct effect on the bile
acids, themselves. Previous studies have shown that calcium, the major component of
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Aquamin, has the capacity to precipitate bile acids (45). While mineral binding and precipitation
might interfere with detection, this could be beneficial if it prevented potentially harmful
secondary bile acids from binding to colonic epithelium or entering the circulation. Arguing
against direct binding and precipitation is the finding that calcium alone did not mimic the effects
of Aquamin on the total bile acid pool.

A decrease in gut bacteria could, potentially, be harmful to colon health if it resulted in
decreased concentration of protective bacterial metabolites, such as the colon-protective
SCFAs (24). However, in this study there was no decrease in the colonic concentration of
butyrate in the Aquamin-treated group and an actual increase in acetate. Thus, even with the
apparent decline in total bacteria, the size and / or composition of the microbial pool was
sufficient to maintain pre-supplementation levels of certain SFCAs.

While the data strongly suggest an Aquamin-associated decrease in gut microbial
bacteria, the specific shifts in gut microbial populations are harder to interpret. One complication
of low microbial biomass samples during microbial sequencing is greater likelihood of detecting
reagent or laboratory contaminant microbes in the amplification step. This has been seen in
low-biomass samples such as glacier ice, air, rocks, etc (46). While it is not likely to be a major
issue in the normal high biomass of the colon, it may be an issue in samples where the biomass
has been reduced by antibiotics or other intervention. For this reason, it remains to be seen in
further studies whether the elevation in Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria seen here have
relevance as a specific Aquamin-related effect in vivo or whether the more important finding is
the overall reduction in major gut phyla and decreased overall colonic bacterial biomass.

It should be noted that the antimicrobial effect of Aquamin might not be a direct
consequence of the mineral components making up the supplement. Our recent studies
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

employing colonoid culture technology demonstrated up-regulation of proteins having antimicrobial activity upon treatment with Aquamin (47). These included lactotransferrin and
natural resistance-associated macrophage protein-1. Lactotransferrin has bacteriostatic activity
related to sequestration of free iron and bactericidal properties leading to the release of
lipopolysaccharides from the bacterial outer membrane (48). Natural resistance-associated
macrophage protein-1 is a divalent transition metal (iron and manganese) transporter involved
in iron metabolism. It has been reported to promote host resistance to certain pathogens (49).
Thus it is possible that the antimicrobial effects seen with Aquamin in vivo are mediated, in part,
through its effects on the colonic mucosa, itself. Finally, decreased bacteria, especially as it
relates to colon biopsy specimens, might reflect altered bacterial adhesion. In our colonoid
culture study (47), numerous proteins involved in cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesive function were
altered by Aquamin. Studies by others have noted that alterations in mucosal surface proteins
affect microbial interactions with the mucosal wall (15,16).

In addition to the microbial and metabolomic changes, there are other, direct, beneficial
effect of Aquamin on the epithelium of the colonic mucosa. Specifically, Aquamin suppressed
colon epithelial proliferation and induced differentiation in colonoid culture. Effects on
proliferation were seen, primarily, in colonoids derived from large adenomas (14) while
improved differentiation – including up-regulation of multiple cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion
molecules and barrier proteins - was observed in normal tissue-derived colonoids (47) as well
as in adenoma colonoids (14). Direct effects on the colonic mucosa and indirect effects
resulting from changes in microbial / metabolomic profiles are, of course, not mutually exclusive.
Further, as noted above, the indirect effects (i.e., anti-microbial activity) may reflect changes
induced in the colonic mucosa.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Limitations in this study include the small sample size and short duration, which were by
design, as this was an initial tolerability study rather than an efficacy study. Although the study
was too short and too small to assess efficacy as a colon cancer preventative, it was sufficiently
powered to detect significant differences in several microbial and metabolomic (bile acid)
endpoints in Aquamin-treated participants relative to the other two interventions. To better
define effects on efficacy-related endpoints like inflammatory markers and epithelial
differentiation / proliferation indices over a longer period, we are currently beginning a 180-day
interventional trial with Aquamin in participants with ulcerative colitis in remission.

In summary, this pilot study demonstrated that 90-day dietary intervention with a
calcium- and magnesium-rich multi-mineral supplement was well-tolerated in healthy human
volunteers. Adverse events were mild, and largely consisted of gastrointestinal symptoms
(constipation, diarrhea etc.) that did not preclude completion of the study. Reports of adverse
events were actually less frequent with Aquamin than with calcium alone. Consistent with this,
liver function / liver injury markers did not vary significantly with intervention. With respect to
microbial and metabolomic findings, Aquamin supplementation resulted in an overall decrease
in gut microbial numbers and a decrease in bile acids, including potentially carcinogenic
secondary bile acids or their precursors. Despite the anti-microbial-like effects, concentrations of
the colon-protective SCFAs were maintained. These findings, along with previous in vitro and
animal data (10-14,47) showing a beneficial effect of Aquamin on colonic health, support future
longer-term interventional studies in human participants. Finally, the observation that Aquamin
had a more pronounced effect on gut microbial populations and bile acid levels than calcium
alone supports the view that the beneficial activity of Aquamin (calcium in conjunction with
additional trace elements) cannot be attributed to calcium alone. This conclusion supports
findings from a recent epidemiological study suggesting that calcium in combination of
additional minerals may be linked with the lower risk of colorectal cancer (50).
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

REFERENCES

1. Keum NN, Aune D, Greenwood DC, Ju W, Givannucci El. Calcium intake and cancer
risk: Dose-response meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. Int J Cancer
2014;135:1940-1948.
2. Newmark HL, Yang K, Kurihara N, Fan K, Augenlicht LH, Lipkin M. Western-style dietinduced colonic tumors and their modulation by calcium and vitamin D in C57Bl/6
mice: a preclinical model for human sporadic colon cancer. Carcinogenesis.
2009;1:88-92.
3. Mariadason JM, Bordonaro M, Aslam F, Shi L, Kuraguchi M, Velcich A, et al. Downregulation of beta-catenin TCF signaling is linked to colonic epithelial cell
differentiation. Cancer Res. 2001;61:3465-71.
4. Baron JA, Beach M, Mandel JS, van Stolk RU, Haile RW, Sandler RS, et al. Calcium
supplements and colorectal adenomas. Polyp Prevention Study Group. Ann NY Acad
Sci. 1999;889:138-45.
5. Grau MV, Baron JA, Sandler RS, Haile RW, Beach ML, Church TR, et al. Vitamin
D, calcium supplementation, and colorectal adenomas: results of a randomized
trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95:1765-71.
6. Baron JA, Barry EL, Mott LA, Rees JR, Sandler RS, Snover DC, et al. A Trial of
Calcium and Vitamin D for the Prevention of Colorectal Adenomas. N Engl J Med.
2015;373:1519-30.
7. Pommergaard HC, Burcharth J, Rosenberg J, Raskov H. Aspirin, Calcitriol, and
Calcium Do Not Prevent Adenoma Recurrence in a Randomized Controlled Trial.
Gastroenterology. 2016;150:114-122.
8. Crockett SD, Barry EL, Mott LA, Ahnen DJ, Robertson DJ, Anderson JC, et al.
Calcium and vitamin D supplementation and increased risk of serrated polyps: results
from a randomised clinical trial. Gut. 2018;pii: gutjnl-2017-315242.
9. Bolland MJ, Avenell A, Baron JA, Grey A, MacLennan GS, Gamble GD, et al. Effect of
calcium supplements on risk of myocardial infarction and cardiovascular
events: meta-analysis. BMJ. 2010;341:c3691.
10. Aslam MN, Paruchuri T, Bhagavathula N, Varani J. A mineral-rich red algae extract
inhibits polyp formation and inflammation in the gastrointestinal tract of mice on a
high-fat diet. Integr Cancer Ther. 20109:93-9.
11. Aslam MN, Bergin I, Naik M, Paruchuri T, Hampton A, Rehman M, et al. A
multimineral natural product from red marine algae reduces colon polyp formation in
C57BL/6 mice. Nutr Cancer. 2012;64:1020-8.
12. Aslam MN, Bhagavathula N, Paruchuri T, Hu X, Chakrabarty S, Varani J. Growthinhibitory effects of a mineralized extract from the red marine algae, Lithothamnion
calcareum, on Ca2+ -sensitive and Ca2+ -resistant human colon carcinoma cells.
Cancer Lett. 2009;283:186-92.
13. Singh N, Aslam MN, Varani J, Chakrabarty S. Induction of calcium sensing receptor in
human colon cancer cells by calcium, vitamin D and aquamin: Promotion of a more
differentiated, less malignant and indolent phenotype. Mol Carcinog. 2015;54(7):54353.
14. McClintock SD, Colacino JA, Attili D, Dame MK, Richter A, Reddy AR, et al. CalciumInduced Differentiation of Human Colon Adenomas in Colonoid Culture: Calcium
Alone versus Calcium with Additional Trace Elements. Cancer Prev Res (Phila).
2018;11:413-428.
24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

15. Belkaid Y, Hand TW. Role of the microbiota in immunity and inflammation. Cell. 2014;
157:121-41.
16. Halfvarson J, Brislawn CJ, Lamendella R, Vázquez-Baeza Y, Walters WA, Bramer
LM, et al. Dynamics of the human gut microbiome in inflammatory bowel disease. Nat
Microbiol. 2017;2:17004.
17. Brennan CA, Garrett WS. Gut Microbiota, Inflammation, and Colorectal Cancer. Annu
Rev Microbiol. 2016;70:395-411
18. Chaplin A, Parra P, Laraichi S, Serra F, Palou A. Calcium supplementation modulates
gut microbiota in a prebiotic manner in dietary obese mice. Mol Nutr Food Res.
2016;60:468-80.
19. Aslam MN, Bassis CM, Zhang L, Zaidi S, Varani J, Bergin IL. Calcium Reduces Liver
Injury in Mice on a High-Fat Diet: Alterations in Microbial and Bile Acid Profiles. PLoS
One. 2016;11:e0166178.
20. Crowley EK, Long-Smith CM, Murphy A, Patterson E, Murphy K, O'Gorman DM,
Stanton C, Nolan YM. Dietary Supplementation with a Magnesium-Rich Marine
Mineral Blend Enhances the Diversity of Gastrointestinal Microbiota. Mar Drugs. 2018;
16; pii: E216.
21. Mello-Vieira J, Sousa T, Coutinho A, Fedorov A, Lucas SD, Moreira R, et al. Cytotoxic
bile acids, but not cytoprotective species, inhibit the ordering effect of cholesterol in
model membranes at physiologically active concentrations. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2013;1828:2152-63.
22. Bernstein H, Bernstein C, Payne CM, Dvorakova K, Garewal H. Bile acids as
carcinogens in human gastrointestinal cancers. Mutat Res. 2005;589:47-65.
23. Wahlström A, Sayin SI, Marschall HU, Bäckhed F. Intestinal Crosstalk between Bile
Acids and Microbiota and Its Impact on Host Metabolism. Cell Metab. 2016;24:41-50.
24. Ríos-Covián D, Ruas-Madiedo P, Margolles A, Gueimonde M, de Los Reyes-Gavilán
CG, Salazar N. Intestinal Short Chain Fatty Acids and their Link with Diet and Human
Health. Front Microbiol. 2016;7:185.
25. Diet History Questionnaire, Version 2.0. National Institutes of Health, Epidemiology
and Genomics Research Program, National Cancer Institute. 2010. (Accessed June
21, 2019) https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/dhq2/
26. Dollive S, Chen YY, Grunberg S, Bittinger K, Hoffmann C, Vandivier L, et al. Fungi of
the murine gut: episodic variation and proliferation during antibiotic treatment. PloS
one. 2013;8(8):e71806.
27. Kozich JJ, Westcott SL, Baxter NT, Highlander SK, Schloss PD. Development of a
dual-index sequencing strategy and curation pipeline for analyzing amplicon sequence
data on the MiSeq Illumina sequencing platform. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2013;
79:5112-20.
28. Schloss PD, Westcott SL, Ryabin T, Hall JR, Hartmann M, Hollister EB, et al.
Introducing mothur: open-source, platform-independent, community-supported
software for describing and comparing microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol.
2009;75:7537-41.
29. Westcott SL, Schloss PD. OptiClust, an improved method for assigning ampliconbased sequence data to operational taxonomic units. MSphere. 2017;2(2):e00073-17.
30. Yue JC, Clayton MK. A similarity measure based on species proportions.
Communications in Statistics-theory and Methods. 2005;34:2123-31
31. Segata N, Izard J, Waldron L, Gevers D, Miropolsky L, Garrett WS, Huttenhower C.
Metagenomic biomarker discovery and explanation. Genome biology. 2011;12(6):R60.
32. Griffiths WJ, Sjövall J. Bile acids: analysis in biological fluids and tissues. J Lipid Res.
2010;51:23-41.
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

33. Demehri FR, Frykman PK, Cheng Z, Ruan C, Wester T, Nordenskjöld A, et al. HAEC
Collaborative Research Group. Altered fecal short chain fatty acid composition in
children with a history of Hirschsprung-associated enterocolitis. J Pediatr Surg.
2016;51:81-6.
34. Yang R, Chiang N, Oh SF, Serhan CN. Metabolomics-lipidomics of eicosanoids and
docosanoids generated by phagocytes. Curr Protoc Immunol. 2011;Chapter 14:Unit
14.26.
35. Anderson MJ. A new method for non-parametric multivariate analysis of variance.
Austral Ecology 2001; 26: 32-46
36. Eyssen HJ, De Pauw G, Van Eldere J. Formation of hyodeoxycholic acid from
muricholic acid and hyocholic acid by an unidentified gram-positive rod termed HDCA
1 isolated from rat intestinal microflora. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1999;65:3158-63.
37. Louis P, Hold GL, Flint HJ. The gut microbiota, bacterial metabolites and colorectal
cancer. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2014;12:661-72.
38. David LA, Maurice CF, Carmody RN, Gootenberg DB, Button JE, Wolfe BE, et al. Diet
rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature. 2014;505:559-63.
39. Sobhani I, Amiot A, Le Baleur Y, Levy M, Auriault ML, Van Nhieu JT, et al. Microbial
dysbiosis and colon carcinogenesis: could colon cancer be considered a bacteria
related disease? Therap Adv Gastroenterol. 2013;6:215-29.
40. Aslam MN, Bergin I, Naik M, Hampton A, Allen R, Kunkel SL, Rush H, Varani J. A
multi-mineral natural product inhibits liver tumor formation in C57BL/6 mice. Biol Trace
Elem Res. 2012;147(1-3):267-74.
41. Fujisaka S, Ussar S, Clish C, Devkota S, Dreyfuss JM, Sakaguchi M,et al. Antibiotic
effects on gut microbiota and metabolism are host dependent. J Clin Invest.
2016;126(12):4430-4443.
42. Lemire JA, Harrison JJ, Turner RJ. Antimicrobial activity of metals: mechanisms,
molecular targets and applications. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2013;11:371-84.
43. Haydel SE, Remenih CM, Williams LB. Broad-spectrum in vitro antibacterial activities
of clay minerals against antibiotic-susceptible and antibiotic-resistant bacterial
pathogens. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2008;61:353-61.
44. Morones-Ramirez JR, Winkler JA, Spina CS, Collins JJ. Silver enhances antibiotic
activity against gram-negative bacteria. Sci Transl Med. 2013;5:190ra81.
45. Van der Meer R, Welberg JW, Kuipers F, Kleibeuker JH, Mulder NH, Termont DS, et
al. Effects of supplemental dietary calcium on the intestinal association of calcium,
phosphate, and bile acids. Gastroenterology.1990;99:1653-9.
46. Eisenhofer R, Minich JJ, Marotz C, Cooper A, Knight R, Weyrich LS. Contamination in
Low Microbial Biomass Microbiome Studies: Issues and Recommendations. Trends
Microbiol. 2019;27:105-117.
47. Attili D, McClintock SD, Rizvi AH, Pandya S, Rehman H, Nadeem DM, et al. Calciuminduced differentiation in normal human colonoid cultures: Cell-cell / cell-matrix
adhesion, barrier formation and tissue integrity. PLoS One. 2019;14:e0215122.
48. Orsi N. The antimicrobial activity of lactoferrin: current status and perspectives.
Biometals. 2004;17:189-96.
49. Cellier MF, Courville P, Campion C. Nramp1 phagocyte intracellular metal withdrawal
defense. Microbes Infect. 2007;9:1662-70.
50. Swaminath S, Um CY, Prizment AE, Lazovich D, Bostick RM. Combined Mineral
Intakes and Risk of Colorectal Cancer in Postmenopausal Women. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev. 2019;28:392-399.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure Legends

Figure 1. Decrease in bacterial DNA with Aquamin. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) for bacterial DNA
in colon (left) and stool (right) samples. The average Cq value from duplicate qPCR runs was
plotted except for one post-Aquamin colon sample which failed to reach the amplification
threshold in one duplicate and was therefore represented by a single Cq value (34.4) rather
than the average. Another post-Aquamin colon sample failed to reach the amplification
threshold in both duplicates and was, therefore, not plotted or included in the statistical analysis.
A decrease in the total amount of bacterial DNA was indicated by a higher cycle quantification
(Cq) value (longer time to reach amplification threshold). There was no difference in pre- vs
post-supplementation for the placebo group. * reflects significance at p<0.05, *** reflects
significance at p<0.001 and **** reflects significance at p<0.0001 compared to the
corresponding pretreatment value.

Figure 2. Differences in gut bacterial community composition with Aquamin. θYC distances as a
comparison of pre- vs post-supplementation values in gut bacterial community composition for
colon (left) and stool (right) samples. Higher values reflect greater differences. ** reflects
significance at p<0.01 relative to calcium. The insets show that the majority of the Aquamin
(colon and stool) samples were above the median value for all samples. The majority of placebo
and calcium samples were at or below the combined median value.

Figure 3. Segregation of gut microbial communities and gut microbial diversity. Biplot figures
depicting PCoAs of θYC distances between colon and stool samples based on Illumina
sequencing of the V4 region of 16S rRNA. θYC Distance is a measure of difference in pre- posttreatment microbial populations from individual participants with each of the three interventions.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Data from colon specimens are shown in A and B, while stool specimen data are presented in C
and D. Some of the OTUs driving the observed segregation between the groups are shown in
the biplots. A: Significant differences in colon microbiota between post-intervention Aquamin
compared to post-intervention placebo and calcium: Aquamin samples with AMOVA p values of
0.005 (compared to placebo) and 0.009 (compared to calcium). B: Post-intervention colon
samples from Aquamin group were also significantly different relative to pre-intervention
Aquamin samples with a AMOVA p value of 0.022. C and D. There were no significant
differences found in stool samples. E and F. Shannon diversity index. Aquamin intervention
reduced gut microbial diversity as compared to the placebo in colon samples (* reflects
significance at p<0.05). No significant change was observed in the gut microbial diversity in
stool samples.

Figure 4. Alterations in the relative abundance of major gut phyla with Aquamin
supplementation. The change in the relative abundances of the top 1000 OTUs (pooled by
phyla) and assessed by pre- post-intervention analysis among three interventions in colon and
stool specimens. For this analysis, 43-48 OTUs across the three treatment groups were pooled
for Actinobacteria, 101-110 OTUs for Bacteroidetes, 543-591 OTUs for Firmicutes, 31-39 OTUs
for Proteobacteria and 4-6 OTUs for Verrucomicrobia phyla. ** reflects significance at p<0.01,
*** reflects significance at p<0.001 and **** reflects significance at p<0.0001.

Figure 5. Decrease in Bile acids and increase in SCFAs in stool specimens. Bile acids and
SCFA were assessed as described in the Materials and Methods Section. Values shown
represent differences in concentration between pre-intervention and post-intervention samples.
Asterisks represent statistical significance. A: Total bile acids (sum of the total conjugated and
total unconjugated bile acids) are shown along with conjugated and unconjugated forms.
*reflects decrease with Aquamin at p=0.0375 (total) and at p=0.0527 (unconjugated) versus
28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19001255; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

calcium. B: Primary bile acids. Cholic acid (CA) and chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) measured
concurrently with deoxycholic acid (DCA) were significantly decreased with Aquamin at
p=0.0074 (CA) and p=0.0310 (DCA/CDCA) versus calcium. C: Secondary bile acids.
Hyodeoxycholic acid (HDCA) was significantly decreased with Aquamin and calcium versus
placebo with p value <0.0001 and =0.0149 respectively. Hyocholic acid (HCA) and Taurineconjugated ursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA), measured concurrently with taurohyodexycholic
acid (THDCA) were decreased with Aquamin relative to calcium, while alpha and omega
muricholic acids were also reduced relative to calcium. For HCA, p=0.015; for TUDCA/THDCA,
p=0.013; for αMCA, p=0.0012 and for ΩMCA, p=0.0003. With calcium supplementation, HDCA
was also decreased relative to placebo (p=0.0149). Inset; TUDCA/THDCA. D: SCFA. Acetate
was significantly increased with Aquamin relative to calcium alone (p<0.0001).

29

Table 1A. Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LefSe) data for OTU with elevated relative abundance in colon post-Aquamina
OTU

Taxonomic ID

Order (Family)

Otu 0034
Otu 0052
Otu 0092
Otu 0082
Otu 0095
Otu 0028
Otu 0067
Otu0157

Ralstonia
Comamonadaceae (unclassified)
Leifsonia
Stenotrophomonas
Rhodococcus
Dorea
Lachnospiraceae (unclassified)
Flavonifractor

Burkholderiales (Burkholderiaceae)
Burkholderiales (Comamonadaceae)
Actinomycetales (Microbacteriaceae)
Xanthomonadales (Xanthomonadaceae)
Actinomycetales (Nocardiaceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Clostridiales (Ruminococcaceae)

LDA
scoreb
Proteobacteria (Betaproteobacteria)
4.68
Proteobacteria (Betaproteobacteria)
4.48
Actinobacteria (Actinobacteria)
4.07
Proteobacteria (Gammaproteobacteria) 4.03
Actinobacteria (Actinobacteria)
3.98
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
3.49
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
3.36
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
3.01

Phylum (Class)

p
value
0.001
0.009
0.002
0.002
0.013
0.027
0.035
0.006

Table 1B. Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LefSe) data for OTU with decreased relative abundance in colon post-Aquamina
OTU

Taxonomic ID

Order (Family)

Phylum (Class)

Otu 0001
Otu 0004
Otu 0008
Otu 0009
Otu 0031
Otu 0026
Otu 0016
Otu 0043
Otu 0029
Otu 0020
Otu 0018
Otu 0076
Otu 0019
Otu0010
Otu0070
Otu0045
Otu0025
Otu0110
Otu0054
Otu0107
Otu0087

Bacteroides
Blautia
Fusicatenibacter
Anaerostipes
Akkermansia
Ruminococcus
Parabacteroides
Lachnospiraceae (unclassified)
Bacteroides
Bacteroides
Clostridiales (unclassified)
Lachnospiraceae (unclassified)
Blautia
Collinsella
Lachnospiraceae_unclassified
Coprococcus
Streptococcus
Parasutterella
Ruminococcus2
Lachnospiraceae_unclassified
Bacteroides

Bacteroidales (Bacteroidaceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Verrucomicrobiales (Verrucomicrobiaceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Bacteroidales (Porphyromonadaceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Bacteroidales (Bacteroidaceae)
Bacteroidales (Bacteroidaceae)
Clostridiales (Clostridiales_unclassified)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Coriobacteriales (Coriobacteriaceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Lactobacillales (Streptococcaceae)
Burkholderiales (Sutterellaceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Bacteroidales (Bacteroidaceae)

Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Verrucomicrobia (Verruccomicrobiae)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidia)
Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Actinobacteria (Actinobacteria)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Firmicutes (Bacilli)
Proteobacteria (Betaproteobacteria)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidia)

LDA
scoreb
4.40
4.15
4.00
3.92
3.88
3.83
3.81
3.80
3.68
3.63
3.60
3.52
3.51
3.33
3.29
3.27
3.18
3.16
3.15
3.14
3.08

p
value
0.016
0.023
0.005
0.032
0.021
0.008
0.013
0.027
0.006
0.029
0.024
0.003
0.004
0.048
0.001
0.009
0.018
0.021
0.031
0.002
0.019

Otu0037
Otu0069
Otu0074
Otu0068
Otu0091
Otu0128
Otu0066

Dialister
Coprococcus
Bacteroides
Lachnospiraceae_unclassified
Lachnospiraceae_unclassified
Clostridiales_unclassified
Alistipes

Selenomonadales (Veillonellaceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Bacteroidales (Bacteroidaceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Clostridiales (Lachnospiraceae)
Clostridiales (Clostridiales)
Bacteroidales (Rikenellaceae)

Criteria for inclusion: LDA values greater than 3 with p<0.05
LDA values reported as absolute value.
OTU: Operational taxonomic unit
a
b

Firmicutes (Negativicutes)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Firmicutes (Clostridia)
Bacteroidetes (Bacteroidia)

3.08
3.07
3.06
3.03
3.03
3.01
3.00

0.019
0.045
0.007
0.009
0.027
0.004
0.048

Fi
gur
e1.

Fi
gur
e2.

Fi
gur
e3.

E

COLON(
Pr
ePost
)

*

F

Shannondi
ver
si
t
yI
ndex

C

PCoA(
STOOL)
D

Shannondi
ver
si
t
yI
ndex

A

PCoA(
COLON)
B

STOOL(
Pr
ePost
)

Fi
gur
e4.

COLON(
Pr
ePost
)
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
**
*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

STOOL(
Pr
ePost
)
*
*
*
*
*
**
*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Bi
l
eAci
ds

A
Pr ce
op ta
i
on te
B at
u
I
so tyr e
va at
l
er e
Va at
e
H l
ex era
H an te
ep o
ta at
O no e
ct at
an e
oa
te

ugat
ed
Tot
al Conj
ugat
ed Unconj
C
C
D
A
C
A
\
D
C
A
G
C
G A
C
D
C
A
TC
TC A
D
C
A

Fi
gur
e5.

D.SCFA

