medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Motivational Strategies for Stroke Rehabilitation:
A Descriptive Cross-sectional Study

Authors:
Kazuaki Oyake, RPT, PhD1, Makoto Suzuki, OTR, PhD2, Yokei Otaka, MD, PhD3,
Satoshi Tanaka, PhD4
Affiliations:
1
Department of Physical Therapy, Shinshu University, Nagano, Japan
2
Faculty of Health Sciences, Tokyo Kasei University, Saitama, Japan
3

Department of Rehabilitation Medicine I, Fujita Health University, Aichi, Japan
4
Laboratory of Psychology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Shizuoka, Japan
Corresponding author:
Satoshi Tanaka, PhD
Laboratory of Psychology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine
1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan

Tel: +81-53-435-2387 Fax: +81-53-435-2387
E-mail: tanakas@hama-med.ac.jp
Keywords: cerebrovascular disease, motivation, motivational model, stroke
Subject Terms: rehabilitation

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background and Purpose: The addition of motivational strategies to a rehabilitation
program is thought to enhance patient adherence and improve outcomes. However, little
is known about how rehabilitation professionals motivate stroke patients during
rehabilitation. The primary objective of this study was to provide a comprehensive and
quantitative list of motivational strategies for stroke rehabilitation. In addition, we aimed
to examine (1) whether professionals with more clinical experience used a higher number
of motivational strategies, (2) the purpose for using each strategy, and (3) the information
considered when choosing strategies.
Methods: This descriptive, cross-sectional study was conducted using a web survey with
a random sample of 407 rehabilitation professionals including physicians, nurses,
physical therapists, occupational therapists, and speech-language-hearing therapists.
Results: We received data for 362 participants. Fifteen strategies were found to be used
by more than 75% of the respondents reported using to motivate their patients. Almost all
of the respondents reported that they actively listen to and praise their patients to increase
patient adherence to rehabilitation programs. Respondents with more clinical experience
tended to use a higher number of motivational strategies (rho = 0.208, p < 0.001). For 11
of the 15 strategies selected by more than 75% of respondents, the highest percentage of
respondents reported that they used the strategies to make rehabilitation worthwhile for
their patients. The majority of respondents reported that they decide which motivational
strategy to use by considering comprehensive information regarding the patient health
condition, environmental factors, and personal factors.
Conclusions: The comprehensive list of motivational strategies obtained may be useful
for increasing patient adherence to rehabilitation, especially for professionals with less
clinical experience. Furthermore, our findings regarding the purpose for using each
strategy and the information used to choose strategies might help rehabilitation
professionals to utilize the motivational strategy list.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Studies on stroke rehabilitation have recommended the use of intensive and repetitive
task-specific practice, as well as aerobic exercise. 1 Given that the patient’s own efforts
are necessary to sustain these practices and exercises, patient motivation is frequently
used as a determinant of rehabilitation outcome. 2 High adherence to a rehabilitation
program is thought to be indicative of motivation,2, 3 and a lack of motivation is one of
the perceived barriers to physical activity and exercise training after stroke. 4-7 Therefore,
the addition of motivational strategies to rehabilitation programs may effectively enhance
patient adherence, producing better outcomes.8
Motivational strategies such as feedback, 9, 10 counseling,11 and information
provision12 have positive effects on recovery after stroke. An international randomized
clinical trial found that praise and positive feedback were effective for improving walking
speed during inpatient rehabilitation.9 Feedback using virtual reality has been found to be
beneficial in improving motivation, upper limb function, and activities of daily living. 10,
13
Counseling and information provision have a positive effect of mood.11, 12 However,
few reports have comprehensively investigated strategies used by medical professionals
to motivate patients undergoing stroke rehabilitation.
Maclean et al. 3 conducted a semi-structured interview of medical professionals
to determine how they increase patient motivation with respect to stroke rehabilitation.
The researchers reported that setting rehabilitation goals, providing information about
rehabilitation, and accessing and using the patient’s cultural norms appeared to have a
positive effect on motivation.3 However, the generalizability of these findings was limited
due to the nature of qualitative research. 14
As opposed to semi-structured interviews, the findings from quantitative surveys
are generalizable to a larger population.14 Therefore, the primary objective of this study
was to provide a comprehensive list of motivational strategies that medical professionals
use for stroke rehabilitation based on quantitative survey data. A list of motivational
strategies is likely to be useful in increasing patient adherence to rehabilitation. We
hypothesized that motivational skills could be acquired through clinical experience. In
addition, understanding the purpose of each motivational strategy and the information
that is evaluated when choosing strategies may contribute to effective utilization of the
list. Thus, our secondary objectives were to examine (1) whether rehabilitation
professionals with greater clinical experience used more motivational strategies, (2) the
purpose for using each strategy, and (3) the information considered when choosing
motivational strategies.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Methods
Data availability statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding
author on reasonable request.
Study design
This study had a descriptive cross-sectional design. We used a random sampling webbased survey to obtain quantitative results from the participant perspective. The study
protocol was approved by the appropriate ethics committee at the Hamamatsu University
School of Medicine (approval number: 18-136). Informed consent was obtained from all
participants.
Participants
Eligible participants were rehabilitation professionals including physicians, nurses,
physical therapists, occupational therapists, speech-language-hearing therapists, or
clinical psychologists currently working in rehabilitation. Participants were recruited with
the cooperation of the 33rd conference of the Comprehensive Rehabilitation Ward
Association, the 48th Annual Meeting of the Nagano Physical Therapy Association, and
other rehabilitation-related associations. To recruit participants, we used leaflets and
posters containing a brief description of the survey and a hyperlink to the survey, which
was conducted online. The first page of the survey informed participants about the total
number of questions, the approximate response time, and the aim of the study. Participants
were asked to report their professional category and years of experience in stroke
rehabilitation. Those who met the eligible criteria proceeded to the next page.
Survey instrument
We consulted the guidelines and followed a checklist to prepare the survey. 15, 16 We chose
to use a voluntarily accessed survey developed by using the Google Forms tool (Google
LLC, Mountain View, CA, USA). Among the individuals who completed the survey, 50
were selected via a draw to receive an honorarium of 1,000 yen (approximately US $9.00).
The survey items regarding motivational strategies were developed based on the
clinical experience of the authors, the findings of related literature, 2-5, 7, 9, 11, 12, 17-20 and
data obtained from semi-structured interviews with five professionals about motivational
strategies for stroke rehabilitation. 21 The experts in stroke rehabilitation reviewed the
items to ensure the content validity. We carried out a pilot test with a group of 10
rehabilitation professionals to determine whether the respondents understood the
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

questions and instructions, and whether the meaning of the questions was the same for all
respondents.16 The survey took an average of 15 min to complete and the qualitative
feedback from the semi-structured interviews with the 10 respondents resulted in some
minor grammatical changes. Consequently, we prepared a list of 22 motivational
strategies (Table 1). In the first section, respondents were shown the list of motivational
strategies and asked if they used each strategy in clinical practice. Respondents were also
asked to respond to an open-ended question when they were invited to propose additional
motivational strategies that were not included in the list.
In the second section, for each motivational strategy that a respondent used, they
were asked to state their aim of using the strategy from the following four purposes: (1)
to increase the patient’s interest in rehabilitation; (2) to make rehabilitation worthwhile
for the patient; (3) to help the patient gain confidence in performing a rehabilitation task;
and (4) to increase patient satisfaction with rehabilitation. These purposes were based on
the four sub-components of motivation proposed by the Attention, Relevance, Confidence,
and Satisfaction (ARCS) model.22, 23 The ARCS model is a problem solving approach of
designing motivational aspects of learning environments with the goal of stimulating and
sustaining students’ motivation to learn. 22 In the third section, respondents were shown
11 items related to the health conditions of the patients, environmental factors, and
personal factors (Table I in the online-only Data Supplement).24 They were also asked to
select all of the items that they considered when deciding which motivational strategy to
use. Finally, respondents were asked to report their sex, primary affiliation, and the phase
of stroke recovery of the patients they worked with.
Sample size
We used the Cochran’s sample size formula to calculate the sample size. We set an alpha
level a priori at 0.05, an acceptable error level of 5%, and a confidence interval of 95%. 25
Consequently, a minimum of 384 participants were required. Assuming that
approximately 5% of the participants were excluded, we aimed to recruit a total of 400
participants.

5

Table 1. List of motivational strategies
Motivational strategy
Representation in the manuscript
Active listening
Active listening
Allowing the patient to use a newly acquired skill
Allowing the patient to use a newly acquired skill
Applying patient preferences to practice and exercise tasks
Application of patient's preferences
Control of task difficulty
Control of task difficulty
Explaining the necessity of a practice
Explaining the necessity of a practice
Goal-oriented practice
Goal-oriented practice
Goal setting
Goal setting
Group rehabilitation
Group rehabilitation
Engaging in enjoyable communication with the patient
Enjoyable communication
Praise
Praise
Proposing conditions for exchange (e.g. promising to undertake the patient's Proposing conditions for exchange
favorite practice after achieving his/her least favorite practice)
Providing a suitable rehabilitation environment
Providing a suitable rehabilitation environment
Providing exercise and practice with game properties
Practice with game properties
Providing medical information
Providing medical information
Providing opportunities for the patient to identify possible treatments
Providing opportunities to identify possible
treatments
Providing practice tasks relating to the patient's experience and lifestyle
Practice related to patient's experience
Providing variations of rehabilitation programs to sustain interest
Providing variations of the program
Recommending the presence of a family member during rehabilitation
Family member present
Respect for self-determination
Respect for self-determination
Sharing the criteria for evaluation
Sharing the criteria for evaluation
Specifying the amount of practice and exercise that will be required
Specifying the amount of practice required
Using tools such as a diary or graph that enables the patient to track his/her Using progress-confirming tools
progress
Motivational strategies are arranged in alphabetical order.
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Statistical analysis
We used descriptive statistics to characterize the study sample and summarize their
responses. The normality of distribution was tested using the Shapiro-Wilk test. We used
Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient or Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficient to test whether respondents with more experience used more motivational
strategies. For the motivational strategies that were used by at least 75% of respondents26,
we conducted a hierarchical cluster analysis using the Ward’s method with a squared
Euclidean distance to group them according to the purpose of use. Statistical analyses
were performed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences software version
25.0 (International Business Machines Corp., NY, USA). Any p values < 0.05 were
considered statistically significant.
Reporting
This study was reported according to the recommended best practices and guidelines in
the literature for the reporting of survey research. 16, 27

Results
The survey was conducted from February to July 2019. Among the 407 participants who
completed the survey, 45 respondents were excluded because they did not meet the
eligibility criteria, refused to participate, or had missing data. Consequently, 362
respondents completed the survey. The flow of participants is shown in Figure 1. The
majority of the respondents were physical therapists (51.1%), had less than 5 years of
clinical experience (36.2%), were female (53.0%), were employed in a hospital (91.2%),
and worked with patients with subacute stroke (71.3%). The distributions of respondents
according to professional category and years in rehabilitation practice are presented in
Figure 2. No clinical psychologist participated in the survey.

Figure 1. Flow diagram of the
participant selection process.
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Figure 2. Distribution of respondents according to professional category (A) and years
of rehabilitation practice (B).
Which strategies do rehabilitation professionals use to motivate their patients?
The percentages of respondents who used each of the presented motivational strategies
are shown in Figure 3. The majority of the respondents (98.3%) selected “active listening”
and “praise”. “Enjoyable communication”, “providing a suitable rehabilitation
environment”, “goal setting”, “explaining the necessity of a practice”, and “respect for
self-determination” were also selected by more than 90% of the respondents (95.3%–
91.7%). The majority of the respondents reported that they used “control of task
difficulty”, “family member present”, “goal-oriented practice”, “providing medical
information”, “application of patient preferences”, “practice related to patient’s
experience”, “providing opportunities to identify possible treatments”, and “specifying
the amount of practice required” (89.2%–76.0%). Thus, 15 out of the 22 presented
strategies were selected by more than 75% of the respondents. Between 69.3% and 66.9%
of the respondents reported that they used “allowing the patient to use a newly acquired
skill”, “sharing the criteria for evaluation”, and “providing variations of the program”.
Less than half of the respondents selected “practice with game properties”, “proposing
conditions for exchange”, “using progress-confirming tools”, and “group rehabilitation”
(49.2%–34.5%). The results by professional category are shown in Figure I in the onlineonly Data Supplement. The numbers of motivational strategies selected by at least 75%
of the respondents who were nurses, physical therapists, and occupational therapists were
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

10, 15, and 18, respectively. There were four additional motivational strategies proposed
by the respondents (Table II in the online-only Data Supplement). Respondents with more
clinical experience tended to use more motivational strategies (rho = 0.208, 95%
confidence interval = 0.105, 0.308, p < 0.001) (Figure II in the online-only Data
Supplement).

Figure 3. The percentage of respondents who reported that they used each presented
motivational strategy during stroke rehabilitation. The vertical dashed line represents
75% of the respondents. The motivational strategies are arranged in descending order by
the percentage of respondents who stated that they used each strategy.
For what purpose do rehabilitation professionals use each motivational strategy?
For 11 of the 15 motivational strategies that were used by at least 75% of the respondents,
the highest percentage of respondents reported that they used the strategies to make
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

rehabilitation worthwhile for their patients (47.6%–31.6%) (Figure 4A). For “control of
task difficulty” and “praise”, the most common purpose for use was to help the patient
gain confidence in performing a rehabilitation task (45.4% and 35.5%, respectively). The
largest proportion of respondents who used “enjoyable communication” and “application
of patient preferences” reported that they used these strategies to increase the patient’s
interest in rehabilitation (49.3% and 39.4%, respectively).
The hierarchical cluster analysis produced three motivational strategy clusters
(Figure 4B). The first cluster included seven motivational strategies, such as “Family
member present” and “providing a suitable rehabilitation environment”. For six of these
seven strategies, more than 30% of the respondents reported that they used the strategies
to help the patients gain confidence in performing a rehabilitation task. The second cluster
included six motivational strategies, such as “providing opportunities to identify possible
treatments” and “explaining the necessity of a practice”. Most of the respondents used
these to make rehabilitation worthwhile for their patient. The third cluster comprised two
strategies that the largest percentage of respondents reported to be using to increase the
patient’s interest in rehabilitation.

Figure 4. The purpose of using each motivational strategy used by at least 75% of the
respondents (A). The order corresponds to Figure 4B. A dendrogram showing the three
distinct clusters identified based on hierarchical cluster analysis via Ward’s method (B).
The vertical dashed line indicates the optimal number of groups.
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

What information is considered when rehabilitation professionals choose motivational
strategies?
Each of the presented 11 items was selected by more than 75% of respondents as the
information that they considered when deciding which motivational strategy to use
(Figure 5). Almost all of the respondents selected “patient’s reaction to a presented
motivational strategy” and “personality” (97.5%), whereas the lowest percentage of
respondents selected “diagnosis” (75.4%). Furthermore, approximately half of the
respondents selected all of the 11 presented items (49.1%).

Figure 5. The percentage of respondents who reported to consider each type of
information when deciding which motivational strategy to use. Outcomes are arranged
in descending order by the percentage of respondents.

Discussion
In the present study, we generated a comprehensive list of motivational strategies for
stroke rehabilitation based on quantitative survey data. We identified 15 motivational
strategies used by more than 75% of the respondents. Our results support our hypothesis
that rehabilitation professionals acquire skills to motivate stroke patients via clinical
experience. Furthermore, our survey generated data regarding the purpose of using each
motivational strategy and the information that professionals consider when they choose
the motivational strategies. To our knowledge, the present study is the first survey-based
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

research to comprehensively investigate the strategies used to motivate patients with
stroke to rehabilitation. We prepared the survey in accordance with the existing
guidelines,15, 16 and conducted pretesting procedures such as expert reviews and pilot
testing to establish content and response process validity. 27 In addition, we utilized
random sampling for data collection. We expected that these procedures would enhance
the reliability and generalizability of our findings.
Which strategies do rehabilitation professionals use to motivate their patients?
Active listening is one of the core communication skills in counseling. 11, 29 A systematic
review reported that counseling has a positive effect on mood in stroke patients. 11, 12 Praise
can induce positive mood and increase motivation to perform a motor skill, resulting in
improved performance.30-32 Moreover, daily feedback with praise has been reported to be
effective in improving walking speed in stroke inpatients. 9 Almost all of the respondents
in our study reported that they actively listen to and praise their stroke patients to increase
patient motivation regarding rehabilitation.
Our results suggest that the majority of the surveyed rehabilitation professionals
recognized that the communication skills of the medical professional, rehabilitation
environment, setting of goals, provision of information, and the presence of family
members during practice can affect patient motivation regarding rehabilitation. These
findings are consistent with those of Maclean et al.. 3 Communication training programs
for clinicians have been shown to increase patient satisfaction, levels of motivation for
goal setting and action, and health-related quality of life.33 Sonoda et al.34 found the
providing a specific rehabilitation environment for stroke inpatients increased the amount
of physical activity that they engaged in during activities of daily living. Furthermore,
providing information about rehabilitation and insuring that a family member is present
during rehabilitation may be effective in improving a patient’s mood and encouraging
them to be more active.12, 35
Respect for self-determination, control of task difficulty, and provision of a goaloriented practice were motivational strategies that were selected by more than 75% of the
respondents. Self-determination contributes to the facilitation and maintenance of
intrinsic motivation.36 The difficulty of a practice task is thought to have an important
effect on the effectiveness of rehabilitation, as inappropriate levels of difficulty can bore
or frustrate the patient.37 Moreover, gradual increases in task difficulty and goal-oriented
practice have been recommended to facilitate functional motor recovery during stroke
rehabilitation.1 Therefore, through clinical practice, professionals may have observed the
effectiveness of these motivational strategies for increasing patient adherence to
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

rehabilitation.
We found the following four strategies that were reportedly used by less than
half of the respondents to motivate their patients: providing practice with game properties,
proposing conditions for exchange, using progress-confirming tools, and providing group
rehabilitation. It remains unclear why these particular motivational strategies were not
used. Environmental and time constraints, professional lack of confidence regarding the
practice, and lack of perceived effectiveness may prevent rehabilitation professionals
from using specific motivational strategies. 28 In addition, some respondents may not have
selected these strategies because they did not understand the accompanying motivational
effects, even if they did use these strategies in clinical practice.
For what purpose do rehabilitation professionals use each motivational strategy?
In clinical settings, rehabilitation professionals may be required to select strategies
according to the cause of a patients’ lack of motivation. Therefore, we examined the
reasons for using each motivational strategy. For 11 of the 15 strategies used by the
majority of respondents, the highest percentage of respondents reported that they used the
strategy to make rehabilitation worthwhile for their patient. Lack of knowledge about the
potential benefits of training may decrease patient adherence to rehabilitation. 19 Therefore,
professionals may emphasize patient comprehension regarding the benefits and
significance of practices to motivate patients regarding rehabilitation.
The hierarchical cluster analysis revealed three groups of motivational strategies.
Strategies that center on the value of rehabilitation for patients, such as explaining the
necessity of a practice and exercise, are expected to motivate patients with poor
understanding regarding the benefits of rehabilitation. For patients with low confidence
regarding their practice tasks, strategies focused on increasing patient confidence, such
as control of task difficulty and praise, may be effective for increasing patient motivation.
Moreover, engaging in enjoyable conversation and applying patient preferences to
practice tasks are likely to increase patient interest and prevent the patient from getting
bored during rehabilitation. There were no strategies that were used by the majority of
respondents to increase patient satisfaction with rehabilitation. However, more than a
quarter of the respondents reported that they use goal setting, goal-oriented practice, and
praise to increase patient satisfaction with rehabilitation. These strategies may be
effective in motivating patients who are not satisfied with rehabilitation. Thus, our
findings may help rehabilitation professionals to choose strategies from the list according
to the cause of a patients’ lack of motivation.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

What information is considered when rehabilitation professionals choose motivational
strategies?
Maclean et al.3 reported that compared with younger patients, older unmotivated stroke
patients did not respond as well to encouragement. Thus, rehabilitation professionals may
benefit from choosing motivational strategies according to the characteristics of each
patient. Our results suggest that the majority of rehabilitation professionals choose
motivational strategies based on comprehensive data regarding a patient’s health
condition, environmental factors, and personal factors. Patient personality type and
responses to motivational strategies suggested by the professional seem to be regarded as
especially essential information. These findings may assist rehabilitation professionals in
deciding which motivational strategy to use and contribute to the effective utilization of
the motivational strategy list.
Limitations
This study had several limitations. First, there may have been a perceived lack of
differentiation between the motivational strategies. As our list of motivational strategies
comprised specific examples about motivating a patient, some of the presented
motivational strategies may have overlapped with one another,8 potentially confusing the
respondents. However, we designed the motivational strategy list to show specific
motivational strategies so that it would be easy to use in a clinical practice. Second, the
responses obtained from the survey may not reflect the actual practice of the professional,
and may have been affected by inaccurate recall or instead reflect the beliefs or desires of
the respondents.38 However, we believe that our web-based survey carried a low
participant burden and enabled more complete population coverage for sampling. 38, 39
Finally, all of the participants were recruited from Japan. Whether our findings are
generalizable to rehabilitation professionals outside of Japan remains unclear, although
the present results are consistent with the previous qualitative9, 28 and experimental
reports9, 11, 12, 29-37 from Western countries. An inter-national survey of motivational
strategies for stroke rehabilitation would improve the external validity of our findings.
In summary, we generated a comprehensive and qualitative list of motivational
strategies used for stroke rehabilitation, and found that our 15 motivational strategies
were used by the majority of rehabilitation professionals. In addition, we obtained data
regarding the purpose for using each motivational strategy and the information considered
when choosing motivational strategies. These findings may enhance the effective
utilization of the motivational strategy list in stroke rehabilitation.
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Taiki Yoshida, Aiko Akiyama, and Kunitsugu Kondo at Tokyo Bay
Rehabilitation Hospital, Keisuke Tani at Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, and
Kimito Momose at Shinshu University for their help and support.

Sources of Funding
This work was supported by a JSPS KAKENHI grant to KO (18K17730) and ST
(16H03201). The funding source had no involvement in the study design, collection,
analysis, and interpretation of data, writing of the report, and the decision to submit the
article for publication.

Disclosures
None.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

References
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

Winstein CJ, Stein J, Arena R, Bates B, Cherney LR, Cramer SC, et al. Guidelines
for adult stroke rehabilitation and recovery: A guideline for healthcare
professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.
Stroke. 2016;47:e98-e169.
Maclean N, Pound P, Wolfe C, Rudd A. Qualitative analysis of stroke patients'
motivation for rehabilitation. BMJ. 2000;321:1051-1054.
Maclean N, Pound P, Wolfe C, Rudd A. The concept of patient motivation: A
qualitative analysis of stroke professionals' attitudes. Stroke. 2002;33:444-448.
Damush TM, Plue L, Bakas T, Schmid A, Williams LS. Barriers and facilitators
to exercise among stroke survivors. Rehabil Nurs. 2007;32:253-260, 262.
Nicholson S, Sniehotta FF, van Wijck F, Greig CA, Johnston M, McMurdo ME,
et al. A systematic review of perceived barriers and motivators to physical activity

6.

after stroke. Int J Stroke. 2013;8:357-364.
Morris J, Oliver T, Kroll T, Macgillivray S. The importance of psychological and

7.

social factors in influencing the uptake and maintenance of physical activity after
stroke: A structured review of the empirical literature. Stroke Res Treat.
2012;2012:195249.
Rimmer JH, Wang E, Smith D. Barriers associated with exercise and community

8.

9.

10.
11.
12.

13.

access for individuals with stroke. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2008;45:315-322.
McGrane N, Galvin R, Cusack T, Stokes E. Addition of motivational interventions
to exercise and traditional physiotherapy: A review and meta-analysis.
Physiotherapy. 2015;101:1-12.
Dobkin BH, Plummer-D'Amato P, Elashoff R, Lee J, SIRROWS Group.
International randomized clinical trial, stroke inpatient rehabilitation with
reinforcement of walking speed (SIRROWS), improves outcomes. Neurorehabil
Neural Repair. 2010;24:235-242.
Laver KE, Lange B, George S, Deutsch JE, Saposnik G, Crotty M. Virtual reality
for stroke rehabilitation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;11:CD008349.
Cheng D, Qu Z, Huang J, Xiao Y, Luo H, Wang J. Motivational interviewing for
improving recovery after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015:CD011398
Forster A, Brown L, Smith J, House A, Knapp P, Wright JJ, et al. Information
provision for stroke patients and their caregivers. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2012;11:CD001919.
Popović MD, Kostić MD, Rodić SZ, Konstantinović LM. Feedback-mediated
upper extremities exercise: Increasing patient motivation in poststroke
16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

rehabilitation. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:520374.
14.

Queirós A, Faria D, Almeida F. Strengths and limitations of qualitative and
quantitative research methods. Eur J Educ Stud 2017;3:2017.

15.

Gehlbach H, Artino AR Jr. The survey checklist (manifesto). Acad Med.
2018;93:360-366.
Kelley K, Clark B, Brown V, Sitzia J. Good practice in the conduct and reporting

16.
17.

of survey research. Int J Qual Health Care. 2003;15:261-266.
Simpson LA, Eng JJ, Tawashy AE. Exercise perceptions among people with
stroke: Barriers and facilitators to participation. Int J Ther Rehabil. 2011;18:520530.

18.

Nicholson SL, Greig CA, Sniehotta F, Johnston M, Lewis SJ, McMurdo ME, et
al. Quantitative data analysis of perceived barriers and motivators to physical
activity in stroke survivors. J R Coll Physicians Edinb. 2017;47:231-236.

19.

Billinger SA, Arena R, Bernhardt J, Eng JJ, Franklin BA, Johnson CM, et al.
Physical activity and exercise recommendations for stroke survivors: A statement

20.

21.

22.
23.
24.

for healthcare professionals from the american heart association/american stroke
association. Stroke. 2014;45:2532-2553.
Dobkin BH. Behavioral self-management strategies for practice and exercise
should be included in neurologic rehabilitation trials and care. Curr Opin Neurol.
2016;29:693-699.
Oyake K, Kondo K, Tanaka S. Categorization of motivational strategies in
rehabilitation based on arcs model. Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of
Japan Society for Educational Technology. 2018:667-668.
Keller JM. Development and use of the arcs model of instructional design. J Instr
Dev. 1987;10:2.
Keller JM. Motivational Design for Learning and Performance. New York:
Springer; 2010.
Ustun TB, Chatterji S, Bickenbach J, Kostanjsek N, Schneider M. The
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health: A new tool for

26.

understanding disability and health. Disabil Rehabil. 2003;25:565-571.
Bartlett JE II, Kotrlik JW, Higgins CC. Organizational research: Determining
appropriate sample size in survey research. ITLPJ. 2001;19:43-50.
Diamond IR, Grant RC, Feldman BM, Pencharz PB, Ling SC, Moore AM, et al.

27.

Defining consensus: A systematic review recommends methodologic criteria for
reporting of delphi studies. J Clin Epidemiol. 2014;67:401-409.
Artino AR Jr, Durning SJ, Sklar DP. Guidelines for reporting survey-based

25.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19011023; this version posted November 12, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

research submitted to academic medicine. Acad Med. 2018;93:337-340.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

Holden J, Davidson M, O'Halloran P. Motivational strategies for returning patients
with low back pain to usual activities: A survey of physiotherapists working in
Australia. Man Ther. 2015;20:842-849.
McGrane N, Cusack T, O'Donoghue G, Stokes E. Motivational strategies for
physiotherapists. Phys Ther Rev. 2014;19:136-142.
Blumenfeld PC, Pintrich PR, Meece J, Wessels K. The formation and role of self
perceptions of ability in elementary classrooms. ESJ. 1982;82:401-420.
Henderlong J, Lepper MR. The effects of praise on children's intrinsic motivation:
A review and synthesis. Psychol Bull. 2002;128:774-795.
Sugawara SK, Tanaka S, Okazaki S, Watanabe K, Sadato N. Social rewards
enhance offline improvements in motor skill. PLoS One. 2012;7:e48174.
Michimata A, Suzukamo Y, Izumi SI. Development of clinicians’ communication
skills influences the satisfaction, motivation, and quality of life of patients with
stroke. Int J Phys Med Rehabil. 2013;1:174.

34.

Sonoda S, Saitoh E, Nagai S, Kawakita M, Kanada Y. Full-time integrated
treatment program, a new system for stroke rehabilitation in Japan: Comparison
with conventional rehabilitation. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2004;83:88-93.

35.

Prakash V, Shah MA, Hariohm K. Family's presence associated with increased
physical activity in patients with acute stroke: An observational study. Braz J Phys
Ther. 2016;20:306-311.

36.
37.

38.
39.

Ryan RM, Deci EL. Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions and
new directions. Contemp Educ Psychol. 2000;25:54-67.
Pan L, Song A, Wang S, Duan S. Experimental study on upper-limb rehabilitation
training of stroke patients based on adaptive task level: A preliminary study.
Biomed Res Int. 2019;2019:2742595.
Bowling A. Mode of questionnaire administration can have serious effects on data
quality. J Public Health (Oxf). 2005;27:281-291.
Archer SK, Wellwood I, Smith CH, Newham DJ. Dysphagia therapy in stroke: A
survey of speech and language therapists. Int J Lang Commun Disord.
2013;48:283-296.

18

