medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fox Insight Collects Online, Longitudinal Patient-Reported Outcomes and Genetic
Data on Parkinson’s disease
Authors
Luba Smolensky, Ninad Amondikar, Karen Crawford, Scott Neu, Catherine M. Kopil, Margaret Daeschler,
Lindsey Riley, 23andMe Research Team, Ethan Brown, Arthur W. Toga, Caroline Tanner

Affiliations
1. The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, Research Partnerships, 111 W 33rd St,
New York, NY 100191
2. The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, Research Partnerships, 111 W 33rd St,
New York, NY 100191
3. Laboratory for Neuro Imaging, Mark and Mary Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics Institute,
Ken School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, 2025 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles,
CA 900332
4. Laboratory for Neuro Imaging, Mark and Mary Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics Institute,
Ken School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, 2025 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles,
CA 900331
5. The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, Research Partnerships, 111 W 33rd St,
New York, NY 100192
6. The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, Research Partnerships, 111 W 33rd St,
New York, NY 100191
7. The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, Research Partnerships, 111 W 33rd St,
New York, NY 100192
8. 23andMe, Inc. , 899 W Evelyn Ave, Mountain View, CA 940411
9. University of California San Francisco, School of Medicine, 1635 Divisadero St, San Francisco, CA
941151
10. Laboratory for Neuro Imaging, Mark and Mary Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics Institute,
Ken School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern California, 2025 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles,
CA 900332
11. University of California San Francisco, School of Medicine, 1635 Divisadero St, San Francisco, CA
94115; Parkinson's Disease Research Education and Clinical Center, San Francisco Veterans Affairs
Health Care System, 4150 Clement Street, San Francisco, CA 941211
Corresponding Author: Luba Smolensky (lsmolensky@michaeljfox.org)

Abstract

Fox Insight is an online, longitudinal health study of people with and without Parkinson’s disease with
targeted enrollment set to at least 125,000 individuals. Fox Insight data is a rich data set facilitating
discovery, validation, and reproducibility in Parkinson’s disease research. The dataset is generated through
routine longitudinal assessments (health and medical questionnaires evaluated at regular cycles), one-time
questionnaires about environmental exposure and healthcare preferences, and genetic data collection.

Qualified Researchers can explore, analyze, and download patient-reported outcomes (PROs) data and
Parkinson’s disease- related genetic variants at https://foxden.michaeljfox.org . The full Fox Insight genetic
data set, including approximately 600,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), can be requested
separately with institutional review and are described outside of this data descriptor.
Fox Insight is sponsored by The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research.

Background & Summary
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease, with prevalence expected
to
increase
overreports
time new
[1, research
2]. Parkinson’s
presents
wide
range
manifestations;
motor
NOTE:
This preprint
that has notdisease
been certified
by peerwith
reviewaand
should
not beof
used
to guide clinical practice.
symptoms, non-motor symptoms, response to medication, and variable rate of progression among those
1
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

affected. This variability has introduced challenges in understanding disease progression, clarifying
underlying pathophysiology, providing meaningful treatments, and fully grasping which symptoms are
most detrimental to patients. In-person trials classically enroll participants who already have access to
specialist care, with milder symptomatology, better cognition, and less diversity than the general
population [3, 4]. As a result, observational studies with larger sample sizes, longer follow-up, and deeper
patient perspective are needed to improve our disease understanding.

Online data collection offers a mechanism to address these research challenges. Online surveys may pose
less subject burden, and enrollment can target traditionally underrepresented demographics. Virtual data
collection is effectively employed in other settings to achieve large sample sizes and facilitate data access
and analysis, such as in the National Institute of Health’s All of Us Research Program [5]. Internet usage
among those over 65, the population most likely to develop Parkinson’s disease, has risen substantially in
the last several years, with 67% reporting regular internet usage [6]. With the blend of growing internet
usage, participation in online research studies, and digitized self-reported assessments, Parkinson’s
disease lends itself well to online data collection.

In addition, genetic variation is thought to play a significant role in Parkinson’s disease etiology likely in
concert with environmental exposure [7]. In a minority of cases, a rare single gene mutation is strongly
associated with Parkinson’s disease. Other mutations increase risk but have lower penetrance [8]. Multiple
genetic variants have been aggregated into a genetic risk score and combined with phenotypic
characteristics to classify people with our without Parkinson’s disease [9]. Remotely assessed self-reported
genotype and phenotype information suggested different clinical subtypes in one online study [10]. Genetic
variation and risk alleles are an important component to understanding many aspects of Parkinson’s
disease, and genetic data is a large asset.

Fox Insight is an online study consisting of regularly-administered questionnaires collected longitudinally
over several years. Fox Insight is open to participants with self-reported PD and those without selfreported PD (caregivers and healthy controls). Fox Insight data is immensely useful in improving
understanding of patient experiences and complementing PROs with Parkinson’s disease genetic risks and
modifiers.
Fox Insight integrates validated PRO instruments and PD -related questionnaires as illustrated in Figure 1.
The content and cadence of each questionnaire is dependent on participant self-reported diagnosis. Fox
Insight also includes the implementation of one-time questionnaires and genetic data collection. By design,
Fox Insight can support modifications to multi-modal data collection in alignment with evolutions in
Parkinson’s disease research. This flexibility is enabled by Fox Insight’s infrastructure, an agile-developed
[11] web application, built through a software development framework that emphasizes phased
deployment, that manages enrollment, e-consent, and a collection of routine longitudinal assessments.

These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1: Online questionnaires. Figure 1 demonstrates the style in which online questionnaires are
presented to participants in Fox Insight. This Fox Insight screenshot shows how participants select selfreported Parkinson’s disease diagnosis.

Methods
Fox Insight is open to participants, aged 18 or older, who provide informed consent through the Fox Insight
website; informed content and study protocol are reviewed by the New England IRB (IRB#: 120160179,
Legacy IRB#: 14-236, Sponsor Protocol Number: 1, Study Title: Fox Insight). Volunteers are recruited
through digital channels (e.g. social network ads, search engine marketing, and email newsletters) and onthe-ground recruitment efforts (e.g. research events, clinician referrals). Upon registration, participants are
divided into two primary cohorts, those with Parkinson’s disease and those without. Importantly,
participants without PD are asked about new diagnoses every three months, and are given a different set
of assessments based on self-reported Parkinson’s disease diagnosis. People with Parkinson’s disease
respond to health, non-motor assessments, motor assessments, quality of life, and lifestyle questionnaires
(through twenty questionnaires that are part of each routine longitudinal assessment). In contrast, people
without Parkinson’s disease respond only to health and lifestyle questionnaires (through a separate
grouping of thirteen questionnaires in each routine longitudinal assessment). Participants that meet the
pre-set eligibility criteria of optional, one-time questionnaires are invited to participate in additional PRO
collection. People with Parkinson’s disease based in the US who have completed at least twenty
questionnaires in a routine longitudinal assessment are invited to participate in genetic research.
The following methods describes the three data acquisition sources of Fox Insight: routine longitudinal
assessments, one-time questionnaires, and genetics as illustrated in Figure 2. Routine longitudinal
assessments form the main study activities and are collected through a custom survey application
developed by Mondo Robot [12], a creative digital agency. One-time questionnaires are deployed through
Qualtrics® survey software [13], leveraged for additional survey programming rules. Finally, genetic data
are collected in collaboration with 23andMe, Inc. [14], a personal genetics company.

These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2: Fox Insight Data flow. Figure 2 represents the data flow in Fox Insight combining patient-reported
outcomes and genetic data into Fox Insight’s data ecosystem. Demographic data and patient-reported
outcomes from routine longitudinal assessments are merged with responses from one-time questionnaires
and genetic data into a central database accessible to researchers.

Routine Longitudinal Assessments
Routine longitudinal assessments are hosted through an online survey platform and offered to participants
based on self-reported Parkinson’s disease diagnosis. The assessment schedule is derived from the
participant’s registration date. These assessments aim to comprehensively evaluate many potential aspects
in Parkinson’s disease, including motor impairment, non-motor symptoms, medication efficacy, functional
impact, and quality of life. Validated instruments are used, when possible, such as the Movement Disorders
Society – Unified Parkinson’s disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) Part II, the Non-Motor Symptoms
Questionnaire (NMSQUEST), and the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS), among others (Table 1).

Data collection from routine longitudinal assessments is governed by survey logic. More specifically, this
includes:
1.

2.
3.
4.

Participants who answer “Yes” to the registration question “Do you currently have a diagnosis of
Parkinson’s disease, or Parkinsonism, by a physician or other health care professional?” are
presented with Parkinson’s disease assessments. Those who answer “No” are classified as people
without Parkinson’s disease and receive a different set of questionnaires.
Questionnaires are presented sequentially; a participant cannot begin a second questionnaire
without completing the first.

Participants cannot explicitly skip questions within an opened questionnaire and can instead
respond “Prefer Not to Answer” to move onto the next question. The only empty values collected
in routine longitudinal assessment data are from bifurcated logic, incomplete surveys, or
undistributed questions.

Sets of questionnaires are repeated at regularly recurring intervals (Table 1) at which time, a
participant is invited, via email, to answer these assessments in Fox Insight.

These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

5.

6.
7.

8.

Participants can update Parkinson’s disease diagnosis, living situation, and hospital experience
every three months in Fox Insight. If a participant indicates a change in diagnosis, the participant
is redirected to a new, alternate set of questionnaires consistent with the change in Parkinson’s
disease diagnosis to best capture current health, including a full baseline battery for newly
diagnosed Parkinson’s disease. Subsequent routine longitudinal assessments continue to be based
on the updated diagnosis and initial study registration date.
Assessments can be modified, added, or removed. A participant sees changes to available
questionnaires at the start of the next complete assessment interval.
Responses to a survey question can determine the deployment and collection of another related
survey question. Condition-based questions that are not presented to participants have empty
values in the data set. For instance, if a participant answers “Have you ever had a form of heart
disease?” in the affirmative, then the following question asks “What kind of heart disease did you
have?” and the participant selects from a drop down list of heart disease options. An initial answer
of “No, I have not had a form of heart disease” skips the second, follow up question and the
response values are empty in the output dataset.

Participants can review a summary of responses to an individual questionnaire and can change a
question response ahead of finalizing questionnaire submission. In addition, questionnaire
responses can be reviewed/revised at any point before the participant receives the next set of
assessments.

Table 1: Routine Longitudinal Assessments. Table 1 summarizes questionnaires offered to Fox Insight
participants, the cohort, the associated frequency (which may be subject to change as the study evolves),
and questionnaire versioning. Questionnaires integrate a battery of assessments that comprehensively
evaluates motor and non-motor symptoms using standardized instruments when available, with the official
names listed in parentheses.
These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

5

Questionnaire
About You [19]

Return Visit Questionnaire
Tell us how you are completing this study
visit
Side of Parkinson’s disease Onset
Medical History
Surgical history

Your Health History [20,21,22,23]
Your Current Medical Conditions [24]
Your Acute Medical Conditions [25]
Your Medication History

Your Medications (people with Parkinson’s
disease)
Your Medications (people without
Parkinson’s disease)

People with Parkinson’s disease
(survey intervals)

People without Parkinson’s
disease (survey intervals)

From first visit until the questionnaire is complete with follow up at 360day intervals

Changes in Parkinson’s disease diagnosis

Until the questionnaire is complete with follow up at 90-day intervals

Prior surgical procedures (Parkinson’s disease and non- Parkinson’s disease related)

Until the questionnaire is complete with follow up at 90-day intervals
Until the questionnaire is complete

Until the questionnaire is complete with follow up at 360-day intervals
360-day intervals only

Until the questionnaire is complete

Until the questionnaire is complete
with follow up at 90-day intervals
NA

NA

NA

Handedness Questionnaire (Edinburgh
Handedness) [27]

Until the questionnaire is complete

Your Non-Movement Experiences (NonMovement Symptom Questionnaire) [33]

Your Sleep Habits (REM Sleep Behaviour
Disorder Single-Question Screen RBDQ1)
[34]
Your Cognition and Daily Activities (Penn
Parkinson’s disease Daily Activities
Questionnaire, PDAQ-15) [35]
Your Mood (Geriatric Depression Scale,
GDS-15) [36]

Until the questionnaire is complete
with follow up at 90-day intervals

Until the questionnaire is complete
with follow up at 180-day intervals

NA
NA

Until the questionnaire is complete with follow up at 180-day intervals

Until the questionnaire is complete with follow up at 360-day intervals

Until the questionnaire is complete
with follow up at 180-day intervals
360-day intervals only

NA

NA

Until the questionnaire is complete with follow up at 90-day intervals
Until the questionnaire is complete with follow up at 360-day intervals
Until the questionnaire is complete
with follow up at 180-day intervals

Role of survey responder (self, care giver, both)
Left or right side of Parkinson’s disease onset

Prior and current health conditions

Family history of Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer's, dementia, memory loss, Amyotrophic
Lateral Sclerosis, autism, dystonia, epilepsy, Multiple Sclerosis, stroke, bi-polar disorder,
schizophrenia, depression, anxiety, suicide

Dominant hand across activities such as writing, teeth brushing, throwing, using a spoon

Daily living questions about Parkinson’s disease effects of lifestyle such as concentrating,
general movement, personal relationships, communication, muscle cramps, and feelings of
embarrassment

Free text response to what are the most bothersome Parkinson’s disease symptoms and
symptom severity. These responses are sequestered until completion of data anonymization

Questions on mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort, anxiety/depression,
current health rating
Lifestyle questions about leisure time, sitting, walking, light recreational activities, moderate
and strenuous sport, household and work-related activities
Movement experiences such as speech, saliva/drooling, chewing/swallowing, eating,
dressing, hygiene, handwriting, hobbies, turning in bed, tremor, walking/balance, freezing

Referral question (“Where did you hear about Fox Insight?”) added in Q2’2017
Question about current living situation added in Q2’2018
Timestamps for start and completion added in Q2’2018
Questionnaire timestamps for start and completion added in Q2’2018

Deployed in Q2’2018 with a typo correction from the previous version initially deployed in Q1’17
Deployed in Q1’2018

Deployed in Q1’2017
Replaced with Health History and Current Health in Q3'2017
Deployed in Q1’2017
Replaced with Health History and Current Health in Q3’2017
Deployed in Q3’2017
Combined version of “Medical History” and “Surgical History” with changes to health conditions
included

Deployed in Q1’2017

Version 1 deployed in Q1’2017 (asking if X relative had any of the following diseases)
Version 2 deployed in Q2’2017 with updated question format (asking if any of the following relatives
had X disease)
Version 3 deployed in Q2’2017 to correct an error in question 9 on schizophrenia to be multi-select
(rather than single-select)
Deployed in Q3’2017

Deployed in Q1’2017
Deployed in Q1’2017
Deployed in Q1’2017

Deployed in Q1’2017

Deployed in Q1’2018. Additional statement was added to the end of the questionnaire asking the
user to confirm that they understand that they may not currently or ever experience certain
symptoms of Parkinson’s disease in Q2’2017
Deployed in Q1’2017

Frequency and duration of OFF episodes.
Physical experiences including dribbling of saliva, loss of taste or smell, difficulty swallowing,
vomiting/nausea, constipation, bowel incontinence, urinary complications, unexplained pain,
Deployed in Q1’2017
recent falls, sleep-related challenges, sexual dysfunction, swelling of legs, sensations,
excessive sweating, hallucinations, fluctuations in weight, mood, sex drive
Sleep habit question about acting out dreams while sleeping

Until the questionnaire is complete Rating effectiveness of cognitive activities (reading, concentration, time tracking, counting,
with follow up at 360-day intervals etc.)

Until the questionnaire is complete with follow up at 360-day intervals

Versioning

Prior health conditions (heart disease, high blood pressure, lung disease, diabetes, gastric
disturbances, kidney disease, liver disease, blood disease, cancer, depression, arthritis, back
pain, anxiety)
Current/existing health conditions (heart disease, high blood pressure, lung disease, diabetes,
gastric disturbances, kidney disease, liver disease, blood disease, cancer, depression, arthritis, Deployed in Q3’2017
back pain, anxiety)
Health questionnaire about heart attack, stroke, traumatic brain disorder, loss of
Deployed in Q3’2017
consciousness, major surgeries
Prior Parkinson’s disease Medication history
Deployed in Q3’2017
Deployed in Q1’2017
Parkinson’s disease and over-the-counter medications and vitamins
Response options for two additional Parkinson’s disease medications (Gocovri (Amantadine,
Extended Release) and Zadago (Safinamide) added in Q3’2017

Until the questionnaire is complete
Over-the-counter medications and vitamins
with follow up at 90-day intervals

Until the questionnaire is complete with follow up at 360-day intervals

What’s Bothering You? (Parkinson’s disease
Patient Reported Outcome of Problem, PDPROP) [29]
Your Physical Experiences (European
Quality of Life Survey, EQ-5D- 5L) [30]
Your Physical Activities (Physical Activity
Scale for the Elderly, PASE) [31]
Your Movement Experiences (Movement
Disorder Society - United Parkinson’s
disease Risk Score, MDS-UPDRS Part II) [32]
Impact of OFF Episodes

Demographics

Until the questionnaire is complete with follow up at 90-day intervals
Until the questionnaire is complete
NA
with follow up at 90-day intervals
Until the questionnaire is complete
NA

Your Family Neurological History [26]

Your Daily Living (Parkinson’s Disease
Questionnaire, PDQ-8) [28]

Summary

Deployed in Q1’2017
Deployed in Q1’2017

Questions about emotional state including life satisfaction, boredom, happiness, helplessness,
Deployed in Q1’2017
activeness, energy, social ability, etc.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

One-Time Questionnaires
One-time questionnaires (Table 2) are deployed through Fox Insight to enrich the PRO data collected
through routine longitudinal assessments with additional validated instruments. These questionnaires can
collect cross-sectional data from novel or unique instruments not included in routine longitudinal
assessments. For instance, one-time questionnaires can be a useful first step for in-person trials as a means
of obtaining patient perspective during research development, evaluating interest in specific interventions,
or targeting recruitment in clinical trials. The ability to deploy one-time questionnaires is an enormous
advantage of the Fox Insight platform. The frequency and content of questionnaires is vetted by study
leadership to ensure alignment with scientific goals.

Table 2: One-Time Questionnaires. Table 2 summarizes scope and eligibility criteria of one-time
questionnaires offered in Fox Insight (which may be subject to change as the study evolves).
Survey
Environmental Exposure Questionnaires (PDRFQ-U)
•
Alcohol
•
Caffeine
•
Smoking and Tobacco
•
Head Injury and Concussion
•
Pesticides at Work
•
Pesticides in Non-Work Settings
•
Residential History
•
Physical Activity and Sleep
•
Height and Weight
•
Calcium Channel Blocker Medication
History
•
Anti-Inflammatory Medication History
•
Occupation
•
Toxicant
•
Female Health History

Summary

Impact and Communication About OFF Periods

•

•

•
•

•

The Financial and Social Impact of Parkinson’s
disease Survey

•

•
Patient Therapeutic Preferences Questionnaire
by the Medical Device Innovation Consortium
(MDIC)

•
•

Understanding OFF and ON in Parkinson’s
disease Patients

These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

•

Detailed questions about lifestyle,
personal habits, living and work
environments, medication and
healthy history
This survey is continuously
recruiting.

Asks care partners and patients to
describe how they discuss OFF
This survey is designed by Connie
Marras and active recruitment
spanned from 02-07-2018 to 0330-2018.
Financial, accounting, and taxrelated questions on health and
medical spending related to
Parkinson’s disease to understand
the economic burden of the disease
This survey is designed by the
Lewin Group and beta tester
recruitment spanned from 09-162018 to 10-16-2018.
Responses to hypothetical medical
situations and procedures to
determine patient preferences to
inform FDA processes for medical
device review
This survey is created by MDIC and
active recruitment spanned from
11-27-2017 to 01-12-2018.
Explores how patients experience,
and communicate about OFF and
ON periods associated with
Parkinson’s disease
This survey is created by the
Parkinson’s disease Education
Consortium and active from 11-262018 to 12-11-2018.

Eligibility Criteria

All participants

All
participants

US-based

People with Parkinson’s
disease

People with Parkinson’s
disease in the US who
report taking at least
one
Parkinson’s
disease-related
medication

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fox Insight Genetic Data
Genotyping, through 23andMe, will be available for up to 17,000 participants with Parkinson’s disease in
the US who have completed a series of routine longitudinal assessments (5,000 participants have been
genotyped at the time of this Data Descriptor). This eligibility criteria of requiring phenotypic data
collection upfront ensures valuable context for interpreting and analyzing genotype data; more so,
researchers can explore correlations between genetic variations and phenotypic manifestations. Eligible
participants provide a sample using 23andMe’s saliva collection kit. Samples have been genotyped on a
variety of genotyping platforms. Within Fox Insight, 6.9% of participants are genotyped on the V3 platform
which is based on the Illumina OmniExpress + BeadChip and contains a total of about 950,000 SNPs, 12.7%
of participants are genotyped on the V4 platform which is a fully custom array of about 570,000 SNPs, and
80.4% of participants are genotyped on the V5 platform which is in current use and is a customized Illumina
Infinium Global Screening Array of about 690,000 SNPs. As part of the resulting dataset, several genetic
variants that may be relevant for Parkinson’s disease research and have a non-identifiable prevalence
within the Fox Insight cohort (including variants located near GBA, LRRK2, APOE, PRKN, MCCC1, BIN3, and
the HLA locus) are available in tabular form alongside phenotypic data in Fox Insight’s public repository.
These variants are included as categorical data to democratize data access and interpretation for otherwise
complex SNP output (the full set of SNPs is available upon request to qualified researchers).
Data Centralization

Participant answers to routine longitudinal assessments, one-time questionnaires and genetic data from
key variants are integrated in a public repository managed at the USC Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Mark
and Mary Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics Institute. Using dates of birth provided during user
registration, dates associated with participant answers are converted to participant ages to protect patient
confidentiality. As questions for a single routine longitudinal assessment may be edited and answered
intermittently, the total number of days used to complete each survey is also recorded for each participant.
Along with dates of birth, unrestricted and free form textual answers are quarantined from the general
public data set; when appropriate, “derived” variables are defined for those questions to filter out (e.g.,
reject non-decimal number values) arbitrary (and possibly patient-identifying) responses. Derived
variables are also added for cases in which participants are allowed to answer a question in different ways
(e.g., enter weight in pounds or kilograms) in order to help standardize these responses.

Code availability
Fox Insight is built by several technology partners, each with its own policies on code availability. Routine
longitudinal assessments are developed through a web-based application built on Ruby on Rails® [15]
software by Mondo Robot and the code base is proprietary. One-time questionnaires are deployed through
Qualtrics®; while the survey platform code is proprietary, Qualtrics® provides an open source application
programming interface (API) for data processing [16]. SQL code, developed at the Laboratory of Neuro
Imaging, used to collate and process data is proprietary.

Data Records
Data collected from each survey is aggregated into a single table and is available via a comma separated
value (CSV) file. Variable values are encoded according to a data dictionary, which accompanies each
download from Fox Insight Data Exploration Network (Fox DEN) at https://foxden.michaeljfox.org (access
and usage notes detailed in later sections). Participant ages are provided alongside time-dependent data.
Additional metrics (e.g., variable vectors per subject recording data availability, histograms of variable
values) are pre-computed to facilitate searching and data grouping by researchers. Data from multiple
surveys may be dynamically combined into a single table for downloading using Fox DEN. A pre-selected
set of 18 SNPs is available in tabular format complemented by genetic metadata including genotype no-call
rate and genotype chip version. The data dictionary (Table 4) describes metadata for the collected variables
for each survey question in the routine longitudinal assessments and one-time questionnaires. The
complete data dictionary, of 2,000 collected variables, is available for download in Fox DEN.
These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Technical Validation
Technical Validation for Fox Insight is bifurcated into tool and data validation. Data validation closely
reviews caveats associated with collecting patient reported outcomes and compares sex chromosome to
self-reported sex for genetic data validation.

Table 4: Data Dictionary for Fox Insight Assessments. Table 4 provides a snippet of the full data dictionary
demonstrating variable truncation, corresponding questionnaire, and code names.
Var_Name
HeartHx

Prompt_Text
Have you ever had a form of heart disease?

Questionnaire
Your Health History

HeartHxTypeVal

Valvular heart disease

Your Health History

HeartHxTypeCon
BirthYr
Age
Sex

Height

Weight

Congestive heart failure
Year of birth

Age at most recent study visit
What is your biological sex?
What is your height?

What is your weight?

Your Health History
Users
All

About You
About You
About You

Deployment of Routine Longitudinal Assessments
To verify the appropriate deployment of routine longitudinal assessments, development tests are routinely
conducted by Mondo Robot. Using RSpec [17], a testing framework for Ruby on Rails®, unit tests are run
on isolated pieces of code functionality. These unit test include, but are not limited to, database querying
for cadence expiration and questionnaire assignment based on registration date. All unit tests
automatically run when code is moved into development, staging, and production environments.

While platform tests verify that questionnaires are deployed according to set intervals, post-tests spot
check data collection nuances from said tools. For example, data from the Physical Activity Scale for the
Elderly (PASE) assessment is expected to be collected regularly. There are 21,484 participants (as of 0124-2019) who completed the questionnaire in the first round of longitudinal assessments and 285 (1.32%
of total) who skipped this assessment entirely in the first set of routine longitudinal assessments. Fox
Insight successfully deploys the PASE questionnaire to participants who skip the questionnaire in
subsequent assessment periods until a complete questionnaire is submitted; in fact, three-quarters (127)
of the participants who skipped PASE in the initial battery of assessments go on to complete the survey in
the subsequent assessment period. Redeploying incomplete assessments helps establish a more robust
PRO data set.
Collected Data

The aforementioned data collection methods converge to form a large sample size of PROs from routine
longitudinal assessments, one-time questionnaires, and genetic data as illustrated in Table 3.

These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 3. Demographics and Collected Data in Fox Insight. Table 3 highlights the scale of collected data in
Fox Insight and key cohort characteristics. As of Q1’19, there are over 22,000 people with Parkinson’s
disease enrolled making Fox Insight the largest prospectively followed Parkinson’s disease cohort
worldwide, exceeding the second largest cohort of 12K people with Parkinson’s disease followed in the
Parkinson’s disease Outcome Project [18]. Of the 30,436 total individuals enrolled in Fox Insight, 72.9% (n
= 22,205) participants are people with Parkinson’s disease. The average age of the Parkinson’s disease
cohort is 66 and these participants, on average age, have been diagnosed for over 6 years. At the time of
this Data Descriptor, the Fox Insight dataset has a larger sample size of cross-sectional data than
longitudinal data; 90.5% (n = 20,099) of people with Parkinson’s disease have answered at least one
questionnaire and 47.7% (n = 10,600) of people with Parkinson’s disease participants have continued
participating in routine longitudinal assessments. People without Parkinson’s disease exhibit a similar
trend in assessment completion. Optional one-time questionnaires are completed by a comparatively lower
proportion of the study population with 34.8% (n = 7,726) of people with Parkinson’s disease, and 14.2%
(n = 1,174) of people without Parkinson’s disease participating in one-time surveys. As of 03-06-2019,
5,880 total participants agreed to genetic data collection and 5,092 participants are genotyped.
Full Cohort (N = 30,436)

Total enrolled N (% of total)
Age* (mean (sd) years)
Sex

Female
Male

Length of Parkinson’s disease diagnosis* (mean (sd) years)

Full Data Collection
First completion of routine longitudinal assessments:
Cross-sectional
Participants (number, percent of total)
Questionnaires (volume, average per participant in
first assessment)
Routine longitudinal assessments: Longitudinal

Participants (number, percent of total)
Questionnaires (volume, average per participant in a
subsequent assessments)
Repeat assessments per participant (mean (sd))
Ancillary Surveys

Participants (number, percent of total)

Questionnaires (volume, average per participant)

Genetic Sub-Study

Total enrolled (genotype completed)

People with
Parkinson’s disease

22,205 (72.9%)
65.87 (10.08)

8,683 (38.9%)

10,813 (48.7%)
6.61 (5.88)

People without
Parkinson’s
disease
8,231 (27.1%)
56.67(
14.07)
5,501(66.8%)

1,705 (20.7%)
NA

20,099 (90.5%)

7,198 (87.4%)

10,600 (47.7%)

2,664 (32.3%)

3.7 (2.1)

3.1 (2.1)

7,726 (34.8%)

1,174 (14.4%)

5,880 (5,092)

NA

252,079 (11.35)
239,461 (10.8)

50,449 (2.2)

65,027 (7.9)
42,951 (5.2)

6,527 (0.8)

Note: Cross sectional refers to the first battery of assessments as part of routine longitudinal assessments. `Age`
and `Length of Parkinson’s disease Diagnosis` are calculated from time of Fox Insight registration. PRO data
as of 01-24-2019. Enrollment in the Genetic Sub-Study as of 03-06-2019.
Beta Participants

Approximately 16% of total participants (N= 4,697) are part of Fox Insight’s beta group, defined as those
joining before the March 2017 soft launch of Fox Insight. Responses to routine longitudinal assessments
for all beta group participants are included in the Fox Insight data set. Data from the beta group could be
subject to questionnaire versioning and inconsistencies associated with platform troubleshooting and
optimization.
Missing Data

These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

As a comment on missing data collection, there are 2,868 (as of 01-24-2019) participants who did not
complete demographic questions in About You; a subset of ~500 individuals skipped this questionnaire
due to a platform glitch which has been resolved as of Q3’2017. Participant drop-off also results in missing
demographic data.
There are 1,476 participants (as of 01-24-2019) who have two consecutive assessment periods starting on
the same day (i.e., questionnaire responses are associated with the same “Days since Acquired” variable).
This questionnaire assignment error has since been fixed. The resulting output for these participants
includes data from the most recent, later, routine longitudinal assessment; data from former assessments
are skipped.
As routine longitudinal assessments are completed sequentially, there is observed drop-off from the first
to the last assessment within the same period of approximately 10.1%.
Validating Fox Insight Genetic Data

The sex chromosome and self-reported sex match for 99.76% of the genetic sub-study participants. As
additional validation documentation, tables of genotyping call rates are provided. The genotyping rates are
ancestry and genotyping platform specific and are derived from the 23andMe participant database (i.e. the
table for genotyping rates of participants with European ancestry genotyped on the V5 platform was
computed on 23andMe participants with European ancestry genotyped on the V5 platform).

Usage Notes

Fox DEN User Interface
Using the Fox DEN interface, investigators may explore, select data, and apply statistical methods using
user-created cohorts based on subject demographics, PROs, and SNPs. Routine longitudinal assessments,
one-time questionnaires, and genetic data are organized in a tree structure. The tree is filtered using dropdown categories (e.g., questionnaires, genetic data) or keyword searches. The distributions of participants'
questionnaire responses and SNP variants are visualized when selected in the tree. Categorical variables
can be reduced to user-defined binary variables, which are useful inputs to the statistical methods. Variable
visualizations are dependent upon the user-selected cohort, and this provides visualizations specific to
subsets of participants. Cohorts are created by recursively selecting values of a variable and using them as
a filter to subset a parent cohort. Cohorts are viewed in a tree structure that shows how the cohorts are
inherited from one another as well as the filters that define them. Fox DEN supports common statistical
methods (linear correlation, logistic regression, chi-square and T-test) through drag and drop operations
of its cohorts and variables. A "Guided Statistics" wizard provides step-by-step guidance in choosing
appropriate statistical methods for user selections.
Access

To access Fox Insight data through the Fox DEN tool, researchers are asked to complete and e-sign a data
use agreement at https://foxden.michaeljfox.org. There are two sets of data use agreements; the first
allows researchers to access responses from routine longitudinal assessments, one-time questionnaires,
and pre-selected Parkinson’s disease-related genetic variants. Separately, the second data use agreement
allows researchers, with institutional review, to request access to all SNPs. Data dictionaries and genetic
data documentation are available in Fox DEN as reference guides.

Researchers can register for an account through Fox DEN and upon successful completion of the Fox Insight
data use agreement, researchers can explore, analyze, and download data as illustrated in Figure 3.

These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3: Fox DEN. Figure 3 shows a screenshot of the Fox Den home page. Qualified researchers can
register for Fox Insight data access through the home page or log in with approved credentials to explore
and download data.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank the 30K+ Fox Insight participants who volunteered their time, responses, and dedication
to the study. We also thank The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research for sponsoring Fox
Insight as well as the Foundation staff who have supported the study, particularly Sohini Chowdhury,
Deputy CEO, and Todd Sherer, CEO, who have championed Fox Insight from its inception. In addition, the
authors would like to thank the Fox Insight team, Marketing, Communications, Development and Research
departments for all their diligent support including: Lauren Bataille, Allison Boiles, Debi Brooks, Bradford
Casey, Kristin Demafeliz, Liz Diemer, Rachel Dolhun, Veronique Enos Kaefer, Allyse Falce, Brian Fiske, Mark
Frasier, Michele Golombuski, Stephen Gradinscak, Jamie Hamilton, Samantha Hutton, Andrea Katz, Sean
Keating, Krishna Knabe, Ashwin Mallya, Lauren McLaughlin, Amanda Melnick, Sherri Mosovsky, Emily
Moyer, Gwen Schroder, Bernadette Siddiqi, Ariella Silberstien, Alisha Steindecker, Stephen Streicher, Shruti
Suresh, Kristen Teesdale, Holly Teichholtz.
The authors thank Fox Insight leadership team and Fox Insight Executive Steering Committee for ongoing
scientific counsel, including: Lana Chahine, Marissa Dean, Roseanne Dobkin, Ken Marek, Connie Marras, Ira
Shaulson, David Standaert and Monica Korell as the global project manager of Fox Insight.

We also acknowledge 23andMe for partnering with Fox Insight on genetic data collection, quality control,
and data sharing and would like to thank the research participants and employees of 23andMe for making
this work possible. Members of the 23andMe Research Team are: Michelle Agee, Babak Alipanahi, Adam
Auton, Robert K. Bell, Katarzyna Bryc, Paul Cannon, Sarah Clarke, Sarah L. Elson, Peter Fonseca, Pierre
Fontanillas, Nicholas A. Furlotte, Barry Hicks, David A. Hinds, Karl Heilbron, Karen E. Huber, Ethan M.
Jewett, Yunxuan Jiang, Aaron Kleinman, Keng-Han Lin, Nadia K. Litterman, Marie Luff, Matthew H. McIntyre,
Kimberly F. McManus, Joanna L. Mountain, Elizabeth S. Noblin, Carrie A.M. Northover, Steven J. Pitts, G.
David Poznik, Helen M. Rowbotham, J. Fah Sathirapongsasuti, Madeleine Schloetter, Janie F. Shelton, Suyash
Shringarpure, Chao Tian, Joyce Y. Tung, Vladimir Vacic, Xin Wang, Catherine H. Wilson, Anne Wojcicki,
Linda P.C. Yu.
The authors are deeply grateful to the technology partners who have been instrumental in building and
scaling Fox Insight. The authors also thank Mondo Robot for developing and maintaining the Fox Insight
platform specifically Jesse Manning, the lead developer at Mondo Robot who has been instrumental in
building data capture mechanisms and Shawn Cimock, Matt Fender, Ben Frederick, Kristian Hansen, Chris
Hess, Jon McKinney, Kai Raider, and Britt Winn at Mondo for managing Fox Insight projects. We’d like to
thank the Laboratory of Neuro Imaging at the University of Southern California for centralizing and
These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

managing Fox Insight and developing Fox DEN. Special thank you to Viktoria Andreeva, Laura Brovold, and
Leonya Ivanov from Rancho Biosciences for quality control and technical consulting on genetic data.

We’d like to extend a warm thank you to Fox Insight’s statistical partners at the University of Iowa,
specifically Janel Barnes, Chelsea Caspell-Garcia, Chris Coffey, Dixie Ecklund, Traci Schwieger, and Maggie
Spencer for creating the data dictionary and analysing Fox Insight data as well as Blackfynn, specifically
Chris Baglieri, Iris Chin, Amanda Christini, Leo Guerico, Mark Hollenbeck, Eva von Weltin for building
analytics dashboards and providing statistical consultation to the Fox Insight Executive Steering
Committee.
The Fox Insight team thanks and acknowledges Qualtrics for developing the one-time questionnaire survey
application.

Author contributions

L.S. conceptualized, wrote, synthesized data, and managed the collaborative development of the
manuscript. N.A. analysed data and technically validated data output. A.R., K.C. and S.N. wrote data
centralization components, oversaw data management, and developed Fox DEN. K.K. conceptualized data
collection and study design as well as heavily reviewed manuscript drafts. M.D. implemented and
maintained questionnaire deployment and study design operations. L.R. project managed clinical
operations for the study. The 23andMe Research Team collected the genetic data, and wrote and edited
genetic data components of the manuscript. E.B. wrote and edited clinical background, study relevance, and
study design. C.T. revised manuscript.

Competing interests

Several authors are staff members at The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, the sponsor
of Fox Insight. All author and non-author contributors are grant recipients from The Michael J. Fox
Foundation. Members of the 23andMe Research Team are current or former employees of 23andMe, Inc.,
and hold stock or stock options in 23andMe.

These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1.

Marras C, Beck JC, Bower JH, Roberts E, Ritz B, Ross GW, Abbott RD, Savica R, Van Den
Eeden SK, Willis AW et al: Prevalence of Parkinson's disease across North America. NPJ
Parkinsons Dis 2018, 4:21.

2.

GBD 2016 Parkinson's Disease Collaborators: Global, regional, and national burden of
Parkinson’s disease, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
2016. Lancet Neurology 2018, 17:939-953.

3.

Schneider MG, Swearingen CJ, Shulman LM, Ye J, Baumgarten M, Tilley BC: Minority
enrollment in Parkinson's disease clinical trials. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2009, 15(4):258-262.

4.

Moore SF, Guzman NV, Mason SL, Williams-Gray CH, Barker RA: Which patients with
Parkinson's disease participate in clinical trials? One centre's experiences with a new cell based
therapy trial (TRANSEURO). J Parkinsons Dis 2014, 4(4):671-676.

5.

NIH announces national enrollment date for All of Us Research Program to advance
precision medicine. National Institutes of Health: News Releases
https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-announces-national-enrollment-dateall-us-research-program-advance-precision-medicine (2018).

6.

Anderson M, Perrin A: Tech Adoptio Climbs Among Older Adults. Pew Research Center 2017.

7.

Domingo A, Klein C: Genetics of Parkinson disease. Handb Clin Neurol 2018, 147:211-227.

8.

Hernandez DG, Reed X, Singleton AB: Genetics in Parkinson disease: Mendelian versus nonMendelian inheritance. J Neurochem 2016, 139 Suppl 1:59-74.

9.

Nalls MA, McLean CY, Rick J, Eberly S, Hutten SJ, Gwinn K, Sutherland M, Martinez M,
Heutink P, Williams NM et al: Diagnosis of Parkinson's disease on the basis of clinical and
genetic classification: a population-based modelling study. The Lancet Neurology 2015,
14(10):1002-1009.

10.

Winslow AR, Hyde CL, Wilk JB, Eriksson N, Cannon P, Miller MR, Hirst WD: Self-report data
as a tool for subtype identification in genetically-defined Parkinson's Disease. Sci Rep 2018,
8(1):12992.

11.

Agile Alliance. Agile 101. Resources. https://www.agilealliance.org/agile101/ (2019).

12.

Mondo Robot. Overview. Mondo Robot Reel http://www.mondorobot.com/work/mondo-robotreel (2019).

These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

13.

Qualtrics. Home. Qualtrics. https://www.qualtrics.com (2019).

14.

23andMe Inc. About Us. Company. https://mediacenter.23andme.com/company/about-us (2019).

15.

Ruby on Rails. Home. Rails. https://rubyonrails.org (2019).

16.

Qualtrics. API Integration Basic Overview. Support.
https://www.qualtrics.com/support/integrations/api-integration/overview (2019).

17.

RSpec. API Documentation. Documentation. http://rspec.info/documentation (2019).

18.

National Parkinson's Foundation. Doing More With Outcomes: Lessons from the
Parkinson’s Outcomes Project. Parkinson’s Outcomes Project https://www.nih.gov/newsevents/news-releases/nih-announces-national-enrollment-date-all-us-research-programadvance-precision-medicine (2016).

19.

Stone K. NINDS common data element project: A long-awaited breakthrough in streamlining
trials. Ann Neurol., 2010 Jul; 68(1): A11–A13. PMID: 20583225.

20.

The Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI), Elixhauser Index (EI), and Chronic Disease Score (CDS)

21.

Charlson ME. Pompei P. Ales KL. MacKenzie CR. A new method of classifying prognostic
comorbidity in longitudinal studies: Development and validation. J Chronic Dis. 1987;40:373–
383.

22.

Elixhauser A. Steiner C. Harris DR. Coffey RM. Comorbidity measures for use with
administrative data. Med Care. 1998;36:8–27.

23.

Von Korff M. Wagner EH. Saunders K. A chronic disease score from automated pharmacy data. J
Clin Epidemiol. 1992;45:197–203.

24.

The Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI), Elixhauser Index (EI), and Chronic Disease Score (CDS)

25.

The Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI), Elixhauser Index (EI), and Chronic Disease Score (CDS)

26.

Stone K. NINDS common data element project: A long-awaited breakthrough in streamlining
trials. Ann Neurol., 2010 Jul; 68(1): A11–A13. PMID: 20583225.

27.

Oldfield, RC. The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh inventory.
Neuropsychologia 1971; 9(1):97-113.

28.

Jenkinson C, Fitzpatrick R, Peto V, Greenhal R, & Hyman, N. The PDQ-8: Development and
validation of a short-form parkinson's disease questionnaire. Psychology & Health, 1997; 12:6,
805-814, DOI: 10.1080/08870449708406741

These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19002659; this version posted July 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

29.

Purks JJ, Harris, M, Anderson, KE & Shoulson I. Applying Natural Language Processing (NLP) to
Verbatim Patient-Reported Outcomes. Ann Neurology 2016; 80,S69–S69.

30.

Herdman M, Gudex C, Lloyd A, Janssen M, Kind P, Parkin D, Bonsel G, Badia X. Development
and preliminary testing of the new five-level version of EQ-5D (EQ-5D-5L). Qual Life Res.
2011;20(10):1727-1736

31.

Washburn RA, McAuley E, Katula J, Mihalko SL, Boileau RA. The Physical Activity Scale for
the Elderly (PASE): Evidence for Validity. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. 1999; 52(7):643–51.

32.

Goetz CG, Tilley BC, Shaftman SR, Stebbins GT, Fahn S, et al. Movement Disorder Societysponsored revision of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS): scale
presentation and clinimetric testing results. Mov Disord. 2008; 23(15):2129-70. doi:
10.1002/mds.22340.

33.

Romenets, SR, Wolfson C, Galatas C, Pelletier A, Altman R, Wadup L, Postuma RB. Validation
of the non-motor symptoms questionnaire (NMS-Quest). Parkinsonism & Related Disorders,
2012; 18:1, 54 – 58.

34.

Postuma RB1, Arnulf I, Hogl B, Iranzo A, Miyamoto T, Dauvilliers Y, Oertel W, Ju YE,
Puligheddu M, Jennum P, Pelletier A, Wolfson C, Leu-Semenescu S, Frauscher B, Miyamoto M,
Cochen De Cock V, Unger MM, Stiasny-Kolster K, Fantini ML, Montplaisir JY.

35.

A single-question screen for rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder: a multicenter validation
study. Mov Disord. 2012 Jun;27(7):913-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.25037. Epub 2012 May 30.Brennan
L, Siderowf A, Rubright JD, Rick J, Dahodwala N, Duda JE, et al. The Penn Parkinson's Daily
Activities Questionnaire-15: Psychometric properties of a brief assessment of cognitive
instrumental activities of daily living in Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord,
2016;25:21-6. doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2016.02.020.

36.

D’At, P, Katona P, Mullan E, Evans, S, & Katona, C. Screening, detection and management of
depression in elderly primary care attenders, 1: The acceptability and performance of the 15-item
GDS (GDS-15) and development of a shorter version. Family Practice, 1994; 11, 260-266.

These authors contributed equally to this work.
2 These authors jointly supervised this work.
1

15

