medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009480; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

PheWAS-ME: A web-app for interactive exploration of multimorbidity
patterns in PheWAS
Nick Strayer1, Jana K Shirey-Rice5, Yu Shyr1, Joshua C. Denny2,3, Jill M. Pulley4,5, Yaomin Xu1,2

1. Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
2. Department of Biomedical informatics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
3. Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN
4. Office of Research, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN
5. Department of Medical Administration, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN

Abstract
Summary: Electronic health records (EHRs) linked with a DNA biobank provide unprecedented
opportunities to use big data for biomedical research in precision medicine. The Phenome-wide
association study (PheWAS) is a widely used technique for high-throughput evaluation of
relationships between a set of genetic variants and a large collection of clinical phenotypes
recorded in EHRs. PheWAS analyses are typically presented as static tables and charts of
summary statistics obtained from statistical tests of association between pairs of a genetic variant
and individual phenotypes. Comorbidities are common and typically lead to complex,
multivariate gene-disease association signals that are challenging to interpret. Discovering and
interrogating multimorbidity patterns and their influence in PheWAS is difficult and timeconsuming. Here, we present a web application to visualize individual-level genotype and
phenotype data side-by-side with PheWAS analysis results in an interactive dashboard, allowing
researchers to explore multimorbidity patterns and their associations with a genetic variant of

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009480; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

interest. We expect this application to enrich PheWAS analyses by illuminating clinical
multimorbidity patterns present in the data.
Availability: A demo PheWAS-ME application is publicly available at
https://prod.tbilab.org/phewas_me/. A sample simulated-dataset is provided for exploration with
the option to upload custom PheWAS results and corresponding individual-level data. The
source code is available as an R package on GitHub
(https://github.com/tbilab/multimorbidity_explorer).

Introduction
Large-scale biobanks combined with electronic health records are becoming increasingly
available for clinical and translational research around the world (Chen et al., 2011; Cho et al.,
2012; Gaziano et al., 2016; Investigators, 2019; McCarty et al., 2011; Sudlow et al., 2015).
These data platforms typically provide subject-level information on a wide range of biomarkers
along with detailed phenotype data and provide a highly anticipated paradigm shift for clinical
and translational research in the era of precision medicine. The Phenome Wide Association
Study is a statistical method to find associations across phenomes in the EHR with a given
biomarker (e.g. SNPs). PheWAS quantifies associations between single SNP-phenotype pairs,
which are blind to complex correlation structures present in phenotypes. When multiple
phenotypes show a strong association with a genetic variant, researchers rely on domain
expertise and more extensive interrogation of the data to determine potential causes. These
include driver phenotypes (e.g., patients with a common disease taking a drug and then
experiencing a common drug side effect), phenotype hierarchy, related diseases with an

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009480; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

overlapping set of patients, or merely people with multiple diseases. Here we present PheWAS
Multimorbidity Explorer (PheWAS-ME), a web application built using the programing language
R and the Shiny library (Chang, Cheng, Allaire, Xie, & McPherson, 2018). PheWAS-ME allows
researchers to interact with PheWAS results alongside the individual-level phenotype and
genotype data that generated them. By visualizing individual-level data along with statistical
results, the application provides a rich and explorable view into the patterns and relationships
between phenotypes and the genotype being investigated. The interactive nature of the tool lets
users enhance their interrogation of comorbidity patterns by delving into areas of interest on the
phenome, such as a disease category, with custom visualizations.

Implementation
Data needed to run PheWAS-ME are a standard PheWAS result table and the corresponding
individual-level data. These results can be supplied to the app via a data loading screen or preloaded. After data are loaded, the app directs to the main visualization and analysis interface - an
interactive dashboard including four views: SNP information, an interactive PheWAS Manhattan
plot, multimorbidity UpSet plot, and a subject-phenotype bipartite network plot.

Application state: PheWAS-ME works by filtering down to a list of ‘selected’ phenotypes. When
a set of phenotypes is selected, the individual-level data are subset to just subjects who had one
or more of the selected phenotypes in their records. This allows users to easily discard
uninteresting or noisy phenotypes and focus in on potentially meaningful patterns using criteria
like strength of the statistical association test or phenotype category.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009480; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

SNP information panel: To provide context to the currently investigated SNP, the application
provides a panel containing summary information (Figure 1A). Minor allele frequency in the
provided subject population and in the currently selected subset are shown as a bar chart. If the
SNP of interest is present in an internal SNP annotation table sourced from dbSNP (Sherry et al.,
2001) and VEP (McLaren et al., 2016), then additional information such as the minor allele,
chromosome, and gene are also provided.

Interactive PheWAS Manhattan plot: A manhattan plot (Figure 1B) is provided for the results of
the PheWAS analysis (Denny et al., 2010). The x and y axis of this plot are phenotype diagnosis
and statistical significance (− log%& (P Value)), respectively. Any additional metadata from the
supplied results table - such as name, description, and statistical results for a phenotype - are
accessible by hovering over the phenotype’s point in the plot. Phenotypes can be selected for
individual-level-data inspection by any combination of clicking, dragging a selection box, and
searching in a table view below the plot.

Multimorbidity UpSet plot: Figure 1C is an UpSet plot (Lex, Gehlenborg, Strobelt, Vuillemot, &
Pfister, 2014). This plot shows the unique multimorbidity patterns seen in the individual-level
data for the currently selected phenotypes as a matrix with columns as phenotypes and patterns
(represented by filled phenotype columns) as rows. On the left side of the plot is a bar-chart
displaying how many subjects had a multimorbidity pattern. To the right is a point estimate and
95% confidence interval of each pattern’s relative risk of occurring given that the subject has the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009480; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

given genetic variant of interest (calculated using Fisher’s Exact Test (Fisher, 1928)). When a
pattern is selected, the subjects who have the pattern are highlighted in the network plot (Figure
1D). For more details on the upset plot we refer the reader to the original UpSet publication (Lex
et al., 2014).

Subject-Phenotype Bipartite Network: Last, individual-level data are visualized directly as a
bipartite network. Phenotypes are represented as larger nodes (colored to match their point in the
manhattan and upset plots) and subjects are represented as smaller nodes (colored by their
number of copies of the SNP minor allele). A link is drawn between subjects and phenotypes if a
subject was diagnosed with a phenotype. A physics-based layout simulation (Bostock,
Ogievetsky, & Heer, 2011) is run in real-time as the data are filtered to position similar
phenotype nodes close to each other. Phenotype nodes can be isolated and removed as the user
investigates the network structure.

Conclusion
In this paper we have provided a brief introduction to the application PheWAS Multimorbidity
Explorer. This application takes PheWAS results and individual-level data, and enables
researchers explore complex multimorbidity patterns in PheWAS analyses.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009480; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Appendix:
User manual for app usage and customization available at
https://prod.tbilab.org/phewas_me_manual/.

Citations:
Bostock, M., Ogievetsky, V., & Heer, J. (2011). D$^3$ data-driven documents. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17(12), 2301–2309.
Chang, W., Cheng, J., Allaire, J. J., Xie, Y., & McPherson, J. (2018). shiny: Web Application
Framework for R. Retrieved from https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=shiny
Chen, Z., Chen, J., Collins, R., Guo, Y., Peto, R., Wu, F., & Li, L. (2011). China Kadoorie
Biobank of 0.5 million people: Survey methods, baseline characteristics and long-term
follow-up. International Journal of Epidemiology, 40(6), 1652–1666.
Cho, S. Y., Hong, E. J., Nam, J. M., Han, B., Chu, C., & Park, O. (2012). Opening of the
national biobank of Korea as the infrastructure of future biomedical science in Korea.
Osong Public Health and Research Perspectives, 3(3), 177–184.
Denny, J. C., Ritchie, M. D., Basford, M. A., Pulley, J. M., Bastarache, L., Brown-Gentry, K., …
Crawford, D. C. (2010). PheWAS: Demonstrating the feasibility of a phenome-wide scan
to discover gene-disease associations. Bioinformatics, 26(9), 1205–1210.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq126
Fisher, R. (1928). Statistical methods for research workers.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009480; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Gaziano, J. M., Concato, J., Brophy, M., Fiore, L., Pyarajan, S., Breeling, J., … others. (2016).
Million Veteran Program: A mega-biobank to study genetic influences on health and
disease. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 70, 214–223.
Investigators, A. of U. R. P. (2019). The “All of Us” Research Program. New England Journal of
Medicine, 381(7), 668–676.
Lex, A., Gehlenborg, N., Strobelt, H., Vuillemot, R., & Pfister, H. (2014). UpSet: Visualization
of Intersecting Sets. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
20(12), 1983–1992. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2014.2346248
McCarty, C. A., Chisholm, R. L., Chute, C. G., Kullo, I. J., Jarvik, G. P., Larson, E. B., …
others. (2011). The eMERGE Network: A consortium of biorepositories linked to
electronic medical records data for conducting genomic studies. BMC Medical Genomics,
4(1), 13.
McLaren, W., Gil, L., Hunt, S. E., Riat, H. S., Ritchie, G. R., Thormann, A., … Cunningham, F.
(2016). The ensembl variant effect predictor. Genome Biology, 17(1), 122.
Sherry, S. T., Ward, M.-H., Kholodov, M., Baker, J., Phan, L., Smigielski, E. M., & Sirotkin, K.
(2001). DbSNP: the NCBI database of genetic variation. Nucleic Acids Research, 29(1),
308–311.
Sudlow, C., Gallacher, J., Allen, N., Beral, V., Burton, P., Danesh, J., … others. (2015). UK
biobank: An open access resource for identifying the causes of a wide range of complex
diseases of middle and old age. PLoS Medicine, 12(3), e1001779.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19009480; this version posted December 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Figure 1. Screenshot of Phewas-Multimorbidity Explorer running with PheWAS results for SNP
rs11196514. A) Info panel displaying minor-allele frequency for provided cohort and currently
selected subset along with annotations and usage instructions. B) PheWAS results plot and table
along with log odds-ratio histogram for filtering and selecting phecodes to investigate at subjectlevel granularity. C) Interactive comorbidity upset plot displaying unique comorbidity patterns
along with summary statistics. D) Subject-level bipartite network plot demonstrating apparent
phenotype clustering caused by hierarchy (three light-green phenotype nodes tightly linked)
along with four other significantly associated with SNP, but mostly non-comorbid, phenotypes.

