medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

To resect or not to resect? Unbiased
performances of single and combined
biomarkers in intra-operative corticography
for tailoring during epilepsy surgery.
Matteo Demuru​a,b​, Stiliyan Kalitzin​a,c​, Willemiek Zweiphenning​b​, Dorien van Blooijs​b​, Maryse van ’t
Klooster​b​, Pieter Van Eijsden​b​, Frans ​Leijten​b​, Maeike Zijlmans​a,b​ on behalf of the RESPECT group
a​ S
​ tichting Epilepsie Instellingen Nederland (SEIN), The Netherlands
b​ B
​ rain Center Rudolf Magnus, Dept. of Neurology & Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, The Netherlands
c​ I​ mage Sciences Institute, University Medical Center Utrecht, The Netherlands
Abstract
Objective:
Signal analysis biomarkers, in an intra-operative setting, may be complementary tools to guide and
tailor the resection in drug-resistant epilepsy patients. Unbiased assessment of biomarker
performances are needed to evaluate their clinical usefulness and translation. We defined a
realistic ground-truth scenario and compared the effectiveness of different biomarkers alone and
combined to localize epileptogenic tissue.
Methods:
We investigated the performances of univariate, bivariate and multivariate signal biomarkers
applied to 1 minute inter-ictal intra-operative electrocorticography to discriminate between
electrodes covering normal or pathologic activity in 47 drug-resistant people with epilepsy
(temporal and extra-temporal) who had been seizure-free one year after the operation.
Results:
The best result using a single biomarker was obtained using the phase-amplitude coupling
measure for which the epileptogenic tissue was localized in 16 out of 47 patients. Combining the
whole set of biomarkers provided an improvement of the performances: 20 out of 47 patients.
Repeating the analysis only on the temporal-lobe resections we reached a sensitivity of 93% (28
out of 30) combining all the biomarkers.
Conclusion:
We suggest that the assessment of biomarker performances on a ground-truth scenario is required
to have a proper estimate on how biomarkers translate into clinical use. Phase-amplitude coupling
seems the best performing single biomarker and combining biomarkers improves localization of
epileptogenic tissue. However, sensitivity achieved is not adequate for the usage as a tool in the
operation theater, but it can improve the understanding of pathophysiological process.
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Epilepsy is a disorder which affects the life of around 50 millions of people worldwide​1​. One third of
epileptic patients are drug-resistant​2,3​. Epilepsy surgery provides a potential cure for these patients.
The success of surgery is linked to the mapping of the epileptogenic zone (EZ), the minimum
cortical area that needs to be resected to achieve seizure freedom​4​.
Intra-operative electro-corticography (ioECoG) can be used during surgery to assess and adjust
the boundaries of the proposed resection area. Typically, tissue showing inter-ictal epiletiform
activity (i.e. spikes) is the main factor to guide the definition of the boundaries​5​. The complete
removal of spikes has been correlated with a good post-surgical seizure outcome​6–11​, but good
outcomes are also seen in cases where not all spikes are removed, and bad outcomes in cases
where no spikes were seen​12–14​. Ictiform spike patterns are a more specific marker than sporadic
spikes​11​. Recently, it was found that high frequency oscillations (HFOs; above 80 Hz) may be more
specific predictors of outcome, especially when still present after the resection​15–17​.
Inter-ictal recordings are richer in content than only spikes, that is why more sophisticated
approaches exploiting different features of the recorded signals were suggested as complementary
methods to spikes​18–20​. During the past years a plethora of biomarkers based on signal analysis
techniques has been developed. These biomarkers can be conceptually subdivided in three
categories: univariate, bivariate and multivariate methods. Univariate methods provide information
related to each signal separately, bivariate methods investigate the relationship, most typically
correlation, between each couple of signals (known as functional connectivity​21​), while multivariate
methods estimate global relationship between all the signals available. There are other distinctions
to differentiate the methods for each of the categories: for example when calculating signal
correlations whether the calculation of the biomarker is amplitude or phase-based, time or
frequency based, undirected or directed, linear or nonlinear​18–20​.
Several studies have shown that using certain biomarkers the epileptogenic tissue can be
distinguished from the healthy tissue based on inter-ictal intracranial recordings​22–29​, but only
statistically on the aggregate group level. A biomarker set is needed that discriminates well
between tissue that needs to be surgically removed and tissue that should not at the patient level,
which can thus be applied for clinical care.
However, clinical translation of biomarkers is hampered by high inter-subject variability, which
hinders their generalizability. This problem is compounded by the lack of an objective (and
commonly accepted) way to assess the biomarker performances in comparison to a ground truth.
The definition of a ground truth scenario is a delicate issue that is most of the time overlooked.
Typically, a tissue (or recording sites) is labeled into one of the two classes normal/pathological
based on pre-resection recordings; where a tissue is defined as ‘normal’ or epileptogenic
depending on some criteria, like inclusion or not in the seizure onset zone (SOZ), inclusion or not in
the resected area, that may or may not correspond well to the actual epileptogenic zone. For
instance, resections may span over normal tissue for surgical constraints rather than suspicious
epileptogenic activity.
Furthermore, the incomplete coverage of the whole brain for the recordings may bias the definition
of the two classes. For example, the absence of any detection of pathological channels may be

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

due to the poor sensitivity of the biomarker but also to a misplaced recording arrangement ( i.e. we
are not recording in the proper spot). Therefore, computing sensitivity and specificity in this way
does not provide a reliable assessment of the biomarker performances.
We aimed to develop a pragmatic approach to overcome these issues and work on a realistic
ground truth scenario. This is possible thanks to the nature of our data: we have both
pre-resection and post-resection recordings, information related to the resected area and good
seizure outcome patients. We reasoned that we can claim that EZ was sufficiently removed in
those patients who become seizure-free after the resection, such that we may use the
post-resection recordings to compute a reliable biomarker reference value for normal tissue (i.e.
not able to trigger a seizure). Comparing this reference to the pre-resection biomarker values,
computed on the resection area, makes it possible to have a proper estimate of the performances
of the biomarker.
We would like to point out that using this analysis approach the only sound estimate to assess the
biomarker performances is the sensitivity (i.e. the number of subjects who have at least a
biomarker value computed in the resected areas during the pre-resection recordings higher than
the reference biomarker value), while specificity (i.e. the number of subjects who have all
biomarker value in the not-resected area during the pre-resection recordings lower or equal the
reference biomarker) is biased since we cannot have full coverage of the brain recording
not-resected areas.
We investigated, in our ground-truth scenario, the performances of different biomarkers that were
already used in previous studies​23–25,27–35​. We defined our biomarker pool with the attempt to be
exhaustive according to the three different categories univariate, bivariate and multivariate
biomarkers. We combined all the biomarkers together, given that they potentially carry different
information, and assessed the performance of our multi-feature biomarker.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods
Patients
We selected patients from a retrospective database of refractory epilepsy patients (RESPect) who
underwent ioECoG-tailored resective surgery at the University Medical Center in Utrecht, the
Netherlands, between 2008 and 2018. The RESPect database contains both retrospective data
and prospectively gathered data. Informed consent is being obtained for prospective part. For the
retrospective part, the Medical Ethical committee of the UMC Utrecht agreed that informed consent
would not be requested. We consecutively anonymized, visually assessed and annotated (i.e. bad
channels marked, artefact marked, good segments of the signal marked) and imported into the
brain imaging data structure (BIDS)​36​ (see ​https://github.com/suforraxi/ieeg_respect_bids​).
We included patients if (1) the data was anonymized, visually assessed, annotated and imported in
BIDS (2) at least one minute artefact free pre- and post-resection ECoG recordings was present (3)
post-surgical seizure outcome after 1 year was available, (4) the recording grids format was 4 x 5
with or without additional strips, (5) pictures pre- and post-resection were present to label the
electrodes (resected or not resected), (6) the ECoG was recorded at a 2,048 Hz sampling
frequency, (7) patients were not included in the HFO trial​37​ , (8) one year good seizure outcome
(Engel 1A or 1B) after the operation.
These criteria restricted our dataset to 47 patients: 30 of those are temporal lobe who had
hippocampectomy and the remaining 17 were extra-temporal patients. We defined these 47
patients as improved. We defined a subset of patients as ‘cured’ if after one year they belonged to
Engel 1A class and they stopped the medication.

Data acquisition
IoECoG signals were recorded for clinical purposes using 4 x 5 electrode grids and 1 x 6 or 1 x 8
electrode strips (Ad-Tech, Racine, WI) placed directly on the cortex. The grids and strips consist of
platinum electrodes with 4.2 mm​2​ contact surface, embedded in silicone, and 1 cm inter-electrode
distances. Recordings were made with a 64-channel EEG system (MicroMed, Veneto, Italy) at
2,048 Hz sampling rate using an anti-aliasing filter at 538 Hz. The signal was referenced to an
external electrode placed on the mastoid. Grids and electrode strips were placed in multiple
arrangements before and after resection. Propofol was used to induce general anesthesia and
maintained using a propofol infusion pump. Propofol was interrupted until a continuous ECoG
background pattern was achieved.

Data selection
For each recording arrangement (from here on ‘situation’) we visually selected one minute artefact
free recording starting at the end of the recording and going backwards. This was done to minimize
the propofol effect. We considered all the situations before the first resection was performed and all
the post-resection situations (i.e. the resection was completely finished).

Data preprocessing and processing
The recordings from channels with visually marked noise (double checked by at least two people in
a common reference montage) were excluded. The data was then re-referenced using a bipolar
montage. The bipolar montage for the grid was computed both along the horizontal and vertical
directions of the grid. This was done in order to take into account possible different orientations of
the sources underneath and to optimally use all electrodes. For each situation the selected minute

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

was divided in 5 second segments and the following preprocessing steps were applied
independently for each segment: detrending, demeaning and z-score transformation. Depending
on the specific measure, additional pre-processing steps were applied (see ​Biomarkers​ section for
details). If the specific measure required filtering a finite impulse response (FIR) filter was used.
For every univariate measure (Auto-Regressive Residual Modulation, and phase-amplitude
coupling, see ​Biomarkers​ ) we averaged the values across the segments to obtain a unique value
for each bipolar channel across the situation. For bivariate and multivariate measures, producing
functional connectivity matrix in each time segment ,we first averaged in order to have one value
per bipolar channel; second we averaged these values across time segments. Granger Causality
(GC) was a special case because the multivariate model was fitted pooling the segments all
together which resulted in one functional connectivity matrix (i.e. no need to average across the
segments).
If the functional connectivity matrix was obtained from a directional measure (non linear correlation
coefficient h​2​,GC, short-time direct Directed Transfer Function, sdDTF see ​Biomarkers​) we
considered the out-strength (i.e. the effect that a channel has on the other channels).

Identification of resected tissue
Electrodes were classified into resected or non-resected using photographs taken during surgery.
Furthermore, because we applied a bipolar montage we labeled a bipolar channel as resected if
both monopolar channels were included in the resection area; we labeled a bipolar channel
not-resected if both the monopolar channels were excluded from the resected area and we did not
consider intermediate cases (bipolar derivations for which one monopolar channel was resected
and the other not).

Measuring effect across all the channels
We considered for each biomarker all values computed in the pre-resection situations for channels
that were eventually resected (from now on ‘pre-resection resected channels’), and we compared
them with the channel values computed on all post-resection situations in cured patients to assess
if the different biomarkers could detect an effect on a group level. We tested for differences in the
distributions with a two-sample one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (testing pre-resection resected
values > post-resection values).

Measuring effect using maximum per patient
All biomarkers that showed a significant difference (p < 0.01, no correcting for multiple comparison)
in the previous analysis were further analyzed. We calculated the maximum value of the biomarker
across all pre-resection situations in resected channels of improved patients and the maximum
value across all post-resection situations in cured patients. Then, we compared the distributions of
maxima across patients between pre-resection resected channels and post-resection channels
using a two-sample one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (testing pre-resection resected values >
post-resection values).
We defined a threshold to discriminate between pathological and healthy tissue by taking the
maximum value of the biomarker across all channels of all post-resection situations in all cured
patients. We reasoned that if a patient becomes seizure-free without medication after surgery, it
means that the operation was successful: enough tissue was removed and the remaining tissue
can be considered not able to generate seizures. Therefore, measuring the biomarker in this tissue
(what is left after resection, post-resection situations) can give an estimate of ‘normal’ values of the
biomarker. Choosing a threshold as the maximum across channels/situations/patients represents a
way to define a ‘universal’ threshold that can be applied to discriminate between normal and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

epileptogenic tissue even for new patients. We measured the performances of each biomarker with
the sensitivity by counting how many patients had at least one value of the pre-resection resected
values above the threshold.
Furthermore, we defined a ‘cumulative’ biomarker combining together all the biomarkers.
Specifically, we considered a true positive if any of the biomarkers is above the respective
threshold. Finally, we repeated the analysis (recomputing the thresholds) considering the
subgroups of temporal and extra-temporal patients.
Mesiotemporal versus neocortical channels
For temporal patients, the first three electrodes of the electrode strip directed at the mesiotemporal
structure (hippocampus, amygdala and enthorhinal cortex) were classified as mesiotemporal
channels and the other channels (i.e. grid) were classified as neocortical channels. We compared
the values of hippocampal channels and neocortical channels using a two-sample one-sided
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (testing mesiotemporal channel values > neocortical channel values) in
order to understand the effect of the anatomical structure on the overall result.

Univariate Biomarkers
Auto-Regressive Residual Modulation
The auto-regressive residual modulation (ARRm) provides the amount of non-harmonicity in the
signal quantified as the high residual variation after auto-regressive modelling​30,31​. It has been
shown that brain tissue with high non-harmonicity corresponds to areas with high frequency
oscillations (HFOs) which in turn may be an indication of epileptogenic tissue​38–42​.
Following Geertsema’s work​31​ we defined the ARRm parameters as : (1) window length of 40
samples, which with a sample frequency of 2048 Hz, corresponds to approximately 20 ms; (2)
consecutive 50% overlapping windows. For the detailed formula see ​Appendix​.
Phase Amplitude Coupling
Phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) is a form of cross-frequency coupling​43​ where the amplitude of a
higher frequency oscillation is modulated by the phase of a lower frequency oscillations. Recent
studies​32–35​ have shown that high PAC values are related with the SOZ. There are many proposed
methods to estimate PAC​44–50​ and different parameter choices that can be made (i.e. the low and
high frequency interval where estimate the phase and amplitude). There is no systematic study
evaluating the performances of PAC in localizing the epileptogenic tissue using either different
PAC implementations or the different parameters choices. We decided to investigate our dataset
computing PAC between the modulating phase of theta band activity (4-8 Hz) and the amplitude of
gamma activity (30-80 Hz) because this frequency band pairs were successfully investigated in
recent epilepsy related studies​32–35​. For the detailed formula see ​Appendix​.

Bivariate biomarkers
Phase Locking Value
Phase locking values​51​ (PLV) is a non linear bivariate measure quantifying frequency-specific
phase synchronization between two signals. Mormann and colleagues​27​ have been one of the first
group to show how mean phase coherence (another name for PLV) can correctly lateralize the side
of the epileptic focus using inter-ictal ECoG recordings. We computed PLV in the gamma
frequency band (30-80Hz), see the formula in the ​Appendix​.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Phase Lag Index
The phase lag index​52​ (PLI) is a bivariate measure quantifying the asymmetry of the distribution of
the phase differences between two signals. Van Dellen et al.​24​ investigated inter-ictal ECoG using
PLI in temporal lobe patients. They showed that PLI was related to disease history. Moreover, van
Diessen et al.​25​ found that network based PLI quantities (strength and eigenvector centrality) in
theta and gamma frequency bands, were associated with areas with HFOs and SOZ in temporal
lobe patients. We chose to compute PLI in gamma band (30-80Hz) using the formula in the
Appendix​.
Non linear correlation coefficient
The non linear correlation coefficient
between signal and is an extension of the linear
correlation coefficient that captures both linear and non linear interactions. It has been widely used
to analyze brain signals in the field of epilepsy (see recent reviews​18,19​). Of note, the work of Bettus

and colleagues​28​ showed that

provided information related to the localization of the

epileptogenic focus using inter-ictal ECoG recordings. In this latter work the effect measured by
was significant for theta, alpha, beta and gamma bands and mostly independent to inter-ictal
spiking. We computed

in gamma band (30-80Hz) using the formula in the ​Appendix​. We looked

also at the possible delayed effect computing
shifting one signal compared to the other for
different delays ([-0.0332s 0.0332s] in steps of 0.0083s) and we chose the delay which gave the
maximum

.

Granger Causality (time-domain)
Granger causality (GC) methods are statistical approaches based on auto-regressive modelling
determined on the data that estimated the amount directed relationship among different
time-series. In a bivariate scenario, one time-series ‘Granger cause’ another time series if the
inclusion of past values of ​ reduces the variance of the modelling error compared to modelling
error using only past values. This can be generalized to a multivariate scenario where the
reduction of modelling error of the multivariate model is used instead (see Blinowska​53​ for detailed
review).
Park and colleagues​29​ successfully applied time based multivariate Granger causality to inter-ictal
ECoG recordings showing that ictal networks can be inferred from inter-ictal recordings. They
showed that there was a significant correlation between the epileptogenic location inferred using
ictal recordings (i.e. defined by a neurologist team) with the location pointed out using GC on
inter-ictal recordings. We applied the analysis pipeline suggested by Park et al.​29​, therefore we
added the first order differentiation as an extra step in the pre-processing analysis before to
compute the z-scores, furthermore the Akaike’s Information Criterion​54​ was used to select the
optimal model order. See the ​Appendix​ for formulas.
short-time direct Directed Transfer Function
An extension of Granger causality methods to the frequency domain is the directed transfer
function​55​. It estimates the causal (in Granger sense, reduction of the modelling error) influence a
time-series exerts on a time-series in a multivariate modelling of the time-series. Short-time
DTF (sdDTF) represents a further development of the DTF in order to capture the dynamic
changes of the causal relationship​53​.
Zweiphenning and colleagues​23​ using sdDTF on ioECoG recordings observed that the out-strength
(i.e. quantification of the ‘driving’ behaviour of a channel ) of a channel in high-frequency bands
(gamma and ripple band) matched the resected channels in patients with a seizure-free outcome.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We computed sdDFT following the Zweiphenning’s pipeline, therefore we chose a model order of
30 samples, since this model order gave the best results. See ​Appendix​ for details.

Code Implementation
All the code is available at ​https://github.com/suforraxi/multiple_biomarkers​. We used MATLAB
(​Release R2019a, The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, Massachusetts, United States.​) as a software
framework plus the following toolboxes fieldtrip​56​, SIFT​57,58​ (for the computation of sdDTF) and
MVGC​59​ (for the computation of GC).

Results
Patient description
Table 1 shows the patients characteristics. Our dataset consisted of 47 drugs-resistant epilepsy
patients of whom 23 were male. Thirty of these patients were temporal patients who underwent
hippocampectomy, while the remaining were extra-temporal. All the patients have a good seizure
outcome after one year (Engel 1A). Thirteen patients could successfully withdraw all medication
after surgery (cured patients) ; 16 patients managed to control seizures with a lower dosage of
anti-epileptic medication and 18 kept the same dosage of medication. The primary pathology
diagnosis is reported in Table 1. The majority of the patients (17) had a low grade tumor (WHO I +
II) diagnosis and 7 patients had focal cortical dysplasia, 7 cavernoma and 7 gliosis/scar diagnosis
classes. There were 5 patients with mesiotemporal sclerosis, 2 patients with cortical malformation
development, one patient with tubero-sclerosis and one patient with no abnormalities. The total
number of bipolar channels in the post-resection recordings were 1864, while 1138 channels were
recorded during the pre-resection phase were eventually resected (labeled as resected channels).
For our analysis we did not use the no-resected channels (1754) and the channels (417) for which
we could not assign a label (cut channels) from the pre-resection recordings. On average we have
around 40 channels per subject recorded in the post-resection and about 24 channels labeled as
resected in the pre-resection recordings.

Measuring effect across all the channels
Figure 1​ shows the comparison between the biomarker distributions of values computed in
pre-resection resected channels in improved patients (Engel 1A) and post-resection channels in
cured patients (Engel 1A without medication). Five out of seven biomarkers (ARR, PAC,PLI, H2,
GC) were significant (p < 0.01) using a one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test.

Measuring effect using maximum per patient
Figure 2​ shows the comparison between the distribution of maximum values computed in
pre-resection resected channels for improved patients and maximum post-resection channel
values for cured patients. We show the five biomarkers for which a significant effect was reported
across all the channels (​Figure 1​). Each coloured dot represents the maximum value of the
biomarker for each individual patient across all the channels and situations. Although for all the
biomarkers the pre-resection resected distribution has a longer tail than the post-resection one,
only the distributions related to PAC are significantly different (p < 0.01).
We defined a threshold for each biomarker as the maximum across all patients in the
post-resection distribution so that we could quantify the number of patients for whom in the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

pre-resection recordings we could localize the channel to be resected. The best performance was
obtained using PAC, 16 out of 47 patients are above the threshold (a sensitivity of 34%).

Pooling together all the biomarkers
Figure 3​ shows for each patient in the pre-resection recordings the number of biomarkers above
their respective thresholds (i.e. the maximum across all channels and all patients in the
post-resection cured group). For each patient, we counted if at least one channel showed a value
higher than the respective threshold for each biomarker. The biomarker counts are higher in
temporal patients compared to extra-temporal ones. There was no patient with all the biomarkers
above the thresholds. These two results suggested that the biomarkers convey different kind of
information related to epileptogenicity.
If we defined a new biomarker (‘cumulative’ biomarker) combining together the contribution of all
biomarkers (i.e. at least one biomarker above the threshold), we obtained a performance of 20 out
of 47 patients (sensitivity of 42%) improving of 8% the best sensitivity found using one single
biomarker.
We decided to investigate separately the two subgroups of temporal and extra-temporal patients,
recomputing all the threshold for each biomarker independently for each subgroup.
Figure 4​ and ​Figure 5​ show the number of biomarkers above the thresholds for each patient in the
temporal and extra-temporal subgroup. After recomputing the threshold independently for each
subgroup, it seems that the biomarkers are more sensitive in the temporal subgroup.
Figure 6​ summarizes the performances of the ‘cumulative’ biomarker for the whole group, the
temporal and extra-temporal subgroups. The best performance was obtained considering the
temporal subgroup: 28/30 (sensitivity of 93%) patients showed a value in the pre-resection
recordings higher than the threshold for at least one biomarker of the pool of biomarkers. However,
for the extra-temporal patients only 4 out of 17 patients (sensitivity of 23%) were above the
threshold.
Mesiotemporal versus neocortical channels
In temporal patients we found a significant (p<0.01) difference between mesiotemporal channels
and neo-cortical channels for the PAC and GC, while no significant difference was found for the
remaining biomarkers.

Discussion
This study investigates the performances of different univariate, bivariate and multivariate signal
biomarkers, used separately and combined, to discriminate between healthy and epileptogenic
tissue using inter-ictal data derived from ioECoG. We performed all the analyses in a ground-truth
scenario, using post-resection recordings of completely cured patients (for whom seizure control
without medication was achieved for at least one year after resection) as a way to define a
reference threshold for healthy tissue to be compared with channels in pre-resection recordings of
improved patients.
We chose our biomarkers with two criteria in mind: 1) to be exhaustive regarding the different
types of measures used (i.e. univariate, bivariate and multivariate); 2) biomarkers should have
been reported to show an overall significant effect in discriminating between healthy and
pathological tissue using inter-ictal intracranial recordings​23–25,27–29,31–35,60​.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We could replicate previous findings regarding the detection of an overall effect, normal versus
abnormal tissue, comparing separately the distribution of pre-resection recordings against
post-resection recordings in 5 out of 7 biomarkers. This is a remarkable result considering the
differences in methodological (and arbitrary) choices we used to harmonize the analysis pipelines
of the aforementioned studies. For the biomarkers for which we failed to observe a significant effect
(PLV and sdDTF) this failure could be indeed related to different signal processing pipelines
regarding the epoch length​61​, the reference montage​62,63​, the different state of vigilance​64–66​, which
could have affected the results.
The resection area in good seizure outcome patients often includes normal brain tissue along with
electrophysiologically abnormal tissue. In order to overcome this problem, we repeated our
analysis using the maximum value across channels for each subject. Although each tested
biomarker showed a longer tail of the pre-resection values compared to the post-resection values,
only the PAC could detect a significant difference between the two distributions. Furthermore, it
revealed the best sensitivity allowing to detect the pathological tissue in 16 out of 47 patients. Our
results confirm the important role of cross-frequency coupling in neuronal communications​43,67​ and
also reinforce the idea that abnormal PAC values are linked to ictogenesis​32–35,60,68–71​.
A possible explanation of the failure of the other biomarkers might be the fact that the maximum
across channels represents a too strict and crude statistic to detect an effect. In fact, the maximum
statistic works on the implicit assumption that one channel with an electrophysiologically abnormal
value (i.e. higher value than the threshold) is enough for ictogenesis. However, evidence has been
accumulated on the role of a critical mass to trigger seizures, hence the maximum as a statistic
may overlook important global network features that go beyond single channel statistics​72–77​.
The combination of the whole pool of biomarkers improved the sensitivity (from 34% to 42%) in
terms of patients for whom it was possible to detect pathological tissue in the pre-resection
recordings: 20 out of 47. This result suggests that different biomarkers may capture different
mechanism of ictogenesis and it is inline with recent literature suggesting that more robust results
are shown by combining different biomarkers​33,34,78​ since they potentially exploit independent
information.
When we performed separately the analysis depending on the type of epilepsy (temporal or
extra-temporal), the combination of multiple biomarkers for temporal patients held the remarkable
result of 93% sensitivity, while 23% was obtained for the extra-temporal group. This performance
difference may point out different structure related mechanisms (i.e. neo-cortical versus
mesiotemporal) involved into the ictogenesis to which biomarkers may be responsive or not.
Hence, considering separately the two groups allows for a definition of better threshold (i.e. more
structure tuned) to discriminate between normal and pathologic tissue. However, it could be that
this result is influenced by the different neurophysiological properties of the tissue independently
from the epileptogenicity. The biomarkers are detecting a difference in terms structure
(mesiotemporal vs neocortical) rather than epileptogenicity. A recent published intracranial ECoG
atlas​79​ of recording in healthy tissue points into this direction, highlighting how different anatomical
brain areas have specific electrophysiological signatures in terms of spectral oscillatory and
non-oscillatory properties. Indeed, we found a significant difference (PAC and GC) in temporal
patients comparing mesiotemporal channels with neocortical ones. However, the sensitivity of 93%
cannot be fully explained in structure related terms since for temporal patients the maximum value
above the biomarker reference was found in the mesiotemporal channels 11 times out of 18 for
PAC and 5 out of 13 for GC.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Nevertheless, our results regarding temporal patients are comparable to a recent similar work on
epileptogenic localization in which good performances are obtained on a dataset of predominantly
temporal patients​34​. The poor performances in the extra-temporal group could also be affected by
the limited amount of resected channels considered in the pre-resection recordings. The mean
number of resected channels available in the extra-temporal group was around 13 compared to 30
in the temporal group, and for two extra-temporal patients only one channel was available.
It is important to realize that, in this retrospective study, the total amount of data analyzed per
situation (1 minute) represents a drawback since it has been shown that longer periods of data are
needed to detect pathological signatures​33,34,65​. However, the time constraint in intra-operative
recordings will be always an issue, because the goal is not only to find a biomarker able to
discriminate what is normal/abnormal but it is to accomplish it in a reasonable amount of time
relative to surgery duration.
The choice of solely the gamma frequency band for some of the biomarkers is a limitation, since it
has been reported that brain networks findings in intracranial recordings are
frequency-dependent​22,80​. However, our a priori choice was motivated by previous works in which
gamma frequency band appeared consistently to reveal significant results using inter-ictal
intracranial recordings​22,23,26,28​.
In this study there are three main limitations related to localization matters. The first, consists of the
not straightforward way to project the bivariate and multivariate biomarkers computed from signals
recorded from two (or more) different locations to a single location. This is not an issue for
univariate measures since they provide a more confined measure, in terms of localization.
However, the employment of a bipolar montage, even though to a lesser extent, posit the same
obstacle. The use of high density grids can be a possible approach to improve the localization
precision.
The second, is related to the unavailability of accurate electrode localization to compare the value
of the biomarkers on the same tissue pre- and post-resection (what is left after resection). In fact,
using the pre- and post-resection pictures is enough to mark (not-)resected channels, but it does
not allow to quantify the value of the biomarker in the same location pre- and post-resection. Third,
in temporal patients, there is uncertainty on the part of the mesiotemporal structure we are
recording from since we do not have the exact position of the placement the strip.
In conclusion, in this retrospective study, using a substantial number of patients for whom seizure
control was improved one year after the operation, we pointed out the importance to work on a
ground-truth scenario to evaluate biomarker performance in an unbiased way. Our results
suggested that a universal unique biomarker is insufficient to pinpoint the epileptogenic tissue. The
combination of different biomarkers improved the localization performances, however the results
should be considered more from a perspective of pathophysiological understanding rather than as
a tool for the operation theater since sensitivity achieved is not adequate.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figures and Tables
Table 1. Patient characteristics.
The complete dataset consists of 47 patients. The variable ​subjID​ is the code used to identify the
subjects. The variable ​outcome​ represents the seizure outcome one year after surgery. This is
identified by a code composed by the Engel class and the amount of medication after surgery (i.e.
1a_aed_stop means 1A Engel class who stop the medication after surgery, 1a_aed_low means
that the medication was lowered and 1a_aed_eq means that the amount of medication was the
same as before surgery)​.​ The variable ​type​ represents the type of epilepsy (E for Extra-Temporal,
T for Temporal). The variable ​primary pathology​ represent the primary pathology and could be one
of the following: low grade tumor (WHO I + II), mesiotemporal (MST), focal cortical dysplasia,
carvernoma, gliosi/scar, malformation of cortical development, no abnormalities. The variable CUT
represents the number of bipolar derivations where one electrode of the bipolar channel is
resected and the other is not in the pre-resection situations. The variable Nres counts the number
of not-resected channels in the pre-resection situations. The variable Res counts the number of
resected channel in the pre-resection situations and finally the variable Post counts the number of
bipolar channels in the post-resection situations.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1 Comparison between biomarker distributions values computed on pre-resection
resected channels (red) and post-resection channels (blue) in cured patients. The
presence of an asterisk indicates that the two distributions are significantly different (p <
0.01 one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test). Note that each point for the univariate
biomarkers (ARR and PAC) represents the value of the biomarker per channel, while the
y-axis for the bi-/multi-variate biomarkers represents the strength. Inside each violin-plot a
boxplot is depicted in gray with the median value highlighted with a white dot.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2 Comparison between maximum biomarker values between pre-resection
resected channels (red) in improved patients and post-resection channels in cured patients
(blue). Each dot represents the maximum value of the biomarker across all channels of
each patient. The presence of an asterisk indicates that the two distributions are
significantly different (p < 0.01 one-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test). Inside each violin-plot
a boxplot is depicted in gray with the median value highlighted with a white dot. For each
biomarker, the green line represents the threshold used to define the normal tissue
(biomarker reference) using post-resection cured patients.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3 Number of biomarkers above the threshold for each patient. On the x-axis each of
the 47 improved patients is displayed with a coded number. The first 17 patients are
extra-temporal patients (E before the coded name), while the remaining 30 patients are
temporal patients (T before the coded name). The y-axis represents the number of
biomarkers above the specific threshold (computed separately for each biomarker) for
each patient.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4 Number of biomarkers above the threshold for each temporal patient. On the
x-axis each of the 30 improved temporal patients is displayed with a coded number. The
y-axis represents the number of biomarkers above the specific threshold for each patient
(computed independently for each biomarker and using only the temporal patients).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5 Number of biomarkers above the threshold for each extra-temporal patient. On
the x-axis each of the 17 improved extra-temporal patients is displayed with a coded
number. The y-axis represents the number of biomarkers above the specific threshold for
each patient (computed independently for each biomarker and using only the
extra-temporal patients).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6 Comparison of the ‘cumulative’ biomarker for the three different groups (Joint
Temporal and Extra-Temporal, only Temporal, only Extra-Temporal). Y-axis counts the
number of patients considering the pre-resection recording of resected channels for which
none (failed detection, labeled as 0 on x-axis ) or at-least one biomarker (detection,
labeled as at least 1) is above its respective threshold.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Appendix
Auto-Regressive Residual Modulation
Given as a signal we divided the signal in overlapping windows
. For each window
it is possible to compute the auto-regressive model of order (in Geertsema’s work​30​ the
model order was 3) for every time point with the following formula:

where

are the coefficient of the model,

is the residual for each time point . Then, it is

possible to compute the variation of the residual per window
and order as
.
The auto-regressive residual modulation can be computed as the coefficient of variation (CV) of the
residuals across the windows:

where

is the residual variation for window

for model order 3. Geertsema et al. 31
​

suggested an improved version of
. This modified version has been shown to be less
sensitive to artefacts compared to the original version​30​. The authors noticed that the decline of the
residuals of different model orders (order 1 and 2) was different for artefacts compared to real
events (spikes, high frequency oscillations). Therefore, they use the steepness of the residual
decline from the first order (
) to the second order (
) to filter the residuals with order 3 (
) to include in the computation of the CV. Specifically, they computed the residual decline
for each window

as:

Then, they defined the residual of model 3 for a specific window an outlier (
two criteria were satisfied:

) if the following

In that case the residual variations of window
and contiguous windows were removed (
). This provides selection of cleaned windows
over which compute the
modified version of ARRm:

Phase Amplitude Coupling
Given as a signal, we filtered the signal in two frequency bands, theta band (4-8Hz) and gamma
band (30-80Hz) obtaining two filtered signals
and . We then computed the Hilbert transform
of the two filtered signals to obtain the instantaneous phases and amplitude envelopes for each
time point ,

. We then compute PAC with the following formula:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Where

is the signal length in samples,

is the absolute operator.

Phase Locking Value
Given and as two signals, we filtered the signals in gamma frequency band (30-80Hz),
obtaining two filtered signals
and
. We then computed the Hilbert transform of the two
filtered signals to obtain the instantaneous phases
then compute PLV with the following formula:

where
operator.

,

and

for each time point . We

is the signal length in samples,

is the absolute

Phase Lag Index
Given and as two signals, we filtered the signals in gamma frequency band (30-80Hz),
obtaining two filtered signals
and
. We then computed the Hilbert transform of the two
filtered signals to obtain the instantaneous phases
then compute PLI with the following formula:

where
absolute operator and

and

for each time point . We

,
is the average across all time points ,
is the sign function:

is the

Non linear correlation coefficient
The implementation of
used in this work follows the implementation suggested by Kalitzin et
81​
al.​ that is obtained using the following formula:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Where

is the time length of the two signal

binned in

bins

variation of

with

explained by

and

for

. The values of

each containing
, while

points.

​ the variation of

are

represents the

explained by

.

Granger Causality
Granger causality index for a bivariate situation in which there are two time-series and can be
defined as the logarithm of the ratio between the autoregressive residual considering the model
with one variable over the autoregressive residual value of the model with two variable and :

where
and
are the residual variance from the autoregressive model using only previous
values of and the residual variance using previous values of and .
This definition can be generalized to a multivariate (multi-channels) case with the following formula:

where Granger causality from to is equal to the natural logarithm of the ratio between the
variance of the residual using the reduced regressive model (considering all the time-series
other than ) and the variance of the residual obtained from the full model (considering all the
time series). For the time based GC we used the implementation in the MVGC toolbox​59​.

short-time direct Directed Transfer Function
The sdDFT is can be computed using the following formula​82​:

where
frequency

is the transfer function describing the directed causal relationship from
,

is the direct partial coherence between

and

to

at

. The combination between the

and
gives a measure of directed causal interaction between
(multi-channel) system.
We used the implementation in the SIFT toolbox for sdDTF​57,58​.

and

in a multivariate

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acknowledgments
M. Demuru was supported by the TKI Health Holland grant LSHM16054-SGF.
M. Zijlmans was supported by the ERC starting grant 803880

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Bibliography

1.

GBD 2016 Epilepsy Collaborators. Global, regional, and national burden of epilepsy,
1990-2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. ​Lancet
Neurol.​ ​18​, 357–375 (2019).

2.

Kalilani, L., Sun, X., Pelgrims, B., Noack-Rink, M. & Villanueva, V. The epidemiology of
drug-resistant epilepsy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. ​Epilepsia​ ​59​, 2179–2193
(2018).

3.

Kwan, P. & Brodie, M. J. Early identification of refractory epilepsy. ​N. Engl. J. Med.​ ​342​,
314–319 (2000).

4.

Jehi, L. The Epileptogenic Zone: Concept and Definition. ​Epilepsy Curr.​ ​18​, 12–16 (2018).

5.

Fernández, I. S. & Loddenkemper, T. Electrocorticography for seizure foci mapping in epilepsy
surgery. ​J. Clin. Neurophysiol.​ ​30​, 554–570 (2013).

6.

San-juan, D. ​et al.​ The prognostic role of electrocorticography in tailored temporal lobe
surgery. ​Seizure​ ​20​, 564–569 (2011).

7.

Bautista, R. E., Cobbs, M. A., Spencer, D. D. & Spencer, S. S. Prediction of surgical outcome
by interictal epileptiform abnormalities during intracranial EEG monitoring in patients with
extrahippocampal seizures. ​Epilepsia​ ​40​, 880–890 (1999).

8.

Sugano, H., Shimizu, H. & Sunaga, S. Efficacy of intraoperative electrocorticography for
assessing seizure outcomes in intractable epilepsy patients with temporal-lobe-mass lesions.
Seizure​ ​16​, 120–127 (2007).

9.

Stefan, H. ​et al.​ Interictal triple ECoG characteristics of temporal lobe epilepsies: An
intraoperative ECoG analysis correlated with surgical outcome. ​Clin. Neurophysiol.​ ​119​,
642–652 (2008).

10. Tripathi, M. ​et al.​ Intra-operative electrocorticography in lesional epilepsy. ​Epilepsy Res.​ ​89​,
133–141 (2010).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

11. Ferrier, C. H. ​et al.​ Electrocorticographic discharge patterns in glioneuronal tumors and focal
cortical dysplasia. ​Epilepsia​ ​47​, 1477–1486 (2006).
12. Gröppel, G., Aull-Watschinger, S. & Baumgartner, C. Temporal Evolution and Prognostic
Significance of Postoperative Spikes After Selective Amygdala-Hippocampectomy. ​Journal of
Clinical Neurophysiology​ vol. 20 258–263 (2003).
13. Cendes, F. ​et al.​ Increased neocortical spiking and surgical outcome after selective
amygdalo-hippocampectomy. E
​ pilepsy Res.​ ​16​, 195–206 (1993).
14. Yu, H.-Y. ​et al.​ Prognostic significance of postoperative spikes varied in different surgical
procedures for mesial temporal sclerosis. ​Seizure​ ​52​, 71–75 (2017).
15. van’t Klooster, M. A. ​et al.​ Tailoring epilepsy surgery with fast ripples in the intraoperative
electrocorticogram. ​Ann. Neurol.​ ​81​, 664–676 (2017).
16. van ’t Klooster, M. A. ​et al.​ Residual fast ripples in the intraoperative corticogram predict
epilepsy surgery outcome. ​Neurology​ ​85​, 120–128 (2015).
17. Wu, J. Y. ​et al.​ Removing interictal fast ripples on electrocorticography linked with seizure
freedom in children. ​Neurology​ ​75​, 1686–1694 (2010).
18. van Mierlo, P. ​et al.​ Functional brain connectivity from EEG in epilepsy: seizure prediction and
epileptogenic focus localization. ​Prog. Neurobiol.​ ​121​, 19–35 (2014).
19. Bartolomei, F. ​et al.​ Defining epileptogenic networks: Contribution of SEEG and signal
analysis. E
​ pilepsia​ ​58​, 1131–1147 (2017).
20. Alkawadri, R. Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) Applications in Mapping of Epileptic Brain
Networks Based on Intracranial-EEG: An Update. ​Front. Neurosci.​ ​13​, 191 (2019).
21. Friston, K. J. Functional and Effective Connectivity: A Review. ​Brain Connect.​ ​1​, 13–36 (2011).
22. Wilke, C., Worrell, G. & He, B. Graph analysis of epileptogenic networks in human partial
epilepsy. ​Epilepsia​ ​52​, 84–93 (2011).
23. Zweiphenning, W. J. E. M. ​et al.​ Increased gamma and decreased fast ripple connections of
epileptic tissue: A high-frequency directed network approach. ​Epilepsia​ (2019)
doi:​10.1111/epi.16296​.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

24. van Dellen, E. ​et al.​ Long-term effects of temporal lobe epilepsy on local neural networks: a
graph theoretical analysis of corticography recordings. ​PLoS One​ ​4​, e8081 (2009).
25. Van Diessen, E. ​et al.​ Are high frequency oscillations associated with altered network topology
in partial epilepsy? ​Neuroimage​ ​82​, 564–573 (2013).
26. Wu, G. R. ​et al.​ Multiscale causal connectivity analysis by canonical correlation: theory and
application to epileptic brain. ​IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.​ ​58​, 3088–3096 (2011).
27. Mormann, F., Lehnertz, K., David, P. & E. Elger, C. Mean phase coherence as a measure for
phase synchronization and its application to the EEG of epilepsy patients. ​Physica D​ ​144​,
358–369 (2000).
28. Bettus, G. ​et al.​ Enhanced EEG functional connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.
Epilepsy Res.​ ​81​, 58–68 (2008).
29. Park, E.-H. & Madsen, J. R. Granger Causality Analysis of Interictal iEEG Predicts Seizure
Focus and Ultimate Resection. ​Neurosurgery​ ​82​, 99–109 (2018).
30. Geertsema, E. E. ​et al.​ Automated Seizure Onset Zone Approximation Based on Nonharmonic
High-Frequency Oscillations in Human Interictal Intracranial EEGs. ​Int. J. Neural Syst.​ ​25​,
1550015 (2015).
31. Geertsema, E. E. ​et al.​ Non-harmonicity in high-frequency components of the intra-operative
corticogram to delineate epileptogenic tissue during surgery. ​Clin. Neurophysiol.​ ​128​, 153–164
(2017).
32. Amiri, M., Frauscher, B. & Gotman, J. Phase-Amplitude Coupling Is Elevated in Deep Sleep
and in the Onset Zone of Focal Epileptic Seizures. ​Front. Hum. Neurosci.​ ​10​, 387 (2016).
33. Varatharajah, Y. ​et al.​ Integrating artificial intelligence with real-time intracranial EEG
monitoring to automate interictal identification of seizure onset zones in focal epilepsy. ​J.
Neural Eng.​ ​15​, 046035 (2018).
34. Cimbalnik, J. ​et al.​ Multi-feature localization of epileptic foci from interictal, intracranial EEG.
Clin. Neurophysiol.​ (2019) doi:​10.1016/j.clinph.2019.07.024​.
35. Guirgis, M., Chinvarun, Y., Del Campo, M., Carlen, P. L. & Bardakjian, B. L. Defining regions

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of interest using cross-frequency coupling in extratemporal lobe epilepsy patients. ​J. Neural
Eng.​ ​12​, 026011 (2015).
36. Holdgraf, C. ​et al.​ iEEG-BIDS, extending the Brain Imaging Data Structure specification to
human intracranial electrophysiology. ​Sci Data​ ​6​, 102 (2019).
37. van ’t Klooster, M. A. ​et al.​ High frequency oscillations in the intra-operative ECoG to guide
epilepsy surgery (‘The HFO Trial’): study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. ​Trials​ ​16​,
1–10 (2015).
38. Helling, R. M., Koppert, M. M. J., Visser, G. H. & Kalitzin, S. N. Gap Junctions as Common
Cause of High-Frequency Oscillations and Epileptic Seizures in a Computational Cascade of
Neuronal Mass and Compartmental Modeling. ​Int. J. Neural Syst.​ ​25​, 1550021 (2015).
39. Zijlmans, M. ​et al.​ High-frequency oscillations as a new biomarker in epilepsy. ​Ann. Neurol.​ ​71​,
169–178 (2012).
40. Jiruska, P. ​et al.​ Update on the mechanisms and roles of high-frequency oscillations in
seizures and epileptic disorders. ​Epilepsia​ ​58​, 1330–1339 (2017).
41. Frauscher, B. ​et al.​ High-frequency oscillations: The state of clinical research. ​Epilepsia​ ​58​,
1316–1329 (2017).
42. Jacobs, J. ​et al.​ Removing high-frequency oscillations: A prospective multicenter study on
seizure outcome. ​Neurology​ ​91​, e1040–e1052 (2018).
43. Canolty, R. T. & Knight, R. T. The functional role of cross-frequency coupling. ​Trends Cogn.
Sci.​ ​14​, 506–515 (2010).
44. Cohen, M. X. Assessing transient cross-frequency coupling in EEG data. ​J. Neurosci. Methods
168​, 494–499 (2008).
45. Penny, W. D., Duzel, E., Miller, K. J. & Ojemann, J. G. Testing for nested oscillation. ​J.
Neurosci. Methods​ ​174​, 50–61 (2008).
46. Tort, A. B. L., Komorowski, R., Eichenbaum, H. & Kopell, N. Measuring phase-amplitude
coupling between neuronal oscillations of different frequencies. ​J. Neurophysiol.​ ​104​,
1195–1210 (2010).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

47. Onslow, A. C. E., Bogacz, R. & Jones, M. W. Quantifying phase–amplitude coupling in
neuronal network oscillations. ​Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol.​ ​105​, 49–57 (2011).
48. Özkurt, T. E. & Schnitzler, A. A critical note on the definition of phase-amplitude
cross-frequency coupling. ​J. Neurosci. Methods​ ​201​, 438–443 (2011).
49. Kramer, M. A., Tort, A. B. L. & Kopell, N. J. Sharp edge artifacts and spurious coupling in EEG
frequency comodulation measures. ​J. Neurosci. Methods​ ​170​, 352–357 (2008).
50. Kramer, M. A. & Eden, U. T. Assessment of cross-frequency coupling with confidence using
generalized linear models. ​J. Neurosci. Methods​ ​220​, 64–74 (2013).
51. Lachaux, J. P., Rodriguez, E., Martinerie, J. & Varela, F. J. Measuring phase synchrony in
brain signals. ​Hum. Brain Mapp.​ ​8​, 194–208 (1999).
52. Stam, C. J., Nolte, G. & Daffertshofer, A. Phase lag index: Assessment of functional
connectivity from multi channel EEG and MEG with diminished bias from common sources.
Hum. Brain Mapp.​ ​28​, 1178–1193 (2007).
53. Blinowska, K. J. Review of the methods of determination of directed connectivity from
multichannel data. ​Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.​ ​49​, 521–529 (2011).
54. Akaike, H. A New Look at the Statistical Model Identification. ​Springer Series in Statistics
215–222 (1974) doi:​10.1007/978-1-4612-1694-0_16​.
55. Kaminski, M. J. & Blinowska, K. J. A new method of the description of the information flow in
the brain structures. ​Biological Cybernetics​ vol. 65 203–210 (1991).
56. Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E. & Schoffelen, J.-M. FieldTrip: Open source software for
advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological data. ​Comput. Intell.
Neurosci.​ ​2011​, 156869 (2011).
57. Mullen, T. R. ​The Dynamic Brain: Modeling Neural Dynamics and Interactions From Human
Electrophysiological Recordings.​ (2014).
58. Delorme, A. ​et al.​ EEGLAB, SIFT, NFT, BCILAB, and ERICA: new tools for advanced EEG
processing. ​Comput. Intell. Neurosci.​ ​2011​, 130714 (2011).
59. Barnett, L. & Seth, A. K. The MVGC multivariate Granger causality toolbox: a new approach to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Granger-causal inference. ​J. Neurosci. Methods​ ​223​, 50–68 (2014).
60. Samiee, S., Lévesque, M., Avoli, M. & Baillet, S. Phase-amplitude coupling and
epileptogenesis in an animal model of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. ​Neurobiol. Dis.​ ​114​,
111–119 (2018).
61. Fraschini, M. ​et al.​ The effect of epoch length on estimated EEG functional connectivity and
brain network organisation. ​J. Neural Eng.​ ​13​, 036015 (2016).
62. Chella, F., Pizzella, V., Zappasodi, F. & Marzetti, L. Impact of the reference choice on scalp
EEG connectivity estimation. ​J. Neural Eng.​ ​13​, 036016 (2016).
63. Chella, F., D’Andrea, A., Basti, A., Pizzella, V. & Marzetti, L. Non-linear Analysis of Scalp EEG
by Using Bispectra: The Effect of the Reference Choice. ​Frontiers in Neuroscience​ vol. 11
(2017).
64. Baud, M. O. ​et al.​ Multi-day rhythms modulate seizure risk in epilepsy. ​Nat. Commun.​ ​9​, 88
(2018).
65. Gliske, S. V. ​et al.​ Variability in the location of high frequency oscillations during prolonged
intracranial EEG recordings. ​Nat. Commun.​ ​9​, 2155 (2018).
66. Wang, K., Steyn-Ross, M. L., Steyn-Ross, D. A., Wilson, M. T. & Sleigh, J. W. EEG slow-wave
coherence changes in propofol-induced general anesthesia: experiment and theory. ​Front.
Syst. Neurosci.​ ​8​, 1–16 (2014).
67. Buzsáki, G. & Wang, X.-J. Mechanisms of gamma oscillations. ​Annu. Rev. Neurosci.​ ​35​,
203–225 (2012).
68. Weiss, S. A. ​et al.​ Seizure localization using ictal phase-locked high gamma: A retrospective
surgical outcome study. ​Neurology​ ​84​, 2320–2328 (2015).
69. Motoi, H. ​et al.​ Phase-amplitude coupling between interictal high-frequency activity and slow
waves in epilepsy surgery. ​Epilepsia​ ​59​, 1954–1965 (2018).
70. Edakawa, K. ​et al.​ Detection of Epileptic Seizures Using Phase-Amplitude Coupling in
Intracranial Electroencephalography. ​Sci. Rep.​ ​6​, 25422 (2016).
71. Ibrahim, G. M. ​et al.​ Dynamic modulation of epileptic high frequency oscillations by the phase

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.26.19015883; this version posted December 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of slower cortical rhythms. ​Exp. Neurol.​ ​251​, 30–38 (2014).
72. Engel, J. ​et al.​ Connectomics and epilepsy. ​Current Opinion in Neurology​ vol. 26 186–194
(2013).
73. Gleichgerrcht, E., Kocher, M. & Bonilha, L. Connectomics and graph theory analyses: Novel
insights into network abnormalities in epilepsy. ​Epilepsia​ ​56​, 1660–1668 (2015).
74. Petkov, G., Goodfellow, M., Richardson, M. P. & Terry, J. R. A critical role for network
structure in seizure onset: a computational modeling approach. ​Front. Neurol.​ ​5​, 261 (2014).
75. Kini, L. G. ​et al.​ Virtual resection predicts surgical outcome for drug-resistant epilepsy. ​Brain
(2019) doi:​10.1093/brain/awz303​.
76. Kramer, M. A. & Cash, S. S. Epilepsy as a Disorder of Cortical Network Organization. ​The
Neuroscientist​ vol. 18 360–372 (2012).
77. Burns, S. P. ​et al.​ Network dynamics of the brain and influence of the epileptic seizure onset
zone. ​Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.​ ​111​, E5321–30 (2014).
78. Gnatkovsky, V. ​et al.​ Biomarkers of epileptogenic zone defined by quantified stereo-EEG
analysis. E
​ pilepsia​ vol. 55 296–305 (2014).
79. Frauscher, B. ​et al.​ Atlas of the normal intracranial electroencephalogram: neurophysiological
awake activity in different cortical areas. ​Brain​ 1130–1144 (2018).
80. Ponten, S. C., Bartolomei, F. & Stam, C. J. Small-world networks and epilepsy: graph
theoretical analysis of intracerebrally recorded mesial temporal lobe seizures. ​Clin.
Neurophysiol.​ ​118​, 918–927 (2007).
81. Kalitzin, S., Parra, J., Velis, D. & da Silva, F. L. Quantification of unidirectional nonlinear
associations between multidimensional physiological signals. in ​Eur. Symp. Biomed. Eng
(2006).
82. Korzeniewska, A., Crainiceanu, C. M., Kuś, R., Franaszczuk, P. J. & Crone, N. E. Dynamics of
event-related causality in brain electrical activity. ​Hum. Brain Mapp.​ ​29​, 1170–1192 (2008).

characteristic_tbl

subjID
RESP0067
RESP0124
RESP0135
RESP0231
RESP0311
RESP0320
RESP0362
RESP0381
RESP0384
RESP0396
RESP0409
RESP0428
RESP0451
RESP0465
RESP0586
RESP0619
RESP0634
RESP0059
RESP0087
RESP0094
RESP0096
RESP0105
RESP0150
RESP0269
RESP0280
RESP0282
RESP0283
RESP0284
RESP0316
RESP0332
RESP0349
RESP0356
RESP0433
RESP0437
RESP0462
RESP0464
RESP0475
RESP0546
RESP0557
RESP0570
RESP0578
RESP0579
RESP0595
RESP0599
RESP0625
RESP0645
RESP0673

Gender
f
m
m
m
f
m
f
m
f
f
f
m
m
f
f
m
m
f
f
m
m
f
m
f
m
f
m
m
m
f
m
m
m
m
f
f
f
f
m
f
m
m
f
f
f
f
f

Age
23
21
51
22
21
11
11
8
13
15
12
19
19
11
28
14
19
25
51
72
25
13
44
13
13
20
31
19
19
17
24
22
22
16
24
21
15
19
28
64
59
24
36
61
9
5
62

outcome
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_eq
1a_aed_stop
1a_aed_low
1a_aed_low

type
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T

primary pathology
FCD
malformation cort. development
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
FCD
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
FCD
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
cavernoma
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
FCD
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
FCD
gliosis/scar
cavernoma
gliosis/scar
gliosis/scar
MTS
cavernoma
malformation cort. development
MTS
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
no abnormalities
gliosis/scar
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
gliosis/scar
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
MTS
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
cavernoma
TuberoSclerosis
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
MTS
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
MTS
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
cavernoma
FCD
FCD
gliosis/scar
cavernoma
gliosis/scar
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
Low Grade Tumor (WHO I + II)
cavernoma

Page 1

CUT
17
41
21
11
3
23
4
6
16
9
5
16
17
5
6
9
9
9
11
13
0
14
6
5
6
4
0
5
6
5
7
5
6
6
14
4
6
10
5
8
7
14
2
5
5
3
8

Nres
34
105
77
26
16
116
99
13
95
44
9
53
29
13
24
14
43
25
93
34
16
24
46
35
25
34
64
37
72
27
33
31
22
6
35
25
38
33
0
32
20
46
0
26
21
15
29

Res
34
31
7
24
1
29
5
10
3
5
2
18
39
6
1
8
8
29
24
51
2
32
19
31
40
31
34
28
21
36
23
24
8
15
44
28
18
30
94
24
38
30
32
36
45
15
25

Post
84
71
22
86
22
42
146
19
13
73
20
99
18
109
22
27
39
20
78
27
72
21
34
36
36
55
32
31
46
23
31
24
23
21
26
29
28
27
38
29
5
20
27
31
23
31
28

