medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

Title: Diet-derived fruit and vegetable metabolites suggest sex-specific mechanisms conferring
protection against osteoporosis in humans

Authors: Kelsey M. Mangano, PhD, RD;1* Sabrina E. Noel, PhD, RD;1* Chao-Qiang Lai, PhD;2
Jacob J. Christensen, PhD, 5,6 Jose M. Ordovas, PhD,3 Bess Dawson-Hughes, MD,4 Katherine L.
Tucker, PhD;1 Laurence D. Parnell, PhD;2*

Affiliations:
1 Department

of Biomedical and Nutritional Sciences, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA USA.

2 USDA

Agricultural Research Service, Nutrition and Genomics Laboratory, JM-USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on
Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA USA.

3 Nutrition

and Genomics Laboratory, JM-USDA Human Nutrition

Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA USA.

4 Bone

Metabolism Laboratory, Jean Mayer U.S.

Department of Agriculture Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Tufts University, Boston, MA USA.
5

Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Familial Hypercholesterolemia, Department of Endocrinology, Morbid Obesity

and Preventive Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Forskningsveien 2B, Oslo, Norway. 6 Department of Nutrition,
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Sognsvannsveien 9, Oslo, Norway.

Corresponding authors:
Laurence D. Parnell, PhD
USDA, Agricultural Research Service
JM-USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University
711 Washington St, Boston, MA 02111
Email: Laurence.Parnell@usda.gov
Phone: 617-556-3089
ORCID iD: 0000-0001-9718-1335
Kelsey M. Mangano, PhD, RD
Department of Biomedical and Nutritional Sciences
University of Massachusetts, Lowell
3 Solomont Way, Lowell, MA 01854
Email: Kelsey_Mangano@uml.edu
Phone: 978-934-6367
ORCID iD: 0000-0002-1750-1747

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

Sources of support:
This study was funded by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute grant P50-HL105185;
National Institute on Aging grants P01-AG023394 and R01-AG055948, a Mentored Career
Development award NIH/NIAMS K01-AR067894 (to SEN), and by the US Department of
Agriculture, under agreement number 8050-51000-098-00D.

ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01231958

Supplemental data have been included with the submission.

Abbreviations:
AUC, area under the curve; BCAA, branched-chain amino acid; BPRHS, Boston Puerto Rican
Health Study; BPROS, Boston Puerto Rican Osteoporosis Study; DHA, docosahexaenoic acid;
DPA, docosahexaenoic acid; EC, Enzyme Commission; EPA, eicosapentaenoic acid; FDR,
false discovery rate; FFQ, food frequency questionnaire; FV , fruit and vegetable; KEGG, Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; OS,
osteoporosis; PCA, principal components analysis; PUFA, poly-unsaturated fatty acids; USDA,
United States Department of Agriculture

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

Abstract
The impact of nutrition on the metabolic profile of osteoporosis is incompletely characterized.
The objective of this cross-sectional study was to detangle the association of fruit and vegetable
(FV) intakes with osteoporosis prevalence. Dietary, anthropometric and blood plasma
metabolite data were examined from the Boston Puerto Rican Osteoporosis Study, a cohort of
600 individuals (age 46-79yr). High FV intake was protective against osteoporosis prevalence.
Associations of 525 plasma metabolites were assessed with fruit and vegetable intake, and
separately with osteoporosis status. Several biological processes affiliated with the FVassociating metabolites, including caffeine metabolism, carnitines and fatty acids, and
glycerophospholipids. For osteoporosis-associated metabolites, important processes were
steroid hormone biosynthesis in women, and branched-chain amino acid metabolism in men. In
all instances, the metabolite patterns differed greatly between sexes, arguing for a stratified
nutrition approach in recommending FV intakes to improve bone health. Factors derived from
principal components analysis of the FV intakes were correlated with the osteoporosisassociated metabolites, with high intake of dark leafy greens and berries/melons appearing
protective in both sexes. These data warrant investigation into whether increasing intakes of
dark leafy greens, berries and melons causally affect bone turnover and BMD among adults at
risk for osteoporosis via sex-specific metabolic pathways, and how gene-diet interactions alter
these sex-specific metabolomic-osteoporosis links.

Keywords: Aging, Metabolism, Metabolomics, Nutrition, Osteoporosis, Sex steroids

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

Osteoporosis (OS) is an important issue for our aging population and has emerged as a
chief public health problem among aging Puerto Rican adults living on the U.S. mainland 1.
Traditionally, OS was not viewed as a health priority for this population, yet a recent study found
that 8.6% of Puerto Rican men from the Boston Puerto Rican Osteoporosis Study (BPROS)
presented with OS (age-adjusted) compared with lower prevalence among non-Hispanic white
men (2.3%) based on national data 1. Puerto Rican women showed similar age-adjusted
prevalence of OS as non-Hispanic white women (10.7% vs. 10.1%). This was surprising as OS
was once thought to be a condition experienced more frequently by white women than Latinas.
Sex differences in the pathogenesis, prevalence and treatment of OS manifest from variations in
peak bone mass and maturation, rate of annual bone loss, and disease screening methods 2.
OS is a concern for men and women, as it typically remains undetected until a fracture occurs,
which dramatically increases risk of morbidity, institutionalization and mortality 3-5. Although
medications are available to prevent or treat bone loss, and ultimately prevent fracture,
adherence is generally poor because of factors such as absence of OS symptoms, and high
cost and potential side effects of medication use 6-8. Thus, identifying and understanding
tailored, modifiable health behaviors as targets for prevention of OS are key for improving
quality of life among aging adults.
Diet is one such central modifiable risk factor for OS 9,10. Higher fruit and vegetable (FV)
intake, recommended as part of a healthy diet, has been associated with better bone health in
several cross-sectional 11-14 and prospective epidemiologic studies 14-16, but not all 17. Across
many ethnic groups, higher FV intake related to lower incidence of fracture in Chinese 11,
European 15 and American 18 populations. Results from randomized controlled trials have been
inconsistent on the effects of FV intake and bone turnover markers, 19,20 possibly due to poor
compliance or assessment only in men and women with adequate intakes of FV. Moreover,
there is increasing awareness that diet may affect subpopulations differently, warranting

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

examination of any diet-disease interactions with a tailored nutrition approach. Thus, while there
is evidence that FV intake is vital for bone health, the sex differences, biological processes and
pathways underpinning this relationship remain incompletely identified.
Several mechanisms have been proposed for the effects of FV on bone health, including
reduction of oxidative stress and inflammation, which in turn, reduces bone resorption and
increases bone mass and strength 21,22. Molecular alterations central to bone health may not
only inform mechanisms for the development of the disease but also may pinpoint therapeutic
targets to prevent OS. Diet-derived compounds linked to bone health are not consumed as
single nutrients, but rather occur as mixtures within the food matrix. Thus, interpretation of
studies on individual nutrients or biochemical compounds as they relate to bone health are
limited as they lack generalizability to typical dietary intakes. Therefore, the overall objective of
this work was to examine associations between FV intakes and metabolomic profiles among
Puerto Rican adults with and without OS. A secondary objective was to characterize the sexspecific aspects to this diet-disease association using a stratified nutrition approach.

Results
A total of 600 men and women from the BPROS had complete dietary, metabolome and
OS data (Table 1). For the total sample, average age was 60.0 ± 7.5 y; 70% were women; 10%
had OS (11% of women, 7% of men); and average FV intake, excluding fruit juice, for the total
sample was 3.0 ± 1.8 servings per day, range: (0.3-13.0).

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

Table 1. Descriptive characteristics of participants (n=600) from the Boston Puerto Rican
Osteoporosis Study
Characteristic

Men (n=174)
Mean or n
SD
(%)
59.8
7.8
30.1
5.1
18.2
7.0
33.1
6.5
56 (32)
22 (13)

Women (n=426)
Mean or %
SD

Age (y) (range: 46-79)
60.3
7.3
BMI (kg/m2)
33.1
7.0
Serum 25(OH) D (nmol/L)
19.8
7.5
a
Physical activity score
30.9
3.6
Current smoker (%)
82 (19)
Heavy alcohol consumption
20 (5)
(%)b
Education
≤8th grade
73 (42)
214 (50)
>8th grade – high school
79 (46)
143 (34)
diploma
21 (12)
69 (16)
Some college
Total energy intake (kcal/d)
2375
828
2017
851
Total calcium intake (mg/d)
991
535
1017
566
Total fruit & vegetable intake
2.7
1.8
3.1
1.8
(servings/d)c
Osteoporosis (yes, %)d
14 (8)
42 (10)
Bone mineral density (g/cm2)
Lumbar Spine (L2-L4)
1.218
0.189
1.133
0.171
Femoral Neck
1.007
0.147
0.916
0.136
a
Physical activity score: a weighted 24-h score of typical daily activity, based on hours spend
doing heavy, moderate, light or sedentary activity.
b

Heavy alcohol consumption defined as >2 drinks per day for men; or >1 drink per day for
women.
c

Total fruit and vegetable intake, excluding starchy vegetables (potatoes, cassava, plantains)
and fruit juice.
Osteoporosis at the femoral neck or the lumbar spine was defined as T-scores ≤ 2.5 (2.5 SD
or more below peak bone mass).
d

FV intake related to OS status
Total FV intake (servings per day) was negatively associated with prevalence of OS
(P=0.03) and remained significant after inclusion of FV variety (Odds Ratio = 0.72; 95% CI =
0.56, 0.93; P=0.01); individuals without OS consumed 3.1 ± 1.8 servings FV per day while those
with OS, consumed 2.3 ± 1.4 servings/day. The variety of FV comprising overall FV intake was

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

not statistically significantly associated with OS prevalence, when controlling for total FV intake
(P=0.28). FV intakes for women without and with OS were 3.2 ± 1.8 and 2.4 ± 1.4 servings per
day, respectively. FV intakes for men without and with OS were 2.8 ± 1.8 and 2.0 ± 1.2,
respectively.

Metabolites significantly related to FV intake differ by sex
Metabolomics of plasma samples from 635 individuals for whom complete dietary and
OS outcomes were available identified 525 known metabolites that passed specific quality
control measures. Among women, 66 plasma metabolites were significantly associated with FV
intake (without fruit juice), after adjustment for covariates (P<0.05), and among men 38
metabolites were significantly associated with FV intake (P<0.05) (Supplemental Table 1,
Supplemental Figure 1). The metabolite patterns of women and men differed substantially, in
that 97 of 104 total significant metabolite-FV intake associations involved unique metabolites. A
few metabolite classes overlapped between men and women. Seven different constituents of
caffeine metabolism were significantly lower with higher FV intake in both women and men. In
the carnitine/fatty acid metabolite class, 12 different molecules, including docosahexaenoate
(DHA), were higher with higher FV intake in both men and women. Lastly, of 16
glycerophospholipid metabolite levels significantly associated with FV intake, 13 had positive
beta values in either men or women, or both (cf. 1-linoleoylglycerol and 2-linoleoylglycerol
(18:2)) (Figure 1).
Although several metabolites were associated with FV intakes in men and women
separately, only seven metabolites were shared as statistically significantly associated with FV
intake (Supplemental Table 2): docosahexaenoate (DHA; 22:6n3), iminodiacetate,
homoarginine, theobromine, 1-linoleoylglycerol (18:2), 2-linoleoylglycerol (18:2), and S-1-

6

Figure 1

Figure 1. Metabolites significantly associating with FV intake matching specific metabolite
classes. Each panel depicts a volcano plot, beta coefficient vs -log10(P-value), for all metabolites
significantly associated with OS (gray) and a distinct metabolite class highlighted in color:
caffeine metabolites (n=8), carnitines and fatty acids (n=13), and glycerophospholipids (n=16).
Data for women are plotted with triangles, for men with circles, and are derived from Table S1.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

pyrroline-5-carboxylate. Of these seven metabolites, all but homoarginine showed directionally
identical beta coefficients in both men and women. Interestingly, for five of these seven
metabolites, the beta coefficient was higher in men compared to women (Figure 2).

FV-associated metabolites and enriched pathways
Pathway enrichment analysis, with FDR correction, was performed on the datasets of
plasma metabolites significantly correlated with FV intake in women and men individually, to
identify bioprocesses and functional modules relevant to how this food group may support
reduced incidence of OS (Supplemental Tables 3 and 4). Notable pathways include amino
acid biosynthesis, and caffeine, arginine and proline, and glycerophospholipid metabolic
pathways (observed in both sexes); prostaglandin/leukotriene and α-linolenic acid/linoleic acid
metabolic pathways along with biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids (women); and glutamate
metabolism (men). Although satiety is not a defined pathway, BPROS women with high FV
intakes had higher linoleoyl ethanolamide and oleoyl ethanolamide, metabolites that correlated
with satiety 23.

Plasma metabolites associated with OS differ by sex
Forty plasma metabolites differed significantly among men by OS status, and in women
that number was 33 metabolites (Supplemental Table 5, Supplemental Figure 2). Similar to
the metabolite sets distinguishing FV intakes, these OS-associated metabolite sets are distinct,
as just two were identified as significant in both men and women with OS. N-(2-furoyl)glycine, a
product of high-temperature cooking or compromised fatty acid beta-oxidation 24, was higher in
both women (P = 0.041, beta = 0.038, beta SE = 0.019, OR = 1.04) and men (P = 0.012, beta =
0.053, beta SE = 0.021, OR = 1.05) with OS. Androstenediol (3β,17β) monosulfate, a metabolite
7

Figure 2

Figure 2. Osteoporosis-associated metabolites corresponding to specific metabolite classes .
Volcano plots of beta coefficients vs -log10(P-value) depict all significantly associated
metabolites (gray) with each specific metabolite class highlighted in color: branched-chain
amino acids, carnitines and fatty acids, and steroid hormone metabolites. Data for women are
plotted with triangles, for men with circles, and are derived from Table S5.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

of steroid hormone metabolism, specifically a precursor of testosterone, was lower in women
with, vs. without, OS (p = 0.012, beta = -1.72, beta SE = 0.80, OR = 0.18) but higher in men
with, vs. without, OS (p = 0.0027, beta = 1.32, beta SE = 0.45, OR = 3.73).
Several sex-specific metabolites merit attention. In women, ten steroid hormone
metabolites were significantly lower in those with, vs. without, OS; four in the phytochemical
class, and three purine/pyrimidine metabolites. In men, nine different molecules linked to
branched-chain amino acid metabolism were higher in those with, vs. without, OS. In addition,
six different molecules belonging to the bio-toxin/drug class were associated with OS, including
three related to ibuprofen. Both women and men also had a number of significant associations
between OS status and various carnitines/fatty acids, glycerophospholipids, and lysine/nitric
oxide metabolites (Figure 3, Supplemental Figure 2).
Comparing the metabolites that discriminated FV intake (n=66) and those that
characterized OS status (n=33) there was an indication of five shared molecules in women:
glutarate, glycerate, homoarginine, tartarate and tartronate, all of which were higher with higher
FV intake, and lower with OS (compared to those without OS). For men, there was no overlap of
metabolites associated with FV intake and OS status.

OS metabolites and enriched pathways
Pathway enrichment analysis was performed separately on the datasets of plasma
metabolites significantly correlated with OS for women and men to identify relevant
bioprocesses and functional modules (Supplemental Tables 6 and 7). For women, as noted
above, ten of the 33 metabolites correlated with OS were sulfate conjugates of steroid
hormones. However, many of these compounds have not been mapped to metabolic pathways
used by the analysis tools chosen, hindering a thorough enrichment assessment. Nonetheless,

8

Figure 3
a
+++ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ++ ++ +++ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ + ̶ ̶ ̶
*

†

*

†

*

** **
†

*
†
†
*

b

†

*
†

†

*

** ** **
†

*

†

*

̶ ̶ + ̶ + ̶ ++ + +++ ̶ + ++ ++ ++ + ++ + ̶ ̶ ++++++ + ̶ + +++++
†

† *

†

**
*

**
*** *

*

†
† †

† † †
*

†

†
*

**
*

†
†

Figure 3. Heat maps depicting the Spearman rho rank correlations between OS-associated
metabolites and principal component factors for FV intake. Above each heat map are minus /
plus symbols indicating the direction of association (beta) of that metabolite with OS, panel a)
for women and panel b) for men. The factors for FV intake and the metabolites are both
ordered according to hierarchical clustering based on hclust in R. Individual panels are
annotated with asterisks (*) for those metabolites whose correlation with the factor reached
statistical significance, or a † when significance of that correlation was <0.10. Significance of the
correlation at P<0.01 and P<0.001 are indicated by ** and *** respectively. Panels where the
color representing the correlation are opposite to the beta of association with OS can be
considered protective to some extent. Abbreviations for metabolites are defined in Table S9.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

a steroid hormone module was significant (FDR P-value 0.017). Other pathways and
bioprocesses of note include phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine biosynthesis,
adenosine/nucleotide metabolism, lysine metabolism, glyoxylate/dicarboxylate metabolism, and
degenerative disc disease pathway. Results from the Mbrole tool highlight the degenerative disc
disease pathway, driven by significantly lower hypoxanthine, urate and uridine with OS
(Supplemental Table 6). These metabolites also are indicators of adenosine degradation,
which was significant at FDR P=0.0296. For men, pathways of note showing enrichment based
on metabolite differences between those with and without OS were BCAA metabolism, and
glycerophospholipid metabolism, including conversion of phospholipid to linoleate within linoleic
acid metabolism and phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis (Supplemental Table 7).

Link between FV-associated metabolites and the steroid hormone biosynthesis pathway
Ten of 33 OS-associated metabolites are steroid hormone derivatives. Metabolites
significantly related to high FV intake that can inhibit one or more enzymatic processes in the
KEGG steroid hormone biosynthesis pathway include 1-methylnicotinamide (beta +),
arachidonate (+), deoxycholate (-), naproxen (-), piperine (+) (all P<0.05), and fatty acids
linoleate, oleate/vaccinate, palmitate and stearate (all P<0.097, with beta +) (Supplemental
Table 8).

Correlations between FV PCA factors and OS-associated metabolites
Principal components analysis of total FV intake generated six meaningful factors: 1)
traditional/sofrito, 2) American vegetable, 3) tropical fruits, 4) other fruits, 5) berries and melons,
and 6) dark leafy greens. Correlations between FV derived factors and OS-associated
metabolites are presented as heat maps (Figure 4). In women, six OS-associated metabolites
9

Figure 4
cholesterol
3

THDOC

1

pregnanediol

progesterone

cortisol

4

5α-pregnane-3α,20α-diol

5

cortisone
11β-hydroxytestosterone

6

androstan-3α,17β-diol

7

estradiol-17β

2

testosterone

Figure 4. Schematic of steroid hormone biosynthesis, proceeding from cholesterol to various
hormones via successive enzymatic reactions. Blue paths indicate synthesis modules predicted
not to be repressed in women based on the observed OS-associated metabolite profiles. Red
paths are predicted to be partially inhibited based on enzyme inhibition data mined from
BRENDA, with numerals indicating those metabolite-enzyme pairs listed in Table S8. THDOC,
tetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone (3α,21-dihydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

correlated with factor 1 (traditional/sofrito) at P<0.10, with positive correlation coefficients
(metabolite by factor 1) suggesting that they are associated with both OS and higher intakes of
these vegetables. This relationship in men differed, where ten OS-associated metabolites
correlated with FV factor 6 at P<0.10, with correlation coefficients opposite to that for OS.
Metabolites significantly associated with PC factors indicating higher intake, while also
associated with less likelihood of OS included, in men: 1-(1-enyl-palmitoyl)-GPC (PC: leafy
greens), 4-hydroxychlorothalonil (PCs: berries/melons & leafy greens), and hippurate (PC:
berries/melons) and; in women: homoarginine (PC: berries/melons), hypoxanthine (PC: tropical
fruits & leafy greens), N-acetyl-beta-alanine (PC: leafy greens), uridine (PCs: other fruits & leafy
greens) and tartronate (PC: berries/melons).

Correlations between OS- PCA factors and OS status.
The ten steroid hormone metabolites that were negatively associated with OS in women
were the main drivers of factor 1 (PC1), which accounts for 21.2% of the variance
(Supplemental Figure 3). Age was not a significant factor (P=0.144) in predicting OS status
compared to PC1 (P=0.0068, logit model). Further analysis of the PC data showed that women
with low factor 1 score had higher likelihood of OS (P = 9.2E-08) (Supplemental Figure 4). In
men, nine of the ten OS-associated metabolites that correlated well with both bone health and
FV factor 6 (dark leafy greens) (Figure 4B) showed good separation in the PC plot generated
from the OS-associated metabolites (Supplemental Figure 5). N-acetylleucine was the
exception.

Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first study to characterize plasma metabolite patterns for
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

osteoporosis in conjunction with the beneficial impact of FV intake in men and women on bone.
The current study identified metabolite differences associated with greater FV intake and
showed sex-specific associations to metabolic pathways in older Puerto Rican adults. Similarly,
the pathways represented by the OS-associated metabolites differed by sex, suggesting that
diet may exert sex-specific mechanisms to affect bone health. These results warrant
investigation into potential personalized nutrition advice for bone health, explicit to FV intakes
that may act upon different sex-specific metabolic pathways related to bone.
In cross-sectional studies, higher FV intake has been associated with greater BMD in
Chinese adults 11, and non-Hispanic white men and women 14. Results from the CHANCES
project, a large cooperative study of osteoporotic fracture, implied that FV intake below 1
serving/day increased risk of hip fracture by 39% 18. Analysis of a Swedish cohort of men and
women showed that FV intake under 5 servings/day significantly increased hip fracture risk 15. In
a meta-analysis, higher intake of vegetables, but not fruit, was associated with lower incidence
of fracture 25. In the current study, greater FV intakes were significantly associated with reduced
prevalence of OS among Puerto Rican older adults, but not variety. FV provide micronutrients
that affect bone positively, including vitamin K, folate, magnesium, potassium, vitamin C and
carotenoids 26. Moreover, greater FV intake may modulate the gut microbiome, thereby altering
metabolic pathways related to bone 27,28. Identifying such metabolic pathways is required to
grasp how diets rich in FV influence bone health and reduce risk of fracture.
In the current study, greater FV intake in women was associated with higher
arachidonate, as well as PUFA DHA, n-3 DPA and EPA. These metabolites may decrease risk
of OS by reducing low-grade chronic inflammation and supporting a shift in mesenchymal stem
cell lineage commitment 29. PUFA also have been shown to inhibit RANKL-induced osteoclast
formation in a dose-dependent manner, with arachidonic acid- and DHA-mediated inhibition the
strongest effectors 30. Women with high FV intake were shown here to have higher

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

homoarginine and piperine concentrations, and homoarginine deficiency has been associated
with increased bone turnover 31, while piperine has been shown to alleviate osteoclast formation
32

. Greater FV intake in women correlated with lower concentrations of several plasma

metabolites, including deoxycholate, gamma-carboxyglutamate, kynurenine, S-1-pyrroline-5carboxylate, S-adenosylhomocysteine and the NSAID naproxen. Lower kynurenine may protect
bone, as elevated kynurenine has been linked to accelerated skeletal aging by impaired
osteoblastic differentiation and increased osteoclastic resorption 33. Finally, higher intake of FV
was associated with lower deoxycholate, gamma-carboxyglutamate, S-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate
and S-adenosylhomocysteine, metabolites with potential to benefit bone. For example, higher
deoxycholic acid and S-adenosylhomocysteine were related to lower BMD 34,35, and gammacarboxyglutamate to greater likelihood of OS 36. Overall, it is clear that several metabolites
related to FV intake in this study have the potential to positively influence bone health in women.
In men, higher FV intake was associated with lower nicotinamide and S-1-pyrroline-5carboxylate, which were reported to inhibit osteoclast differentiation 37 and promote osteopenia,
respectively 38. Greater FV intake in men was associated with higher dimethylglycine (DMG)
and myo-inositol. Low plasma DMG has been associated with low BMD and increased risk of
hip fracture 39, while higher BMD has been associated with phytate (myo-inositol
hexaphosphate) intake 40. Men with higher FV intake also had higher DHA levels, which was
shown to positively influence bone health (46) potentially through inhibiting late-stage
osteoclastogenesis 41, although, in the current study, this association was not as strong as that
observed in women.
Of 12 different pathways and processes showing enriched representation by the set of
66 metabolites associated with FV intakes in women, several merit highlighting. First,
biosynthesis pathways of unsaturated fatty acids (P=0.0032) and α-linolenic acid and linoleic
acid metabolism (P=0.0036) indicate a relation between bone function and bone marrow (BM)

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

fat. For example, significantly lower unsaturation of BM lipids has been noted in OS patients
than in controls 42, with low unsaturation and high saturation lipid concentrations in diabetes
patients with prevalent fractures 43. Second, α-linolenic acid metabolism is pertinent to the
function of the G-protein-coupled receptor GPR40, a long chain unsaturated fatty acid receptor,
which is regulated by estrogen and involved in in vivo and in vitro osteogenic differentiation 44.
Third, reduced glycine degradation can positively affect creatinine biosynthesis, and at least one
meta-analysis showed that creatine supplementation may improve BMD 45. Although many
metabolites detected as significant differed between men and women, a few pathways were
shared: arginine and proline metabolism, protein synthesis, and caffeine metabolism. Caffeine
metabolites were lower in both men and women with greater FV intake. However, coffee intake
did not differ significantly by FV intake or OS status intake; hence the observed lower caffeine
metabolites may indicate altered liver function 46. Lower arginine and proline metabolism, as
observed here for proline, S-adenosylhomocysteine and S-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate, agree with
observations indicating that dysregulation in arginine metabolism may partially explain bone
related complication of diabetes 47. Approximately 43% of the current BPROS cohort had
diabetes at the time of measurement. Protein metabolism has been shown to influence bone
health positively, where amino acid-sensing mechanisms may be important in calcium
metabolism and bone homeostasis 48. As a whole, pathways enriched by FV intake in this study
may influence bone health via modulations in BM fatty acids, and regulation of amino acid
metabolism.
Of 33 plasma metabolites significantly different in women with OS compared to those
without, ten steroid hormone metabolites were significantly lower among women with OS. These
include mono- and disulfate byproducts of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA-S) and testosterone.
Among men, only androstenediol (3β,17β) monosulfate differed significantly by OS status. It is
well established that estrogens and androgens slow the rate of bone remodeling and protect

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

against bone loss 49,50. Conversely, estrogen loss leads to increased remodeling and negatively
affects the balance between bone resorption and formation in favor of resorption 51. The current
study corroborates that loss of steroid hormones with age, particularly among women, is
detrimental for bone and increases prevalence of OS.
Three different compounds positively associated with FV intake in women might partially
inhibit ten enzymes and five different reactions in steroid hormone biosynthesis. Another four
metabolites with trending associations with FV intake might contribute to inhibiting these same
five reactions. Additionally, another three metabolites (one trending) showed negative
association with FV intake and potential for reduced inhibition of other enzymes and outputs of
this pathway. We interpret these data to suggest that a diet high in FV in women changes the
levels of specific metabolites that can alter the flux through the steroid hormone biosynthesis
pathway, promoting progesterone, testosterone and estradiol-17β production (Figure 5,
Supplemental Table 8). Detailed analysis of OS-associated metabolites supports this
interpretation, in that ten different steroid hormone metabolites were negatively associated with
OS prevalence in women, and that factor 1 from PCA of these 33 metabolites includes strong
loadings for all ten of these OS metabolites. Importantly, age was not a significant factor in
predicting OS status, in contrast to the impact of FV intake on OS status via steroid hormone
biosynthesis.
Steroid 5α-reductase (SRD5A, EC 1.3.1.22), inhibited by five of the FV-associated
metabolites, catalyzes dihydrotestosterone (DHT) formation, and its inhibition promotes
estrogen production. Treating 51 men with recurrent or metastatic prostate cancer with a
bispecific SRD5A inhibitor yielded significantly elevated estradiol 52. Therapeutic SRD5A
inhibitors are prescribed most commonly for male pattern baldness. Due to the direct DHT
reduction and because DHT is an key hormone in bone anabolism, several studies examined
how chronic use of such inhibitors affects bone health in men, implying that SRD5A inhibitors

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

demonstrate neutral impact on BMD53-55 with one study of 14,152 men showing reduced fracture
rates over 9-yr follow-up 56. It was then postulated that the neutral or slightly positive effects on
bone resulted from an indirect increase in circulating estrogen. Thus, habitually high intake of
FV may increase estrogen levels via SRD5A inhibition.
Upregulation of STS, steroid sulfatase (3.1.6.2), is another enzyme positively influenced
by higher FV intakes. Post-menopausal women have substantially lower gonadal estrogens in
circulation, resulting in altered bone remodeling, decreased bone density and increased OS risk
57,58

. Yet, postmenopausal women tend to have high circulating sulfated steroids, particularly

estrone sulfate and DHEA-S 59. Conversion of these precursors to active estrogens by STS may
provide some of the estrogen needed to maintain bone density in postmenopausal women.
Preosteoblastic cells possess STS activity and can upregulate estrogen production in bone 60.
The current study suggests that greater FV intakes may modulate STS activity and promote a
healthy bone phenotype. However, current data do not clarify if reduced inhibition of STS via
lower deoxycholate in women with high FV intake directly leads to greater STS production
and/or activity (Supplemental Table 8). Metabolites associated with a dietary pattern that itself
associates with bone health could contribute to inhibiting pathways relevant to bone
phenotypes. Further research must determine if specific FV-associated metabolites affect
steroid hormone biosynthesis. It is also necessary to ascertain if altered regulation of these
biosynthetic enzymes by FV intakes affects bone health via systemic changes in concentration
and/or via regulation of sex steroid hormones directly within bone cells.
In addition to steroid hormone metabolites, differences in several other compounds are
notable among women with, vs. without, OS. Higher ceramides lactosyl-N-nervonoylsphingosine and lactosyl-N-palmitoyl-sphingosine could be indicators of osteoblast cell death
via caspase-9-mediated apoptosis 61. Lower threonate in OS women could relate to tissue
mineralization and bone resorption 62,63. Lower homoarginine is an indicator of higher bone

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

turnover 31. Glutarate stimulates SLC22A8/Roct organic anion transport activity, and lower
glutarate in OS women may compromise the excretion of Roct substrates such as bone
turnover factors 64.
Men with OS presented with differences in several compounds relevant to this disease.
Higher ibuprofen and its metabolites carboxyibuprofen and 2-hydroxyibuprofen suggest the
possible occurrence of joint pain. Hippurate, lower in men with OS, stimulated bone-forming
gene expression in mice 65. Higher plasma ribonate and kynurenine may indicate chronic kidney
disease (CKD) 66. Rats with CKD were shown to have elevated peripheral kynurenine and
pathological changes in bone structure 67. Here, plasma N6-carboxymethyllysine (N6-cmLys), a
major product of non-enzymatic glycosylation of collagen by glucuronic acid, was lower in OS
men 68, in contrast to literature showing higher N6-cmLys in adults with OS 69. However, it is not
clear whether glycosylated end products, such as N6-cmLys are a causal phenomenon of OS or
an epiphenomenon. Arguably, the most impressive of the OS-associated metabolites in men in
this study, is the set of nine that function in BCAA metabolism, including isoleucine, leucine and
seven affiliated metabolites. In men with, vs without, OS, all nine were higher. Although, to our
knowledge, our study is the first to link elevated BCAA metabolism with OS, others have
proposed a role for altered BCAA metabolism in osteoarthritis 70,71, and these metabolites may
prove useful as biomarkers of the combined effects of metabolic dysfunction and disease
progression.
In this analysis, FV intake and OS status metabolite patterns differed greatly by sex.
Greater FV intake may affect different mechanisms as bone health declines, perhaps because
high FV intake, although providing many benefits to bone 14, is itself a good marker of an overall
healthy dietary pattern 72. Hence, it is not surprising that so few OS-associated metabolites
correlate with FV PC factors at P<0.05. PCA produced six major factors representing FV intakes
within this adult population, showing that dark leafy greens and berries/melon were significantly

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

associated with reduced likelihood of OS in both men and women. Although to our knowledge
there is little to no literature examining the relation between dark leafy greens, berries and bone
health, dark leafy greens are the primary source of vitamin K in the diet, which has been shown
to lower risk of fracture 73,74 and are high in magnesium, which recently was shown to be
important for bone health in this cohort 75. In addition, berries are an excellent source of vitamin
C and carotenoids, which have been associated independently with higher BMD 76 and lower
risk of fracture 77. Here, the association between the dark leafy green factor and reduced risk of
OS was stronger in men, where dark leafy green intakes were negatively correlated with ten of
the 40 OS-associated metabolites, while in women, they correlated with three.
This study had several strengths. To date, this is one of the largest studies of bone
health among Puerto Rican adults living on the US mainland, although there was a small
sample of men with osteoporosis. A comprehensive analysis of metabolomics was performed
on a large sample of community dwelling older adults. In addition, bone measures and
assessment of osteoporosis were completed using the benchmark (DXA) and standard
definitions for the disease. Limitations to the current study include the cross-sectional design
and inability to assess causality. The use of the FFQ has inherent limitations because of the
lack of detailed information on portion sizes and specific recipes with the potential for systematic
errors that could have resulted from under- or over-reporting of food intakes. As was used in the
current study, energy adjustment can partially mitigate systematic errors. The FFQ is best suited
for ranking typical food group intakes as were used in this study.
In summary, women with greater FV intakes had higher concentrations of metabolites
known to inhibit specific branches of the steroid biosynthesis pathway, enhancing greater
estrogen production. In both men and women, a dark leafy green dietary factor and a
berries/melon factor were significantly related to reduced likelihood of OS. These data warrant
future investigation into whether increasing FV intake, particularly dark leafy greens and/or

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

berries/melons, may causally affect bone turnover and BMD among adults at risk for
osteoporosis. In addition, future research is warranted to investigate tailored nutrition
interventions that may differentially alter bone health by sex.

Methods
Study population
This study included data for 600 participants aged 46-79yr from the Boston Puerto Rican
Osteoporosis Study (BPROS), an ancillary study to the Boston Puerto Rican Health Study. The
parent BPRHS cohort included 1504 Puerto Rican adults aged 45-75yr recruited from the
Greater Boston Area through door-to-door enumeration and community-engaged activities 78. Of
1504 Puerto Rican adults who completed the baseline interview, 1267 participated in a 2-yr
follow up visit. All who completed the 2-yr visit were invited to join the BPROS. A total of 973
participants were re-consented for the BPROS; 205 declined participation, 13 had moved from
the area, 47 had difficulty scheduling the interview, 11 were lost to follow up, two did not
participate for other reasons, and 20 had died since the 2-yr interview. Four participants did not
complete the 2-yr interview but were re-consented for BPROS. Those who declined to
participate were older (60.9yr vs. 58.7yr, P<0.001) and more likely to have type 2 diabetes
(47.8% vs. 40.4%, P=0.03) than those who participated in the BPROS (no differences were
noted by sex, P=0.91; smoking status, P=0.16; physical activity score, P=0.42; or activities of
daily living, P=0.34). BPROS participants were invited to the Bone Metabolism Laboratory at the
Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University to complete
an in-person interview, body composition and BMD measures with a trained, bilingual
interviewer. Of 973 participants consented for BPROS, 21 participants were removed from
analyses due to invalid BMD measurements at the lumbar spine and/or femoral neck. 817

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

BPRHS parent cohort samples were sent to Metabolon, Inc (Morrisville, NC USA) for
metabolomic analysis. With the final data merge, 635 participants presented with diet, bone and
metabolomics data; 35 of these participants were missing one or more FV food groups and/or
their diet records were deemed invalid. Thus, the total sample size in current analyses included
data from 600 BPROS participants. All participants provided written informed consent. The
study was approved by the IRBs at Tufts University and the University of Massachusetts,
Lowell, and adhered to the ethical principles of the declaration of Helsinki.
Data Collection
Study data were collected and managed using REDCap electronic data capture tools hosted at
the University of Massachusetts, Lowell 79,80. REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a
secure, web-based software platform designed to support data capture for research studies,
providing 1) an intuitive interface for validated data capture; 2) audit trails for tracking data
manipulation and export procedures; 3) automated export procedures for seamless data
downloads to common statistical packages; and 4) procedures for data integration and
interoperability with external sources.
Measures of Bone Mineral Density and Osteoporosis
BMD was assessed with DXA on a GE-Lunar Model Prodigy scanner (GE Lunar,
Madison, WI, USA), with weekly calibration using an external standard (aluminum spine
phantom; Lunar Radiation Corp). As reported previously, the root mean square precision was
1.31% and 1.04% for BMD of the femoral neck (FN) and lumbar spine (LS, L2-L4), respectively
81

. The DXA measures were completed using DXA acquisition software version 6.1 and analysis

version 12.2. The right hip was scanned per standard procedures, unless the participant
reported hip fracture or joint replacement in that hip. The study endocrinologist (BDH) reviewed
all scans identified as having a T-score >4.0 for non-anatomical parts and for extraskeletal

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

calcification, and excluded 32 participants (25 for the LS and 7 for the FN). OS at the FN or the
LS was defined as T-scores ≤ 2.5 (2.5 SD or more below peak bone mass) 82. Individuals were
classified as having OS if they had OS at either the hip or spine.
Dietary Assessment
Analyses used dietary measures from the interview closest to the BMD measurement (at
2-y follow-up visit). A food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) adapted and validated for use in this
population of Hispanic adults was used to assess usual dietary intake. The traditional Puerto
Rican diet differs considerably from both the general US population and from other Hispanic
subgroups (e.g. Mexican Americans). Hence, the food list for the FFQ was developed using the
National Cancer Institute/Block food frequency format but modified with data from the Hispanic
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey dietary recalls for Puerto Rican adults. For example,
foods like plantains, and specific soup and rice-dish recipes, as well as appropriate portion
sizes, were added to the FFQ. The BPRHS FFQ is a better estimator of dietary intakes in this
Hispanic population than the original Block questionnaire 83. It has been validated against
plasma carotenoids 84, vitamin E 85, vitamin B6 86 and vitamin B12 87 in Hispanic adults aged
60yr and older. Information on nutrient intakes were calculated from the FFQs using the Nutrient
Data System for Research software.
Servings of FV were obtained by dividing the gram amount of each food by the reference
serving amount in the USDA Food Guide Pyramid. A composite variable for total FV intakes
(servings per day) was calculated as the sum of all FV intakes, excluding starchy root
vegetables (potatoes, cassava, plantains), vegetables considered as fat sources (avocado and
olives) and fruit juices. Variety in FV intake was defined as the total number of unique fruits and
vegetables consumed at least once per month over the past 12 months. Variety score was
regressed on total FV servings per day to generate residuals that were then included in models
to predict OS. The use of residuals accounts for variation in types of FV consumed, independent
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

of total FV intake, as reported 88.
To characterize the common groupings of FV consumed by this cohort of Puerto Rican
adults, we performed principal components analysis (PCA) on the intakes of 42 FV items, which
was accomplished in several steps. First, FV were condensed to 42 predefined groups, based
on nutrient-composition similarities. Only foods included in the total FV intake calculation were
included in the food groupings. Each food group was then calculated as a percent contribution
to total FV servings per day (food group x1 = x1 servings intake per day/total FV servings per
day * 100). Because PCA is sensitive to outliers, data were evaluated to ensure that no
participants with FV contributions from food groups more than 0.5 SD beyond the mean intake
contribution for that group were included (2 participants excluded). PCA factors were generated
using the PROC FACTOR procedure in SAS (v9.4; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC USA). This
procedure was run with prespecified numbers of factors (2-8) to determine which value best
explained the variation in the current sample’s FV intakes. The 6-factor set was chosen based
on scree plot readings, eigenvalues, total variance explained and meaningful interpretation of
the individual factor loadings. Background and discussion on these methods have been
described 89.
Measures of the Metabolites
Metabolic profiling of plasma samples was performed by Metabolon, Inc (Morrisville, NC
USA) as described for this population 90. Briefly, frozen plasma samples were shipped on dry
ice, and stored at −80°C until analysis. After methanol extraction of proteins, metabolomic
analysis employed ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectroscopy.
Individual metabolites were identified by referring to a library of over 4500 purified standards for
retention time/index, mass-to-charge ratio, and chromatographic data, and then quantified by
estimating the AUC of the peaks. Metabolites were log-transformed for entry into analysis. The
median relative standard deviation for internal standards (a measure of instrument variability
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

akin to coefficient of variation) was 5%. After normalization across samples, 525 metabolites
passed quality control. See section “Additional Covariates,” below, for details on other
measured outcomes. Metabolite abbreviations are defined in Table S9.
Additional Covariates
Data on sex, age, menopausal status, estrogen use, and osteoporosis medication use
were obtained through questionnaire during BPROS visits. Hormone status of women and sex
of participants were used to derive an estrogenic status variable (male, estrogenic female, nonestrogenic female). Height and weight were measured in duplicate per standard methods. BMI
was calculated as weight (kg)/height (m)2. A fasting blood sample was collected by a bilingual
certified phlebotomist to assess plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD). Blood samples were
collected in evacuated EDTA tubes and centrifuged to separate plasma. A 125I
radioimmunoassay (DiaSorin, Inc., Stillwater, MN, USA; manufacturer procedures: 68100E) 91
was used to obtain plasma 25OHD measures; the intra-assay coefficient of variation was 10.8%
and inter-assay coefficient of variation was 9.4%. All other covariates, including educational
attainment (<8th grade, 9th-12th grade and some college or higher), alcohol consumption,
smoking status, physical activity, total dietary calcium intake and total energy intake were
obtained by questionnaires during the 2-yr follow-up visit 78. The physical activity index (PAI) is a
variation of the Framingham PAI, a weighted 24-h score of typical daily activity, based on hours
spent doing heavy, moderate, light, or sedentary activity plus sleeping 92. Dietary calcium intake
(mg) and total energy intake (kcal) were estimated from the FFQ

83

.

Bioinformatics and Statistical Analysis
Associations of plasma metabolites with OS status and FV intakes. Differences in
plasma metabolite concentrations between disease groups (OS vs no-OS) were compared
using logistic regression while adjusted for age, smoking, alcohol use, height, and physical

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

activity. Metabolites were considered nominally significantly different between groups at P≤0.05.
Associations between plasma metabolites and total FV intake were assessed with linear
regression while controlling for age, smoking, alcohol use, physical activity, education, and total
energy intake. Associations were considered nominally significant at P≤0.05. A positive beta
coefficient indicates higher metabolite concentration in those with higher intake of FV as
combined servings per day. For OS status, a positive beta coefficient indicates increased
metabolite concentration in those with OS, and correspondingly a negative beta coefficient
indicates lower concentration in those with OS.
Identification of enzyme inhibitors related to metabolites significantly associated with OS
status or FV intake. Enzyme inhibitor data were mined from BRENDA to identify metabolites
with published data indicating inhibitory action on a given Enzyme Commission (EC) number

93

.

EC number-pathway assignments were taken from KEGG. Lower inhibitory action (negative
beta) is interpreted as supporting reduced inhibition of that particular enzyme.
Pathway analysis. Metabolites significantly associated with OS status or with total FV
intake were analyzed for enrichment in various biological pathways, functional modules,
bioprocesses and diseases. Software included Mbrole 2.0 94, MetaboAnalyst 95, and Reactome
96

, with analyses run using default parameters, including FDR correction of P-values. These

analysis packages support assignment of a metabolite to several, often overlapping, functional
pathways and modules. Data were analyzed as women and men separately. Biological
interpretation of the resulting enriched functional and pathway sets was conducted for those
sets represented by two or more significantly different metabolites.
Correlation of OS-associated metabolites with intake of specific FV food groupings.
Correlation coefficients were calculated as Spearman’s rho rank correlations, followed by
hierarchical clustering of the resulting correlation coefficients using the top six PCA factors for
intake of FV and sex-specific sets of OS-associated metabolites. This work was performed in R
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

(v 3.5.1; R Core Team (2018) R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL: https://www.R-project.org/) and
RStudio (v 1.1.456) with the tidyverse, ggpubr, Hmisc (type=“spearman”),reshape2 and
stats packages. We used the stats::hclust function for hierarchical clustering. To identify
metabolite groups illustrative of bone health and OS within the disease-associated metabolite
profiles, PCA of the osteoporosis-associated metabolites was performed, in R with the
factoextra library and the stats::prcomp function (center=“TRUE”, scale.=“TRUE”), in
addition to the above libraries and functions. Significance was evaluated with the
Hmisc::rcorr and t.test functions, with P<0.05 considered significant. The glm function
(family=”binomial”) was used to test logit models for predicting OS status. Molecules of interest
were queried in the scientific literature for evidence relating to OS, bone health, or osteoblast or
osteoclast function.
All statistical tests were two-sided and considered statistically significant at p<0.05.

Acknowledgements: The Boston Puerto Rican Health Study and Osteoporosis Study have
been supported by NIH P50 HL105185, P01 AG023394, R01 AG055948, R01 AG027087 and
R01 AR072741. Grant 201806105018 from the US Department of Agriculture, under agreement
no. 8050-51000-098-00D partially supported this work, as well as support for SEN’s time by
NIAMS-KO1AR067894. Any opinions, findings, conclusion, or recommendations expressed in
this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the US
Department of Agriculture. Mention of trade names or commercial products in this publication is
solely for providing specific information and does not imply recommendation or endorsement by
the U.S. Department of Agriculture. The USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

Author Contributions: Study design: KLT, KMM, LDP and SEN. Study conduct: KLT. Data
collection: SEN and BDH. Data analysis: LDP, CQL and KMM. Data interpretation: LDP, CQL,
KMM, KLT, SEN, and JJC. Drafting manuscript: LDP and KMM. Revising manuscript content:
KMM, LDP, SEN, KLT, JJC, CQL, JMO, and BDH. All authors take responsibility for approving
the final version of manuscript and for the integrity of the data analysis.

Competing Interests Statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

Data Availability Statement: The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current
study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Code Availability Statement: All computer code used to generate data within this manuscript
are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.

References
1
2
3
4
5
6

Noel, S. E. et al. Prevalence of Osteoporosis and Low Bone Mass Among Puerto Rican Older
Adults. J Bone Miner Res, doi:10.1002/jbmr.3315 (2017).
Alswat, K. A. Gender Disparities in Osteoporosis. Journal of Clinical Medicine Research 9, 382387, doi:10.14740/jocmr2970w (2017).
Cauley, J. A. Public health impact of osteoporosis. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 68, 1243-1251,
doi:10.1093/gerona/glt093 (2013).
Magaziner, J. et al. Recovery from hip fracture in eight areas of function. J Gerontol A Biol Sci
Med Sci 55, M498-507 (2000).
Marks, R., Allegrante, J. P., Ronald MacKenzie, C. & Lane, J. M. Hip fractures among the elderly:
causes, consequences and control. Ageing Res Rev 2, 57-93 (2003).
Imaz, I. et al. Poor bisphosphonate adherence for treatment of osteoporosis increases fracture
risk: systematic review and meta-analysis. Osteoporos Int 21, 1943-1951, doi:10.1007/s00198009-1134-4 (2010).

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

7

8

9
10
11
12
13

14
15

16

17

18
19

20

21
22
23
24

25

McCombs, J. S., Thiebaud, P., McLaughlin-Miley, C. & Shi, J. Compliance with drug therapies for
the treatment and prevention of osteoporosis. Maturitas 48, 271-287,
doi:10.1016/j.maturitas.2004.02.005 (2004).
Weycker, D., Macarios, D., Edelsberg, J. & Oster, G. Compliance with drug therapy for
postmenopausal osteoporosis. Osteoporos Int 17, 1645-1652, doi:10.1007/s00198-006-0179-x
(2006).
Morgan, K. T. Nutritional determinants of bone health. J Nutr Elder 27, 3-27,
doi:10.1080/01639360802059670 (2008).
Tucker, K. L. Osteoporosis prevention and nutrition. Curr Osteoporos Rep 7, 111-117 (2009).
Chen, Y. M., Ho, S. C. & Woo, J. L. Greater fruit and vegetable intake is associated with increased
bone mass among postmenopausal Chinese women. Br J Nutr 96, 745-751 (2006).
Prynne, C. J. et al. Fruit and vegetable intakes and bone mineral status: a cross sectional study in
5 age and sex cohorts. Am J Clin Nutr 83, 1420-1428 (2006).
Qiu, R. et al. Greater Intake of Fruit and Vegetables Is Associated with Greater Bone Mineral
Density and Lower Osteoporosis Risk in Middle-Aged and Elderly Adults. PLoS One 12, e0168906,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0168906 (2017).
Tucker, K. L. et al. Potassium, magnesium, and fruit and vegetable intakes are associated with
greater bone mineral density in elderly men and women. Am J Clin Nutr 69, 727-736 (1999).
Byberg, L., Bellavia, A., Orsini, N., Wolk, A. & Michaelsson, K. Fruit and vegetable intake and risk
of hip fracture: a cohort study of Swedish men and women. J Bone Miner Res 30, 976-984,
doi:10.1002/jbmr.2384 (2015).
Macdonald, H. M., New, S. A., Golden, M. H., Campbell, M. K. & Reid, D. M. Nutritional
associations with bone loss during the menopausal transition: evidence of a beneficial effect of
calcium, alcohol, and fruit and vegetable nutrients and of a detrimental effect of fatty acids. Am
J Clin Nutr 79, 155-165, doi:10.1093/ajcn/79.1.155 (2004).
Kaptoge, S. et al. Effects of dietary nutrients and food groups on bone loss from the proximal
femur in men and women in the 7th and 8th decades of age. Osteoporos Int 14, 418-428,
doi:10.1007/s00198-003-1391-6 (2003).
Benetou, V. et al. Fruit and Vegetable Intake and Hip Fracture Incidence in Older Men and
Women: The CHANCES Project. J Bone Miner Res 31, 1743-1752, doi:10.1002/jbmr.2850 (2016).
Macdonald, H. M. et al. Effect of potassium citrate supplementation or increased fruit and
vegetable intake on bone metabolism in healthy postmenopausal women: a randomized
controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 88, 465-474, doi:10.1093/ajcn/88.2.465 (2008).
Neville, C. E. et al. Effect of increased fruit and vegetable consumption on bone turnover in older
adults: a randomised controlled trial. Osteoporos Int 25, 223-233, doi:10.1007/s00198-0132402-x (2014).
Nieves, J. W. Skeletal effects of nutrients and nutraceuticals, beyond calcium and vitamin D.
Osteoporos Int 24, 771-786, doi:10.1007/s00198-012-2214-4 (2013).
Weaver, C. M., Alekel, D. L., Ward, W. E. & Ronis, M. J. Flavonoid intake and bone health. J Nutr
Gerontol Geriatr 31, 239-253, doi:10.1080/21551197.2012.698220 (2012).
Hansen, H. S. Role of anorectic N-acylethanolamines in intestinal physiology and satiety control
with respect to dietary fat. Pharmacol Res 86, 18-25, doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2014.03.006 (2014).
Pettersen, J. E. & Jellum, E. The identification and metabolic origin of 2-furoylglycine and 2,5furandicarboxylic acid in human urine. Clin Chim Acta 41, 199-207, doi:10.1016/00098981(72)90512-8 (1972).
Luo, S. et al. Increased intake of vegetables, but not fruits, may be associated with reduced risk
of hip fracture: A meta-analysis. Sci Rep 6, 19783, doi:10.1038/srep19783 (2016).

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

26

27
28

29

30

31

32

33
34

35

36

37

38
39

40
41

42

Sahni, S., Mangano, K. M., McLean, R. R., Hannan, M. T. & Kiel, D. P. Dietary Approaches for
Bone Health: Lessons from the Framingham Osteoporosis Study. Curr Osteoporos Rep 13, 245255, doi:10.1007/s11914-015-0272-1 (2015).
Klinder, A. et al. Impact of increasing fruit and vegetables and flavonoid intake on the human gut
microbiota. Food Funct 7, 1788-1796, doi:10.1039/c5fo01096a (2016).
Trost, K. et al. Host: Microbiome co-metabolic processing of dietary polyphenols - An acute,
single blinded, cross-over study with different doses of apple polyphenols in healthy subjects.
Food Res Int 112, 108-128, doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2018.06.016 (2018).
Kelly, O. J., Gilman, J. C., Kim, Y. & Ilich, J. Z. Long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids may
mutually benefit both obesity and osteoporosis. Nutr Res 33, 521-533,
doi:10.1016/j.nutres.2013.04.012 (2013).
Boeyens, J. C. et al. Effects of omega3- and omega6-polyunsaturated fatty acids on RANKLinduced osteoclast differentiation of RAW264.7 cells: a comparative in vitro study. Nutrients 6,
2584-2601, doi:10.3390/nu6072584 (2014).
Pilz, S. et al. Associations of homoarginine with bone metabolism and density, muscle strength
and mortality: cross-sectional and prospective data from 506 female nursing home patients.
Osteoporos Int 24, 377-381, doi:10.1007/s00198-012-1950-9 (2013).
Deepak, V., Kruger, M. C., Joubert, A. & Coetzee, M. Piperine alleviates osteoclast formation
through the p38/c-Fos/NFATc1 signaling axis. Biofactors 41, 403-413, doi:10.1002/biof.1241
(2015).
Refaey, M. E. et al. Kynurenine, a Tryptophan Metabolite That Accumulates With Age, Induces
Bone Loss. J Bone Miner Res 32, 2182-2193, doi:10.1002/jbmr.3224 (2017).
Jovanovich, A. et al. Deoxycholic Acid, a Metabolite of Circulating Bile Acids, and Coronary
Artery Vascular Calcification in CKD. Am J Kidney Dis 71, 27-34, doi:10.1053/j.ajkd.2017.06.017
(2018).
Poloni, S. et al. Leptin concentrations and SCD-1 indices in classical homocystinuria: Evidence for
the role of sulfur amino acids in the regulation of lipid metabolism. Clin Chim Acta 473, 82-88,
doi:10.1016/j.cca.2017.08.005 (2017).
Gundberg, C. M., Lian, J. B., Gallop, P. M. & Steinberg, J. J. Urinary gamma-carboxyglutamic acid
and serum osteocalcin as bone markers: studies in osteoporosis and Paget's disease. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 57, 1221-1225, doi:10.1210/jcem-57-6-1221 (1983).
Baek, J. M. et al. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase inhibits receptor activator of nuclear
factor-kappaB ligand-induced osteoclast differentiation in vitro. Mol Med Rep 15, 784-792,
doi:10.3892/mmr.2016.6069 (2017).
Phang, J. M., Liu, W. & Zabirnyk, O. Proline metabolism and microenvironmental stress. Annu
Rev Nutr 30, 441-463, doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.012809.104638 (2010).
Oyen, J. et al. Plasma dimethylglycine, nicotine exposure and risk of low bone mineral density
and hip fracture: the Hordaland Health Study. Osteoporos Int 26, 1573-1583,
doi:10.1007/s00198-015-3030-4 (2015).
Lopez-Gonzalez, A. A. et al. Phytate (myo-inositol hexaphosphate) and risk factors for
osteoporosis. J Med Food 11, 747-752, doi:10.1089/jmf.2008.0087 (2008).
Akiyama, M., Nakahama, K. & Morita, I. Impact of docosahexaenoic acid on gene expression
during osteoclastogenesis in vitro--a comprehensive analysis. Nutrients 5, 3151-3162,
doi:10.3390/nu5083151 (2013).
Yeung, D. K. et al. Osteoporosis is associated with increased marrow fat content and decreased
marrow fat unsaturation: a proton MR spectroscopy study. J Magn Reson Imaging 22, 279-285,
doi:10.1002/jmri.20367 (2005).

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

43

44
45
46
47

48

49
50
51

52

53

54

55

56

57
58

59
60

Patsch, J. M. et al. Bone marrow fat composition as a novel imaging biomarker in
postmenopausal women with prevalent fragility fractures. J Bone Miner Res 28, 1721-1728,
doi:10.1002/jbmr.1950 (2013).
Gao, B. et al. Dose-response estrogen promotes osteogenic differentiation via GPR40 (FFAR1) in
murine BMMSCs. Biochimie 110, 36-44, doi:10.1016/j.biochi.2015.01.001 (2015).
Candow, D. G., Chilibeck, P. D. & Forbes, S. C. Creatine supplementation and aging
musculoskeletal health. Endocrine 45, 354-361, doi:10.1007/s12020-013-0070-4 (2014).
Bechtel, Y. C. et al. Caffeine metabolism before and after liver transplantation. Int J Clin
Pharmacol Ther 39, 53-60, doi:10.5414/cpp39053 (2001).
Bhatta, A. et al. Deregulation of arginase induces bone complications in high-fat/high-sucrose
diet diabetic mouse model. Mol Cell Endocrinol 422, 211-220, doi:10.1016/j.mce.2015.12.005
(2016).
Conigrave, A. D., Brown, E. M. & Rizzoli, R. Dietary protein and bone health: roles of amino acidsensing receptors in the control of calcium metabolism and bone homeostasis. Annu Rev Nutr
28, 131-155, doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.28.061807.155328 (2008).
Manolagas, S. C., Kousteni, S. & Jilka, R. L. Sex steroids and bone. Recent Prog Horm Res 57, 385409 (2002).
Syed, F. & Khosla, S. Mechanisms of sex steroid effects on bone. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
328, 688-696, doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.11.097 (2005).
Imai, Y. et al. Estrogens maintain bone mass by regulating expression of genes controlling
function and life span in mature osteoclasts. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1173 Suppl 1, E31-39,
doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04954.x (2009).
Eisenberger, M. A. et al. Phase I and clinical pharmacology of a type I and II, 5-alpha-reductase
inhibitor (LY320236) in prostate cancer: elevation of estradiol as possible mechanism of action.
Urology 63, 114-119, doi:10.1016/j.urology.2003.08.017 (2004).
Amory, J. K. et al. The effect of 5alpha-reductase inhibition with dutasteride and finasteride on
bone mineral density, serum lipoproteins, hemoglobin, prostate specific antigen and sexual
function in healthy young men. J Urol 179, 2333-2338, doi:10.1016/j.juro.2008.01.145 (2008).
Borst, S. E. et al. Anabolic effects of testosterone are preserved during inhibition of 5alphareductase. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 293, E507-514, doi:10.1152/ajpendo.00130.2007
(2007).
Matsumoto, A. M. et al. The long-term effect of specific type II 5alpha-reductase inhibition with
finasteride on bone mineral density in men: results of a 4-year placebo controlled trial. J Urol
167, 2105-2108 (2002).
Jacobsen, S. J., Cheetham, T. C., Haque, R., Shi, J. M. & Loo, R. K. Association between 5-alpha
reductase inhibition and risk of hip fracture. JAMA 300, 1660-1664,
doi:10.1001/jama.300.14.1660 (2008).
Downey, P. A. & Siegel, M. I. Bone biology and the clinical implications for osteoporosis. Phys
Ther 86, 77-91, doi:10.1093/ptj/86.1.77 (2006).
Heshmati, H. M. et al. Role of low levels of endogenous estrogen in regulation of bone
resorption in late postmenopausal women. J Bone Miner Res 17, 172-178,
doi:10.1359/jbmr.2002.17.1.172 (2002).
Reed, M. J., Purohit, A., Woo, L. W., Newman, S. P. & Potter, B. V. Steroid sulfatase: molecular
biology, regulation, and inhibition. Endocr Rev 26, 171-202, doi:10.1210/er.2004-0003 (2005).
Dias, N. J. & Selcer, K. W. Steroid sulfatase in the human MG-63 preosteoblastic cell line:
Antagonistic regulation by glucocorticoids and NFkappaB. Mol Cell Endocrinol 420, 85-96,
doi:10.1016/j.mce.2015.11.029 (2016).

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

61

62
63

64

65

66
67
68
69

70
71

72
73

74
75
76

77

78

79

Klein, B. Y., Kerem, Z. & Rojansky, N. LDL induces Saos2 osteoblasts death via Akt pathways
responsive to a neutral sphingomyelinase inhibitor. J Cell Biochem 98, 661-671,
doi:10.1002/jcb.20807 (2006).
He, J. H., Tong, N. W., Li, H. Q. & Wu, J. [Effects of L-threonate on bone resorption by osteoclasts
in vitro]. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban 36, 225-228 (2005).
Rowe, D. J., Ko, S., Tom, X. M., Silverstein, S. J. & Richards, D. W. Enhanced production of
mineralized nodules and collagenous proteins in vitro by calcium ascorbate supplemented with
vitamin C metabolites. J Periodontol 70, 992-999, doi:10.1902/jop.1999.70.9.992 (1999).
Ohtsuki, S. et al. Mouse reduced in osteosclerosis transporter functions as an organic anion
transporter 3 and is localized at abluminal membrane of blood-brain barrier. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther 309, 1273-1281, doi:10.1124/jpet.103.063370 (2004).
Chen, J. R. et al. Diet-derived phenolic acids regulate osteoblast and adipocyte lineage
commitment and differentiation in young mice. J Bone Miner Res 29, 1043-1053,
doi:10.1002/jbmr.2034 (2014).
Hu, J. R. et al. Serum metabolites are associated with all-cause mortality in chronic kidney
disease. Kidney Int 94, 381-389, doi:10.1016/j.kint.2018.03.008 (2018).
Kalaska, B. et al. Elevated Levels of Peripheral Kynurenine Decrease Bone Strength in Rats with
Chronic Kidney Disease. Front Physiol 8, 836, doi:10.3389/fphys.2017.00836 (2017).
Ehrlich, H. et al. Modification of collagen in vitro with respect to formation of Nepsiloncarboxymethyllysine. Int J Biol Macromol 44, 51-56, doi:10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2008.10.001 (2009).
Hein, G., Wiegand, R., Lehmann, G., Stein, G. & Franke, S. Advanced glycation end-products
pentosidine and N epsilon-carboxymethyllysine are elevated in serum of patients with
osteoporosis. Rheumatology (Oxford) 42, 1242-1246, doi:10.1093/rheumatology/keg324 (2003).
Adams, S. B., Jr. et al. Global metabolic profiling of human osteoarthritic synovium.
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 20, 64-67, doi:10.1016/j.joca.2011.10.010 (2012).
Zhai, G. et al. Serum branched-chain amino acid to histidine ratio: a novel metabolomic
biomarker of knee osteoarthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 69, 1227-1231, doi:10.1136/ard.2009.120857
(2010).
Agriculture, U. S. D. o. H. a. H. S. a. U. S. D. o. (December 2015).
Booth, S. L. et al. Dietary vitamin K intakes are associated with hip fracture but not with bone
mineral density in elderly men and women. Am J Clin Nutr 71, 1201-1208,
doi:10.1093/ajcn/71.5.1201 (2000).
Feskanich, D. et al. Vitamin K intake and hip fractures in women: a prospective study. Am J Clin
Nutr 69, 74-79, doi:10.1093/ajcn/69.1.74 (1999).
Noel, S. et al. Risk Factors for Bone Health in Older Puerto Rican Adults (OR18-05-19). Curr Dev
Nutr 3, doi:10.1093/cdn/nzz028.OR18-05-19 (2019).
Sahni, S. et al. Protective effect of total and supplemental vitamin C intake on the risk of hip
fracture--a 17-year follow-up from the Framingham Osteoporosis Study. Osteoporos Int 20,
1853-1861, doi:10.1007/s00198-009-0897-y (2009).
Sahni, S. et al. Inverse association of carotenoid intakes with 4-y change in bone mineral density
in elderly men and women: the Framingham Osteoporosis Study. Am J Clin Nutr 89, 416-424,
doi:10.3945/ajcn.2008.26388 (2009).
Tucker, K. L. et al. The Boston Puerto Rican Health Study, a longitudinal cohort study on health
disparities in Puerto Rican adults: challenges and opportunities. BMC Public Health 10, 107,
doi:10.1186/1471-2458-10-107 (2010).
Harris, P. A. et al. The REDCap consortium: Building an international community of software
platform partners. J Biomed Inform 95, 103208, doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2019.103208 (2019).

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

80

81
82
83

84

85

86

87

88

89
90

91

92
93
94
95
96

Harris, P. A. et al. Research electronic data capture (REDCap)--a metadata-driven methodology
and workflow process for providing translational research informatics support. J Biomed Inform
42, 377-381, doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2008.08.010 (2009).
White, J., Harris, S. S., Dallal, G. E. & Dawson-Hughes, B. Precision of single vs bilateral hip bone
mineral density scans. J Clin Densitom 6, 159-162 (2003).
Kanis, J. A. et al. A reference standard for the description of osteoporosis. Bone 42, 467-475,
doi:10.1016/j.bone.2007.11.001 (2008).
Tucker, K. L., Bianchi, L. A., Maras, J. & Bermudez, O. I. Adaptation of a food frequency
questionnaire to assess diets of Puerto Rican and non-Hispanic adults. Am J Epidemiol 148, 507518, doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a009676 (1998).
Bermudez, O. I., Ribaya-Mercado, J. D., Talegawkar, S. A. & Tucker, K. L. Hispanic and nonHispanic white elders from Massachusetts have different patterns of carotenoid intake and
plasma concentrations. J Nutr 135, 1496-1502, doi:10.1093/jn/135.6.1496 (2005).
Gao, X., Martin, A., Lin, H., Bermudez, O. I. & Tucker, K. L. alpha-Tocopherol intake and plasma
concentration of Hispanic and non-Hispanic white elders is associated with dietary intake
pattern. J Nutr 136, 2574-2579, doi:10.1093/jn/136.10.2574 (2006).
Ye, X., Maras, J. E., Bakun, P. J. & Tucker, K. L. Dietary intake of vitamin B-6, plasma pyridoxal 5'phosphate, and homocysteine in Puerto Rican adults. J Am Diet Assoc 110, 1660-1668,
doi:10.1016/j.jada.2010.08.006 (2010).
Kwan, L. L., Bermudez, O. I. & Tucker, K. L. Low vitamin B-12 intake and status are more
prevalent in Hispanic older adults of Caribbean origin than in neighborhood-matched nonHispanic whites. J Nutr 132, 2059-2064, doi:10.1093/jn/132.7.2059 (2002).
Bhupathiraju, S. N. & Tucker, K. L. Greater variety in fruit and vegetable intake is associated with
lower inflammation in Puerto Rican adults. Am J Clin Nutr 93, 37-46,
doi:10.3945/ajcn.2010.29913 (2011).
Newby, P. K. & Tucker, K. L. Empirically derived eating patterns using factor or cluster analysis: a
review. Nutr Rev 62, 177-203, doi:10.1301/nr.2004.may.177-203 (2004).
Lai, C. Q. et al. Epigenomics and metabolomics reveal the mechanism of the APOA2-saturated
fat intake interaction affecting obesity. Am J Clin Nutr 108, 188-200, doi:10.1093/ajcn/nqy081
(2018).
Wang, S. et al. Fermented milk supplemented with probiotics and prebiotics can effectively alter
the intestinal microbiota and immunity of host animals. J Dairy Sci 95, 4813-4822,
doi:10.3168/jds.2012-5426 (2012).
Kannel, W. B. & Sorlie, P. Some health benefits of physical activity. The Framingham Study. Arch
Intern Med 139, 857-861 (1979).
Schomburg, I. et al. The BRENDA enzyme information system-From a database to an expert
system. J Biotechnol 261, 194-206, doi:10.1016/j.jbiotec.2017.04.020 (2017).
Lopez-Ibanez, J., Pazos, F. & Chagoyen, M. MBROLE 2.0-functional enrichment of chemical
compounds. Nucleic Acids Res 44, W201-204, doi:10.1093/nar/gkw253 (2016).
Chong, J. et al. MetaboAnalyst 4.0: towards more transparent and integrative metabolomics
analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 46, W486-W494, doi:10.1093/nar/gky310 (2018).
Fabregat, A. et al. The Reactome pathway Knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res 44, D481-487,
doi:10.1093/nar/gkv1351 (2016).

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

Figure legends
Figure 1. Metabolites significantly associating with fruit and vegetable intake matching
specific metabolite classes. Each panel depicts a volcano plot, beta coefficient vs log10(P-value), for all metabolites significantly associated with osteoporosis (gray) and a
distinct metabolite class highlighted in color: caffeine metabolites (n=8), carnitines and
fatty acids (n=13), and glycerophospholipids (n=16). Data for women are plotted with
triangles, for men with circles, and are derived from Table S1.

Figure 2. Osteoporosis-associated metabolites corresponding to specific metabolite
classes. Volcano plots of beta coefficients vs -log10(P-value) depict all significantly
associated metabolites (gray) with each specific metabolite class highlighted in color:
branched-chain amino acids, carnitines and fatty acids, and steroid hormone
metabolites. Data for women are plotted with triangles, for men with circles, and are
derived from Table S5.

Figure 3. Heat maps depicting the Spearman’s rho rank correlations between
osteoporosis [OS]-associated metabolites and principal component factors [PC] for fruit
and vegetable [FV] intake. Above each heat map are minus / plus symbols indicating
the direction of association (beta) of that metabolite with OS, panel a) for women and
panel b) for men. The factors for FV intake and the metabolites are both ordered
according to hierarchical clustering based on hclust in R. Individual panels are
annotated with asterisks (*) for those metabolites whose correlation with the factor

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19003848; this version posted August 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also made available
for use under a CC0 license.

reached statistical significance, or a † when significance of that correlation was <0.10.
Significance of the correlation at P<0.01 and P<0.001 are indicated by ** and ***
respectively. Panels where the color representing the correlation are opposite to the
beta of association with OS can be considered protective to some extent. Abbreviations
for metabolites are defined in Table S9.

Figure 4. Schematic of steroid hormone biosynthesis, proceeding from cholesterol to
various hormones via successive enzymatic reactions. Blue paths indicate synthesis
modules predicted not to be repressed in women based on the observed osteoporosisassociated metabolite profiles. Red paths are predicted to be partially inhibited based
on enzyme inhibition data mined from BRENDA, with numerals indicating those
metabolite-enzyme pairs listed in Table S8. THDOC, tetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone
(3α,21-dihydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one).

32

Figure 1

Figure 1. Metabolites significantly associating with FV intake matching specific metabolite
classes. Each panel depicts a volcano plot, beta coefficient vs -log10(P-value), for all metabolites
significantly associated with OS (gray) and a distinct metabolite class highlighted in color:
caffeine metabolites (n=8), carnitines and fatty acids (n=13), and glycerophospholipids (n=16).
Data for women are plotted with triangles, for men with circles, and are derived from Table S1.

Figure 2

Figure 2. Osteoporosis-associated metabolites corresponding to specific metabolite classes .
Volcano plots of beta coefficients vs -log10(P-value) depict all significantly associated
metabolites (gray) with each specific metabolite class highlighted in color: branched-chain
amino acids, carnitines and fatty acids, and steroid hormone metabolites. Data for women are
plotted with triangles, for men with circles, and are derived from Table S5.

Figure 3
a
+++ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ++ ++ +++ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ ̶ + ̶ ̶ ̶
*

†

*

†

*

** **
†

*
†
†
*

b

†

*
†

†

*

** ** **
†

*

†

*

̶ ̶ + ̶ + ̶ ++ + +++ ̶ + ++ ++ ++ + ++ + ̶ ̶ ++++++ + ̶ + +++++
†

† *

†

**
*

**
*** *

*

†
† †

† † †
*

†

†
*

**
*

†
†

Figure 3. Heat maps depicting the Spearman rho rank correlations between OS-associated
metabolites and principal component factors for FV intake. Above each heat map are minus /
plus symbols indicating the direction of association (beta) of that metabolite with OS, panel a)
for women and panel b) for men. The factors for FV intake and the metabolites are both
ordered according to hierarchical clustering based on hclust in R. Individual panels are
annotated with asterisks (*) for those metabolites whose correlation with the factor reached
statistical significance, or a † when significance of that correlation was <0.10. Significance of the
correlation at P<0.01 and P<0.001 are indicated by ** and *** respectively. Panels where the
color representing the correlation are opposite to the beta of association with OS can be
considered protective to some extent. Abbreviations for metabolites are defined in Table S9.

Figure 4
cholesterol
3

THDOC

1

pregnanediol

progesterone

cortisol

4

5α-pregnane-3α,20α-diol

5

cortisone
11β-hydroxytestosterone

6

androstan-3α,17β-diol

7

estradiol-17β

2

testosterone

Figure 4. Schematic of steroid hormone biosynthesis, proceeding from cholesterol to various
hormones via successive enzymatic reactions. Blue paths indicate synthesis modules predicted
not to be repressed in women based on the observed OS-associated metabolite profiles. Red
paths are predicted to be partially inhibited based on enzyme inhibition data mined from
BRENDA, with numerals indicating those metabolite-enzyme pairs listed in Table S8. THDOC,
tetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone (3α,21-dihydroxy-5α-pregnan-20-one).

Figure S1

Figure S1. Plasma metabolites significantly associated with FV intake. Each panel shows a plot of
beta vs -log10(P-value) for all metabolites significantly associated with OS (gray) and a specific
metabolite class highlighted in color. Data for women are plotted with triangles, for men with
circles, and are derived from Table S1, which lists 66 metabolite-FV associations for women and
38 for men.

Figure S2

Figure S2. Plasma metabolites significantly associated with OS status. Each panel depicts a
volcano plot, beta vs -log10(P-value), for all metabolites significantly associated with OS (gray)
and a distinct metabolite class highlighted in color. Data for women are plotted with triangles,
for men with circles, and are derived from Table S5, which lists 33 metabolite-FV associations
for women and 40 for men.
.

Figure S3

Figure S3. PCA of OS-associated metabolites in BPROS women. OS-associated metabolites are
plotted by factor 1 (PC1) vs factor 2 (PC2), which in turn represent 21.2% and 10.0% of the total
variance. The group of ten steroid hormone metabolites all have highly positive PC1 values and
form a tight cluster. Abbreviations for metabolites are defined in Table S9.

A

Figure S4

B

Figure S4. PC1 values are a strong indicator of OS status in BPROS women. A) Female
participants are plotted according to PC1 and PC2 values with OS status depicted as gray
without and blue with osteoporosis. B) A histogram of 12 evenly spaced bins of PC1 values
indicates that the mean PC1 values (dotted line) and the distribution of all values for women
with OS are shifted toward lower PC1 values than for women without disease (P=9.2E-08).
Running along the x-axis is a density plot of all women based on their PC1 values, colored by OS
status.

Figure S5

Figure S5. PCA of OS-associated metabolites in BPROS men. OS-associated metabolites are
plotted by factor 1 (PC1) vs factor 2 (PC2), which represent 15.1% and 10.9% of the total
variance, respectively. Green data points are those metabolites whose correlations with FV
factor 6 (dark leafy greens, all P<0.10) are exactly opposite to the association with OS incidence,
per Figure 3B. Abbreviations for metabolites are defined in Table S9.

