medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

STUDY PROTOCOL

A systematic review of medical and clinical research
landscapes and quality in Malaysia and Indonesia
[REALQUAMI]: the review protocol

Boon-How Chew1; Lim Poh Ying2; Shaun Wen Huey Lee3; Navin Kumar Devaraj1; Adibah Hanim
Ismail @ Daud1; Nurainul Hana Shamsuddin1; Puteri Shanaz Jahn Kassim1; Aneesa Abdul Rashid1;
4

5

6

7

Aaron Fernandez ; Noraina Muhamad Zakuan ; Soo Huat Teoh ; Akiza Roswati Abdullah ;
Hanifatiyah Ali1; Abdul Hadi Abdul Manap1; Fadzilah Mohamad1; Indah S. Widyahening8
1

Department of Family Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia,

Malaysia
2

Department of Community Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia,

Malaysia
3

School of Pharmacy, Monash University Malaysia, Jalan Lagoon Selatan, 47500 Bandar Sunway,

Selangor, Malaysia
4

Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia,

Malaysia
5

Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Universiti Putra

Malaysia, Malaysia
6

Advanced Medical and Dental Institute (AMDI), Universiti Sains Malaysia, Bertam, Kepala Batas,

Penang, Malaysia
7

Medical and Health Sciences Library, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Universiti Putra

Malaysia, Malaysia
8

Department of Community Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia

Correspondence: Boon-How Chew, Department of Family Medicine, Faculty of Medicine & Health
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
Tel: +603-89472520,
Fax: +603-89472328
Email: chewboonhow@upm.edu.my

Page 1 of 16
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background: Research landscapes and quality may change in many ways. Much research waste has
been increasingly reported. Efforts to improve research performance will need good data on the
profiles and performance of past research.
Purpose: To describe the characteristics and quality of clinical and biomedical research in Malaysia
and Indonesia.
Methods: A search will be conducted in PubMed, EMBASE, CINAHL and PsycINFO to identify for
published clinical and biomedical research from 1962 to 2017 from Malaysia and/or Indonesia.
Additional search will also be conducted in MyMedR (for Malaysian team only). Studies found will be
independently screened by a team of reviewers, relevant information will be extracted and quality of
articles will be assessed. As part of quality control, another reviewer will independently assess 10-20%
of the articles extracted. In Phase 1, the profiles of the published research will be reported
descriptively. In Phase 2, a research quality screening tool will be validated to assess research quality
based on three major domains of relevance, credibility of the methods and usefulness of the results.
Associations between the research characteristics and quality will be analysed. The independent
effect of each of the determinant will be quantified in multivariable regression analysis. Longitudinal
trends of the research profiles, health conditions in different settings will be explored. Depending on
the availability of resources, this review project may proceed according to the different clinical and
biomedical disciplines in sequence.
Discussion: Results of this study will serve as the 'baseline' data for future evaluation and within
country and between countries comparison. This review may also provide informative results to
stakeholders of the evolution of research conduct and performance from the past till now. The
longitudinal and prospective trends of the research profiles and quality could provide suggestions on
improvement initiatives. Additionally, health conditions or areas in different settings, and whether they
are over- or under-studied may help future prioritization of research initiatives and resources.
Keywords: Systematic Review; Clinical Research; Biomedical Research; Research Characteristics;
Research Quality; Malaysia; Indonesia

Page 2 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
There is now an increasing number of clinical and biomedical research and publications published,
especially those originating from Asia. Huge research wasting have been reported because of
1

2

3

irrelevancy, poor research designs, inaccessible research data and incomplete reporting.

4,5

Moreover, "It was very easy to make errors” as admitted by John Ioannidis, one of the co-director at
the new Meta-Research Innovation Center at Stanford (METRICS) on the challenges along the
6

research process despite the noble intentions of the researchers. However, it is uncertain of the
actual clinical and biomedical research landscapes that is evolving throughout the past decades in
Asia. Similarly, the quality of the published research in a country such as Malaysia over the past few
decades has not been examined. These assessment and evidence are needed to inform the existing
researchers, research institutes and funders in Malaysia of adequacy of current effort or a need to
improvise the existing ways of conducts.
There are about 200 tools available for evaluating research quality or biases in randomized
and non-randomized studies.7-9 Nevertheless, most tools available for assessing non-randomized
studies are generally of poor methodological quality, making that the assessment of methodological
quality and risk of bias consistently across primary studies difficult or impossible.10 Many different tools
exist for different study designs such as the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool for randomized trials,11 the
QUADAS 2 tool

12

for diagnostic test accuracy studies, and the AMSTAR

13

and ROBIS tools

14

for

systematic reviews, and the ROBINS-I 15 for non-randomized studies of the effects of interventions.
Additionally, there are a few web-based tools and checklist for different study designs such as the NIH
Study Quality Assessment Tool for controlled intervention studies, systematic reviews and metaanalyses, observational cohort and cross-sectional studies, case-control, pre-post, case series studies
(https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/study-quality-assessment-tools); the Critical Appraisal Skills
Programme (CASP) checklists by an Oxford-based Better Value Healthcare Ltd (https://caspuk.net/casp-tools-checklists/); a web application Critical Appraisal Tools (FLC 2.0) developed by
OSTEBA Spain to guide critical appraisal process (http://www.lecturacritica.com/es/acerca.php).
Among some of the more widely used and recommended tools are the Newcastle-Ottawa
scale,16 the Downs and Black instrument 17 and the latter RTI item bank (RTI-IB).18 The NewcastleOttawa Scale (NOS), which has been used to illustrate issues in data extraction from primary non-

Page 3 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

randomized studies, and it has only eight items and is simpler to apply.16 However, the items may still
need to be customized to the review question of interest. The Downs and Black instrument

17

has

been modified for use in a methodological systematic review.8 The reviewers found that some of the
29 items were difficult to apply to case control studies, that the instrument required considerable
epidemiological expertise and that it was time consuming to use. There are reports that these tools are
difficult to apply,19-22 and agreement between review authors is modest. Median observed inter-rater
agreement for the RTI-IB was 75% (25th percentile [p25] =61%; p75 =89%), median first-order
agreement coefficient statistic was 0.64 (p25 =0.51; p75 =0.86). Although the RTI-IB facilitates a more
complete quality assessment than the NOS but is more burdensome. Additionally, there are different
meanings in epidemiological terminology in different countries for example the term ‘selection bias’
describes what others may call ‘applicability’ or ‘generalizability’. Thus, comprehensive manuals are
required to accompany these tools to offer instructions for standardized interpretation by different
users. However, this may pose a great challenge to users and not many tools have such
comprehensive manual.
Therefore, no tool is found adequate as an all-rounded tool for all types of study designs,9 or is
a recommended tool that is suitable to assess the quality of the published researches as a relatively
quick screening tool. Accordingly, we assimilate the quality indicators used in the existing tools, based
on the series of the users' guides to the medical literature by the Evidence-Based Medicine Working
Group

23,24

and a recent review

25

26

and principles of clinical epidemiology, and developed one for this

review project.

Aims of the project
This project aims to systematically identify for published research articles performed by researchers in
each participating country. For example, we aim to identify for articles published by Malaysian
researchers on research conducted in Malaysia. We will subsequently assess the characteristics and
quality of the researches published in journals as described below.

Material and methods
This systematic review will consists of two phases. In the first phase, we will descriptively report the
demographics and characteristics of studies performed in each country to date (research landscapes).

Page 4 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

In the second phase, we will assess the quality of the research based on the published reports in
journals (research quality) (Figure 1).

Protocol and registration
A protocol of this systematic review is available from the Open Science Framework’s registry for
Research on the Responsible Conduct of Research (RRRCR) with the registration ID:
https://osf.io/w85ce.

Inclusion criteria and search strategy
All clinical and biomedical research conducted in Malaysia or Indonesia from January 1962 (Malaysia
after Singapore independence) to December 2017 will be identified from the following databases:
PubMed, EMBASE, CINAHL and PsycINFO. We will include all published papers of health and
biomedical researches done in each country (Malaysia or Indonesia) or by citizen of each country
(Malaysian or Indonesian) with an affiliation in one of the institution in each country (Malaysian or
Indonesian). We will also search for additional literature from MyMedR (http://mymedr.afpm.org.my/)
database as it specifically compiles published papers in health and biomedical research conducted in
Malaysia or by authors who has a Malaysian affiliation as well as from MyJurnal, an online system
used by Malaysia Citation Centre (MCC), Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia to collect and index all
the Malaysian journals. Search results will be compiled into Endnote reference management software
where duplicates will be removed. If necessary, authors and institutions will be contacted. A medical
librarian and a science officer at the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Universiti Putra
Malaysia will complete these tasks. The review work will be completed by two separate teams with
each is based in Malaysia and Indonesia, respectively.

Page 5 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Identification

Figure 1 The two phases of the review.

Records identified through database
searching:
PubMed (n = )
EMBASE (n = )
CINAHL (n = )
PsycINFO) (n = )
MyMedR (n = )

Additional records identified
through other sources:
Contact authors (n = )

Included

Eligibility

Screening

Records after duplicates removed
(n = )

Records screened
(n = )

Records excluded
(n = )

Full-text articles assessed
for eligibility
(n = )

Full-text articles excluded,
with reasons
(n = )

Studies included in
research landscape study
for characteristics
(n = )

Studies included in
research quality
assessment
(n = )

Adapted from: Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, The PRISMA Group (2009). Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses: The PRISMA Statement. PLoS Med 6(7): e1000097.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed1000097. For more information, visit www.prisma-statement.org.

Page 6 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Study selection and data extraction
All review authors will independently screen identified articles by title and abstract. Full text of eligible
article will be retrieved and independently extracted using a standard data extraction template. This
template will be pilot-tested on 10 articles among all the review authors for clarity, and modification of
the template will be done accordingly. The final piloted template is available as Supplementary Table
1. To ensure the data quality, a review author (BHC) will reassess 10-20% of the articles. Any
discrepancy will be solved by consensus between three or more review authors.
In the event of duplicate publications or multiple reports of a research study, we will use the most
complete data set aggregated across all known publications. Duplicate publications are defined as two
or more published articles that report on the same research question. All review authors will learn
about the principles of clinical epidemiology through a workshop and reach consensual understanding
on the terms used to represent research quality in this project.

1 Research landscapes
The first phase of the project will describe the characteristics of the reported research project such
as team members and the journal that publishes the article. The following lists the research
characteristics of interest (See Supplementary Table 1)
a. Institution and qualification of the corresponding author/s
b. Numbers of authors, institutions and specialties
c. Numbers of oversea collaborating authors and institutions
d. Numbers of study site
e. Journal type: local vs. regional vs. international, open access vs. traditional subscriptionbased, general vs. discipline-specific
f.

Setting- healthcare facility (hospital, clinic, etc.) or community

g. Type of study- audit vs. research- secondary (reviews) or primary (diagnostic, prognostic,
etiologic or interventional), clinical vs. non-clinical (laboratory, public health, health service,
etc.)
h. Data collection designs

Page 7 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

i.

Years when the study conducted, completed and published

j.

Health conditions studied or organ systems that are involved

k. Drugs, devices/tools, surgical, psychological, or health services

2 Research quality
In phase 2 of the study, the research quality will be assessed based on the following criteria in
three domains: relevance, credibility and usefulness (Table 1). At the start of screening, we will
implement a training session for all reviewers in which all reviewers will extract the same articles.
This will help ensure uniformity in the terminology and domains used. We will also determine the
inter-rater reliability agreement using Cohen’s kappa κ and intra-class correlation (ICC).The kappa

κ is a measure of agreement between different observers beyond chance agreement.27 κ statistic
will be computed separately for each domain’s item (0 or 1). The ICC will be used to assess the
domains’ subtotal (3, 4 and 3) and the grand total score of the tool (Table 1).
The Kappa result be interpreted as follows: values ≤ 0 as indicating no agreement and 0.010.20 as none to slight, 0.21-0.40 as fair, 0.4 - 0.60 as moderate, 0.61- 0.80 as substantial, and
0.81-1.00 as almost perfect agreement.28 For the ICC, values < 0.40 is poor, 0 .40 - 0.59 is fair,
0.60 - 0.74 good, and 0.75 - 1.0 is excellent. We specify an a priori level of κ > 0.60 and ICC >
0.60 must be achieved before the second phase of this study begins. Retraining and
reassessment of the reviewers on different articles will be conducted until the inter-rater
agreement reach the desirable levels. The expected lower bound of a 95 % confidence limit for κ
is no less than 0.60, with an assumed same marginal prevalence of zero score of 30%. Using
alpha and beta error rates of 0.05 and 0.2, respectively, a pair of two reviewers will rate 20 papers
each,

28,29

2.1

with five pairs of reviewers and 100 samples for the subtotal and total ICC estimation.

30

Relevance

The relevance of a research will be assessed from three perspectives: scientific relevance,
the composition of the research team and societal relevance. A research is being scientifically
relevant if it addresses a true and real scientific problem and provides the needed knowledge

Page 8 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

to understand an existing phenomena. Scientific relevance also denotes that the research sets
out on justified scientific foundation and informed of existing evidence. Thus, a scientifically
relevant research is usually a globally relevant research due to its highly generalizable topic
and subjects of research.
Societal relevance refers to the research that addresses a true and real problem in the
society. This relevancy may exist at a smaller and wider population such as it may relevant for
all the human population in the world or it may be relevant to a particular group of condition or
disease in a unique population. These two domains of scientific and societal relevance relate
to having a novelty in the research.
The last domain in the relevance category is about the research team of comprising
investigators and experts of relevant professional qualifications. This may include patients and
public people in certain research area when opinion of the end-users are considered important
such as intervention or experience of the patients or family members.

2.2

Credibility

This category is further assessed after it is judged that the research is relevant. Four essential
features that are considered the very minimums in a research for it to be credible and its
results to inform or contribute to practice change are data collection design, precision,
important sample (external validity) and internal validity.
The design of the data collection of a research is to be appropriate to its objective or
research question. The approach used in the data collection depends on whether it is a causal
or non-causal research, and then experimental or non-experimental conduct of the research
would provide better data. The time feature or characteristic of the variables involved in the
research should be collected in their intended phases or stages such as a risk factor in the
asymptomatic phase, or symptoms or biomarkers in the latent period.
Sampling and samples are the next important credibility domain. The sample of the
participants is to be right group of the population for the research. They represent the
important population to which the results could be generalised to later. However, in causal or
experimental research, comparability between groups in the research take precedence over

Page 9 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

representativeness because confounding or prognostic factors between groups results in valid
outcomes as of the exposure.
Quantitative research is essentially about measurement, measuring tools and
process. The measurement of the variables is to be done by validated tools, through a
standardised process, and if necessary by trained and blinded assessors. Any query or
suspicion on the methods of measurement in the research will cause internal non-validity.
A credible research provides an appropriate and rational sample size estimation. This
bases on the research question and its primary objective, and a similar earlier research.
Adequate sample size is required for sufficient precision in a research. The achievement or
non-achievement of the desired sample size should be reported or justified and discussed,
respectively.

2.3

Usefulness

The research that is credible worth its results a good attention. Usefulness of the research
results consists of it being important outcomes, providing meaningful estimates and fair
conclusion as supported by the research designs.
Important outcomes are that of high priority and concern to the end-users. These
generally refer to the hard outcomes or strong correlates or intermediate markers of the hard
outcomes to the exposure in the research. Examples of important outcomes include the
diagnoses of the conditions, and the examples of the surrogates are blood or serum markers.
Results of a research are meaningful when they are easily understood in the context
of clinical practice or daily life of patients. The meaningful estimates are usually the direct
results or the research such as the actual numbers of occurrence, incidence and prevalence
rates, and risk ratios. Transformed estimates such as standardised or log will need translation
and interpretation.
Lastly, conclusion of the research bears the second testimony to that of the readers’
own judgement of the research. As the final interpretation and remarks by the authors and
investigators of the research, it is important to put the results of the research as an evidence in

Page 10 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the right context and applicability taken into consideration of the constraint in the research
designs and limitations encountered along the whole research process.

Table 1 Research quality domains used in the screening tool
Relevance (3 domains)
[1] Scientific relevance
o

[1] Data collection design-

Indicating this with an

appropriate for the research

acceptable literature review or

question*

citing systematic reviews*
[2] Societal relevance (area
researched or involvement of
end user eg. patient)
[3] Research team / experts
o

Credibility (4 domains)

o

Usefulness (3 domains)
[1] Important outcome used and
reported*
[2] Meaningful estimates- practical

Experimental, non-experimental,

numerical results taking into

time feature of variables

consideration response rate,

considered

missing data, proper statistical

[2] Important samples (external
validity)- representative of or

The research is led by expert

generalizability to an important

in the relevant field or

and relevant population;

conducted with relevant

comparability between groups in

experts

randomised control trials
[3] Internal validity – validated

test and analysis**
[3] Conclusion based on results
o

Take into consideration the
study limitations***

* Outcomes that truly matter to
patients

*Set the right research priorities;

instrument, measurement process

** The study provides useful data

clear research question/hypothesis

and by trained or blinded

for the intended end-users; unusual

assessors

or unexpected analysis is explained

[4] Precision- appropriate sample size
estimation and achievement

and justified
*** No over-claimed or misleading
conclusion

* Ethical conduct & patient
safety/rights/priorities included
Subtotal score = 3

Subtotal score = 4

Subtotal score = 3

Total score = 10

Page 11 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Data analysis
Every eligible article and study will be assessed according to two main areas – characteristics and
quality of research. Data will be checked for any missing data and errors. The data will be reported
descriptively, with frequency and percentage for categorical data while mean and standard deviation
(median and interquartile range) for normally distributed (and not normally distributed) continuous
data. Time series plot will be conducted to investigate the trends and patterns of the research
characteristics, health conditions studied and quality of research over the years. Geographic
information system (GIS) may also be plotted to evaluate the locations and areas of research
conducted. Longitudinal trends of certain research characteristics, health conditions or areas in
different settings will be explored.
Associations between characteristics of the included research project and quality will be
explored, and the independent effect of each of the determinants will be quantified in multiple linear
regression analysis. Additionally, the research quality as a categorical outcome will be explored as
tertiles. The highest tertile will be compared to the lowest tertile, and the determinants will be
assessed in multiple logistic regression. Longitudinal trends of the research quality will be explored. A
calculated 95% confidence interval and two-sided α of 0.05 will be used to test significance. Model
checking will be conducted in order to get the best and parsimony final model as well as fulfilled
statistical assumptions. Estimates will be obtained with PASW 25.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL) and MLwiN
version 3.02 (Centre for Multilevel Modelling, University of Bristol).

Discussion
Results will be informative to all stakeholders of clinical and biomedical research in the country of the
evolution of research conduct and performance from the past till now. Profiles of the research
throughout the past decades may be studied according to socioeconomic, politic or policy changes of
certain years. The longitudinal and prospective trends of the research profiles, research quality and
the association between them could provide suggestions on improvement initiatives or an institutional
role model that has been ‘successful’ to some extent could be discovered. Additionally, health
conditions or areas in different settings, and whether they are over- or under-studied may help future
prioritization of research initiatives and resources. Descriptive comparison between countries may also

Page 12 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

be possible if there are similar studies done in other countries. This provides meaningful
benchmarking and insights into the effects of evolving historical events on clinical and biomedical
research activities and quality in each country.
The research quality tool of this study may be a useful screening tool for all quantitative study
designs except qualitative study, case reports, and systematic reviews. We hope it would be a useful
tool for a quick critical appraisal of research quality. The sequence of Relevance-CredibilityUsefulness enable efficiency and empower the tool users in the critical appraisal process. The main
limitation of this review would be the reporting quality of the research including zero reporting or null
publication of any completed studies.32 In addition, a relatively large number of graduate and
postgraduate students’ research projects that were published as thesis and not in journals 33 will not
be searchable through the search strategies used in this review project. Reporting quality is not
assessed with the research quality tool that is created for this project because there are already
specific guides and checklists for this purpose. The quality and comprehensiveness of the research
reporting may be less worse than the research quality in terms of methodology but may affect its
assessment.34 The 10 items within the three domains of the research quality screening tools are
believed to be the fundamental minimums of most clinical and biomedical research that would be
available in most published articles. Contacting the corresponding authors either through email or
telephone would recover missing information in the included articles.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the following colleague who have given helpful suggestion during the protocol
development stage: Dr. Alfi Yasmina from the Faculty of Medicine, Lambung Mangkurat University,
Banjarbaru, Kalimantan, Indonesia; Dr. Tan Kit-Aun from the Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia; Dr. Sanjiv Rampal Lekhraj from the
Department of Orthopaedic, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia; Dr.
Dhashani Sivaratnam from the Unit of Ophthalmology, Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine
and Health Science, Universiti Putra Malaysia; and Dr. Maliza Mawardi, Associate Professor Dr.
Cheong Ai Theng, Associate Professor Dr. Lee Ping Yein and Associate Professor Dr. Ching Siew
Mooi from the Department of Family Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Universiti
Putra Malaysia.

Page 13 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Disclosure
The author reports no conflicts of interest in this work.

References
1. Chalmers I, Bracken MB, Djulbegovic B, et al. How to increase value and reduce waste when
research priorities are set. Lancet. 2014;383(9912):156-165.
2. Ioannidis JP, Greenland S, Hlatky MA, et al. Increasing value and reducing waste in research
design, conduct, and analysis. Lancet. 2014;383(9912):166-175.
3. Chan AW, Song F, Vickers A, et al. Increasing value and reducing waste: addressing inaccessible
research. Lancet. 2014;383(9913):257-266.
4. Macleod MR, Michie S, Roberts I, et al. Biomedical research: increasing value, reducing waste.
Lancet. 2014;383(9912):101-104.
5. Glasziou P, Altman DG, Bossuyt P, et al. Reducing waste from incomplete or unusable reports of
biomedical research. Lancet. 2014;383(9913):267-276.
6. Ioannidis JPA. Why Most Published Research Findings Are False. PLoS Med. 2005;2(8):e124.
7. Deeks JJ, Dinnes J, D'Amico R, et al. Evaluating non-randomised intervention studies. Health
Technol Assess. 2003;7(27):iii-x, 1-173.
8. MacLehose RR, Reeves BC, Harvey IM, Sheldon TA, Russell IT, Black AM. A systematic review
of comparisons of effect sizes derived from randomised and non-randomised studies. Health
Technol Assess. 2000;4(34):1-154.
9. Zeng X, Zhang Y, Kwong JS, et al. The methodological quality assessment tools for preclinical
and clinical studies, systematic review and meta-analysis, and clinical practice guideline: a
systematic review. J Evid Based Med. 2015;8(1):2-10.
10. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 5.1.0 [updated March 2011].
The Cochrane Collaboration; 2011.
11. Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gotzsche PC, et al. The Cochrane Collaboration's tool for assessing risk
of bias in randomised trials. Bmj. 2011;343:d5928.
12. Whiting PF, Rutjes AW, Westwood ME, et al. QUADAS-2: a revised tool for the quality
assessment of diagnostic accuracy studies. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155(8):529-536.

Page 14 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

13. Shea BJ, Grimshaw JM, Wells GA, et al. Development of AMSTAR: a measurement tool to assess
the methodological quality of systematic reviews. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2007;7:10.
14. Whiting P, Savovic J, Higgins JP, et al. ROBIS: A new tool to assess risk of bias in systematic
reviews was developed. J Clin Epidemiol. 2016;69:225-234.
15. Sterne JA, Hernan MA, Reeves BC, et al. ROBINS-I: a tool for assessing risk of bias in nonrandomised studies of interventions. Bmj. 2016;355:i4919.
16. Wells GA, Shea B, O'Connell D, et al. The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) for assessing the
quality of nonrandomised studies in meta-analyses. Ottawa Hospital Research Institute.
http://www.ohri.ca/programs/clinical_epidemiology/oxford.asp. Published 2011. Accessed 16/07,
2018.
17. Downs SH, Black N. The feasibility of creating a checklist for the assessment of the
methodological quality both of randomised and non-randomised studies of health care
interventions. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1998;52(6):377-384.
18. Viswanathan M, Berkman ND. Development of the RTI item bank on risk of bias and precision of
observational studies. J Clin Epidemiol. 2012;65(2):163-178.
19. Lo CK, Mertz D, Loeb M. Newcastle-Ottawa Scale: comparing reviewers' to authors' assessments.
BMC Med Res Methodol. 2014;14:45.
20. Hartling L, Milne A, Hamm MP, et al. Testing the Newcastle Ottawa Scale showed low reliability
between individual reviewers. J Clin Epidemiol. 2013;66(9):982-993.
21. Oremus M, Oremus C, Hall GB, McKinnon MC. Inter-rater and test-retest reliability of quality
assessments by novice student raters using the Jadad and Newcastle-Ottawa Scales. BMJ Open.
2012;2(4).
22. Margulis AV, Pladevall M, Riera-Guardia N, et al. Quality assessment of observational studies in a
drug-safety systematic review, comparison of two tools: the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale and the RTI
item bank. Clin Epidemiol. 2014;6:359-368.
23. Guyatt G, Drummond R, Meade M, Cook D. The Evidence Based-Medicine Working Group Users’
Guides to the Medical Literature. 2nd edition ed. Chicago: McGraw Hill; 2008.
24. Oxman AD, Sackett DL, Guyatt GH. Users' guides to the medical literature. I. How to get started.
The Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group. Jama. 1993;270(17):2093-2095.

Page 15 of 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004010; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

25. von Niederhausern B, Schandelmaier S, Mi Bonde M, et al. Towards the development of a
comprehensive framework: Qualitative systematic survey of definitions of clinical research quality.
PLoS One. 2017;12(7):e0180635.
26. Grobbee DE, Hoes AW. Clinical Epidemiology: Principles, Methods, and Applications for Clinical
Research. Jones & Bartlett Learning; 2014.
27. McGinn T, Wyer PC, Newman TB, Keitz S, Leipzig R, for GG. Tips for learners of evidence-based
medicine: 3. Measures of observer variability (kappa statistic). CMAJ. 2004;171(11):1369-1373.
28. McHugh ML. Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic. Biochem Med (Zagreb). 2012;22(3):276-282.
29. Bujang MA, Baharum N. Guidelines of the minimum sample size requirements for Kappa
agreement test. Epidemiology Biostatistics and Public Health. 2017;14(2):1-10.
30. Sim J, Wright CC. The kappa statistic in reliability studies: use, interpretation, and sample size
requirements. Phys Ther. 2005;85(3):257-268.
31. Hallgren KA. Computing Inter-Rater Reliability for Observational Data: An Overview and Tutorial.
Tutor Quant Methods Psychol. 2012;8(1):23-34.
32. Groves T. What makes a high quality clinical research paper? Oral Dis. 2010;16(4):313-5.
33. Post RE, Mainous AG 3rd, O'Hare KE, King DE, Maffei MS. Publication of research presented at
STFM and NAPCRG conferences. Ann Fam Med. 2013;11(3):258-261.
34. Widyahening IS, Wangge G, Saldi SR, et al. Quality and reporting of publications by Indonesian
researchers: a literature survey. J Evid Based Med. 2014;7(3):163-171.

Page 16 of 16

