medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Pain Reduction by Inducing Sensory-Motor Adaptation in Complex
Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS PRISMA): Protocol for a Doubleblind Randomized Controlled Trial
Monika Halicka1,2, Axel D Vittersø1,2,3, Michael J Proulx2,4, and Janet H Bultitude1,2
1

Centre for Pain Research, University of Bath, UK

2

Department of Psychology, University of Bath, UK

3

Department of Sport & Health Sciences, University of Exeter, UK

4

Centre for Real and Virtual Environments Augmentation Labs, Department of Computer Science,

University of Bath, UK
Corresponding author:
Monika Halicka
Email: m.halicka@bath.ac.uk
Phone: 01225 386226
Address: Department of Psychology, University of Bath, Claverton Down Road, Bath BA2 7AY, UK

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background: Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS) presents as chronic, continuous pain and
sensory, autonomic, and motor abnormalities affecting one or more extremities. People with CRPS
can also show changes in their perception of and attention to the affected body part and sensory
information in the affected side of space. Prism Adaptation (PA) is a behavioural intervention targeted
at reducing attention deficits in post-stroke hemispatial neglect. PA also appears to reduce pain and
other CRPS symptoms; however, these therapeutic effects have been demonstrated only in small
unblinded studies. This paper describes the protocol for an ongoing double-blind, randomized, shamcontrolled clinical trial that will evaluate the efficacy of PA treatment for CRPS. The secondary aims of
the study are to examine the relationships between neuropsychological changes (such as spatial
attention, space and body representation, and motor spatial performance) and clinical manifestations
of CRPS, as well as symptom improvement.
Methods: Forty-two participants with upper-limb CRPS type I will undergo two weeks of twice-daily
PA treatment or sham treatment. The primary outcome measures are current pain intensity and CRPS
severity score, measured immediately before and after the treatment period. Secondary outcome
measures include the results of self-report questionnaires about pain, movement, symptoms
interference, and body representation; clinical assessments of sensory, motor, and autonomic
functions; and computer-based psychophysical tests of neuropsychological functions. Data are
collected in four research visits: four weeks and one day before treatment, and one day and four
weeks after the end of treatment. Additional follow-up through postal questionnaires is conducted
three and six months post-treatment.
Discussion: It is hypothesised that participants undergoing PA treatment, compared to those receiving
sham treatment, will show greater reduction in pain and CRPS severity score, and improvements on
other clinical and neuropsychological measures. Also, more pronounced neuropsychological
symptoms are predicted to correlate with more severe clinical CRPS symptoms. This study will provide
the first randomized double-blind evaluation of the therapeutic effects of PA that could be
implemented as a rehabilitation method for CRPS, and will contribute to the understanding of how
neuropsychological changes in body representation and attention pertain to the manifestation and
treatment of CRPS.
Trial registration (27/03/2017): ISRCTN46828292 [1].
Keywords: Randomized Controlled Trial, Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS), Prism Adaptation,
Pain, CRPS Symptom Severity, Attention, Body representation, Neuropsychology, Neglect, Protocol

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

1. Background
People with Complex Regional Pain Syndrome (CRPS) experience continuous pain and a range of
sensory, autonomic, and motor signs and symptoms. The condition primarily affects one or more
extremities, which can become swollen and present with asymmetric changes in hair, nail and skin
growth, sweating, limb temperature, and skin colour. Further clinical features of CRPS include
allodynia (non-nociceptive stimulation perceived as painful) and hyperalgesia (mildly noxious
stimulation experienced as extremely painful), as well as motor disturbance in the affected limb (e.g.,
decreased range of movement, weakness, tremor, and muscle contractions [2, 3]). Although CRPS
usually develops after an injury to the limb (e.g., a fracture [4]), it can also develop spontaneously [5],
and the symptoms are disproportionate to any inciting trauma [3]. There is no known cause of CRPS,
however, several pathophysiological mechanisms are suggested to play a role in the development and
maintenance of this syndrome, including neuroinflammation, nociceptive sensitization, vasomotor
dysfunction, and maladaptive neuroplasticity [2].
CRPS patients have shown reduced attention to tactile [6–8] and visual stimulation on the affected
limb and in external space near it [9, 10]. These biases appear to be associated with the side of space
in which the limb usually resides [7, 9] rather than a tendency to pay less attention to the affected
body parts per se. These space-based attention changes resemble those found in post-stroke
hemispatial neglect patients [11].
One emerging treatment for CRPS is Prism Adaptation (PA). PA is a form of a sensory-motor training
used to reduce lateralised attention deficits in post-stroke hemispatial neglect. The treatment involves
performing a pointing task while wearing goggles fitted with prismatic lenses that induce a lateral
deviation of the visual image. Due to this visual shift, patients’ pointing initially errs in the direction of
prismatic displacement. With repeated movements, pointing becomes more accurate through an
adjustment of pointing movements in the opposite direction to the optical shift, indicating a
realignment of the sensory-motor reference frames [12, 13]. Once the goggles are removed, a
negative after-effect is observed whereby pointing movements err in the opposite direction to the
earlier optical shift. Using PA to induce pointing after-effects towards the neglected side reduces poststroke hemispatial neglect [14–22].
The apparent attention bias in CRPS patients led to investigations of whether PA could also have
therapeutic effects on chronic pain, as it does in post-stroke hemispatial neglect. Results of three
studies have shown that PA performed with the affected hand to produce pointing after-effects
towards the CRPS-affected side reduced pain and other CRPS symptoms [23–25]. However, these
studies included only small numbers of patients (13 in total across all three studies), no sham

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

treatment conditions, and were not blinded. Thus, to date there are not sufficient grounds for
implementing PA as a standard rehabilitation method for CRPS [12]. The aim of this study is to provide
a robust evaluation of the effects of PA on CRPS through a double-blind, randomized-controlled trial.

1.1. Research questions and hypotheses
1.1.1. Primary research question (RQ) and hypothesis (H)
RQ 1. Is two weeks of twice-daily PA treatment more effective in reducing pain and CRPS symptom
severity than an identical regime using sham prism adaptation (“sham treatment”)?
Sham prism adaptation has an identical procedure to PA treatment, except that pointing movements
are performed without any optical deviation and therefore no adaptation takes place. This will allow
us to dissociate the effects of the additional movement of the affected limb imposed by the treatment,
to isolate the true effects of PA.
H 1. There will be greater reductions in pain and CRPS symptom severity in the participants who
receive PA treatment compared to the participants who receive sham treatment.

1.1.2. Secondary research questions and hypotheses
RQ 2. Are the neuropsychological changes in CRPS related to clinical signs and symptoms of CRPS?
A secondary aim of this study is to investigate the relationships between the severity of clinical
symptoms of CRPS and the extent of neuropsychological changes in spatial attention, space and body
representations, and motor functions.
H 2. Baseline abnormalities in perception of and attention to the affected limb and its surrounding
space in participants with CRPS (compared to the perception and attention of healthy control
participants) will correlate with the severity of pre-treatment clinical symptoms.
RQ 3. Are there any improvements in other clinical signs of CRPS, psychological functioning, and
neuropsychological symptoms following PA treatment?
In addition to the primary outcome measures of pain and CRPS symptom severity, we aim to evaluate
the effects of PA treatment on secondary outcomes (listed below) that are relevant to participants’
daily physical and psychological functioning, and for understanding the mechanisms of the therapeutic
effects of PA (e.g., through establishing which neuropsychological symptoms might be affected by
treatment).
H 3. Compared to the sham treatment group, participants in the PA group will have a reduction in
spatial attention bias (consistent with its primary applications), as well as bias in cognitive
representation of space and spatially-modulated motor function; body representation
distortion (see [23]); emotional disturbance; fear of movement; average pain, movement

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

restriction, and symptoms interference; and sensory, motor, and autonomic signs of CRPS
following treatment.
RQ 4. How long are any benefits sustained for after the cessation of PA treatment?
We will determine this through assessment of all primary and secondary outcomes immediately and
four weeks after the completion of treatment, and through additional assessment of a subset of selfreported secondary outcomes at three and six months post-treatment. The time course of any
improvements will be also analysed at more granular level through participants’ daily subjective
ratings of pain, range of movement, and the extent to which their symptoms interfere with daily life
over a period of 11 weeks.
RQ 5. Are there factors that can predict the CRPS progression over time and / or the response to PA
treatment?
Finally, the current study aims to explore potential predictors of the course of the disease and
therapeutic response by tracking the symptoms of the same individuals over the course of 7.5 months.
We plan to identify possible markers that would account for the individual differences in the
progression of CRPS over time and / or in response to PA treatment. Due to insufficient evidence to
support any specific predictions and limited sample size, we will perform exploratory analyses to
address this research question. Factors such as demographic characteristics, pain intensity, CRPS
symptom severity, sensory, motor and autonomic functions, and the extent of neuropsychological
changes will be taken into consideration.

2. Methods
2.1. Design
This study has a double-blind, randomized, sham-controlled design. The schedule of enrolment,
interventions, and assessments is presented in Table 1 and consists of four in-person Research
Sessions (RS), two weeks of twice-daily home-based treatment, and two sets of long-term postal
follow-up questionnaires. After provisional eligibility assessment through a structured phone
interview, 42 participants with CRPS will undergo two baseline research sessions. Two baseline
assessments (RS1 and RS2) are conducted to give an indication of normal fluctuations in CRPS
symptoms (or lack thereof) prior to the treatment period. Research Session 1 (RS1) commences the
timeline of the study at week 1 and includes in-person assessment of the eligibility criteria, informed
consent, and collection of the outcome measures that are described in the “Measurements” section.
Treatment allocation takes place 1-5 days before Research Session 2 (RS2), where the participants
with CRPS are randomly allocated to one of the two groups of equal size: the PA treatment group or

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the sham treatment group. RS2 at the end of week 4 involves revisiting eligibility criteria, collecting
outcome measurements, and instructing the participants in how to carry out the treatment. The
participants then perform their first treatment during RS2 under the guidance of a researcher who is
not involved in any part of data collection. All other elements of the study (telephone screening,
symptom assessment, experiment administration, and input of questionnaire data) are performed by
researchers who are blind to the conditions that the participants have been allocated to. The
treatment period spans weeks 5 and 6 of the study, where the participants perform twice-daily
treatment in a self-guided manner. Outcome measurements are collected in two post-treatment
assessments (RS3 and RS4) to evaluate differences in PA versus sham treatment effects, and whether
any benefits of treatment are maintained at 4 weeks after treatment. The first post-treatment
Research Session (RS3) takes place at the beginning of week 7 (i.e., the day immediately following the
final treatment session). Research Session 4 (RS4) takes place at the end of week 11. During the first
11 weeks of the study, the participants also record their self-reported daily ratings of pain intensity,
range of movement, and the extent to which their symptoms interfere with daily life in a provided
logbook, which will allow us to track the time course of any changes between research sessions. Long
Term Follow-Up 1 at 3 months (LTFU1; week 19) and Long Term Follow-Up 2 at 6 months (LTFU2; week
31) post-treatment are conducted through questionnaires sent and returned by post. RS3 marks the
primary endpoint and LTFU2 marks the secondary and final endpoint of the study.
Deviations from the schedule of consecutive Research Sessions and Follow-Ups will be accepted within
the following time windows: up to 2-weeks deferral of RS2 and RS4, up to 1-week deferral of RS3, up
to 3-weeks deferral of LTFU1 and LTFU2. If the times that the participant can attend RS2 and RS3 are
planned to be longer than 14 days apart, the participant would commence the treatment 2 weeks
before RS3. If the participant already started the treatment and has to postpone RS3, they would
continue the treatment until RS3.
Twenty-one healthy control participants are being recruited for a single research session to obtain
normative data. They undergo testing only once and do not receive any treatment.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1 Schedule of enrolment, interventions, and assessments for the participants with CRPS
STUDY PERIOD

Enrolment

TIME POINT

Baseline research
sessions

PA treatment or
Sham treatment

Post-treatment research

Follow-up

sessions

(14 days)

Prior to
Week 1

Week 1

Week 4

(phone)

RS1

RS2

X

X

X

Week 5

Week 6

Week 7*

Week 11

Week 19

Week 31**

RS3

RS4

LTFU1

LTFU2

X

X

ENROLMENT:
Eligibility assessment
Informed consent

X

Allocation

X

INTERVENTIONS (one of
two, twice-daily):
PA treatment OR
Sham treatment
ASSESSMENTS:
Self-report questionnaires

X

X

X

X

Clinical assessments

X

X

X

X

Computer-based tests

X

X

X

X

Daily logbook***

RS: Research Session; LTFU: Long Term Follow-Up (postal questionnaires only); PA: Prism Adaptation;
* Primary endpoint of the study.
** Secondary endpoint of the study.
*** Self-reported average levels of pain, range of movement and symptoms interference with daily life in the last 24 hours,
rated daily on 0-10 Numeric Rating Scales.

2.1.1. Setting of the study
All research centres and recruitment sites are located in the United Kingdom. The University of Bath
is the main research centre and one of the research sites, and research sessions can also take place at
the Universities of Oxford, Exeter, or Liverpool; or in participants’ homes.

2.2. Participants
2.2.1. Eligibility criteria
2.2.1.1. Participants with CRPS
This study enrols both male and female individuals, who:
1) are willing and able to give informed consent to take part in the trial,
2) are aged 18-80,
3) have a diagnosis of CRPS type I based on the Budapest diagnostic research criteria [3] as
assessed at RS1 and revisited at RS2,
4) have CRPS type I primarily affecting one upper limb,
5) have had CRPS for a minimum of 3 months at the time of RS1,

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6)

and report current pain intensity ≥2 on a 0-10 Numeric Rating Scale at RS1 and RS2.

Participants are excluded from the CRPS group if they:
1) lack sufficient English language ability to provide informed consent,
2) are classified as legally blind,
3) have a history of neurological disorder (e.g. stroke, neurodegenerative disease or traumatic
brain injury),
4) have CRPS meeting the Budapest diagnostic clinical or research criteria affecting both sides of
the body,
5) report that they have confirmed presence of nerve damage (CRPS type II) based on the results
of nerve conduction test,
6) have dystonia or any other physical limitation severe enough to prevent satisfactory execution
of PA / sham treatment,
7) or have a severe psychiatric comorbidity (such as schizophrenia) that in the researchers’
opinions would compromise participation in the study.
2.2.1.2. Healthy control participants
The inclusion criteria for healthy control participants of this trial are:
1) willingness and ability to give informed consent,
2) age 18-80,
3) and being neurologically healthy and without current or chronic pain.
Criteria that would exclude an individual from the study are:
1) insufficient English language ability to provide informed consent,
2) being classified as legally blind,
3) physical disability or injury limiting normal mobility,
4) or a history of a neurological or severe psychiatric illness.
Each healthy control participant is matched to one participant with CRPS by sex, self-reported
handedness prior to the onset of CRPS, and age (+/- 5 years).

2.2.2. Recruitment and participant retention strategies
The recruitment commenced on 31 March 2017 and is ongoing at the time of submission. People with
CRPS are recruited through the National CRPS-UK Registry, Oxford University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, the Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, and other hospitals in the UK by post and
clinicians’ referrals. Information about the trial is also disseminated through word of mouth, print and

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

online advertisements and articles, and social media. Trial webpages have been set up on the funder’s
and research centre’s websites. All of the above information channels provide potential participants
with contact details of the authors, should they be interested in more information and / or taking part
in the study.
To promote retention, participants are sent reminders before each RS and LTFU. Since recruitment
takes place over a broad geographic area, their travel costs are reimbursed, or the research sessions
are conducted in their own home. In recognition of the inconvenience of participation, which is
heightened due to the burden of CRPS, participants receive a financial compensation of £250 for their
time and contribution to the study once they complete RS4, and further financial compensation once
they return the completed LTFU2 questionnaires by post (£50). Healthy control participants are
reimbursed for their time and contribution at a rate of £10 per hour of their involvement.
Since the assessments and treatment are non-invasive and do not interfere with the participants’
ongoing standard treatment, and there are potential benefits from taking part, we expect good
participant retention. Some participants may directly benefit from reduction in pain and CRPS
symptom severity due to treatment. All participants will have an opportunity to undergo the PA
treatment after the trial is completed, should the trial support the effectiveness of the treatment.
In the event of the participant’s withdrawal from the study, their data from any completed research
sessions will be included in the analysis as far as possible. Participants who withdraw after RS2 will be
considered lost to follow-up. For any participant who withdraws before RS4, an additional participant
will be recruited to the trial such that there will be 42 full datasets for RS1-RS4. Should participants
deviate from the intervention protocol (e.g., missed treatment sessions), the number of logged
treatment sessions can be used as a possible covariate in the final analyses.

2.3. Randomisation
Treatment allocation is conducted by method of randomisation with stratification to minimise
baseline (RS1) group differences. Eligible participants with CRPS are allocated in equal numbers to one
of the two treatment groups: PA treatment group or sham treatment group. Group allocation is
performed using MINIM computer programme [26] by a researcher who is not involved in data
collection (JHB). The minimisation procedure controls for the stratification factors that are listed in
Table 2. In the event of participant’s withdrawal after treatment allocation, but before RS3, their data
shall be removed from the minimisation procedure and an additional participant shall be recruited for
the trial to ensure equal numbers of full datasets with any post-intervention data in the two groups.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 2 Criteria for stratification as recorded in RS1
Factor

Weight

Categories

Current pain intensity (0 – 10

2

6

Numerical Rating Scale)
CRPS severity score (1 - 16) [27]

>6
2

 12
> 12

Primarily affected arm

1

Left
Right

Pre-CRPS dominant hand (writing)

1

Left
Right

Sex

1

Male
Female

Age

1

18 - < 40
40 - < 61
61 - 80

Presence of CRPS in body parts other

1

than the primary affected arm
Presence of other non-CRPS pain

Yes
No

1

Yes
No

CRPS duration

1

< 1 year
1 - < 5 years
5 - < 10 years
≥ 10 years

2.4. Treatment
Participants in the PA treatment group are provided with welding goggles fitted with 35-diopter (∆)
Fresnel lenses that induce a visual shift of approximately 19° away from the CRPS-affected side (the
optical displacement is of a similar magnitude as in previous studies [23–25]). During each treatment
session, the participant is seated in front of a vertical surface, such as a wall, upon which an A4
laminated page in landscape orientation is positioned. The page displays two visual targets (red circles
2cm in diameter), in each top corner. The page is mounted approximately at eye-level, hence targets
are located 12.5cm (approximately 10°) to the left and to the right of the participant’s body midline.
The distance between their torso and the wall is established individually, such that the participant can
touch the targets with an almost fully extended arm (approximately 60cm). Participants put on the

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

goggles and use their CRPS-affected arm to perform a total of 50 pointing movements (a number
sufficient to induce sensory-motor adaptation [16]), alternating between the two targets (25 per side)
and returning the pointing hand to their chest between each movement. The participants are
instructed and trained to move as quickly as possible, and the goggles occlude the vision of the
participant’s arm for approximately the first half of the movement. Both of these steps limit on-line
correction of movement trajectory (strategic component of PA) and reinforce adaptive realignment,
which is thought to maximise the effects of PA [13, 28, 29]. One treatment session takes approximately
5 minutes. The participant performs the treatment once under the guidance of an experimenter, and
then twice daily for two weeks in a self-guided manner in their own home (giving a total of 29
treatment sessions). The intensity and duration of the treatment regime have been established based
on previous studies evaluating the effects of PA on attention in hemispatial neglect following stroke,
and on pain in CRPS. In particular, previous studies suggest that repeated sessions of PA are required
to obtain a significant reduction in CRPS symptoms [23, 25] and that intense treatment (2 sessions a
day for 4 days or more) produces symptom reduction that is sustained for at least two weeks posttreatment [23, 24].
Participants in the sham treatment group carry out the same procedure as the PA treatment group,
except they are provided with goggles fitted with neutral lenses that do not induce optical deviation
of the visual field. This is a standard control treatment for PA [18, 30]. Both prismatic and neutral
lenses distort the acuity and clarity of vision, and both sets of goggles occlude the first part of the
reaching movement. This factor ensures similarity of the two treatment arms in all aspects of the
treatment aside from the sensory-motor adaptation.
To improve their adherence to the treatment protocol the participants are provided with written
instructions and a video tutorial. The researcher who trained them in the treatment is also available
to address any questions or concerns about the procedure by phone or email. In order to monitor
participants’ compliance and adherence, they keep a daily logbook throughout the treatment period,
in which they record the time and duration of each treatment session. We will report the adherence
to treatment as a percentage of participants in each treatment group who did not miss more than 6
treatment sessions. The extent of exposure in each group will be reported as average number of
logged treatment sessions. Protocol deviations are defined as missed or additional treatment sessions,
and sessions for which logbook entries suggest that anything other than the trained procedure has
been used. We will report the total number of treatment sessions per group in which deviations other
than missed or extra sessions are suspected. We will also compare the average number of logged
treatment sessions between the two groups, and if significantly different, the number of logged
treatment sessions will be used as a covariate in the analyses of the primary outcomes.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The participants are instructed to continue their standard pharmaceutical, physical, and / or other
treatments during the trial, and are encouraged not to make any significant alterations to these
treatments (e.g., major changes in medication, commencing new physiotherapy programmes).
Medications and other treatments are noted during every research session to monitor any changes.
Criteria for discontinuing the allocated treatment before the 2 weeks have elapsed are a participant’s
withdrawal from the study, or reports of experiencing an increase in CRPS symptoms that significantly
heightens their discomfort or distress. As the treatment procedures require repeated movements of
the CRPS-affected arm, participants may experience pain related to movement. However, this is
expected to be temporary and no greater than the pain that could accompany standard physiotherapy
or daily activities. To date, there have been no publications reporting serious adverse events related
to PA in healthy controls or clinical populations (patients with stroke, Parkinson’s disease [30], or
CRPS). In one case study exploring the effects of different PA directions and strengths, one CRPS
patient experienced a small, temporary increase in pain when they performed PA using optical
deviation towards the affected side [25]. Similar events in the current study are highly unlikely, as all
PA is conducted with optical deviation away from the CRPS-affected side, i.e., in the direction thought
to achieve therapeutic effects. Each participant is assigned their own dedicated set of prism goggles
in a bag labelled with their participant code. The direction of optical deviation is independently
checked by two people before the goggles are placed in a labelled bag. Any unexpected serious
adverse events related to the administration of any study procedures will be reported to the
researcher responsible for blinding (JHB) who will then make any decisions about discontinuing an
individual’s participation and / or the trial, in consultation with the protocols for dealing with adverse
events as outlined by the Research Ethics Committees.

2.5. Measurements
Tests and measures used in the current study and time points at which they are administered are
listed in Table 3. These are categorised as self-report questionnaires, clinical assessments, or
computer-based tests.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 3 Measures
Category Measures
Brief Pain Inventory (BPI; short form) [32]

Time points
Weeks 1, 4, 7, 11, 19 & 31

Pain Detect Questionnaire [33]
Bath CRPS Body Perception Disturbance Scale (BPDS) [34]

Self-report questionnaires

Tampa Scale for Kinesiophobia [35]
Profile of Mood States [36]
Edinburgh Handedness Inventory [31]

Week 1

Revised Life Orientation Test [37]
Patient-Centred Outcomes Questionnaire [38]
Patient’s Global Impression of Change [39]

Weeks 7, 11, 19 & 31

Logbook
Pain

Weeks 1 to 11 (daily)

Range of movement
Symptoms interference
Treatment sessions
Budapest diagnostic research criteria assessment [40]

Weeks 4 to 6 (twice-daily)
Weeks 1, 4, 7 & 11

CRPS severity score [41]

Clinical assessments

Limb temperature asymmetry
Oedema
Grip strength
Δ Finger-To-Palm distance (ΔFTP)
Elements of Quantitative Sensory Testing (QST) [42]:
Mechanical Detection Threshold (MDT)
Mechanical Pain Threshold (MPT)
Mechanical Allodynia

Computer-based tests

Two-Point Discrimination [43]
Visual Temporal Order Judgement (TOJ) [9]

Weeks 1, 4, 7 & 11

Landmark task [44]
Greyscales task [45]
Mental Number Line Bisection task [46]
Directional Hypokinesia [47]
Hand Laterality Recognition task [48]

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2.5.1. Baseline descriptors
Age, sex, and handedness of all the participants are recorded as demographic characteristics. An
interview regarding their medical history is conducted to collect information about the date and type
of any inciting injury or insult, CRPS duration in months from diagnosis to RS1, the presence of CRPS
in body parts other than the primarily affected upper limb, the presence of non-CRPS pain conditions
and other co-morbidities, and current treatments.
A hand laterality index is calculated using the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory [31] in RS1. The scoring
can range from -100 (extreme left-handedness) to 100 (extreme right-handedness). All participants
respond regarding their current hand preference, and the participants with CRPS additionally
complete another version of the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory based on their recalled hand
preference prior to the onset of CRPS symptoms. A “change in handedness” score (Handedness after
CRPS – Handedness before CRPS) is calculated to give an approximation of the functional impact of
the CRPS.

2.5.2. Primary outcomes
A change between RS2 (immediately before the commencement of treatment) and RS3 (immediately
after the end of the treatment period) in current self-reported pain intensity and CRPS severity score
[27, 41] are the primary outcomes. Current pain intensity is measured using item 6 of the Brief Pain
Inventory (BPI; short form) [32], which is a Numerical Rating Scale (NRS) ranging from 0 – “no pain” to
10 – “pain as bad as you can imagine”. The BPI has high reliability [32]. The CRPS severity score
assessment protocol follows the 16-points scoring system published by Harden and colleagues [27].
This continuous index of CRPS symptom severity has good discrimination abilities, concurrent validity
and adequate sensitivity to change [27, 41].

2.5.3. Secondary outcomes
2.5.3.1. Self-report questionnaires
There is a lack of validated outcome measures for CRPS (however, see recently published
recommendations [49]). Therefore, the choice of the measures for the current trial was guided by
general recommendations of core outcome measures for chronic pain clinical trials (IMMPACT; [50])
and the existing literature on CRPS implicating other relevant questionnaires.
There are 10 self-report questionnaire measures of pain, physical and emotional functioning, body
representation, expectations about treatment, and impressions of treatment outcome. The BPI [32],
Pain Detect Questionnaire [33], Bath CRPS Body Perception Disturbance Scale (BPDS; [34]), Tampa
Scale for Kinesiophobia, and Profile of Mood States [36] are completed in every research session and
long-term follow-up (RS1-RS4, LTFU1-LTFU2). A Revised Life Orientation Test [37] and a Patient-

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Centred Outcomes Questionnaire [38] are administered only in RS1. The Patient’s Global Impression
of Change questionnaire [39] is completed only at post-treatment research sessions and long-term
follow-ups (RS3-RS4, LTFU1-LTFU2). Finally, a daily logbook of self-reported average pain, range of
movement and symptom interference is kept by the participants during the baseline, treatment, and
post-treatment periods (i.e., every day for the 11 weeks that elapse between RS1 and RS4).
Participants use the short-form of the BPI [32] to rate their pain intensity (current, average, and worst
and least pain over the last 24 hours) and the extent to which pain interferes with their physical, social
and psychological functioning on 0-10 NRSs (0 – “no pain” or “does not interfere”; 10 – “pain as bad
as you can imagine” or “completely interferes”, respectively). The pain intensity component of BPI can
result in a score between 0 and 40, whereas the interference component score can range from 0 to
70. The Pain Detect Questionnaire is a validated measure of the neuropathic features of experienced
pain [33] scored from -1 to 38, with higher scores indicating a greater neuropathic component of pain.
The BPDS [34] includes seven self-reported items to assess subjective detachment, awareness,
attention to, and feelings about the CRPS-affected limb; the perceived changes in size, temperature,
pressure, and weight of the limb; and any desire to amputate the limb. The BPDS includes a mental
imagery task in which the mental representation of both limbs (affected and unaffected) is sketched
by a researcher based on the participants’ description. Total score ranges from 0 (no disturbance) to
57 (most severe disturbance of body perception). Since BPDS is not a validated measure, normative
data is also collected from healthy control participants who are responding to the self-report
components regarding the limb that corresponds to the CRPS-affected limb of their matched
participant with CRPS.
The Tampa Scale for Kinesiophobia [35] is administered to measure pain-related fear of movement
and re-injury. The participants choose the extent to which they agree with each of 17 statements
about fear of movement and physical activity that could (subjectively) cause pain and / or injury (1 –
“strongly disagree”, 4 – “strongly agree”). The final score varies from 17 to 68 points, with higher
numbers indicating more severe kinesiophobia. The Tampa Scale for Kinesiophobia is included as a
measure of the likely extent to which participants use their affected limb and their beliefs and
emotions about those movements.
Considering that mood can exert effects on pain [51–53] and attention [54–56], the Profile of Mood
States is administered in the current trial to verify that the two treatment groups are matched
according to mood disturbance, and to enable evaluation of whether treatment results in any
significant differences in mood improvements between the groups. The Profile of Mood States is a 64item scale indicating the extent to which the respondent is experiencing various transient, distinct

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

mood states (1 – “not at all”, 5 – “extremely”). High reliability and validity of Profile of Mood States
[36, 57] has been reported. This measure is also completed by healthy control participants at a single
research session.
The Revised Life Orientation Test [37] assesses levels of optimism and pessimism. Participants rate to
what extent they agree with 10 statements on a scale from 0 – “strongly disagree” to 4 – “strongly
agree”. The Patient Centred Outcomes Questionnaire [38] is also administered to measure patientcentred expectations and criteria for success in chronic pain treatment. Rating scales from 0 to 10 are
used to indicate the usual, desired, expected and considered successful levels of pain, fatigue,
emotional distress, and interference with daily activities (0 – “none”, 10 – “worst imaginable”), and
the importance of improvement in each of these areas (0 – “not at all important”, 10 – “most
important”). The decision to include the Revised Life Orientation Test and the Patient Centred
Outcomes Questionnaire in the current trial was driven by the fact that optimism and expectations of
outcome have been known to influence the success of novel treatments [58–60]. Thus, it is important
to confirm that the two treatment groups are matched on these extraneous factors, or to include
these variables as covariates in the analysis of outcome measures if they are not.
The participants keep daily logbooks for weeks 1-11 in which they use 0-10 NRSs to record their
average level (over the preceding 24 hours) of pain (0 – “no pain at all”, 10 – “pain as bad as it could
be”), the range of movement in the affected arm (0 – “no movement at all”, 10 – “normal movement”),
and the degree to which their symptoms have interfered with their daily life (0 – “no interference at
all”, 10 – “complete interference”). These measures are designed to track the time-course of any
change in pain, movement and interference during the first 11 weeks of the study (i.e. four-week
baseline period, two-week treatment period, and four-week immediate post-treatment period).
Finally, the Patient Global Impression of Change questionnaire [39] is administered to measure
participants’ impression of how much their symptoms have changed due to treatment. It produces a
single rating on a scale from 1 – “no change” to 7 – “a great deal better”. The Patient Global Impression
of Change is a widely recommended measure of perceived global improvement and satisfaction with
treatment [49, 50].
2.5.3.2. Clinical assessments
The clinical measures include examination of CRPS signs and symptoms, sensory thresholds,
autonomic changes, and motor functions. Participants with CRPS undergo all clinical assessments in
RS1-RS4, whereas healthy control participants undergo the same clinical assessments during a single
research session. Locations for sensory testing are the most painful site on the CRPS-affected limb and
the corresponding site on the unaffected limb, always beginning with the unaffected limb so that

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

participants can be familiarised with the test procedures and sensations before the tests are
administered on their painful limb. For sensory testing in control participants, measures taken from
the limb corresponding to the CRPS-affected limb of their matched participant with CRPS are
compared to measures taken from the other limb.
CRPS diagnosis is confirmed in RS1 and RS2 during the baseline period, before commencement of the
treatment, based on the Budapest research criteria [40]. These criteria are also assessed in the posttreatment period (RS3-RS4) to determine if the participants still meet the CRPS diagnosis.
The severity of symptoms is assessed and quantified as CRPS severity score in RS1-RS4, according to a
recently validated protocol [27, 41]. Each of the 16 items is recorded as present (“1”) or absent (“0”)
based on the self-reported symptoms and the signs confirmed at the time of examination through
sensory testing, visual, and manual assessments. These include continuing, disproportionate pain;
allodynia; hyperalgesia and / or hypoesthesia; temperature, colour, and sweating asymmetry;
oedema; dystrophic changes; and motor abnormalities. Summed scores indicate the overall CRPS
severity score. Where possible, criteria are evaluated based on a comparison between the affected
and unaffected upper limb for a sign to be classified as present, including objective quantification of
limb temperature asymmetry, oedema, muscle weakness, and active range of movement.
Photographs of the dorsal and palmar surface of both hands and forearms are taken so that the
presence of skin colour and trophic changes can be double-scored by a researcher who is not involved
in data collection and who is blind to the time point at which the photographs were taken, to which
limb is affected by CRPS, and to which group the participant is allocated. Video recordings of both
limbs performing the movements of fist closure and opening, wrist flexion and extension, and radial
and ulnar wrist deviation are taken so that the motor abnormalities can be double-scored according
to the same protocol. We will use Cohen’s kappa statistic to report inter-rater agreement.
An infrared thermometer is used to measure temperature asymmetry. Temperature measurements
are taken to the nearest 0.1°C from the dorsal and palmar surface of both hands (over the thenar
muscle) and the centre of the region of worst pain as indicated by the participant. An arithmetic mean
of the 3 measurements on each limb is calculated. According to the Budapest diagnostic criteria [40],
an absolute difference between the affected and unaffected side greater than 1°C is classed as a
temperature asymmetry. When available, thermal images of both limbs are additionally taken
(camera FLIR T620 that is sensitive to changes in temperature as small as 0.04°C).
Oedema is measured using the figure-of-eight procedure that uses a soft tape measure. The detailed
protocol for hand and wrist size measurement is described elsewhere [61]. This measure has excellent

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

intra- and interrater reliability and concurrent validity compared with water volumetry [62]. Hand size
is calculated as an arithmetic mean of 3 measurements performed on each hand. Presence of
asymmetric oedema is considered if the average measure taken from the CRPS-affected hand is at
least 0.56cm larger compared to the unaffected hand, which was suggested to be a clinically relevant
difference in a previous study [63].
Grip strength is measured as a marker of muscle weakness, using an electronic hand dynamometer
(Constant, model 14192-709E). Participants are seated in a chair with their elbows flexed at 90°,
forearms in neutral position, and wrists at between 0 and 30° extension. They are instructed to
squeeze the dynamometer’s handle as hard as they can and perform three such trials with each hand,
alternating between the hands and allowing a pause of at least 15 seconds between each trial. An
arithmetic mean of the 3 measurements (kg force) for each hand is calculated. Muscle weakness of
the affected hand is indicated if the ratio of grip force in the affected to unaffected side is smaller than
0.95 for left-handed participants or smaller than 0.85 for right-handed participants. These criteria take
into account the normal difference between dominant and non-dominant hands for left- and righthanded individuals [64, 65].
Active range of movement in the hands is assessed by measuring a change in Finger-To-Palm (∆FTP)
distance (cm). A detailed measurement protocol is described elsewhere [66]. ∆FTP is an index of the
extent to which a person can fully flex their fingers (e.g., to make a fist) relative to the extent to which
they can extend them (e.g., to make their hand flat). ∆FTP was selected as a measure of range of
movement as it takes into account both these aspects of motor function, unlike classic FTP that only
regards the maximum flexion. A significant decrease in the range of movement in the affected hand
is defined as ∆FTPaffected / ∆FTPunaffected < 0.9.
In addition to those limb differences that are assessed through clinical examination for the CRPS
severity score, differences between the affected and unaffected limbs are also objectively quantified
through elements of a standard Quantitative Sensory Testing (QST) procedure to assess hypoesthesia,
pinprick hyperalgesia, and allodynia. Participants undergo the assessment of Mechanical Detection
Threshold (MDT) that follows the standardized protocol [42] using von Frey filaments of 0.008g to
300g force (Bioseb, model Bio-VF-M). Then the ratio of thresholds for affected vs. unaffected side is
derived [(MDTaffected-MDTunaffected)/MDTaffected]. A positive score indicates hypoesthesia (increased
tactile detection threshold) on the affected side. Based on relative QST reference data comparing both
sides of the body, hypoesthesia is confirmed if the ratio is  0.38 [67]. We also assess Mechanical Pain
Threshold (MPT) according to the standardized protocol [42] on both limbs, using pinprick stimulators
of 8mN to 512mN intensities (MRC Systems PinPrick Stimulator Set). A positive thresholds ratio

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[(MPTunaffected-MPTaffected)/MPTunaffected] indicates hyperalgesia (decreased pain threshold) on the
affected side. Hyperalgesia is confirmed if the ratio is  0.4, based on relative QST reference data
comparing both sides of the body [67]. Allodynia is examined using a procedure adapted from the
dynamical mechanical allodynia test of the QST [42]: the cotton ball, Q-tip and brush (MRC Systems
PinPrick Stimulator Set) are applied to the skin five times each, in a random order, with a single 1-2cm
long sweeping motion lasting approximately 1 second. Participants rate each sensation on a scale from
0 – “no pain, no sharp, pricking, stinging, or burning sensation” to 100 – “most intense pain sensation
imaginable”. Any sharp, pricking, stinging, or burning sensation is defined as painful and given a rating
above 0. Allodynia is quantified as an arithmetic mean of 15 ratings on each limb. Its presence is
indicated by scores greater than zero.
A Two-Point Discriminator disk (Exacta, North Coast Medical) is used to record tactile discrimination
thresholds [43]. The participant’s index finger tip is touched either with one tip or two tips of the disk
for 3 seconds per touch, with consistent pressure, and while the participant has their eyes closed. On
each trial, participant reports whether they perceived touch on one point or two points of their finger.
The procedure starts with two points separated by 7mm distance, and the distance between points is
increased or decreased (down to a single tip) across trials according to the staircase procedure. For
example, if the participant initially reports two touches, smaller distances are applied until the
participant reports the sensation of only one point. The distance is then increased until a sensation on
two points is reported again. The procedure continues until 5 subthreshold and 5 suprathreshold
values are obtained. The tactile discrimination index is calculated as a geometric mean of these 10
turning points for each hand. To quantify the difference between the two sides of the body, we derive
the tactile discrimination thresholds ratio [(affected-unaffected)/affected]. Positive score indicates
less precise tactile discrimination ability on the affected limb.
2.5.3.3. Computer-based / psychophysical tests
Six computer-based measures are used in the present study to assess the following
neuropsychological functions: visuospatial attention, cognitive representation of space, spatiallydefined motor function, and body representation. To test for spatial attention bias in near space, we
administer versions of three tasks that have been used to measure spatial attention in hemispatial
neglect: a visual Temporal Order Judgement (TOJ) task [9], a Landmark task [44], and a Greyscales task
[45]. The fourth task is a Mental Number Line Bisection task, which measures the mental
representation of space [46, 68]. The fifth task is a Directional Hypokinesia task, a measure of motor
“neglect-like” impairment. The final computer-based task is a Hand Laterality Recognition task, which
is thought to be indicative of body representation [48].

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

All measures presented in this section are collected in RS1-RS4 from the participants with CRPS and
during a single research session from healthy control participants. Hand and side of space for all tasks
are coded as affected or unaffected (for controls, the “affected” and “unaffected” hand / side is coded
based on their matched participant with CRPS). Each task is preceded by a short practice session to
familiarise the participant with the task. If they do not appear to follow the instructions during
practice, these are explained again, and the practice is repeated.
2.5.3.3.1. Visuospatial attention
The following three computer-based tests are used to measure visuospatial attention: the visual TOJ
task, the Landmark task and the Greyscales task.
2.5.3.3.1.1. The visual TOJ task
TOJ tasks are sensitive measures of spatial attention, used both in clinical populations [69–75] and
healthy people [76–80]. The usual procedure involves presenting pairs of identical stimuli, one on each
side of space, with different onsets but the same duration. The participant’s task is to report which of
the two stimuli they perceived first. According to the prior entry hypothesis [81], stimuli that are
subject to greater attention are perceived earlier relative to stimuli that are subject to lesser attention.
The TOJ task takes advantage of this premise. The visual variant of the TOJ used in this study is similar
to that described in a previous article [9]. The participants keep their hands uncrossed on their laps
under the table, and have their head stabilised by a chinrest. They are instructed to maintain their
gaze on a black fixation point (3mm in diameter), approximately 28cm from their torso, located in the
centre of a 46.5 x 35.5cm white board laid on a table. Pairs of brief (10ms) red light stimuli (3mm in
diameter) are presented using laser pointers controlled via an Arduino platform that is integrated with
PsychoPy software [82]. The lights are presented 9cm (approximately 18°) to the left and 9cm to the
right of the fixation point (one on each side), using a range of ten temporal offsets: 10, 30, 60,
120 and 240ms (with negative numbers representing the trials in which the light on the affected
side appeared first). Each temporal offset is presented 15 times in pseudorandom order, giving a total
of 150 trials. To account for any response bias [83] the participants complete the TOJ task once while
indicating which of the two lights appeared first, and a second time while indicating which light
appeared second (order counterbalanced between participants). Participants’ verbal responses
(“Left” or “Right”) are inputted via the computer keyboard by the researcher. The relative number of
left-right responses to different offsets of the stimuli is re-expressed as the number of affectedunaffected responses. To derive the Point of Subjective Simultaneity (PSS) for each participant and
each condition, these data are then fitted with a cumulative Gaussian using a criterion of maximum
likelihood. The PSS expresses the amount of time (ms) by which the light that appears in the affected
side of space should precede (negative PSS values) or follow (positive PSS values) the light that appears

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in the unaffected side of space for the two stimuli to be perceived as simultaneous. For the analysis,
PSSs from the two response blocks (which light appeared first or second) will be averaged to obtain a
single index of attention bias. A negative PSS value indicates a bias of attention away from the affected
side, whereas a PSS value of 0 indicates equal distribution of attention to both sides of space.
2.5.3.3.1.2. The Landmark task
In addition to the TOJ task, participants complete four tasks involving presentation of visual stimuli on
a computer screen. For these, participants are seated with their head in a chinrest that is aligned with
the centre of the screen. Stimuli are presented on a laptop touch screen (34.5cm x 19.4cm size, 1920
x 1080 pixels resolution) using PsychoPy software [82] on the Windows 10 operating system. The
laptop screen is positioned at a viewing distance of 50cm. The responses are recorded using a custommade button box positioned such that the buttons are aligned vertically.
We use a modified version of a Landmark task to measure bias in attention to or the representation
of relative horizontal distance in near space. The task is adapted from a previous study [44] and
involves simultaneous presentation of two stimuli (“landmarks”; white circles 1.1° in diameter) to the
left and to the right of a central fixation cross. The total distance between the two landmarks is kept
constant across trials (15°), however, their position relative to the fixation cross varies by 0.1°
increments from 8.1° to 6.9° away from the fixation cross in the horizontal plane (Figure 1). Thus,
there are 6 stimulus pairs in which the right landmark is closer to the fixation cross, 6 stimulus pairs in
which the left landmark is closer, and 1 stimulus pair in which the distance of both landmarks from
the fixation cross is equal. Each stimulus pair is presented 15 times during one block resulting in 195
trials per block, presented in pseudorandom order. The participant is instructed to maintain their gaze
on a white, 1.4° high fixation cross presented in the centre of a grey screen. After 500ms, the fixation
cross is joined by the two stimuli which are displayed for 300ms. Then a 200ms mask is presented,
consisting of a white 1.6° high line extending horizontally across the entire screen, with a grey fixation
cross in the same location as the previous white one (Figure 2).

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1. Representation of the stimuli in the Landmark task. White filled circles represent the stimulus pair in
which the left landmark is farther from the fixation cross (-8.1° away) and the left landmark is closer (6.9° away).
Circles with dashed lines in matched colours represent other possible stimulus pair locations.

Figure 2. The time course of a single trial in the Landmark task.

Participants are instructed to indicate whether the left or the right landmark was closer to the fixation
cross. They give their responses by pressing the green (“left”) or red (“right”) button (using the index
and middle finger of the unaffected hand). The button press ends the trial and initiates the next trial.
To control for response bias, in a separate, second block of the task, they are instructed to indicate
which target was further away from the fixation cross by pressing the same buttons. The order of the
two blocks is counterbalanced between participants. Attention bias is calculated from a relative
number of “Left” and “Right” responses to each stimulus pair (landmarks position relative to the
fixation cross). This is re-expressed in terms of affected versus unaffected sides of space and converted
to a Point of Subjective Equality (PSE) using a cumulative Gaussian fit. The PSE expresses the relative
distance at which the landmark on the affected side of space should be further from (negative PSE

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

values) or closer to (positive PSE values) the fixation cross for the two landmarks to be perceived as
appearing at equal distance from the fixation cross. A negative PSE value indicates an attention bias
away from the affected side and / or under-representation of that side of space. For example, if a
participant with a left-affected limb indicates that the left landmark is appearing closer to the fixation
cross more often than the right landmark (i.e., underestimating distance on left side), their PSE value
will be negative and indicate reduced attention to or under-representation of the left (affected) side.
We will average the PSEs from the two response blocks (which landmark was closer or further away
from the fixation cross) to obtain a single spatial bias index for our analyses.
2.5.3.3.1.3. The Greyscales task
The Greyscales task is a sensitive measure of spatial attention bias. The task used in the present study
follows a previously developed procedure [45]. Forty pairs of short (9.95° x 1.95°) and long (12° x 1.95°)
greyscale bars (Figure 3) are presented in the centre of a white screen in a free-viewing condition until
the response is given. Participants indicate if the top or the bottom bar appears overall darker by
pressing the upper or lower button, respectively (using the index and middle fingers of their
unaffected hand). The trials are separated by an 18° x 8° mask (random dot 1111 x 362 black and white
pixel pattern of static) displayed for 150ms, after which the next trial begins. An attention bias score
is calculated by subtracting the number of “leftward” responses (choosing whichever bar is darker on
its left side, regardless of its vertical position) from the number of “rightward” responses and dividing
the difference by a total number of trials. Negative scores indicate leftward bias, i.e. reduced attention
to the right side. This will be re-expressed as bias relative to the affected / unaffected side.

Figure 3. Example pair of stimuli in the Greyscales task. A person who has reduced attention to the left side of
space would judge the upper bar as having overall greater average darkness.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2.5.3.3.2. Mental representation of space
The Mental Number Line Bisection task aims to measure spatial bias in the mental representation of
space. This is based on the evidence that people implicitly represent numbers in a linear arrangement
in which smaller numbers are located to the left side of space, and larger numbers are located to the
right side of space [84]. The procedure is adapted from a previous study [46] in which pairs of numbers
were read aloud to the participants and they were required to indicate the number that would fall
midway between the two without making any calculations. The current task uses the same intervals
(9, 16, 25, 36, 49 and 64) between two numbers that ranged from 2 to 98. For example, the midpoint
number between 54 and 70 (16-interval) would be 62 (Figure 4). The only deviation from the previous
procedure [46] is that every pair of numbers is presented twice – once in ascending and once in
descending order, to reduce response bias. There are 84 trials presented in pseudorandom order and
participants’ verbal responses are inputted to the computer via the keyboard by the researcher. We
subtract the objective midpoint number from the subjective midpoint number in each trial (for
example, see Figure 4), and the average score is transformed to indicate the relative bias in the mental
representation of space away (negative values) or towards (positive values) the affected hand-side. A
bias away from the affected side was previously found in CRPS patients on Mental Number Line
Bisection [46], as well as a rightward bias in post-stroke hemispatial (left) neglect patients [68, 85–87],
and a leftward bias in healthy participants (“pseudoneglect”) [46, 88, 89].

Figure 4. A pictorial representation of a theoretical trial from the Mental Number Line Bisection task. The
participant is asked to indicate the midpoint number between the numbers 54 and 70, which are verbally
presented by the experimenter. A negative bias score indicates that the centre of the participant’s mental
number line is shifted towards smaller numbers, consistent with an over-representation of the left side of space
relative to the right side of space.

2.5.3.3.3. Spatially-defined motor function
We use the Directional Hypokinesia task to assess two distinct forms of motor neglect – directional
hypokinesia, i.e. relative slowing in the initiation of movements directed toward the affected side, and
directional bradykinesia, i.e. relative slowing in the execution of movements directed toward the
affected side of space [90]. The task measures movement initiation and execution times to targets
that appear on the left or the right side of the screen. The task follows the exact procedure previously
used for research with hemispatial neglect patients [47]. A black 1.4° fixation cross and two black 3° x
3° squares, one 12° to the left and one 12° to the right of the fixation cross, are on constant display

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(locations are re-expressed as affected and unaffected visual field). Each trial is initiated by the
participant pressing and holding a button with their index finger. After a time interval that varies
randomly between 1500ms and 3000ms a black target (1.4° high “X”) appears inside one of the
squares, in a pseudorandomized order, for 2000ms. The target onset initiates the response window
and the participant is required to release the button, touch the screen in the location where the target
appeared, and then return their index finger to the button as fast as possible, which initiates the next
trial. There are 30 trials per block. A touch screen is used to monitor the accuracy of pointing-to-target
movements. The Reaction Times (RTs) to release the button after the target onset (movement
initiation time) are recorded, as well as time taken between releasing the button and touching the
screen (movement execution time). There are three different hand starting positions (location of the
button box): 25cm to the left from body midline, central (aligned with the body midline), and 25cm to
the right from body midline (the locations are re-expressed as the affected, central, and unaffected
side). Manipulating the hand starting position allows dissociation between perceptual component of
the task (e.g., slower detection of the targets on the affected side) and the true directional
hypokinesia. Participants perform each condition once with each hand in separate blocks, giving a
total of 6 conditions (unaffected hand from the unaffected side, unaffected hand from the centre,
unaffected hand from the affected side, affected hand from the unaffected side, affected hand from
the centre, affected hand from the affected side). The order of the starting positions is
counterbalanced between participants, with the only restriction that they alternate between the
unaffected and the affected hand in each subsequent block to reduce fatigue. Directional hypokinesia
would be indicated by slower initiation of movements towards the affected side of space, independent
of which arm is used [47, 90, 91]. Directional bradykinesia would be indicated by slower movement
execution times towards targets appearing in their affected side of space, even when using the
unaffected arm.
2.5.3.3.4. Body representation
As an objective measure of body representation we use a modified Hand Laterality Recognition task
based on a procedure described elsewhere [48]. The stimuli were developed specifically for the
current study (examples shown in Figure 5). A gender-neutral right hand was photographed in 36
different postures and mirror-reversed to create equivalent pictures of a left hand. In a pilot study,
these were presented at four different orientations (0°, 90°, 180° and 270°), each in left and right
visual field (giving a total of 576 trials). In each trail, a black 0.1° fixation cross on a white background
was on constant display. After 1000ms a colour image of a hand (12° x 12°) was randomly presented
8° to the left or to the right of the fixation cross (i.e., in the left or the right visual field, as in a previously
published similar procedure [8]) for 200ms. The pilot participants (N = 22 healthy adults; 11 females;

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

mean age = 27.91; SD = 8.43) were required to indicate whether the image represented the right or
the left hand by pressing “up” or “down” keys, respectively, using the index and middle fingers of their
dominant hand. The next trial started after 3000ms from the stimulus onset or once the response was
given, whichever came first. Participants were instructed to be as fast and as accurate in their
responses as possible. Following a practice session with longer stimulus presentation times (2000ms),
participants completed the task in three blocks, allowing a break after every 196 trials. Fifty images
(25 of each hand in the same posture and orientation) were selected from the pilot image bank for
the current study based on sufficient accuracy obtained in the pilot study: at least 72% accuracy
averaged across both hemifields and less than 15% difference in accuracy between left and right
hemifield. These requirements were set to ensure that the stimuli properties were such that a healthy
participant is able to determine the laterality above the chance level. Example stimuli are presented
in Figure 5.

Figure 5. Examples of the images of hands in four postures and rotation angles included in the Hand Laterality
Recognition task.

The procedure in the current research follows that of the pilot study with several exceptions. First,
prior to the main task, participants complete a practice block of 12 trials that includes feedback until
they reach at least 75% accuracy across the entire practice block (they repeat the practice to ensure
that they able to perform the task above chance level). Second, the size of the images is increased to
12.9° x 12.9° to improve the visibility of the stimuli. Third, the images are presented for 180ms, a
period short enough to prevent foveation of the stimuli, ensuring that the images are presented to
one visual hemifield. Participants indicate their laterality judgements by pressing the red or green
button using the index and middle finger of their unaffected hand. Speed and accuracy are both
emphasised but there is no upper time limit for the response, and the button press initiates the next
trial. There is a total of 100 trials (25 images x 2 hemifields x 2 depicted hands) conducted in a single
block. Accuracy rates and RTs of the correct responses are calculated separately for the images of
hands corresponding to the participant’s affected and unaffected limbs, and for the visual hemifield
corresponding to their affected and unaffected side of space (matched sides in healthy controls). As

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the task requires mental rotation of the images of hands, slower RTs and lower accuracy rates are
considered to be an indicator of a distorted representation of the depicted limb [8, 48, 92].

2.6. Blinding
All outcome measurements are recorded by a researcher who is blind to group allocations (MH). A
researcher (JHB) who is not involved in data collection allocates participants with CRPS to treatment
groups 1-5 days before RS2. JHB or another researcher not involved in data collection (ADV) trains the
participants in how to carry out the PA treatment or sham treatment in a self-guided manner at the
end of RS2. The participants return the goggles in sealed opaque bags after completing the treatment
in RS3 so that the primary researcher (MH) remains blind to their treatment allocation. MH will be
unblinded as to the group allocations of the participants once the last person has completed RS4, as
there will be no further research sessions in which she will assess symptoms. Follow-up measurements
in weeks 19 (LTFU1) and 31 (LTFU2) will be carried out via postal questionnaires scored by research
assistants who are blind to the group allocations.
The participants will be blind to their group allocations as they are not made aware of the specific
nature of the intervention beyond that it involves sensory-motor coordination, nor the type of goggles
used in the other treatment arm. A more general term “sensory-motor adaptation” is used to refer to
PA in all study documents and instructions that the participants receive, to reduce the possibility that
they could determine their treatment condition based on descriptions of PA on the Internet. At the
end of the last in-person session (RS4) they will also be asked whether they have a belief about which
condition they were allocated to, and their degree of confidence about this belief. They will be
unblinded once data collection for this study is completed for all participants. Also, a participant might
be unblinded before this time should they experience any worsening of symptoms that causes them
concerns. If so, that participant will be withdrawn from the study in that no further data will be
collected from them.

2.7. Statistical analyses
To process and analyse the data we will use IBM SPSS Statistics [93], R [94], and MATLAB [95] software.
Hypotheses will be tested using a significance level of α = .05. We will control type I errors in the
primary analyses using Holm-Bonferroni corrections for multiple comparisons within each outcome
analysis. No correction for multiple testing will be made in the exploratory analyses. We will report
95% bias-corrected and accelerated (BCa) bootstrap confidence intervals around all mean values.
Outliers are defined as scores outside ±3 SDs from the participant’s mean score for a task condition
(participant-level data) or from the group mean (group-level data) for a particular test or task
condition. We will examine participant-level and group-level RT data in the Hand Laterality

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Recognition and Directional Hypokinesia tasks for the presence of outliers and use nearest neighbour
replacement if any are identified. We will use the same method of nearest neighbour replacement for
the group-level outliers identified on the remaining outcome measures.
T-tests and ANOVAS will be conducted to compare mean values between groups and between data
collection time points. Statistically significant interactions will be interrogated through follow-up
contrasts. Wilcoxon signed-rank tests and Mann-Whitney U tests will be used if assumptions of t-tests
are violated; however, ANOVAs are robust to moderate violations of normality and homogeneity of
variance. Therefore, we will use ANOVAs unless severe violations of normality, homogeneity of
variance, and sphericity assumptions are present, in which case we will use linear mixed models
analyses with bootstrapping procedures.

2.7.1. Sample size and power calculation
The required sample size was calculated based on the primary outcome measure of self-reported pain
[96]. A meta-analysis defined a clinically significant reduction in pain as a change of Δ = -2 (on a scale
of 0-10) [97]. The sample size required to detect a pain reduction of this magnitude between RS2 and
RS3 was estimated. The risk of type I error was set at 5% and the risk of type II error was set at 10%,
giving 90% power to detect a significant change in the pain. The standard deviation expected in the
current study was estimated as 1.98 based on pain intensity ratings obtained by our group in recent
research [9]. Given these parameters, a minimum of 42 participants with CRPS (21 per group) is
required to evaluate the effects of the PA treatment on the primary outcome measure of pain. Taking
into account an anticipated drop-out rate of 20%, up to 52 participants with CRPS will be enrolled in
order to obtain a total of at least 21 complete datasets for RS1-RS4 per treatment group. To provide
normative data, 21 healthy (pain-free) control participants will be recruited.

2.7.2. Timing
No interim analyses are planned. The timing of the final analyses will be stratified by planned length
of follow-up for the relevant outcome measures. Once all participants have completed RS4, we will
analyse the RS1-RS4 data to address our research questions regarding the efficacy of PA treatment in
reducing CRPS symptom severity (RQ1) and the relationships between the severity of clinical
symptoms of CRPS and neuropsychological changes in perception of and attention to the affected limb
and its corresponding side of space in RS1 (RQ2). We will conduct separate analyses of current selfreported pain intensity, the BPI, the Pain Detect Questionnaire, the BPDS, the Tampa Scale for
Kinesiophobia, the Profile of Mood States, and the Patient’s Global Impression of Change scores once
all participants meet the secondary endpoint (LTFU2). Recruitment will be terminated if we are not
able to collect 42 full datasets for RS1-RS4 by 1 March 2019.

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2.7.3. Treatment outcome analyses
We will conduct intention to treat (ITT) as our primary analysis to examine the overall effects of prism
adaptation. The ITT analysis will include all allocated participants with CRPS regardless of treatment
adherence and completion of outcome measurements. Baseline post-randomisation observation
(RS2) carried forward will be used to account for missing data in ITT analysis, as the participants are
expected to return to pre-treatment baseline over time. The exception is the Patient Global
Impression of Change questionnaire that is only completed in the post-treatment research sessions,
in which case the RS3 observation will be carried forward. Missing data from the computer-based
tasks within each research session will be replaced by group mean for the particular task condition
(with an exception of Directional Hypokinesia task, where some participant with CRPS may not be able
to complete the task using the affected limb; in such cases only the conditions completed with the
unaffected limb will be analysed). Missing daily logbook ratings will be interpolated using linear
regression.
We will also conduct a supportive per-protocol (PP) analysis to see whether PA treatment can benefit
the participants with CRPS who were able to perform it according to the trained protocol compared
to those participants who were able to complete the sham treatment according to trained protocol
[98]. The PP population will be the subset of the ITT population who provided complete outcome data
for RS1-RS4 (i.e. attended all in-person research sessions and completed the primary outcome
measures) and missed no more than 6 treatment sessions.
We will use confidence intervals to compare the RS1 primary outcomes scores of the participants with
CRPS who withdrew and those who remained in the trial until RS4. The timing and reasons for
withdrawal will be presented in a CONSORT diagram.

2.7.4. Descriptive characteristics
We will report baseline characteristics for individual participants with CRPS such as affected limb, type
of inciting injury, CRPS duration, co-morbidities, prescribed medications and other treatments, and
change in handedness score.
Minimisation factors listed in Table 2 will be presented as group means for continuous factors or
proportion of participants in each group who are classed positive on each categorical factor. We will
conduct a series of contrasts and chi-square tests to confirm that the minimisation procedure
successfully equated the two groups on these factors. Contrasts will also be used to confirm that the
PA and sham treatment groups are matched on mean Profile of Mood States, Revised Life Orientation
Test, and Patient Centred Outcomes Questionnaire scores.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2.7.5. Efficacy of PA treatment in reducing pain and CRPS symptom severity (RQ1)
A 2x6 ANOVA with Group as a between-subjects factor (PA treatment, sham treatment), and Time
(RS1, RS2, RS3, RS4, LTFU1, LTFU2) as a within-subject factor will be conducted for the first primary
outcome of pain intensity rating. We will also conduct sixteen a-priori contrasts to compare RS1 vs.
RS2, RS2 vs. RS3, RS3 vs. RS4, RS2 vs. RS4, RS2 vs. LTFU1, RS4 vs. LTFU1, LTFU1 vs. LTFU2, and RS2 vs.
LTFU2 within each group. We will also conduct a 2x4 ANOVA with the factors Group (PA treatment,
sham treatment) and Time (RS1, RS2, RS3, RS4) for the second primary outcome of CPRS severity
score, followed by eight a-priori contrasts comparing RS1 vs. RS2, RS2 vs. RS3, RS3 vs. RS4, and RS2 vs.
RS4 within each group.
Minimisation factors (see Table 2) may be included as covariates in the ANOVAs if there are significant
differences at RS1. Similarly, if we find significant group differences in the Profile of Mood States,
Tampa Scale for Kinesiophobia, or Revised Life Orientation Test RS1 scores, these variables may be
used as covariates in the ANOVAs on pain and CRPS severity score.
We will also calculate the Number Needed to Treat (NNT) separately for pain and CRPS severity score.
The NNT will be based on the proportion of participants in each treatment arm that achieved clinically
significant pain relief (≥2 points on 0-10 NRS scale [97]) and reduction in CRPS symptom severity (≥4.9
points [27]) in RS3 compared to RS2.

2.7.6. Baseline neuropsychological symptoms and their relationships with the clinical
symptoms of CRPS (RQ2)
We will conduct a series of contrasts to compare mean age, proportion of males and females, and
proportion of left- and right-handed individuals between participants with CRPS in RS1 and healthy
controls. Participants’ mean scores on self-report questionnaires and clinical assessments in RS1 will
also be compared between the two groups. Specifically, we will conduct contrasts to compare
participants with CRPS and healthy controls groups on the BPDS and Profile Of Mood States scores;
the hand laterality indices (current for healthy controls, and handedness before CRPS for the
participants with CRPS); limb temperature asymmetry and hands size difference (affected –
unaffected), grip strength and ΔFTP ratios (affected / unaffected), MDT, MPT, two-point
discrimination threshold ratios, and mean allodynia score on the affected side.
To test whether the participants with CRPS in RS1 show visuospatial attention bias compared to
healthy controls, we will use four separate contrasts. Specifically, we will conduct four between-group
comparisons of the following variables: PSSs in the TOJ task, PSEs in the Landmark task, attention bias
scores in the Greyscales task, and bias scores in the MNLB task.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The Directional Hypokinesia task conditions performed with the affected and unaffected hand will be
analyzed separately. We will exclude incorrect and missed trials and calculate mean Movement
Initiation Time (MIT) and Movement Execution Time (MET) for each combination of Visual Field (VF)
in which the target appeared (affected and unaffected) and hand Starting Position (affected, central,
and unaffected location).
To test if the participants with CRPS show signs of directional hypokinesia compared to the healthy
controls we will conduct two three-way ANOVAs on MITs for each hand with the following factors:
Group (participants with CRPS, healthy controls), VF (affected, unaffected), and Starting Position
(affected, central, unaffected). Significant interactions will be followed by four a-priori contrasts to
test whether the participants with CRPS are slower to initiate movements toward the targets in their
affected side of space (regardless of the direction of reaching movement required) and / or in the
direction toward their affected side of space (regardless of the location of the target). Specifically, we
will examine if participants with CRPS have slower MITs to the targets in the affected VF than in the
unaffected VF; to the affected VF compared to healthy controls; to the affected VF from central
compared to affected Starting Position; and to the affected VF from central Starting Position compared
to healthy controls.
To dissociate any signs of directional hypokinesia from potential mechanical constraints, two indices
of directional hypokinesia will be derived based on the analyses described in previous research [47].
Movement pathways and indices are illustrated in Figure 6. The first index (A) quantifies the difference
in MITs to the targets in the affected vs. unaffected VF as a function of the direction of the movements
[i.e. reaching toward the affected side (from central Starting Position) relative to reaching toward the
unaffected side (from affected Starting Position). Index A will be calculated as: [central Starting
Position (MIT affected VF – MIT unaffected VF) – affected Starting Position (MIT affected VF – MIT
unaffected VF)]. Thus, a larger value on this index will indicate greater directional hypokinesia. A
potential drawback of Index A is that it involves planning a movement across body midline (from the
affected Starting Position to the unaffected VF) that covers a longer distance and may be more difficult
than other movement trajectories. Therefore, we will also derive a second index (B) that directly
quantifies the relative slowing in the ability to initiate movements to the targets in the affected VF
when making movements of the same physical length toward the affected side (from central Starting
Position), versus toward the unaffected side (from affected Starting Position). Index B will be
calculated as [central Starting Position (MIT affected VF) – affected Starting Position (MIT affected
VF)]. Positive values on each index (A and B) would indicate hypokinesia for the affected side. We will
examine differences between Groups (participants with CRPS, healthy controls) on MITs through
separate contrasts for each index (A and B).

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3

Affected

Unaffected

VF

VF

4

Affected
Starting
Position

1

2

Central
Starting
Position

Unaffected
Starting
Position

Figure 6. Target locations (affected and unaffected Visual Field, VF) and hand Starting Positions (affected,
central, and unaffected) in the Directional Hypokinesia task as an example of a participant with CRPS of left arm.
Index A is calculated as initiation time of the movements represented by arrows [(1 – 2) – (3 – 4)]. Index B is
calculated as initiation time of movements (1 – 3).

As further exploratory analyses we will examine how many participants with CRPS are impaired on
both indices (A and B) of directional hypokinesia and bradykinesia by identifying which participants
obtained positive A and B indices and by comparing each CPRS patient’s indices to the mean indices
for healthy controls using Crawford t-tests [99]. To examine whether the participants with CRPS show
signs of directional bradykinesia (longer movement execution times toward the affected side relative
to healthy controls), METs will be analyzed analogously to the MITs.
To test for differences in body representation as measured by the Hand Laterality Recognition task
between the participants with CRPS and healthy controls, we will conduct two three-way ANOVAS
with the factors Group (participants with CRPS, healthy controls), depicted Hand (affected,
unaffected), and VF (affected, unaffected) on accuracy rates and RTs to accurate responses. If there
are significant three-way interactions, we will conduct a-priori contrasts to test whether the
participants with CRPS are less accurate and / or slower in responding to: the depicted hands
corresponding to their affected hand compared to those corresponding to their unaffected hand when
the hands are presented in the affected VF; the affected hands presented in the affected VF compared
to the unaffected VF; the affected hands compared to the unaffected hands; the affected hands
presented in the affected VF compared to healthy controls; the affected hands compared to healthy
controls; and the hands presented in the affected VF compared to healthy controls. If there is no effect
of VF, we will only consider accuracy rates / RTs to recognize affected and unaffected hands averaged
across both VFs in follow-up contrasts and any further correlation / regression analyses. To obtain
single Hand Laterality Recognition indices, we will also calculate the differences in accuracy rates / RTs
between depicted hands by subtracting values for the unaffected hand from the affected hand.

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2.7.6.1. Relationships between neuropsychological changes and clinical symptoms of CRPS
Correlation and regression analyses will be conducted to test relationships between
neuropsychological changes (as measured by computer-based tasks) and clinical symptoms of CRPS
(as measured by self-report questionnaires and clinical assessments). These analyses will depend on
which outcomes show significant differences between participants with CRPS and healthy controls,
thus they are exploratory.

2.7.7. Effects of PA treatment on neuropsychological changes and other secondary outcomes
(RQ3) and time course of any improvements (RQ4)
To analyze between-group (PA treatment vs. sham treatment) differences on the secondary outcome
measures (see Table 3) across four (RS1-RS4) or six (RS1-LTFU2) time points, we will conduct 2x4 or
2x6 ANOVAs as described for the analyses of the primary outcomes. Specifically, a 2x4 ANOVA will be
run on each clinical assessment outcome (limb temperature asymmetry, hands size difference, grip
strength and ΔFTP ratios, MDT, MPT, two-point discrimination threshold ratios, and allodynia) and
mean group scores in the following computer-based measures: PSSs in the TOJ task, PSEs in the
Landmark task, attention bias scores in the Greyscales task, and bias scores in the MNLB task. We will
also use 2x4 ANOVAS to analyse between-group differences on indices A and B for the affected and
unaffected hand performance in the Directional Hypokinesia task, as well as on hand laterality
recognition accuracy and RTs indices in the Hand Laterality Recognition task across RS1-RS4. Separate
2x6 ANOVAs will be run on mean group scores on each of the self-reported questionnaire measures:
pain intensity and interference components of the BPI, the Pain Detect Questionnaire, The BPDS, the
Tampa Scale for Kinesiophobia, and the Profile of Mood States.
We will plot group means of daily ratings of average pain, range of movement, and interference over
time and use contrasts to identify the time points of significant group differences. We will also identify
for both groups and for each measure the average number of days to reach peak improvement from
the start of treatment, and the average number of days from the peak improvement to return to
baseline.

2.7.8. Predictors of the response to PA treatment and / or CRPS progression over time (RQ5)
We will conduct exploratory analyses of the potential factors that can predict response to treatment
for the PA group. First, we will calculate reduction scores as a change in current pain scores and CRPS
severity scores from the immediate pre-treatment to immediate post-treatment sessions (RS3 – RS2).
Second, we will conduct two separate linear mixed models regressions on pain reduction scores and
CRPS severity reduction scores including the pertinent explanatory factors such as demographic

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

characteristics; current pain intensity; CRPS severity score; and scores on the self-report
questionnaires, clinical assessments, and computer-based tests. In the first instance, we will consider
those outcomes that differed the most from the healthy control participants in RS1.
The same factors will be considered potential explanatory variables in linear mixed models regressions
on current pain scores and CRPS severity scores across four research sessions (RS1-RS4). These
exploratory analyses will be conducted for data from all the participants with CRPS to examine possible
predictors of CRPS progression over time (including but not limited to treatment group).

3. Discussion
Considering the poor overall response to conventional medical treatments for CRPS [100], it is
important to seek novel methods of pain relief and symptoms improvement. PA is an emerging
treatment that targets spatial attention deficits, has shown early promise as an intervention for CRPS,
and might operate through different mechanisms to mirror visual feedback (another neurocognitive
treatment for CRPS [23, 101]).
The ongoing trial that is described in this protocol is the first to investigate the effects of PA treatment
on pain and CRPS symptom severity using a double-blind, randomized, and sham-controlled design in
a patient sample that is large enough to detect a clinically significant reduction in pain. We are
evaluating a brief, low-cost treatment that can be easily self-administered by the participant in a home
setting.
While clearly defining our primary outcome measures, the trial includes a wide range of secondary
outcome measures to assess the impact of a treatment on pain and other clinical CRPS symptoms, as
well as neuropsychological and emotional functioning, and symptoms’ interference with daily life.
These measures will allow us to explore relationships between self-reported, clinical, and
neuropsychological manifestations of CRPS from baseline data, independent of the primary research
aim of testing the efficacy of PA.
Furthermore, this research may identify potential individual differences accounting for the course of
CRPS and response to treatment. The findings could provide an indication of how to identify the
patients who are most likely to benefit from PA based on their cognitive and physical symptoms. This
would inform subsequent research and therapies.
If PA brings benefits beyond that of the sham treatment on the primary outcome measures of the
ongoing trial, this treatment should be developed as a recommended method to reduce pain and

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

other CRPS symptoms. The study is likely to expand on our limited understanding of this debilitating
condition and its neuropsychological components.

4. List of abbreviations
BPDS: Bath CRPS Body Perception Disturbance Scale;
BPI: Brief Pain Inventory;
CRPS: Complex Regional Pain Syndrome;
FTP: Finger-To-Palm distance;
LTFU1: Long Term Follow-Up 1 (week 19) by post;
LTFU2: Long Term Follow-Up 2 (week 31) by post;
MDT: Mechanical Detection Threshold;
MET: Movement Execution Time;
MIT: Movement Initiation Time;
MPT: Mechanical Pain Threshold;
NRS: Numerical Rating Scale;
PA: Prism Adaptation;
PSE: Point of Subjective Equality;
PSS: Point of Subjective Simultaneity;
RS1: Research Session 1 (week 1);
RS2: Research Session 2 (week 4);
RS3: Research Session 3 (week 7);
RS4: Research Session 4 (week 11);
RSDSA: Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy Syndrome Association;
RT: Reaction Time;
QST: Quantitative Sensory Testing;
TOJ: Temporal Order Judgement;
VF; Visual Field.

5. Declarations
5.1. Ethics approval and consent to participate
This trial gained approval from National Health Service Oxfordshire Research Ethics Committee A and
Health Research Authority, reference number 12/sc/0557, and from the University of Bath Psychology
Ethics Committee (16-333). Major protocol amendments are implemented only after formal approval
from the Research Ethics Committee. Any protocol updates are also documented and dated on the

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ISRCTN trial record. The researcher who is responsible for data collection (MH) obtains informed
consent from each participant that is signed and dated prior to any study-related procedures. Verbal
consent to continue with the study is taken at the beginning of each consecutive research session.
Participants are able to withdraw from the trial at any time.
The study sponsor, the University of Bath, is involved in the trial management through providing data
storage and ethical supervision (Contact: Prof. Jonathan Knight, pro-vc-research@bath.ac.uk,
Claverton Down Road, Bath BA2 7AY, UK).
5.2. Consent for publication
Not applicable.
5.3. Availability of data and material
There is no data associated with the current paper, which describes a protocol for a clinical trial that
is in progress at the time of submission. All investigators will have access to the final dataset.
Anonymised participant-level data from the trial will be stored using the Open Science Framework
repository and access will be granted upon request. Access shall be requested by contacting the
corresponding author via email. Description of the data and specific instructions for gaining access will
be listed in a publicly-available format in the repository. The data will be made available in this format
at the time that the paper describing the trial outcome is published, upon MH’s graduation from her
PhD, or two years after the end of data collection (whichever comes first). Obtained results will be
communicated to participants, clinicians, and the public through newsletters, talks and press releases.
Materials that were modified or developed specifically for the purpose of the current trial, as well as
data management plan, will be available from the project’s webpage at Open Science Framework
upon completion of data collection for the trial.
5.4. Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
5.5. Funding
The study is funded by Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy Syndrome Association (RSDSA). The RSDSA
approved the design of the study and have no other role regarding the use of the data or preparation
of the manuscript.
5.6. Authors’ contributions
The study was conceived of by JHB. JHB, MH, ADV and MJP contributed to design. JHB and MJP secured
the funding. MH developed the testing protocols, programmed the computer-based tasks, and

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

prepared the draft. MH and JHB devised the randomisation with minimisation procedure. All the
authors have read and approved this version of the manuscript.
5.7. Acknowledgements
Not applicable.

6. Supplementary materials
SPIRIT Checklist – Table includes manuscript page number references to the recommended items to
address in a clinical trial protocol and related documents.
WHO Trial Registration Data Set – Table lists all items from the World Health Organisation Trial
Registration Data Set.

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

7. References
1. ISRCTN - ISRCTN46828292: Treatment of complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) with sensorymotor adaptation. doi:10.1186/ISRCTN46828292.
2. Marinus J, Moseley GL, Birklein F, Baron R, Maihöfner C, Kingery WS, et al. Clinical features and
pathophysiology of complex regional pain syndrome. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10:637–648.
3. Harden NR, Bruehl S, Perez RSGM, Birklein F, Marinus J, Maihofner C, et al. Validation of proposed
diagnostic criteria (the “Budapest Criteria”) for Complex Regional Pain Syndrome: Pain.
2010;150:268–74.
4. Beerthuizen A, Stronks DL, van’t Spijker A, Yaksh A, Hanraets BM, Klein J, et al. Demographic and
medical parameters in the development of complex regional pain syndrome type 1 (CRPS1):
Prospective study on 596 patients with a fracture: Pain. 2012;153:1187–92.
5. Rooij AM, Perez RSGM, Huygen FJ, Eijs F, Kleef M, Bauer MCR, et al. Spontaneous onset of Complex
Regional Pain Syndrome. Eur J Pain. 2010;14:510–3.
6. Moseley GL, Gallace A, Di Pietro F, Spence C, Iannetti GD. Limb-specific autonomic dysfunction in
complex regional pain syndrome modulated by wearing prism glasses: Pain. 2013;154:2463–8.
7. Moseley GL, Gallace A, Spence C. Space-based, but not arm-based, shift in tactile processing in
complex regional pain syndrome and its relationship to cooling of the affected limb. Brain.
2009;132:3142–51.
8. Reid E, Wallwork SB, Harvie D, Chalmers KJ, Gallace A, Spence C, et al. A New Kind of Spatial
Inattention Associated With Chronic Limb Pain?: Somatospatial Inattention in Pain. Ann Neurol.
2016;79:701–4.
9. Bultitude JH, Walker I, Spence C. Space-based bias of covert visual attention in complex regional
pain syndrome. Brain. 2017;140:2306–21.
10. Filbrich L, Alamia A, Verfaille C, Berquin A, Barbier O, Libouton X, et al. Biased visuospatial
perception in complex regional pain syndrome. Sci Rep. 2017;7:9712.
11. Legrain V, Bultitude JH, De Paepe AL, Rossetti Y. Pain, body, and space: What do patients with
complex regional pain syndrome really neglect?: Pain. 2012;153:948–51.
12. Torta DM, Legrain V, Rossetti Y, Mouraux A. Prisms for pain. Can visuo-motor rehabilitation
strategies alleviate chronic pain? Eur J Pain. 2016;20:64–9.
13. Redding GM, Rossetti Y, Wallace B. Applications of prism adaptation: a tutorial in theory and
method. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2005;29:431–44.
14. Luauté J, Halligan P, Rode G, Jacquin-Courtois S, Boisson D. Prism adaptation first among equals in
alleviating left neglect: a review. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2006;24:409–418.

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

15. Frassinetti F, Angeli V, Meneghello F, Avanzi S, Làdavas E. Long-lasting amelioration of visuospatial
neglect by prism adaptation. Brain. 2002;125:608–623.
16. Rossetti Y, Rode G, Pisella L, Farné A, Li L, Boisson D, et al. Prism adaptation to a rightward optical
deviation rehabilitates left hemispatial neglect. Nature. 1998;395:166–169.
17. Làdavas E, Bonifazi S, Catena L, Serino A. Neglect rehabilitation by prism adaptation: different
procedures have different impacts. Neuropsychologia. 2011;49:1136–1145.
18. Mizuno K, Tsuji T, Takebayashi T, Fujiwara T, Hase K, Liu M. Prism adaptation therapy enhances
rehabilitation of stroke patients with unilateral spatial neglect: a randomized, controlled trial.
Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2011;25:711–720.
19. Serino A, Bonifazi S, Pierfederici L, Làdavas E. Neglect treatment by prism adaptation: What
recovers and for how long. Neuropsychol Rehabil. 2007;17:657–87.
20. Serino A, Barbiani M, Rinaldesi ML, Làdavas E. Effectiveness of prism adaptation in neglect
rehabilitation. Stroke. 2009;40:1392–1398.
21. Vangkilde S, Habekost T. Finding Wally: prism adaptation improves visual search in chronic neglect.
Neuropsychologia. 2010;48:1994–2004.
22. Jacquin-Courtois S, O’Shea J, Luauté J, Pisella L, Revol P, Mizuno K, et al. Rehabilitation of spatial
neglect by prism adaptation. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2013;37:594–609.
23. Bultitude JH, Rafal RD. Derangement of body representation in complex regional pain syndrome:
report of a case treated with mirror and prisms. Exp Brain Res. 2010;204:409–18.
24. Christophe L, Chabanat E, Delporte L, Revol P, Volckmann P, Jacquin-Courtois S, et al. Prisms to
Shift Pain Away: Pathophysiological and Therapeutic Exploration of CRPS with Prism Adaptation.
Neural Plast. 2016;2016:1–21.
25. Sumitani M, Rossetti Y, Shibata M, Matsuda Y, Sakaue G, Inoue T, et al. Prism adaptation to optical
deviation alleviates pathologic pain. Neurology. 2007;68:128–33.
26.

Minim:

allocation

by

minimisation

in

clinical

trials.

https://www-

users.york.ac.uk/~mb55/guide/minim.htm. Accessed 26 Jul 2017.
27. Harden NR, Maihofner C, Abousaad E, Vatine J-J, Kirsling A, Perez RSGM, et al. A prospective,
multisite, international validation of the Complex Regional Pain Syndrome Severity Score: PAIN.
2017;158:1430–6.
28. Facchin A, Daini R, Toraldo A. Prismatic Adaptation in the Rehabilitation of Neglect Patients: Does
the Specific Procedure Matter? Front Hum Neurosci. 2013;7. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00137.
29. Redding GM, Wallace B. Adaptive spatial alignment and strategic perceptual-motor control. J Exp
Psychol Hum Percept Perform. 1996;22:379.

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

30. Bultitude JH, Rafal RD, Tinker C. Moving Forward with Prisms: Sensory-Motor Adaptation Improves
Gait Initiation in Parkinson’s Disease. Front Neurol. 2012;3. doi:10.3389/fneur.2012.00132.
31. Oldfield RC. The assessment and analysis of handedness: the Edinburgh inventory.
Neuropsychologia. 1971;9:97–113.
32. Cleeland CS. The Brief Pain Inventory. In: McDowell I, Newell C, editors. Measuring health
outcomes. 2nd edition. New York: Oxford University Press; 1996. p. 352–7.
33. Freynhagen R, Baron R, Gockel U, Tölle TR. Pain DETECT: a new screening questionnaire to identify
neuropathic components in patients with back pain. Curr Med Res Opin. 2006;22:1911–1920.
34. Lewis J, McCabe CS. Body perception disturbance (BPD) in CRPS. Pract Pain Manag. 2010;10:60–
66.
35. Miller RP, Kori SH, Todd DD. The Tampa Scale: a Measure of Kinisophobia. Clin J Pain. 1991;7:51.
36. McNair DM, Lorr M, Droppleman LF. Manual for the POMS. San Diego Educ Ind Test Serv. 1971.
37. Scheier MF, Carver CS, Bridges MW. Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism (and trait anxiety,
self-mastery, and self-esteem): a reevaluation of the Life Orientation Test. J Pers Soc Psychol.
1994;67:1063.
38. Robinson ME, Brown JL, George SZ, Edwards PS, Atchison JW, Hirsh AT, et al. Multidimensional
success criteria and expectations for treatment of chronic pain: the patient perspective. Pain Med.
2005;6:336–345.
39. Hurst H, Bolton J. Assessing the clinical significance of change scores recorded on subjective
outcome measures. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2004;27:26–35.
40. Harden NR. Objectification of the diagnostic criteria for CRPS. Pain Med. 2010;11:1212–1215.
41. Harden NR, Bruehl S, Perez RSGM, Birklein F, Marinus J, Maihofner C, et al. Development of a
severity score for CRPS: Pain. 2010;151:870–6.
42. Rolke R, Magerl W, Campbell KA, Schalber C, Caspari S, Birklein F, et al. Quantitative sensory
testing: a comprehensive protocol for clinical trials. Eur J Pain. 2006;10:77–77.
43. Pleger B, Ragert P, Schwenkreis P, Förster A-F, Wilimzig C, Dinse H, et al. Patterns of cortical
reorganization parallel impaired tactile discrimination and pain intensity in complex regional pain
syndrome. NeuroImage. 2006;32:503–10.
44. Makin TR, Wilf M, Schwartz I, Zohary E. Amputees “Neglect” the Space Near Their Missing Hand.
Psychol Sci. 2010;21:55–7.
45. Nicholls ME, Bradshaw JL, Mattingley JB. Free-viewing perceptual asymmetries for the judgement
of brightness, numerosity and size. Neuropsychologia. 1999;37:307–314.
46. Sumitani M, Misaki M, Kumagaya S, Ogata T, Yamada Y, Miyauchi S. Dissociation in accessing space
and number representations in pathologic pain patients. Brain Cogn. 2014;90:151–6.

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

47. Sapir A, Kaplan JB, He BJ, Corbetta M. Anatomical Correlates of Directional Hypokinesia in Patients
with Hemispatial Neglect. J Neurosci. 2007;27:4045–51.
48. Schwoebel J, Friedman R, Duda N, Coslett HB. Pain and the body schema. Brain. 2001;124:2098–
2104.
49. Grieve S, Jones L, Walsh N, McCabe C. What outcome measures are commonly used for Complex
Regional Pain Syndrome clinical trials? A systematic review of the literature. Eur J Pain.
2016;20:331–40.
50. Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Farrar JT, Haythornthwaite JA, Jensen MP, Katz NP, et al. Core outcome
measures for chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT recommendations: Pain. 2005;113:9–19.
51. Bair MJ, Robinson RL, Katon W, Kroenke K. Depression and Pain Comorbidity: A Literature Review.
Arch Intern Med. 2003;163:2433–45.
52. Tang NKY, Salkovskis PM, Hodges A, Wright KJ, Hanna M, Hester J. Effects of mood on pain
responses and pain tolerance: An experimental study in chronic back pain patients. PAIN.
2008;138:392–401.
53. Villemure C, Bushnell MC. Mood Influences Supraspinal Pain Processing Separately from Attention.
J Neurosci. 2009;29:705–15.
54. Tucker DM, Hartry-Speiser A, McDougal L, Luu P, deGrandpre D. Mood and spatial memory:
emotion and right hemisphere contribution to spatial cognition. Biol Psychol. 1999;50:103–25.
55. Moriya H, Nittono H. Effect of mood states on the breadth of spatial attentional focus: An eventrelated potential study. Neuropsychologia. 2011;49:1162–70.
56. MacLeod C, Mathews A, Tata P. Attentional bias in emotional disorders. J Abnorm Psychol.
1986;95:15.
57. Shacham S. A shortened version of the Profile of Mood States. J Pers Assess. 1983;47:305–306.
58. Turner JA, Deyo RA, Loeser JD, Korff MV, Fordyce WE. The Importance of Placebo Effects in Pain
Treatment and Research. JAMA. 1994;271:1609–14.
59. Bingel U, Wanigasekera V, Wiech K, Mhuircheartaigh RN, Lee MC, Ploner M, et al. The Effect of
Treatment Expectation on Drug Efficacy: Imaging the Analgesic Benefit of the Opioid Remifentanil.
Sci Transl Med. 2011;3:70ra14.
60. Linde K, Witt CM, Streng A, Weidenhammer W, Wagenpfeil S, Brinkhaus B, et al. The impact of
patient expectations on outcomes in four randomized controlled trials of acupuncture in patients
with chronic pain. PAIN. 2007;128:264–71.
61. Pellecchia GL. Figure-of-eight method of measuring hand size: J Hand Ther. 2003;16:300–4.

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

62. Maihafer GC, Llewellyn MA, Pillar WJ, Scott KL, Marino DM, Bond RM. A comparison of the figureof-eight method and water volumetry in measurement of hand and wrist size. J Hand Ther.
2003;16:305–10.
63. Leard JS, Breglio L, Fraga L, Ellrod N, Nadler L, Yasso M, et al. Reliability and concurrent validity of
the figure-of-eight method of measuring hand size in patients with hand pathology. J Orthop
Sports Phys Ther. 2004;34:335–340.
64. Incel NA, Ceceli E, Durukan PB, Erdem HR, Yorgancioglu ZR. Grip strength: effect of hand
dominance. Singapore Med J. 2002;43:234–237.
65. Petersen P, Petrick M, Connor H, Conklin D. Grip strength and hand dominance: challenging the
10% rule. Am J Occup Ther. 1989;43:444–447.
66. Torok KS, Baker NA, Lucas M, Domsic RT, Boudreau R, Medsger Jr TA. Reliability and validity of the
delta finger-to-palm (FTP), a new measure of finger range of motion in systemic sclerosis. Clin Exp
Rheumatol. 2010;28 2 Suppl 58:S28.
67. Rolke R, Baron R, Maier C, Tölle TR, Treede - D. R., Beyer A, et al. Quantitative sensory testing in
the German Research Network on Neuropathic Pain (DFNS): Standardized protocol and reference
values: Pain. 2006;123:231–43.
68. Zorzi M, Priftis K, Umiltà C. Brain damage: neglect disrupts the mental number line. Nature.
2002;417:138–139.
69. Barrett DJK, Edmondson-Jones AM, Hall DA. Attention in neglect and extinction: Assessing the
degree of correspondence between visual and auditory impairments using matched tasks. J Clin
Exp Neuropsychol. 2010;32:71–80.
70. Baylis GC, Simon SL, Baylis LL, Rorden C. Visual extinction with double simultaneous stimulation:
what is simultaneous? Neuropsychologia. 2002;40:1027–34.
71. Robertson IH, Mattingley JB, Rorden C, Driver J. Phasic alerting of neglect patients overcomes their
spatial deficit in visual awareness. Nature. 1998;395:169.
72. Karnath H-O, Zimmer U, Lewald J. Impaired perception of temporal order in auditory extinction.
Neuropsychologia. 2002;40:1977–82.
73. Guerrini C, Berlucchi G, Bricolo E, Aglioti SM. Temporal Modulation of Spatial Tactile Extinction in
Right-Brain-Damaged Patients. J Cogn Neurosci. 2003;15:523–36.
74. Sinnett S, Juncadella M, Rafal R, Azañón E, Soto-Faraco S. A dissociation between visual and
auditory hemi-inattention: Evidence from temporal order judgements. Neuropsychologia.
2007;45:552–60.
75. Berberovic N, Pisella L, Morris AP, Mattingley JB. Prismatic adaptation reduces biased temporal
order judgements in spatial neglect. Neuroreport. 2004;15:1199–1204.

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

76. Pérez A, García Pentón L, Valdés-Sosa M. Rightward shift in temporal order judgements in the
wake of the attentional blink. Psicológica. 2008;29:35–54.
77. Sambo CF, Torta DM, Gallace A, Liang M, Moseley GL, Iannetti GD. The temporal order judgement
of tactile and nociceptive stimuli is impaired by crossing the hands over the body midline: Pain.
2013;154:242–7.
78. Vibell J, Klinge C, Zampini M, Spence C, Nobre AC. Temporal order is coded temporally in the brain:
early event-related potential latency shifts underlying prior entry in a cross-modal temporal order
judgment task. J Cogn Neurosci. 2007;19:109–120.
79. De Paepe AL, Crombez G, Spence C, Legrain V. Mapping nociceptive stimuli in a peripersonal frame
of reference: Evidence from a temporal order judgment task. Neuropsychologia. 2014;56:219–28.
80. Botvinick M, Cohen J. Rubber hands’ feel’touch that eyes see. Nature. 1998;391:756.
81. Spence C, Parise C. Prior-entry: A review. Conscious Cogn. 2010;19:364–379.
82. Peirce JW. PsychoPy—Psychophysics software in Python. J Neurosci Methods. 2007;162:8–13.
83. Filbrich L, Torta DM, Vanderclausen C, Azañón E, Legrain V. Using temporal order judgments to
investigate attention bias toward pain and threat-related information. Methodological and
theoretical issues. Conscious Cogn. 2016;41:135–8.
84. Dehaene S, Bossini S, Giraux P. The mental representation of parity and number magnitude. J Exp
Psychol Gen. 1993;122:371–96.
85. Zorzi M, Priftis K, Meneghello F, Marenzi R, Umiltà C. The spatial representation of numerical and
non-numerical sequences: Evidence from neglect. Neuropsychologia. 2006;44:1061–7.
86. Priftis K, Zorzi M, Meneghello F, Marenzi R, Umiltà C. Explicit versus Implicit Processing of
Representational Space in Neglect: Dissociations in Accessing the Mental Number Line. J Cogn
Neurosci. 2006;18:680–8.
87. Rossetti Y, Jacquin-Courtois S, Rode G, Ota H, Michel C, Boisson D. Does Action Make the Link
Between Number and Space Representation?: Visuo-Manual Adaptation Improves Number
Bisection in Unilateral Neglect. Psychol Sci. 2004;15:426–30.
88. Longo MR, Lourenco SF. Spatial attention and the mental number line: Evidence for characteristic
biases and compression. Neuropsychologia. 2007;45:1400–7.
89. Göbel SM, Calabria M, Farnè A, Rossetti Y. Parietal rTMS distorts the mental number line:
Simulating “spatial” neglect in healthy subjects. Neuropsychologia. 2006;44:860–8.
90. Mattingley JB, Bradshaw JL, Phillips JG. Impairments of movement initiation and execution in
unilateral neglect: directional hypokinesia and bradykinesia. Brain. 1992;115:1849–74.
91. Nico D. Detecting directional hypokinesia: the epidiascope technique. Neuropsychologia.
1996;34:471–474.

43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000653; this version posted June 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

92. Schwoebel J, Coslett HB, Bradt J, Friedman R, Dileo C. Pain and the body schema: Effects of pain
severity on mental representations of movement. Neurology. 2002;59:775–7.
93. IBM SPSS Statistic. SPSS 23.0 for windows. Chic IL. 2015.
94. R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. 2015.
95. MATLAB and Statistics Toolbox. Natick, Massachusetts, United States: The MathWorks, Inc.
96.

Estimating

Sample

Size

for

Comparison

of

Two

Means

-

eXtension.

http://articles.extension.org/pages/65498/estimating-sample-size-for-comparison-of-twomeans. Accessed 18 Jul 2017.
97. Farrar JT, Young JP, La Moreaux L, Werth JL, Poole RM. Clinical importance of changes in chronic
pain intensity measured on an 11-point numerical pain rating scale. Pain. 2001;94:149–58.
98. Gupta SK. Intention-to-treat concept: a review. Perspect Clin Res. 2011;2:109.
99. Crawford JR, Howell DC. Comparing an individual’s test score against norms derived from small
samples. Clin Neuropsychol. 1998;12:482–486.
100. O’Connell NE, Wand BM, McAuley J, Marston L, Moseley GL. Interventions for treating pain and
disability in adults with complex regional pain syndrome-an overview of systematic reviews.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;4:1–68.
101. Cacchio A, De Blasis E, De Blasis V, Santilli V, Spacca G. Mirror Therapy in Complex Regional Pain
Syndrome Type 1 of the Upper Limb in Stroke Patients. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2009;23:792–
9.

44

