medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Maternal Mortality and Women’s Political
Participation*
Sonia Bhalotra

Damian Clarke

Joseph Gomes

University of Essex

Universidad de Santiago de Chile

University of Navarra

Atheendar Venkataramani
University of Pennsylvania

June 7, 2019

Abstract
We show that large declines in maternal mortality can be achieved by raising women’s political
participation. We estimate that the recent wave of quotas for women in parliament in low income
countries has resulted in a 9 to 12% decline in maternal mortality. Among mechanisms are that
gender quotas lead to an 8 to 10% increase in skilled birth attendance, a 6 to 12% increase in
prenatal care utilization and a 4 to 11% decrease in birth rates.

JEL codes: I14, I15, O15.
Keywords codes: Maternal mortality, women’s political representation, gender, quotas, reproductive
health services.

* Bhalotra: ISER & Department of Economics, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, Colchester CO4 3SQ, United
Kingdom, srbhal@essex.ac.uk; Clarke: Universidad de Santiago de Chile damian.clarke@usach.cl; Gomes: University of
Navarra, ICS, Navarra Center for International Development, Pamplona, Spain, jgomes@unav.es; Venkataramani: University of Pennsylvania, USA, atheenv@pennmedicine.upenn.edu. This paper carries acknowledgement of UNU-WIDER
in Helsinki, who originally commissioned the study in connection with the 17th Nordic Conference on Development Economics. We are grateful to James Fenske, Alessandro Tarozzi, Dean Yang, and conference/seminar audiences at the British
Academy panel debate on reducing global inequality, the EPCS Rome (where this was a keynote lecture); IZA gender conference NY; UPF Barcelona; Essex; NEUDC Boston; ACEGD Conference at ISI Delhi; RES Manchester; UNAV; UB;
DSE Winter School; SMU Dallas; and the World Bank Conference on “Equity and Development: Ten Years On” for their
comments and feedback. Bhalotra acknowledges partial support from ESRC Grant ES/L009153/1 awarded to the Research
Centre for Micro-Social Change at ISER, University of Essex.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1 Introduction
Maternal mortality, defined as the death of women within 42 days of childbirth, remains a looming
global health problem well into the 21st century. It is estimated to account for 830 deaths per day, and
more than 216 deaths per 100,000 live births globally (Ceschia and Horton, 2016). In sub-Saharan
Africa, the maternal mortality ratio (MMR) exceeds the rate in developed countries a century ago
(Alkema et al., 2016; Loudon, 1992).1 Moreover, maternal mortality is only the tip of an iceberg, the
mass of which is maternal morbidity.
Persistence of high rates of maternal mortality is striking given that the knowledge and technology
needed to dramatically reduce it have been available for nearly a century, and the costs of intervention
are relatively small (Cutler, Deaton and Lleras-Muney, 2006; Loudon, 1992). There remains far from
universal coverage of reproductive health services in low income countries. Since 99% of maternal
mortality occurs in developing countries, a natural explanation may be that low income has constrained
progress. However, while income displays a positive association with each of female and male life expectancy, it exhibits only a weak relationship with the ratio of female to male life expectancy, a proxy
for excess deaths of women associated with reproduction (Appendix Figure B1).2 This suggests other
factors at play.3 We investigate the hypothesis that, among other factors, are gendered policy preferences. In particular, that addressing maternal mortality has been a low priority in male-dominated
parliaments.
Maternal mortality has declined rapidly in the last two decades, but there was massive variation
in rates of decline.4 We leverage this variation to investigate the hypothesis that political will plays
a significant role, and that women have greater political will (and/or efficacy) than men for maternal
1

MMR is defined as deaths per 100,000 live births. In sub-Saharan Africa in 2015 it was 547; in the US in 1936 it was
555.
2
Duflo (2012) notes: “other than pre-birth and in early childhood, women are most likely to be missing relative to men in
childbearing years.” Of the 6 million missing women each year, 21% are in their reproductive years (Wong, 2012).
3
Our estimates show that GDP growth is MMR-reducing, albeit less effective than implementation of gender quotas. Our
purpose is to highlight that there remains considerable variation in MMR conditional upon income.
4
In this period, MMR increased in a few countries, including the United States (MacDorman et al., 2016), which has the
highest MMR among developed countries (Kassebaum et al., 2016). In 2015, MMR was 26.4 in the USA compared with
9.2 in the UK and 4.4 in Sweden per 100,000 live births. Research investigating the potential for women in politics to
reverse this trend is merited. In a recent tweet based on Mann et al. (2018), Amitabh Chandra makes a point similar to
ours concerning allocative inefficiency related to interventions around women’s health, see Twitter: Amitabh Chandra
(stored for posterity here).

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mortality reduction. The broad stylized facts line up with our hypothesis: since 1990 MMR has shown
an unprecedented fall of 44%, a period in which the share of women in parliament has risen unusually
rapidly, from under 10% to more than 20% (Figure 1a). We study whether these trends are causally
related.
The share of women in parliament has been increasing at an increasing rate but smoothly, making
it hard to isolate its effects from those of other gradually evolving trends. We address this problem by
exploiting the abrupt legislation of parliamentary gender quotas sweeping through developing countries since the early to mid 1990s. The identifying assumption is that, conditional on country and year
fixed effects, the timing of quota implementation is quasi-random. Figure 1b shows that trends in
women’s share in parliament track trends in quota coverage. We combine country-specific dates of
quota implementation with the first annualized estimates of MMR across countries, released in 2015
to generate a global country-year panel for 1990–2015. Our strategy is to estimate event study style
regressions that show trends in MMR pre- and post-quota adoption (Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan,
1993; Goodman-Bacon, 2018).
Our estimates show that passage of parliamentary gender quotas leads to an immediate 5 to 6
percentage point (55 to 66%) increase in the share of parliamentary seats held by women, and a 9
to 12% decrease in the maternal mortality ratio. The effects of quotas are increasing in time since
implementation, the share of seats reserved, and in pre-intervention maternal mortality rates. There
is no evidence of differential pre-trends in the outcomes. Moreover, the estimates are robust to using
an alternate data source on MMR, changes in sample composition, changes in covariates (including
adjustment for predictors of quota implementation identified in the political science literature), and
addressing the degree of potential bias from any additional unobserved confounding in an IV setup
using the method of Conley, Hansen and Rossi (2012). We also address measurement issues, showing
results for a balanced sample, using alternative measures of MMR, and using alternative inference
procedures.
Investigating mechanisms that may link an increasing share of women in parliament to lower
maternal mortality, we find evidence in favor of investments in key low-cost medical inputs. Gender
quotas result in a 6.9 to 8.2 percentage point (8.3–9.8%) increase in skilled birth attendance and a
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

5.1 to 9.8 percentage point (6.2–11.8%) increase in antenatal care utilization. The WHO recommends
universal access to these inputs, and they are widely promoted as tools for maternal mortality reduction
(WHO, 2014; Jamison et al., 2013).5 We also find a 4–10% decline in birth rates and some tendency
for an increase in girls’ education following gender quotas, both of which previous research has shown
to be associated with lower maternal mortality. We also tested whether quotas lead to increases in the
share of development assistance for maternal health from international donors, as this is thought to
have played a critical role in the world’s response to the Millennium Development Goals (one of which
was MMR reduction) since 2000 (Dieleman et al., 2016), but we find no evidence of this. We find no
discernible impact of gender quotas on GDP, or on health expenditure as a share of GDP. Importantly,
the relationship between MMR and gender quotas is not sensitive to conditioning upon these variables.
It is notable that income has no impact on the share of women in parliament, but it has a significant
impact on MMR. A 1% increase in GDP results in a 0.5% reduction in MMR. A crude back-of-theenvelope calculation assuming log-linearity, and holding democracy and quotas constant suggests that
to achieve the estimated 9–12% reduction in MMR due to quota adoption (on the same sample), GDP
would have to increase by about 18–24%. Income is potentially endogenous so this is only a crude
calculation but note that we test whether GDP changes in response to quotas and we find it does not.
These results suggest that the operative mechanism linking parliamentary gender quotas to MMR
reduction may have been a more efficient allocation of existing resources to reflect refreshed priorities, and improved allocative efficiency. We probe this by examining whether gender quotas were
associated with detrimental effects on other health outcomes. We find no significant impact of quotas
on adult male mortality, a crude analogue of maternal mortality. We also find no impact on tuberculosis mortality, a highly prevalent disease in low income countries that mostly affects adults in their
(re)productive years and that has been equally burdensome for men and women. We find some evidence that gender quotas result in a fall in infant mortality for girls, but not boys. Overall, the evidence
indicates that women parliamentarians are more effective in targeting women’s health than at targeting
health in general and, further, that they appear to improve allocative efficiency.
5

In the few causal studies available, Pettersson-Lidbom (2014) estimates that a 1% increase in the share of midwife-assisted
home-births decreased MMR by 2% in 19th century Sweden, and Anderson et al. (2016) document that occupational
licensing of midwives reduced MMR by 6-8 percent in the US in the early 20th century.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

To summarize, using longitudinal cross-country data across a period of 25 years that encompasses
periods of dramatic decline in maternal mortality, we provide compelling new evidence that raising
women’s political participation can have substantial impacts on maternal mortality. Overall, quotas
led to a 13% decline in maternal mortality within 10 years of implementation, comparing favorably to
the 44% decline in MMR globally that occurred over a 25 year period.6 The importance of women’s
political participation is underscored by a dose-response relationship: countries that reserved 20-30%
of parliamentary seats, close to the internationally recommended target, experienced an 18% decline
in MMR. We also find that the impact of gender quotas on MMR is increasing in the baseline rate of
MMR, consistent with the “low-hanging fruit” argument, or diminishing returns.
Efforts to reduce maternal mortality over our study period have focused on raising access to trained
birth assistance, prenatal and antenatal care, contraception and women’s education (Grépin and Klugman, 2013; Kruk et al., 2016). There has been no recognition among policy makers of the potential
relevance of the political economy of resource allocation influencing these inputs. However, the 6
to 9 percentage point increase in birth attendance and the 5 to 9 percentage point increase in prenatal
care that we demonstrate flow from quota passage compare well with the 12 and 13 percentage point
increases achieved through the recent 25 years.
Our study makes two key contributions. We are the first to propose that gender quotas can be
an effective policy tool for maternal mortality reduction. This is important because (i) the broader
evidence on the success of quotas is mixed (Coate and Loury, 1993; Besley et al., 2017; Pande and
Ford, 2012; Niederle, 2016), and (ii) MMR has been difficult to bring down. Regarding the latter, the
decline in MMR of 44% since 1990 fell well short of the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) target
decline of 75% (Hogan et al., 2010; Kassebaum et al., 2014), and yet the new Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) have set a higher target. This is a clear flag that some policy innovation is needed. Our
results suggest that women leaders are more effective than men in implementing the known recipes
for success in this domain.
Second, we provide possibly the first systematic analysis of the impacts of the recent wave of
6

Our analysis period is the same, 1990–2015. However, the estimated declines in this paper emerge from the 22 countries
mandating quotas.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

implementation of gender quotas across countries.7 Our findings cohere with previous evidence that
increasing the share of women politicians influences policy choices in favor of public goods or policies that align with the preferences of women (Chattopadhyay and Duflo, 2004; Taylor-Robinson and
Heath, 2003; Swers, 2005; Clots-Figueras, 2012; Kose, Kuka and Shenhav, 2016). Experimental research showing that women have different preferences from men provides a behavioural underpinning
to these results (Niederle, 2016).
Reducing maternal mortality is of both intrinsic and functional value, as it favorably influences
women’s human capital attainment, employment, and growth (Albanesi and Olivetti, 2016, 2014;
Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney, 2009; Bloom, Kuhn and Prettner, 2015).8 A broad stream of research
has documented the importance of population health for economic growth, via life expectancy and
human capital accumulation (Soares, 2005; Weil, 2007; Ashraf, Lester and Weil, 2009; Shastry and
Weil, 2003; Bloom, Canning and Sevilla, 2004; Lorentzen, McMillan and Wacziarg, 2008; Aghion,
Howitt and Murtin, 2010).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we provide a discussion of the implementation of parliamentary gender quotas. In section 3 we describe the data used in this paper,
and in section 4 we lay out the empirical strategy. We present results in section 5, and discuss the
mechanisms underlying these results in section 6. We briefly conclude in section 7.

2 Gender Quotas – Background
In response to an active civil society movement and rising awareness of women’s rights, in 1990
the UN Economic and Social Council set a target of 30% female representation in decision making
bodies by 1995 (Pande and Ford, 2012; UN Women, 1995). The passage of gender quotas followed
this and accelerated after the unanimous signing of the Beijing Platform for Action by all UN delegates
at the Fourth World Conference on Women in 1995 (Inter-Parliamentary Union, 2015; Chen, 2010;
Krook, 2010). Since 1990, 22 countries in sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, and South and East

7

See, for instance, the review by Pande and Ford (2012), who discuss the cross-country implementation of quotas but
provides evidence emerging only from implementation of local government quotas in India.
8
Although see Bhalotra, Venkataramani and Walther (2018) for contrasting evidence showing increases in fertility and
reductions in labor force participation.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Asia have implemented constitutionally protected quotas reserving seats in parliament for women. The
geographic spread and trend in gender quotas is described in Figures A1 and A2.9 We observe an uptick
in quotas particularly after year 2000, with these being most prevalent in Sub-Saharan Africa. The
distribution of the share of seats reserved for women by legislative changes is described in Figure A3,
the median (mean) gender quota is 21% (20%). In section 5.2, we identify country-specific predictors
of quota implementation.
While the main focus of our study is reserved seat quotas, since 1990 the number of countries
with candidate list quotas for women has also risen sharply (from 1 to 46). As candidate quotas have
a different geographical spread, tending to have been passed in middle and higher income countries
rather than in low income countries (see Figure A1), we analyse them separately.
Casual inspection suggests support for our hypothesis that reserved seat quotas are associated
with MMR decline. Comparing country pairs with similar GDP per capita in 1990, selecting one
which implemented reserved seat quotas before 2010 and one which did not, we found that the quotaimplementing country typically witnessed a larger decline in maternal mortality in 1990–2010. Thus,
Burundi did better than Malawi, Kenya did better than Zimbabwe and Niger did better than the DRC.

3 Data
We merge quota dates with MMR data and the estimation sample contains (at most) 174 countries,
through 1990–2015. Summary statistics are in Table A1. The data on country-specific adoption of
parliamentary gender quotas up until 2005 are from Dahlerup (2005). We updated these using the
Global Database of Quotas for Women. The data include information on the date of passage and the
share of seats reserved for women. We merge these data to a comprehensive country-year panel on
the share of women in parliament aggregating information from multiple sources, namely the World
Development Indicators (WDI), the UN Millennium Development Goals (MDG) Indicators and the
ICPSR dataset compiled by Paxton, Green and Hughes (2008).
9

The countries implementing quotas are: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Burundi, China, Djibouti, Eritrea, Haiti, Iraq,
Jordan, Kenya, Morocco, Niger, Pakistan, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, South Sudan, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda
and Zimbabwe. Samoa implemented quotas in 2016 after the MMR data became available, and we do not have data for
Kosovo, Somalia and Taiwan, which have implemented quotas. Uganda is the only country which reserved seats before
1990, in 1989.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

For maternal mortality, we use estimates recently made available from the United Nations Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group (MMEIG) containing data for 1990–2015 for as many as 183
countries. These are widely considered the best MMR estimates to date, as they address known measurement difficulties in survey and vital statistics data on maternal mortality using Bayesian methods
applied to multiple, complementary data sources including vital statistics, special inquiries, surveillance sites, population-based household surveys and census files (Alkema et al., 2016, 2017). The
world distribution of average MMR for the period of 1990–2015 from these data is represented in
Appendix Figure A4. Prior to the release in 2015 of these MMR data, there were no annual time series for a comprehensive set of countries. This has no doubt contributed to maternal mortality being
vastly understudied relative to, say, infant mortality. As these data include measures of MMR that
are estimated, we conduct a sensitivity check that allows for this in inference. We also show that our
results hold using an MMR measure from an alternate dataset, the Demographic and Health Surveys
(DHS), in which consistent estimates over time are available for a restricted sample of countries. The
data and checks are discussed further in section 5.2.
We also use data on a range of time-varying controls, intermediate outcomes and placebo outcomes. Most of these data are compiled from large cross-country databases including the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators (WDI) database. For some of these variables we have observations for
only a subset of years. Appendix A provides details of all the variables used, and Appendix Table A1
provides the summary statistics.

4 Empirical Strategy
We exploit the staggered timing of the implementation of quotas across countries, looking to identify causal effects from significant breaks in the outcome series following implementation. Research
designs working in such a setting often employ the single coefficient difference-in-differences (DD)
estimator. As shown in Goodman-Bacon (2018), this is only strictly valid when treatment occurs
once, between the pre- and the post-period, generating fixed treated and control units. When treatment varies over time, arriving in some regions after others, there are in fact multiple experiments.
Already treated units can act as controls for later treated units because their treatment status does not

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

change. However, if there are changes in treatment effects over time, these get subtracted from the
DD estimate, biasing the single coefficient estimator away from the true treatment effect. This is not a
problem with the underlying design but, rather, with the restriction to a single coefficient. For this reason, our preferred estimates for our main outcomes come from flexible event study models (Jacobson,
LaLonde and Sullivan, 1993).
Our main event study model is as follows:

Yct = α +

∑10+
l=2

βllead Quotac × 1{leadt = l} +

∑10+
k=0

βklag Quotac × 1{lagt = k}

(1)

+Xct γ + µt + ϕc + εct .

The variation is across country c and year t. The outcome Yct is, first, the proportion of women
in parliament, allowing us to estimate how effective gender quotas are at increasing representation.
What we may think of as a second-stage outcome but in fact is estimated as a reduced form outcome
is the natural logarithm of the maternal mortality ratio. Quotac is 1 if a country ever adopted a quota,
and this is interacted with a full set of leads and lags with respect to the year the quota was adopted.
We include 10 lags and leads, the tenth term including all years greater than 10, and the first lead is
omitted as the base category. We include country and year fixed effects (ϕc and µt respectively), and
cluster standard errors at country level (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan, 2004).
The β lag coefficients capture the impacts of interest and the β lead coefficients partially test the
identifying assumption of no differential pre-trends. The β lead coefficients provide only a partial test
of the identifying assumptions, as to estimate unbiased parameters we require parallel trends between
treated and non-treated units in the absence of treatment. Parallel pre-trends provide support for this
assumption, but cannot be used to test what would have happened at the time of the reform had the
reform not been implemented (Kahn-Lang and Lang, 2018).
As income and democracy are potentially correlated with both quotas and MMR, we include log
GDP per capita and democracy score as time-varying covariates Xct . However as these controls
are potentially endogenous, we show results with and without them. We implement a number of other
checks, including testing robustness to including potential predictors of quota legislation as controls in
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

both estimating equations, and estimating bounds on IV estimates that allow for failure of the exclusion
restriction (Conley, Hansen and Rossi, 2012).
We also estimate a parametric difference in difference (DD) specification where the independent
variable is defined as one for all years following the implementation of a quota for implementing
countries, and zero before. It is set to zero for all countries that do not implement quotas in the sample
period. In a specification check, we drop the 47 high income countries from the sample so that the
control group is more homogeneous. In general, though, we retain in the sample the many (high and
low income) countries that do not pass quotas in the sample period, as this expands the set of good
comparisons available to identify trends (Borusyak and Jaravel, 2017). Borusyak and Jaravel (2017)
show that the DD specification will tend to estimate an average of treatment effects that over-weights
short-run effects and under-weights long-run effects. Since the event study plots suggest that treatment
effects increase with time since the quota event, in our setting the DD model will produce conservative
estimates.
Since the best available country-year panel data on MMR are estimated (due to gaps in vital statistics) and are published with uncertainty bounds (Alkema et al., 2016), we show estimates using a
double-bootstrap procedure re-sampling over the uncertainty intervals to calculate the standard errors.
About 76% of the country-year observations in the MMR data that we use in the main estimates are
original survey data points, the remaining 24% being imputed. An important further check we conduct
to address this potential concern is that we re-estimate the model using a different data source—the
DHS—for which systematic and comparable survey data on MMR are available, albeit for a smaller
sample of countries.
As the countries in the sample vary considerably in population size, we re-estimated the equation
weighting by this. Solon, Haider and Wooldridge (2015) argue that this affords a test of model misspecification. Since MMR varies considerably across countries, proportional changes implied by using
logarithms will exaggerate achievements in countries with lower baseline rates (Deaton, 2006). We
therefore replaced the logarithm with the level of MMR as a robustness exercise. We also investigate
intensive margin effects, exploiting variation in quota size, and we investigate effects by duration and
by baseline rates of MMR.
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

To understand the scope of women’s influence on health outcomes, we replace MMR with mortality for adult males (age 15–60), roughly mirroring the age profile of MMR.10 We also produce
estimates for tuberculosis mortality and infant mortality as these affect both genders.11 Since the TB
data had the occasional zero, we use the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation rather than the log
transformation for this outcome. For completeness, we show results for adult female mortality as
well. After presenting the main results we investigate the impact of quotas on a series of intermediate
outcomes with a view to identifying mechanisms.

5 Results
5.1 Principal Estimates
Estimates of Equation 1 are in Figure 2. Panel A shows a discrete jump in women’s parliamentary
representation in the year after quotas are implemented. Panel B shows a break in the coefficient series,
with maternal mortality falling more rapidly in quota implementing countries. The drop is visually
apparent in the year after implementation, and becomes statistically significant two years after quotas
are introduced and is then sustained at an increasing rate. The lead coefficients allay concerns about
endogeneity of policy adoption, as they are quite tightly centred around zero.
The single coefficient difference-in-differences models are useful complements to the plots as they
allow us to report an effect size, which also enables comparison with effect sizes in other studies that
rely upon the DD specification. See Table A2. Following Figure 2, we allow a one year lag for the
share of women in parliament, and an additional year for impacts on maternal mortality. As the share
of women can only change at the next election, we identified for every country, the years between
quota legislation and election. The mode and median are zero years, the mean is 1.3. Once women
are in parliament, it is plausible that it takes (at least) one year for any changes they induce to have
discernible population-level impacts on maternal mortality.12 The point estimates indicate statistically
10

Mean MMR in the global sample is 233 per 100,000 births, with range, 3 to 2890. The width of the range demonstrates
the potential for reduction. Notice that mean adult male mortality is 238 per 1,000 male population, with range 58.8 to
689 (Table A1).
11
If anything, the incidence and death rates from TB are higher among men than women: “In 2017 close to 6 million adult
men contracted TB and around 840,000 died from it. This compares with an estimated 3.2 million adult women who fell
ill and almost half a million who died from TB” (WHO, September 2018).
12
The estimates are not sensitive to shrinking the lags since impacts endure.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

significant effects of gender quotas on the proportion of women in parliament of 5–6 percentage points
which, relative to the average in 1985–1990 of 9%, represents a 55 to 66% increase.13 We also identify
a substantial reduction in MMR of 9–12%. In considering the effect size, we avoid linear extrapolation
as the effects are non-linear in quota size. This is discussed below.

5.2 Robustness Checks and Extensions
Sample, functional form, weights, endogenous surveillance, clustering. Dropping high income
countries and re-estimating produces essentially identical estimates (Figure 3a). To assess sensitivity
of our estimates to compositional change, we dropped the 7 countries that passed quotas after 2005
to create a balanced sample. The estimates again are essentially unchanged (Figure 3b). Figure 3c
and Table A2 also shows that the estimates are robust to using level rather than log MMR. Results
with population weights are provided in Figure 3d. Since China and India are outliers in population
size, the weighted estimates exclude them (China implemented quotas, India did not). So as to isolate
changes ensuing from weighting from changes associated with removing these countries, we also
show unweighted estimates on the reduced sample (Figure 3e). The point estimates in a single term
DD model are larger with China and India excluded, and again larger when weighted. However, all
changes in the sequence are not statistically meaningful (Table A2).
A potential concern is that the availability and quality of MMR data may be endogenous if surveillance and tracking are correlated with preferences in favor of addressing MMR decline. However, any
bias this creates in the coefficient of interest will render our estimates conservative– because if women
parliamentarians act to expand coverage of MMR data – including remote under-developed areas for
instance– then, other things equal, estimated MMR will tend to increase. Another possible concern
is that inference in our specification treats the data as independent across countries, but not within
countries. To address potential concerns that quota implementation was temporally correlated, we es13

The median (mean) gender quota is 21% (20%). The estimated impacts of quotas on the proportion of women in parliament are smaller than the entire size of quotas. In quota implementing countries the pre-quota share of women in
parliament was not always zero, the average was 7.9%, rising to 20.9% post-quota (median: 6.2 and 21.0%). Taking all
countries, the mean was 14.1%, median 11.5% (see Figures A5 and B2 for full distributions). See Figure B3 for temporal
variation by country. In Rwanda we see a jump in line with quota legislation but from a high baseline, while Djibouti
shows a sharp jump from zero to quota attainment. In some countries, it took time from quota passage until fulfillment.
In Niger, for instance, the quota was in 2000 but the next election in 2004.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

timate event studies with two-way clustering (Cameron, Gelbach and Miller, 2011) of standard errors
by both country and by year, see Figure 3f. While the confidence intervals are now wider, we still
observe statistically significant effects.
Democracy, income and health expenditure controls. All estimates discussed so far are conditional
upon income and democracy. However, because they are potentially endogenous, it is important to
show that our estimates are not sensitive to inclusion of these controls (see Figure 3g and additional
specifications in Figure B4). It is notable that income has no impact on the share of women in parliament, but it has a significant impact on MMR. A 1% increase in GDP results in a 0.5% reduction
in MMR. A crude back-of-the-envelope calculation assuming log-linearity, and holding democracy
and quotas constant suggests that to achieve the estimated 9–12% reduction in MMR due to quota
adoption (on the same sample), GDP would have to increase by about 18–24%. Income is potentially
endogenous so this is only a crude calculation but note that we test whether GDP changes in response
to quotas and we find it does not (additional discussion is provided in section 6).
We find that democracy has direct impacts on both outcomes, increasing women in parliament
and decreasing maternal mortality, but only when the democracy score is above the mean.14 Previous
evidence on women’s sway in policy making has mostly emerged from democratic regimes, in line
with theoretical models of politician behavior that admit a role for politician identity (Besley and Coate,
1997). However, a number of the quota implementing countries in our sample were non-democratic.15
Our results are consistent with women acting upon their innate preferences, potentially motivated by
the mission of public service rather than by electoral motives.16
We also show that the impact of quotas on maternal mortality is robust to including health expen14

Democracy raises women’s share when the score is at least 6 on a scale 0–10, and directly impacts MMR when the score
is 9 or 10.
15
There is no clear agreement on the precise definition of democracy. Besley and Kudamatsu (2008) discuss two particular
cut-offs based on democracy scores issued in Polity IV. According to the often used definition where any non-zero PolityIV score is classified as democratic, 7 of 22 quota adopting countries were non-democratic in the 5 years pre- and postquota adoption (China, Eritrea, Morocco, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Swaziland and Uganda). If the more demanding cut-off
of a polity-IV score greater than 5 is used, 14 of 22 quota adopting countries would be classified as non-democratic for
this period.
16
Women tend to show more intrinsic motivation than men (Folbre, 2012). In the political domain, Baskaran et al. (2018)
argue that women legislators in India exhibit more intrinsic rather than extrinsic motivation based upon comparing male
and female legislator performance in swing vs non-swing constituencies in a sample of close elections between men and
women.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

diture as a share of GDP as an additional control (Figure 3h). The reason that health expenditure is
not included as a control in the baseline estimates is that it is only available for a subset of the sample
(years 1995–2013) so controlling for it creates compositional effects.
Heterogeneity: Duration and dose effects, estimates by baseline MMR. We observe increasing
impacts over time as displayed in Figure 2b. By 10 years out, MMR was 13% lower in countries that
passed quotas. Intensive margin impacts of reserved seats that leverage variation in quota size across
countries (Figure A3) are in Figure 4. The estimates are rising in quota size, consistent with a “doseresponse.” The unweighted estimates from the single-coefficient DD model (Table A3) indicate that
quotas of less than 15% have no significant impact, quotas of 15 to 20% raise the share of women
in parliament by 5.5 percentage points and reduce MMR by 8.6% and the corresponding figures for
quotas of 20–30% are 7.7 percentage points and 17.5% respectively.
We also investigated heterogeneity in the impact of quotas by baseline MMR, dividing the sample
so as to allocate roughly a third of all quota countries to each of three samples, indicated as low,
medium and high rates of baseline MMR. We find a clear tendency for the impact of quotas to be
higher where baseline rates are higher. Full event studies are presented in Figure 5. The summary
coefficient in single term DD models is a 5.9% reduction in MMR in low baseline countries and a
18.2% reduction in high baseline countries (Table A4).
Omitted trends: IV and bounds. Although the event study plots mitigate potential concerns about
omitted trends, we directly assess and address any bias in the regression coefficients associated with the
possibility that when quotas were adopted, the country was already adopting other measures favorable
to maternal mortality decline. To do this we estimate 2SLS regressions of MMR on the share of
women in parliament, instrumented with quota implementation. Now the concern about omitted trends
translates to a concern that the instrument is invalid. In particular, if quota implementation proxies a
change in an omitted variable then it does not satisfy the IV exclusion restriction. However, as quota
implementation is likely to be “plausibly exogenous” if not strictly so, we follow Conley, Hansen
and Rossi (2012) and provide bounds on the IV estimates. The first stage is in columns 1–3 of Table
A2.17 The second stage estimates are in Table A5. These provide the scaled impact of women’s
17

We note that the instrument does not always pass a weak instrument test, but present these as ancillary estimates.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

parliamentary representation among compliers. They indicate that a 1 percentage point increase in
women’s share in parliament is associated with a 1.8% decrease in MMR. In estimating bounds on
the 2SLS estimates, we allow the adoption of quotas to have a direct impact on maternal mortality of
up to −1% over and above its impact on MMR via increasing women in parliament. The estimated
bounds are informative, indicating a 0.1% to 3.2% reduction in maternal mortality for a 1 percentage
point increase in the share of women in parliament (Table A5). The unweighted estimates produce
estimates in an entirely negative range, whether or not India and China are in the sample, although
once we weight the bounds include zero.
Omitted trends: Predictors of quota legislation. As the determinants of quota legislation are of substantive interest and previous work does not provide any clear quantitative analysis, we investigated
them directly by acquiring country-year panel data on predictors that have been discussed in the political science literature, typically with reference to case studies (Krook, 2010; Baines and Rubio-Marin,
2005); see Table A6. The potential predictors include evolving norms of equality and representation
and accelerating movements for women’s rights, pressure from international organizations (which can
be proxied with overseas development assistance), and occasions of broader constitutional reform including transitions into democracy and post-conflict reconstruction (including peace-keeping forces).
Using cross-country panel data methods, we find some evidence that transitions from autocratic rulers
to democracy, recent changes in women’s economic rights, and exposure to international organizations
predict quota legislation (see Table A6).We include all of the potential predictors, including changes
in women’s rights, as controls in the estimated equations. If the predictors of quota legislation rather
than the passage of the legislation drive impacts on MMR then this would be revealed in the coefficient
on quota legislation becoming insignificantly different from zero. Our estimates are, however, robust
to these controls (Table A7).18
Candidate list quotas We obtained estimates of candidate list quotas on women’s representation and
18

Since progress on women’s rights is of particular interest, we investigated this further. Using recently collated data on
women’s political, social and economic rights (Cingranelli, Richards and Clay, 2013), we estimate a different event
study, regressing the rights index on a series of year dummies, defined for a small window around the (country-specific)
date of quota legislation. Consistent with quotas being part of the index of political rights, we observe a trend break in
this index. However, we see no evidence of trend breaks in women’s economic and social rights coincident with the
date of quota legislation. Thus it does not seem that the passage of gender quotas is capturing secular generic progress
in women’s rights.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

found significant impacts, but smaller than associated with reserved seat quotas, a result with some
antecedents (Pande and Ford, 2012; Bagues and Campa, 2017) that follows from the fact that candidate
list quotas do not guarantee seats in parliament but instead require that a specified proportion of female
candidates appear on the ballot.
We obtained the first estimates of impacts of candidate quotas on MMR (see Appendix Figure B5).
Notice that, if we are willing to assume that the omitted variables that predict quota implementation
are the same for the two sorts of quotas then this result further undermines the possibility that those
omitted variables are driving our finding that reserved seat quotas lead to MMR decline.
Our finding that gender quotas on candidate lists have no discernible impact on MMR is probably
a result of both (i) the smaller impact on political representation, and (ii) the fact that countries implementing candidate list quotas during the study period (predominantly in Latin America) had already
achieved dramatic declines in MMR prior to quota implementation– our estimates for reserved seat
quotas show that impacts are smaller where baseline rates of MMR were lower, consistent with diminishing returns to policy intervention. For most health conditions, improvements are more readily
achieved when starting at higher levels.
Accounting for uncertainty in measurement of maternal mortality. As discussed in the Data section, the global country panel of maternal mortality data that we use were generated using a range
of vital and demographic data sources (Alkema et al., 2017, 2016; World Health Organization, 2015;
Wilmoth et al., 2012). We estimated the event study specification using an alternative data source
providing actual (rather than estimated) maternal mortality ratios. We calculated MMR from Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) reports of maternal deaths for the 44 countries in which the DHS
maternal mortality module has been implemented. We observe similar results, indicating a reduction
in rates of maternal death after the implementation of quotas; see Figure 6. The timing of the decline is
similar, and the effects are larger (though less precisely estimated), consistent with the DHS countries
having higher MMR on average.
Given the multiplicity of data sources for some countries and the paucity in others, the UN estimates of MMR are modeled, and thus come with their own uncertainty intervals. We assessed if our

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

conclusions were sensitive to directly accounting for this uncertainty. We follow a double-bootstrap
procedure to calculate standard errors when undertaking inference. This procedure consists of first
re-sampling observations in a (clustered) bootstrap over the countries in the original panel. We then
resample the particular maternal mortality realisation for each country from within the entire uncertainty interval reported along with official maternal mortality statistics. This accounts for the (normal)
sampling variation, and the uncertainty in maternal mortality data series.19 Appendix B describes the
re-sampling algorithms and assumptions.
Table A8 replicates the difference-in-differences estimates from Table A2, showing p-values for
the impact of quotas on maternal mortality associated with a range of re-sampling procedures. The
different re-sampling procedures reflect different assumptions relating to the distribution of maternal
mortality in the uncertainty intervals presented by the MMEIG. We first provide p-values associated
with a standard clustered bootstrap prior to taking into account uncertainty in MMR measurements.
Next we provide two sets of bootstrapped p-values computed assuming either a triangular distribution
or a normal distribution for MMR uncertainty intervals. While the end points of the triangular distribution are at the ends of the uncertainty interval, the normal distribution provides coverage outside of
the 80% UI.20
Table A8 shows that the triangular correction is (generally) less demanding than the normal correction, and that allowing for correlation within country reduces the estimate uncertainty. When the
dependent variable is log(MMR), p-values based on the two distributional assumptions are larger than
the standard bootstrapped p-values and depending on the specification fall between 0.091 and 0.226.
When the dependent variable is MMR, p-values based on the two distributional assumption are larger
19

The maternal mortality data are published by the MMEIG along with 80% uncertainty intervals associated with each
point estimate. In describing the modeling procedure, the authors note “We computed 80% uncertainty intervals (UIs)
for the MMR and all related outcomes using the 10th and 90th percentiles of the posterior distributions. …We report 80%
UIs rather than 95% UIs because of the substantial uncertainty inherent in maternal mortality outcomes: intervals based
on higher uncertainty levels quickly lose their ability to present meaningful summaries of a range of likely outcomes.”
(Alkema et al., 2016, p. 1250)
20
In each of the two types of distributions we allow for the possibility of either assuming full correlation in uncertainty
by country or not. The corrections by country assume full correlation in uncertainty within a country over time. Where
not by country, the estimator assumes no correlation within a country over time. The triangular corrections re-sample
from MMR so that coverage respects the full 80% uncertainty interval suggested by the MMEIG. The normal corrections re-sample so that 80% of re-samples fall within the 80% uncertainty interval reported by the MMEIG. Both of
these inference procedures are implemented assuming no correlation by country, and then assuming full correlation in
uncertainty by country.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

than the standard bootstrapped p-values and fall between 0.002 and 0.069. Thus our results are robust
to allowing for uncertainty in MMR estimates when the dependent variable is in levels. When it is in
logarithms, robustness is more sensitive to specification.
Other health outcomes. In focusing on maternal mortality, we engaged the tendency for women
leaders to serve the preferences of women citizens.21 In fact our findings are also in line with women
attaching greater weight to health outcomes than men. This is plausible because women disproportionately bear the costs of bad health: women risk dying in childbirth, they bear the burden of giving
birth again when children die, and they are the main caregivers for sick adults and children. Although
high fertility and high morbidity characterize poor countries, the tendency for women to attach more
weight to health is also evident in the British Election Survey of 2001: women expressed most concern
over the quality of the National Health Service, while the single most important concern for men was
low taxes (Campbell, 2004).22 In line with this, Miller (2008) and Bhalotra and Clots-Figueras (2014)
show that women’s political participation improved infant mortality in early 19th century America and
contemporary India respectively.23
We therefore investigated whether the introduction of gender quotas led to improvements in health
in other domains. For reasons discussed in section 4, we looked at adult male and female mortality
and TB. See Figure B6. The event study plot for mortality among adult men suggests no significant
impacts following the reform, with quite tightly estimated zeros until at least 5 years post-quota implementation, and imprecisely estimated reductions from 7 years post reform. The DD coefficient is
positive but even then it is about a third of the size of the coefficient for MMR, and it collapses once we
introduce population weights. For tuberculosis we similarly observe no statistically significant impact
of quotas in event study specifications. The corresponding DD model yields statistically insignificant

21

The political identity literature tends to refer to leader preferences and there is some evidence that leaders influence not
only citizens of their identity but the wider population in accordance with their preferences (see Bhalotra, Clots-Figueras
and Iyer (2018); Bassi and Rasul (2017)). However, in democratic regimes, an alternative possibility is that women
leaders implement women-friendly policies for strategic reasons, namely, to incentivize women voters to re-elect them.
22
In addition to having stronger preferences over health, women may be more effective at delivering health if, because of
their greater involvement in child-bearing and caring for the sick, health is more salient in their minds or they have more
information on how it can be addressed.
23
Infant mortality is a widely used proxy for public health in the earlier stages of development. These results may be further
influenced by the tendency for women to dedicate more resources toward children than men, possible evolutionary roots
of which lie in paternity uncertainty (Cox, 2007).

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

coefficients (Table B1).24
However if we draw a measure of infant mortality by sex from microdata in the Demographic and
Health Surveys (DHS) for the sub-sample of DHS countries, and separate girls and boys, we find some
evidence that gender quotas lead to lower infant mortality for girls of, on average, 12 percent (Figure
7). This is despite the fact that policies typically used to address infant mortality (e.g. provision of
clean water or access to medical professionals and drugs) cannot readily discriminate between boys
and girls. The reason that MMR is a conceptually clean outcome to study is that reproductive health
services that address maternal mortality are by definition targeted at women.25
Overall, there are two takeaways from these results. First, women leaders appear to prioritize the
health of women and girls over and above their concerns for health in general.26 Second, although
there was no perceptible decline in male mortality or in TB mortality following gender quotas, it is
notable that there was no increase as this undermines the possibility that women leaders achieved
MMR decline by reallocating resources away from other areas of public health investment. Since we
document below that gender quotas were not associated with increases in GDP, the share of GDP spent
on public health, or international development assistance for maternal health, it seems that women
effected maternal mortality decline by using available resources more effectively.

24

The evidence is suggestive rather than conclusive. First, mortality rates by cause of death and age for many developing
countries are inadequate, for instance, see Klasen and Vollmer (2013). The MMR data we use were generated by a major
multi-UN task force, no analogue of which has been appointed to create estimates for other categories of mortality. If
there were more measurement error in measuring TB or male mortality than in measuring MMR and if that measurement
error were classical, then the coefficients for TB and male mortality would be noisier. This said, as we also find that they
are smaller, or less negative, this alone is unlikely to explain away our finding of differentially large effects on MMR.
Second, one needs to be careful comparing changes delivered by gender quotas for conditions with different treatability.
For instance, the injuries and accidents that contribute to adult male mortality may be harder for policy to address than
the reproductive health services that contribute to maternal mortality.
25
For completeness, we also present estimates for adult female mortality. Visual inspection of the plot suggests a sharper
response of female than of male adult mortality, but it is not significant. This does not surprise us because any policies
targeting causes of adult mortality among women other than MMR (TB, accidents, etc.) are not easily targeted to women.
The share of MMR in female adult mortality varies in the sample, from 0.002 (Finland, Greece and Poland) to 0.343
(Niger).
26
We do not measure outcomes for every domain of health spending, so in principle some unmeasured outcome may have
suffered. However, as discussed in the section 4, adult male mortality is a natural analogue to MMR, infant mortality
is a marker of population health, and TB remains an important cause of illness and death for men and women in poor
countries.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

6 Mechanisms
Having shown that increasing the share of women in parliament leads to more rapid declines in
maternal mortality, we now seek to identify underlying mechanisms. To do this, we estimated reduced
form equations for endogenous mediators of the relationship between gender quotas and MMR. We
consider impacts on health services interventions recommended by the WHO: antenatal care, which
can help identify life threatening conditions such as pre-eclampsia and eclampsia early on; and deliveries attended by a skilled professional, which can address causes of mortality specific to the birthing
process, such as uterine bleeding and post-partum infection (WHO, 2014). Simple OLS regressions of
MMR on these inputs using our analysis sample and conditioning on GDP and democracy show that a
1 percentage point increase in the share of attended births or women receiving prenatal care is associated with a 3.4 and 2.3% decline in MMR respectively. These variables measure population coverage
(quantity) rather than the quality of facilities (better medical equipment for existing staffed clinics),
but there are no cross-country time series data indicating service quality. We also model birth rates,
the education of women, health expenditure share, GDP, and international development assistance for
maternal health as potential mediators. We observe that, to the extent that women parliamentarians act
through information campaigns, or to improve allocative efficiency, maternal mortality decline may
be achieved without any of the selected mediator variables responding to gender quotas.
We prevent event studies of these relationships, and DD specifications are provided in appendix
Table B2. As discussed earlier, when the control group is large and treatment effects increase with
time since event, the DD bias is likely to be small. Event study estimates of antenatal care and attended births are provided in Figure 8 panels A and B, and suggest increased rates of coverage in the
years following quotas. The DD coefficients indicate a statistically significant increase of 6.9 to 9.6
percentage point in skilled birth attendance and a 5.2 to 9.9 percentage point increase in the share of
women using prenatal care.
We further investigated fertility and women’s education (Figure 8 panels C and D), given evidence
that these variables are associated with maternal mortality (Bhalotra and Clarke, 2013). We find a
decrease of 1.1 to 2.6 births per 1,000 population in birth rates. The DD coefficient suggests an
increase in the education of girls aged 15–19 at the time of the reform by around 0.6 years, and a
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

similar increase is observed in event studies.
We find no statistically significant increase in health expenditure as a share of GDP following
introduction of quotas (Table B2), although the event study plot shows a tendency for it to increase
(Figure 8e). We also find that the introduction of quotas had no significant effects on the proportion of
international development assistance for health (DAH) that goes towards maternal health (see Figure
8f). This was of particular interest as DAH has played a critical role in the world’s response to the
MDGs (one of which was MMR reduction) since 2000, although less so since 2010. In 2015, US$36.4
billion was disbursed in DAH, and 9.8% was for maternal health (Dieleman et al., 2016). We also
tested for the possibility that gender quotas lead to higher income and that this, in turn, contributes to
MMR decline. We see no evidence of any trend break in GDP following the passage of quotas (Figure
8g).
Women leaders could have effected declines in MMR at low cost by disseminating information,
campaigning, monitoring, or inspiring action (Miller, 2008; Baskaran et al., 2018; Beaman et al., 2009;
Bhalotra and Clots-Figueras, 2014).27

7 Conclusion
We show that women’s involvement in policy-making can effect rapid maternal mortality decline
and at low cost. Thus gender quotas may be a powerful at-scale means of modifying public health
priorities in favour of maternal health. Despite significant progress, especially since 2000, preventable
maternal mortality remains high. The lifetime risk of maternal mortality is 1 in 41 women in low
income countries. Despite a wave of gender quota implementation, 130 countries in the world have
none. There is thus substantial room for manoeuvre. Our findings have implications for the recently
27

Miller (2008) cites evidence from historical studies that women conducted door to door information campaigns in early
20th century America, to encourage families to boil drinking water, and this contributed to sharp reductions in infant
mortality. Baskaran et al. (2018) show that women legislators in India are more likely to complete an allocated village
road building project in their constituency than are male legislators. They also show that women are less corrupt than
men and that, in contrast to men, they act to raise economic activity in their constituencies even when they have won in
a non-swing constituency. They argue that, if economic growth is the common currency in which costs are evaluated,
then having women instead of men in government imposes no economic cost. Beaman et al. (2009) show that quotas
for women in village council leadership in India led to raised aspirations and higher educational investments in girls.
Bhalotra and Clots-Figueras (2014) show that breastfeeding rates in Indian districts increase when women legislators
are elected from the district.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

launched Global Health 2035 report, and the ambitious Sustainable Development Goals. The MDG
target was not met and the SDG target is more ambitious, so we clearly need some policy innovation.
In fact this paper shows that SDG 3.1 for reducing maternal mortality is complementary to SDG 5.5
for raising the share of women in parliament.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Aghion, Philippe, Peter Howitt, and Fabrice Murtin. 2010. “The Relationship Between Health and
Growth: When Lucas Meets Nelson-Phelps.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER
Working Papers 15813.
Albanesi, Stefania, and Claudia Olivetti. 2014. “Maternal health and the baby boom.” Quantitative
Economics, 5(2): 225–269.
Albanesi, Stefania, and Claudia Olivetti. 2016. “Gender Roles and Medical Progress.” Journal of
Political Economy, 124(3): 650–695.
Alkema, Leontine, Doris Chou, Daniel Hogan, Sanqian Zhang, Ann-Beth Moller, Alison Gemmill, Doris Ma Fat, Ties Boerma, Marleen Temmerman, Colin Mathers, and Lale Say. 2016.
“Global, regional, and national levels and trends in maternal mortality between 1990 and 2015, with
scenario-based projections to 2030: a systematic analysis by the UN Maternal Mortality Estimation
Inter-Agency Group.” The Lancet, 387(10017): 462–474.
Alkema, Leontine, Sanqian Zhang, Doris Chou, Alison Gemmill, Ann-Beth Moller, Doris Ma
Fat, Lale Say, Colin Mathers, and Daniel Hogan. 2017. “A Bayesian approach to the global
estimation of maternal mortality.” The Annals of Applied Statistics, 11(5): 1245–1274.
Anderson, D. Mark, Ryan Brown, Kerwin Kofi Charles, and Daniel I. Rees. 2016. “The Effect
of Occupational Licensing on Consumer Welfare: Early Midwifery Laws and Maternal Mortality.”
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc NBER Working Papers 22456.
Ashraf, Quamrul H., Ashley Lester, and David N. Weil. 2009. “When Does Improving Health Raise
GDP?” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008, Volume 23. NBER Chapters, 157–204. National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Bagues, Manuel F., and Pamela Campa. 2017. “Can Gender Quotas in Candidate Lists Empower
Women? Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design.” Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA)
IZA Discussion Papers 10888.
Baines, Beverley, and Ruth Rubio-Marin. 2005. The Gender of Constitutional Jurisprudence. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.
Baskaran, Thushyanthan, Sonia R. Bhalotra, Brian Min, and Yogesh Uppal. 2018. “Women Legislators and Economic Performance.” Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) IZA Discussion Papers
11596.
Bassi, Vittorio, and Imran Rasul. 2017. “Persuasion: A Case Study of Papal Influences on FertilityRelated Beliefs and Behavior.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(4): 250–302.
Beaman, Lori, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia Topalova.
2009. “Powerful women: does exposure reduce bias?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
124(4): 1497–1540.
Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer, and Patrick Walsh. 2001. “New
tools in comparative political economy: The Database of Political Institutions.” World Bank Economic Review, 15(1): 165–176.
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust
Differences-In-Differences Estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249–275.
Besley, Timothy, and Masayuki Kudamatsu. 2008. “Making Autocracy Work.” In Institutions and
Economic Performance. , ed. Elhanan Helpman, 453–510. Harvard University Press.
Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate. 1997. “An economic model of representative democracy.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1): 85–114.
Besley, Timothy, Olle Folke, Torsten Persson, and Johanna Rickne. 2017. “Gender quotas and
the crisis of the mediocre man: Theory and evidence from Sweden.” American Economic Review,
107(8): 2204–42.
Bhalotra, Sonia, and Damian Clarke. 2013. “Educational Attainment and Maternal Mortality.” UNESCO Background paper prepared for the Education for All Global Monitoring Report 2013/4
2014/ED/EFA/MRT/PI/14.
Bhalotra, Sonia, and Irma Clots-Figueras. 2014. “Health and the political agency of women.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2): 164–197.
Bhalotra, Sonia, Atheendar Venkataramani, and Selma Walther. 2018. “Fertility Responses to
Reductions in Mortality: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from 20th Century America.” mimeo.
Bhalotra, Sonia R., Irma Clots-Figueras, and Lakshmi Iyer. 2018. “Religion and Abortion: The
Role of Politician Identity.” Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) IZA Discussion Papers 11292.
Bloom, David E, David Canning, and Jaypee Sevilla. 2004. “The effect of health on economic
growth: a production function approach.” World Development, 32(1): 1–13.
Bloom, David E., Michael Kuhn, and Klaus Prettner. 2015. “The Contribution of Female Health
to Economic Development.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21411.
Borusyak, Kirill, and Xavier Jaravel. 2017. “Revisiting Event Study Designs, with an Application to
the Estimation of the Marginal Propensity to Consume.” SSRN Working Paper Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2826228.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference With Multiway Clustering.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 29(2): 238–249.
Campbell, Rosie. 2004. “Gender, Ideology and Issue Preference: Is There such a Thing as a Political
Women’s Interest in Britain?” The British Journal of Politics and International Relations, 6(1): 20–
44.
Ceschia, Audrey, and Richard Horton. 2016. “Maternal Health: Time for a Radical Reappraisal.”
The Lancet, 388(10056): 2064–2066.
Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra, and Esther Duflo. 2004. “Women as policy makers: Evidence from
a randomized policy experiment in India.” Econometrica, 72(5): 1409–1443.
Chen, Li-Ju. 2010. “Do Gender Quotas Influence Women’s Representation and Policies?” The European Journal of Comparative Economics, 7(1): 13–60.
24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cingranelli, D. L., D. L. Richards, and K. C. Clay. 2013. “The ciri human rights dataset.”
http://www.humanrightsdata.org, Version 2013.12.05.
Clots-Figueras, Irma. 2012. “Are Female Leaders Good for Education? Evidence from India.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1): 212–244.
Coate, Stephen, and Glenn C Loury. 1993. “Will affirmative-action policies eliminate negative
stereotypes?” American Economic Review, 1220–1240.
Conley, Timothy G., Christian B. Hansen, and Peter E. Rossi. 2012. “Plausibly Exogenous.” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1): 260–272.
Cox, Donald. 2007. “Biological Basics and the Economics of the Family.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2): 91–108.
Cutler, David, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006. “The determinants of mortality.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3): 97–120.
Dahlerup, Drew. 2005. “Increasing Women’s Political Representation: New Trends in Gender Quotas.” In Women in Parliament: Beyond Numbers. , ed. J. Ballington and A. Karam, 140–153. International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance.
Deaton, Angus. 2006. “Global patterns of income and health: facts, interpretations, and policies.”
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dieleman, Joseph L, Matthew T Schneider, Annie Haakenstad, Lavanya Singh, Nafis Sadat, Maxwell Birger, Alex Reynolds, Tara Templin, Hannah Hamavid, Abigail Chapin, and
Christopher J L Murray. 2016. “Development assistance for health: past trends, associations, and
the future of international financial flows for health.” The Lancet, 387(10037): 2536–2544.
Duflo, Esther. 2012. “Women Empowerment and Economic Development.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 50(4): 1051–1079.
Folbre, Nancy. 2012. “Should Women Care Less? Intrinsic Motivation and Gender Inequality.”
British Journal of Industrial Relations, 50(4): 597–619.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018. “Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Timing.”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25018.
Grépin, Karen A, and Jeni Klugman. 2013. “Maternal health: a missed opportunity for development.” The Lancet, 381(9879): 1691–1693.
Hogan, Margaret C, Kyle J Foreman, Mohsen Naghavi, Stephanie Y Ahn, Mengru Wang, Susanna M Makela, Alan D Lopez, Rafael Lozano, and Christopher JL Murray. 2010. “Maternal
mortality for 181 countries, 1980–2008: a systematic analysis of progress towards Millennium Development Goal 5.” The Lancet, 375(9726): 1609–1623.
Inter-Parliamentary Union. 2015. “Women in Parliament: 20 years in review.” IPU, Geneva.
Jacobson, Louis S, Robert J LaLonde, and Daniel G Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of Displaced
Workers.” American Economic Review, 83(4): 685–709.
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Jamison, Dean T., Lawrence H. Summers, George Alleyne, Kenneth J. Arrow, Seth Berkley,
Agnes Binagwaho, Flavia Bustreo, David Evans, Richard G. A. Feachem, Julio Frenk, Gargee
Ghosh, Sue J. Goldie, Yan Guo, Sanjeev Gupta, Richard Horton, Margaret E. Kruk, Adel
Mahmoud, Linah K. Mohohlo, Mthuli Ncube, Ariel Pablos-Mendez, K. Srinath Reddy, Helen
Saxenian, Agnes Soucat, Karene H. Ulltveit-Moe, and Gavin Yamey. 2013. “Global health 2035:
a world converging within a generation.” The Lancet, 382(9908): 1898–1955.
Jayachandran, Seema, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2009. “Life Expectancy and Human Capital
Investments: Evidence from Maternal Mortality Declines.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
124(1): 349–397.
Kahn-Lang, Ariella, and Kevin Lang. 2018. “The Promise and Pitfalls of Differences-inDifferences: Reflections on ‘16 and Pregnant’ and Other Applications.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24857.
Kassebaum, Nicholas J, Amelia Bertozzi-Villa, Megan S Coggeshall, Katya A Shackelford, Caitlyn Steiner, Kyle R Heuton, Diego Gonzalez-Medina, Ryan Barber, Chantal Huynh, Daniel
Dicker, et al. 2014. “Global, regional, and national levels and causes of maternal mortality during
1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013.” The Lancet.
Kassebaum, Nicholas J, Ryan M Barber, Zulfiqar A Bhutta, Lalit Dandona, Peter W Gething,
Simon I Hay, Yohannes Kinfu, Heidi J Larson, Xiaofeng Liang, Stephen S Lim, et al. 2016.
“Global, regional, and national levels of maternal mortality, 1990–2015: a systematic analysis for
the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015.” The Lancet, 388(10053): 1775–1812.
Klasen, Stephan, and Sebastian Vollmer. 2013. “Missing Women: Age and Disease: A Correction.”
Courant Research Centre PEG Courant Research Centre: Poverty, Equity and Growth - Discussion
Papers 133.
Kose, Esra, Elira Kuka, and Na’ama Shenhav. 2016. “Women’s Enfranchisement and Children’s
Education: The Long-Run Impact of the U.S. Suffrage Movement.” Institute for the Study of Labor
(IZA) IZA Discussion Papers 10148.
Krook, Mona Lena. 2010. Quotas for Women in Politics: Gender and Candidate Selection Reform
Worldwide. Oxford:Oxford University Press.
Kruk, Margaret E, Stephanie Kujawski, Cheryl A Moyer, Richard M Adanu, Kaosar Afsana,
Jessica Cohen, Amanda Glassman, Alain Labrique, K Srinath Reddy, and Gavin Yamey. 2016.
“Next generation maternal health: external shocks and health-system innovations.” The Lancet,
388(10057): 2296–2306.
Lorentzen, Peter, John McMillan, and Romain Wacziarg. 2008. “Death and development.” Journal
of Economic Growth, 13(2): 81–124.
Loudon, Irvine. 1992. Death in Childbirth: An International Study of Maternal Care and Maternal
Mortality 1800–1950. Oxford, UK:Clarendon Press.
MacDorman, Marian F, Eugene Declercq, Howard Cabral, and Christine Morton. 2016. “Is
the United States’ Maternal Mortality Rate Increasing? Disentangling trends from measurement
issues.” Obstetrics & Gynecology, 128(3): 447.
26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Mann, Susan, Lisa M Hollier, Kimberlee McKay, and Haywood Brown. 2018. “What We Can
Do about Maternal Mortality—And How to Do It Quickly.” New England Journal of Medicine,
379(18): 1689–1691.
Miller, Grant. 2008. “Women’s Suffrage, Political Responsiveness, and Child Survival in American
History.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3): 1287–1327.
Niederle, Muriel. 2016. “Gender.” In The Handbook of Experimental Economics, Volume 2: The
Handbook of Experimental Economics, second edition. , ed. John H Kagel and Alvin E Roth, 481–
553. Princeton:Princeton university press.
Pande, Rohini, and Deanna Ford. 2012. “Gender Quotas and Female Leadership.” In Gender Equality and Development, Background Paper. , ed. World Development Report 2012. World Bank.
Paxton, P, J Green, and M Hughes. 2008. “Women in parliament, 1945-2003: Cross-national
dataset.” ICPSR24340-v1. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR24340.v1.
Pettersson-Lidbom, Per. 2014. “Midwives and maternal mortality: Evidence from a midwifery policy experiment in Sweden in the 19th century.” mimeo.
Shastry, Gauri Kartini, and David N Weil. 2003. “HOW MUCH OF CROSS-COUNTRY INCOME
VARIATION IS EXPLAINED BY HEALTH?” Journal of the European Economic Association,
1(2-3): 387–396.
Soares, Rodrigo R. 2005. “Mortality reductions, educational attainment, and fertility choice.” American Economic Review, 95(3): 580–601.
Solon, Gary, Steven J Haider, and Jeffrey M Wooldridge. 2015. “What are we weighting for?”
Journal of Human resources, 50(2): 301–316.
Swers, Michele, L. 2005. “Connecting Descriptive and Substantive Representation: An Analysis of
Sex Differences in Cosponsorship Activity.” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 30(3): 407–433.
Taylor-Robinson, Michelle M, and Roseanna Michelle Heath. 2003. “Do women legislators have
different policy priorities than their male colleagues? A critical case test.” Women & Politics,
24(4): 77–101.
UN Women. 1995. “Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.” http://www.un.org/
womenwatch/daw/beijing/pdf/BDPfA%20E.pdf. Accessed on 22 Feb, 2017.
Weil, David N. 2007. “Accounting for the Effect Of Health on Economic Growth.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122(3): 1265–1306.
WHO. 2014. “Maternal mortality, Fact sheet Number 348, Updated May 2014, Accessed - July 2014.”
Wilmoth, John R., Nobuko Mizoguchi, Mikkel Z. Oestergaard, Lale Say, Colin D. Mathers,
Sarah Zureick-Brown, Mie Inoue, and Doris Chou. 2012. “A New Method for Deriving Global
Estimates of Maternal Mortality.” Statistics, Politics and Policy, 3(2): 2151–7509.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Wong, Yen Nee. 2012. “World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development.” In
Forum for Development Studies. Vol. 39, 435–444.
World Health Organization. 2015. Trends in Maternal Mortality: 1990 to 2015. Estimates by WHO,
UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank Group and the United Nations Population Division. Geneva:WHO.

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Trends in gender quotas, women in parliament and maternal mortality

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

5

10
15
Average % of Women in Parliament

Total Number of Countries with Reserved Seats
5
10
15
20
0

10
15
Average % of Women in Parliament
5

ln(Maternal Mortality Ratio)
4.2
4.4
4.6
4
1990

20

(b) Reserved seats and women in parliament

20

4.8

(a) Women in parliament and ln(maternal mortality ratio)

1990

1995

2000

Year
ln(MMR)

2005

2010

2015

Year
Women in Parliament

Number of Quotas

Women in Parliament

Notes: Raw trends in number of countries with parliamentary gender quotas, the percentage of women in parliamentary seats and the
log of the maternal mortality ratio. Data sources are provided in the Data Appendix. The sample is a global sample of 174 countries for
which we have annual data through 1990–2015.

29

0+
-1

rs
ea

Y

-5

0

5

10

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

8
10

+

Y

r
ea

s

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-

+
10

ar

Ye

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

s
-8

-6

-4

0

Time to Reform

-2

2

4

(b) ln(maternal mortality ratio)

6

8
10

+

rs
a
Ye

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

Notes: Point estimates of the lag and lead terms in the event study specification described in equation 1 are presented, along with their 90% and 95% confidence intervals. Estimates
are conditional on country and year fixed effects, the natural logarithm of per capita GDP, and indicators for levels of the Polity IV democracy index. Time periods greater than 10
years from the reform date are displayed as a single “10 +” indicator. Standard errors are clustered by country. The omitted base category is taken as 1 year prior to the reform,
indicated by the solid vertical line.

Women in Parliament

15

(a) Percent of women in parliament

log(Maternal Deaths)

Figure 2: Gender quotas: Event studies for women in parliament and maternal mortality
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3: Robustness of maternal mortality reduction to alternative measures and specifications
(b) Estimates with balanced samples

(a) Removing high income countries
.1

ln(Maternal Mortality Ratio)

.1

-.1

-.2

0

-.1

-.2

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

ar
s

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

s
ar
-1

10

+

0+

Ye

Ye

8

Ye
10

+

0+
-1

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-.3

ar
s

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

Ye

ar

-8

s

-.3

-8

log(Maternal Deaths)

0

Time to Reform

Time to Reform

(c) Maternal mortality rate in levels

(d) Population-weighted estimates (No India/China)
.2

100

Women in Parliament

Maternal Mortality Ratio

.1
0

-100

0

-.1

-200
-.2
Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

s
ar

8

Ye

6

4

2

+
10

Time to Reform

Time to Reform

(e) No India/China samples

(f) Clustering by country and time
.1

log(Maternal Deaths)

.1

0

-.1

0

-.1

-.2

-.2
Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

s
ar

8

-1

10

+

0+

Ye

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

s
Ye
ar

s

8

ar
+
10

-1

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-.3

Ye

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

0+

Ye
ar

s

-.3

-8

Women in Parliament

0

-2

-4

-6

0+
-1

10

+

0+
-1

-8

Ye
ar

ar

8

s

s

-.3

Ye

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

Ye
ar

-8

s

-300

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

Time to Reform

Time to Reform

(g) Estimates without time-varying controls

(h) Conditional on health expenditure
.1

0

log(Maternal Deaths)

0

-.1

-.1

-.2

-.2
Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

s
ar

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

Ye

Ye
-1

10

+

0+

Ye
10

+

0+
-1

-6

ar

8

s

s

-.3

ar

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

Ye

ar

s

-.3

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-8

log(Maternal Deaths)

.1

Time to Reform

Time to Reform

Notes: Each panel plots event study estimates of the impact of quota passage on maternal mortality, based on alternative data sources,
control groups or model specifications. Panel A removes high income countries from the control group. A static (2015) measure of high
income is used to ensure consistency of the sample across years. The estimation sample of non-high-income countries consists 2,309
yearly observations in 112 countries. Panel B estimates removing any countries which legislate quotas after 2005, to ensure that each
quota country has 10 years of lags in the event study. Panel C is presented using maternal mortality in levels rather than in logs. Panels D
provides estimates using country population weights, where India and China are removed given that their population (weight) is an order
of magnitude larger than most other countries. Estimates for the unweighted sample are available in panel E. Confidence intervals in
Panel F are based on two-way clustering of standard errors. Panels G and H estimate with alternative specifications of controls. Identical
plots for women in parliament are provided as appendix Figure B7.

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4: Impact of Quotas on MMR by size of gender quota
(a) Quota Size: 0-15
.4

log(Maternal Deaths)

.2

0

-.2
Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

s
Ye

ar

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-1

10

+

0+

Ye
a

rs

-.4

Time to Reform

(b) Quota Size: 15-20
.4

log(Maternal Deaths)

.2

0

-.2
Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

ar
s
Ye

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-1

10

+

0+

Ye
ar

s

-.4

Time to Reform

(c) Quota Size: 20-30
.4

log(Maternal Deaths)

.2

0

-.2

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

s
ar

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-1

10

+

0+

Ye

Ye

ar
s

-.4

Time to Reform

Notes: Event study estimates are presented separately for countries with a different proportion of seats reserved in their quota. These are
presented in three quota size bins. Bins approximately separate quotas into three equal groups. Each set of coefficients is estimated in a
single event study, and so is conditional on all other quota groups. In each case, the baseline group is countries which do not implement
a quota. Remaining details follow Figure 2.

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5: Impact of Quotas on MMR by Baseline MMR
(a) “Low” baseline Rates (MMR <400)
.4

log(Maternal Deaths)

.2

0

-.2
Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

s
Ye

ar

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-1

10

+

0+

Ye
a

rs

-.4

Time to Reform

(b) “Medium” baseline Rates (MMR [400,800))
.4

log(Maternal Deaths)

.2

0

-.2
Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

ar
s
Ye

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-1

10

+

0+

Ye
ar

s

-.4

Time to Reform

(c) “High” baseline Rates (MMR ≥800)
.4

log(Maternal Deaths)

.2

0

-.2

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

s
ar

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-1

10

+

0+

Ye

Ye

ar
s

-.4

Time to Reform

Notes: Event study estimates are presented separately for countries with different rates of maternal mortality at baseline. Baseline
maternal mortality rates are calculated as average values in countries prior to the year 2000. Ranges above are chosen to approximately
equally split the number quota-passing countries into each of the three groups. Each set of lags and leads are estimated in a single model,
implying that each panel is conditional on the full set quota lags/leads in each country type.

33

-

+
10

s
ar
Ye

-10

0

10

20

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

8
10

+

Y

r
ea

s

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-

+
10

s

ar

Ye

-1

-.5

0

.5

1

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

(b) ln(maternal mortality ratio)

8
10

+

rs
a
Ye

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

Notes: Specification replicates Figure 2, however now replacing world wide estimates of MMR with maternal mortality calculated from microdata reports from the DHS. As the DHS
maternal mortality module is available in only a subsample of the DHS countries (44 of 68 countries with publicly available surveys), we estimate using 2 year lags/leads to reduce
noise. Substantively similar results obtain if using yearly lags and leads.

Women in Parliament

30

(a) Percent of women in parliament

ln(Maternal Mortality Rate)

Figure 6: Gender quotas: Event studies from DHS microdata
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

34

-

+
10

s

ar
Ye

-1.5

-1

-.5

0

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

8
10

+

Y

r
ea

s

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-

+
10

s

ar

Ye

-1.5

-1

-.5

0

.5

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

(b) ln(male infant mortality ratio)

8
10

+

rs
a
Ye

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

Notes: Infant mortality is recorded from Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) microdata where mothers report their full fertility history, any children who have died, their child’s
age at death (if relevant) and the year of death (if relevant). We generate infant mortality rates using retrospective fertility and survival histories for DHS surveys in the 68 publicly
available DHS countries.

log(Female Infant Mortality Rate) DHS

.5

(a) ln(female infant mortality)

log(Male Infant Mortality Rate) DHS

Figure 7: Event studies for female and male infant mortality using DHS microdata
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

35

36

s
ar

Ye

s

ar

Ye

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

8
10

+

s

ar
Ye

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

8
10

+

s

ar
Ye

(d) Women’s Schooling (Average, 15-19)

-8

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

log(GDP per capita)
-1

0+

s
ar

Ye

-.4

-.2

0

.2

s

ar

Ye

-1

0

1

2

3

s

ar

Ye

0+
-1

0+
-1

-5

0

5

10

15

20

-8

-8

-8

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

8
10

+

s
ar

Ye

-6

-6

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

(g) ln(GDP per capital)

-4
6

8
10

+

8

s
ar
Ye

10

+

s
ar
Ye

(e) Health Expenditure as a % of GDP

-6

(b) Attended Births

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

s
ar

+

Ye

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

Ye

0
-1

0+
-1

-4

-2

0

2

4

s
ar

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

8
10

+

s
ar
Ye

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

8
10

+

s
ar
Ye

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

(f) Development Assistance for Maternal Health

-8

(c) Birth Rates

Notes: Event-study estimates of intermediate outcomes as a function of the passage of gender quotas, following specification 1. Antenatal coverage and birth attendance refer to
the percentage of coverage, are accessed from the World Bank databank, and are only available for a sub-sample of years for each country (an unbalanced panel from 1990–2015).
Estimates in Panels A and B use a linearly interpolated measure, event studies based on non-imputed values are available in Appendix Figure B8. Birth rates are expressed as per
the full population, and are available as World Bank indicator SP.DYN.CBRT.IN. Women’s schooling measures are taken from Barro-Lee which gives average years of schooling
for women aged 15-19 years. Barro-Lee is only available quinquennially from 1950 to 2015. We use the sample from 1990–2015, and linearly interpolate by country between 5
year periods. Health expenditure is expressed as a percent of GDP, and is accessed from the World Health Organization’s National Health Accounts (NHA) data series. Proportion
of development assistance for health that goes towards maternal health is provided by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) Development Assistance for Health
Database. The log of GDP per capita is PPP adjusted and measured in 2011 international dollars.

0+

-1

-1

0

1

2

-1

0+

-10

0

10

20

30

Skilled Birth Attendance
Health Expenditure (% of GDP)

(a) Antenatal Care

Proportion of DAH to Maternal Health

Antenatal Care Coverage

Women's Years of Schooling (15-19)

Birth Rate per 1,000 People

Figure 8: Mechanisms: Event studies for impacts of gender quotas on intermediate outcomes
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Appendix Figures and Tables
Figure A1: Quota coverage: 1990–2015

Quota Type
No Legislative Quotas
Reserved Seats
Candidate List Quotas

Notes: Geographic distribution of countries implementing a quota for reserved seats in parliament and candidate list quotas. Data
compiled from Dahlerup (2005) and updated with information for recent years from the online quotaproject.org database developed and
maintained by the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (IDEA), the Inter-Parliamentary Union, and Stockholm
University. This database was consulted on 19th of July, 2016.

Figure A2: Reserved seat quota timing: 1990–2012

Total Number of Countries with a Gender Quota

25

East Asia & Pacific
Latin America
Middle East & N Africa
South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

20

15

10

5

0

1990

1995

2000
Year

2005

2010

Notes: Timing of the implementation of reserved seats by geographic area. Additional notes in Figure A1.

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0

1

Number of Countries
2
3

4

Figure A3: Reserved seat quota sizes

0

5

10
15
20
Percent of Seats Reserved for Women

25

30

Notes: This histogram describes the quota size for each country which adopts a reserved seat quota. Each country (quota) is included as
a single observation.

Figure A4: Maternal mortality ratio: 1990–2015

MMR
(432,1254]
(93.8,432]
(21.4,93.8]
[3.8,21.4]
No data

Notes: Average rates by country for the period 1990–2015. Values are calculated as deaths per 100,000 live births, and are provided by
WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank Group, and the United Nations Population Division.

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table A1: Summary statistics for reserved seat analysis
N
% Women in Parliament
Maternal Mortality Ratio
Reserved Seats
Male Mortality Rate (15-60)
Female Mortality Rate (15-60)
ln(GDP per capita)
Polity IV Democracy score
Percent of Pregnancies Receiving Prenatal Care
Percent of Births Attended by Skilled Staff
Health Expenditure as a % of GDP
Female Infant Mortality Rate (DHS subsample)
Male Infant Mortality Rate (DHS subsample)
Birth rates per 1,000 population

Mean

4186 14.06
4186 236.03
4186 0.06
4126 240.90
4126 168.08
4186 8.90
3212 5.60
662 84.04
1199 83.33
3124 6.24
1067 0.08
1066 0.10
4160 24.30

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

10.45
325.90
0.24
120.48
116.62
1.22
3.85
17.75
24.16
2.39
0.05
0.05
11.74

0.00
3.00
0.00
58.80
34.32
5.51
0.00
15.40
5.00
0.72
0.00
0.00
7.60

63.80
2890.00
1.00
753.70
685.03
11.77
10.00
100.00
100.00
17.10
0.60
0.33
55.56

Notes: Refer to Data Appendix A for a full description of each variable and its source. The Maternal Mortality Ratio
is measured as deaths per 100,000 live births. For comparison, the male and female mortality rates for 15–60 year-olds
is expressed as per 1,000 male and female adults respectively. Reserved seats is a binary variable taking one for each
country and year pair where a quota was implemented, and 0 otherwise.

39

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

13.632
3167
154
0.565
Y

4.397
3212
156
0.597
N

4.389
3167
154
0.588
N

4.389
3167
154
0.621
Y

249.190
3212
156
0.375
N

249.707
3167
154
0.382
N

249.707
3167
154
0.454
Y

-115.805***
[24.891]

(9)

Difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of reserved seats in parliament on women in parliament (columns 1-3), the log of the maternal mortality ratio
(columns 4-6), and MMR in levels (columns 7-9). In each case country and year fixed effects are included, and time-varying controls consist of the log of PPP
adjusted GDP per capita, and a democracy score. Unweighted (columns 1-2, 4-5, and 7-8), and population weighted specifications (column 3, 6 and 9) are
displayed. When weighting, China and India are removed from the estimation sample, to avoid regression results being largely driven by these two countries,
with a population an order of magnitude larger than other countries. The unweighted specification without these countries is displayed in columns 2, 5 and 8.
Standard errors clustered by country are displayed in parentheses. * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.

13.632
3167
154
0.483
N

13.647
3212
156
0.475
N

(4)

Mean of Dep. Var.
Observations
Number of Countries
R-Squared
Population Weights

(3)

Maternal Mortality Ratio

5.144** 5.818** 6.051*** -0.107** -0.113** -0.148** -110.599** -124.659**
[2.301] [2.326]
[1.860]
[0.049]
[0.051]
[0.062]
[49.926]
[50.661]

(2)

ln(Maternal Mortality Ratio)

Reserved Seats

(1)

% Women in Parliament

Table A2: Gender quotas: DD impacts on women in parliament and maternal mortality
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0

.02

Density
.04

.06

.08

Figure A5: Proportion of women in parliament in countries with reserved seats

0

20
40
Percent of Women in Parliament
Prior to Quotas

60

Following Quota Implementation

Notes: Density plots for the proportion of women in parliament in countries which at some point adopt a reserved seat quota. Plots are
based on each country by year observation in the women in parliament data.

41

(3)

(4)

(5)

13.647
3212
156
0.477
N

13.632
3167
154
0.487
N

13.632
3167
154
0.570
Y

4.397
3212
156
0.598
N

4.389
3167
154
0.590
N

1.799
1.798
1.222**
-0.044
-0.045
[1.165]
[1.189]
[0.600]
[0.044]
[0.044]
5.540*** 5.442*** 7.328*** -0.087** -0.089**
[1.740]
[1.738]
[1.281]
[0.040]
[0.041]
7.683*
9.565** 10.363*** -0.176** -0.200**
[4.522]
[4.608]
[2.339]
[0.087]
[0.093]

(2)

4.389
3167
154
0.621
Y

-0.131**
[0.060]
-0.176**
[0.082]
-0.123*
[0.073]

(6)

ln(Maternal Mortality Ratio)

Difference-in-difference estimates of the impact of the size of the gender quota on women in parliament (columns 1-3)
and maternal mortality (columns 4-6). Specifications follow Table A2, replacing the binary quota indicator with a binned
indicator for quota size. Bins approximately seperate quotas into three equal groups. Each independent variable shown
is equal to zero whenever reserved seats for women are not in place in a country, and equal to one when a reserved seat
quota is in place, and is of the magnitude indicated in the independent variable listed in the table. Remaining details are
available as notes to Table A2. * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.

Mean of Dep. Var.
Observations
Number of Countries
R-Squared
Population Weights

Reserved Seats (20-30]%

Reserved Seats (15-20]%

Reserved Seats (0-15]%

(1)

% Women in Parliament

Table A3: Intensive margin impacts of reserved seats (binned by quota size)
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

42

13.647
3212
156
0.480
N

13.632
3167
154
0.487
N

13.632
3167
154
0.574
Y

4.397
3212
156
0.598
N

4.389
3167
154
0.589
N

2.540
4.311** 8.271*** -0.059* -0.072**
[2.360] [2.063]
[1.492]
[0.034] [0.033]
3.595** 3.556** 2.070**
-0.066
-0.067
[1.631] [1.644]
[0.893]
[0.056] [0.056]
9.038* 9.030* 10.146*** -0.182* -0.183*
[5.345] [5.310]
[3.216]
[0.108] [0.109]
4.389
3167
154
0.622
Y

-0.181**
[0.089]
-0.125**
[0.057]
-0.142
[0.087]

(6)

Difference-in-difference estimates of the impact of the size of the gender quota on women in parliament (columns 1-3) and maternal
mortality (columns 4-6). Specifications follow Table A2, replacing the binary quota indicator with a series of quota indicators,
indicating if a country adported a reserved seat quota, and if its baseline maternal mortality was in the group (<400), the group
(400-800) or the group (≥ 800). Magnitudes approximately seperate quotas into three equal groups. Each independent variable
shown is equal to zero whenever reserved seats for women are not in place in a country, and equal to one when a reserved seat quota
is in place, and baseline MMR is of the magnitude described. Remaining details are available as notes to Table A2. * p<0.10; **
p<0.05; *** p<0.01.

Mean of Dep. Var.
Observations
Number of Countries
R-Squared
Population Weights

Reserved Seats (High Baseline MMR)

Reserved Seats (Mid Baseline MMR)

Reserved Seats (Low Baseline MMR)

(5)

(4)

(3)

(1)

(2)

ln(Maternal Mortality Ratio)

% Women in Parliament

Table A4: Impacts of reserved seats by baseline MMR
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

43

-0.019***
[0.006]

4.753
5.951
0.031
0.016
[-0.035;-0.005] [-0.032;-0.005]
4.397
4.389
3212
3167
156
154
N
N

-0.020***
[0.007]

(2)
ln(MMR)

10.070
0.002
[-0.049;0.049]
4.389
3167
154
Y

-0.025**
[0.012]

(3)
ln(MMR)

Instrumental variables regressions are run where gender quotas are used to instrument women in parliament. The first stage regression of women in parliament on reserved seats is displayed in columns 1-3
of Table A2. F-Statistic of the first stage and the associated p-value are traditional tests of instrumental
relevance. Displayed coefficients give the effect of an additional percentage of women in parliament on
rates of maternal mortality, where women in parliament is instrumented with reserved seats. The 95%
confidence interval from Conley et al. (2012) is a robustness test, where we allow the instrument to be
imperfect in the sense that the exclusion restriction is only close to holding. These confidence intervals
are associated with the estimates where quotas are able to have a direct effect in reducing MMR that is
not mediated by women in parliament of 0.01 (or 1%) using Conley et al. (2012)’s Union of Confidence
Intervals (UCI) approach. Each regression includes country and year fixed effects and clusters standard
errors by country. * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.

F-Statistic First Stage
p-value First Stage
95% CI from Conley et al. (2012)
Mean of Dep. Var.
Observations
Number of Countries
Population Weights

% Women in Parliament

(1)
ln(MMR)

Table A5: Reserved seats as an IV for women in parliament
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table A6: The passage of reserved seat legislation
No Country Fixed Effects
Overseas Development Assistance
Peace Keepers
Change in Women’s Rights
Right Wing Executive
Left Wing Executive
Years in Power
Herfindahl Index
Vote Share Opposition
Transitioning Regime

(1)

(2)

0.003
[0.018]
0.002
[0.002]
0.008*
[0.005]
-0.002
[0.002]
-0.003
[0.003]
-0.000
[0.000]
-0.010
[0.007]
-0.000
[0.000]
0.008
[0.005]

-0.008
[0.020]
0.016**
[0.008]
0.008
[0.005]
-0.002
[0.003]
-0.003
[0.003]
-0.000*
[0.000]
-0.012
[0.007]
-0.000
[0.000]
0.009
[0.006]
0.030
[0.029]
-0.015**
[0.008]
-0.003
[0.004]

1951
118
0.023

1840
117
0.044

First Lag (ODA)
First Lag (peace keepers)
First Lag (∆ Womens Rights)
Second Lag (ODA)
Second Lag (peace keepers)
Second Lag (∆ Womens Rights)
Observations
Number of Countries
R-Squared

(3)

Country Fixed Effects
(4)

(5)

-0.023
-0.021
-0.018
[0.028]
[0.022]
[0.029]
0.018* 0.003**
0.017**
[0.010]
[0.001]
[0.008]
0.009*
0.008*
0.008
[0.005]
[0.005]
[0.005]
-0.002
-0.002
-0.000
[0.003]
[0.002]
[0.003]
-0.003
-0.004
-0.004
[0.003]
[0.004]
[0.005]
-0.000 -0.001*** -0.001***
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
-0.012
-0.014
-0.017
[0.008]
[0.011]
[0.012]
-0.000
-0.000
-0.000
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
0.009
0.009
0.011
[0.007]
[0.006]
[0.007]
0.011
0.010
[0.030]
[0.029]
-0.021
-0.015*
[0.015]
[0.008]
-0.001
-0.003
[0.003]
[0.004]
0.036
[0.030]
0.004
[0.007]
0.005
[0.005]
1729
117
0.047

1951
118
0.027

1840
117
0.045

(6)
-0.032
[0.033]
0.020**
[0.010]
0.009*
[0.005]
-0.000
[0.003]
-0.003
[0.005]
-0.001***
[0.000]
-0.018
[0.014]
-0.000
[0.000]
0.012
[0.008]
-0.001
[0.029]
-0.022
[0.015]
-0.001
[0.003]
0.017
[0.025]
0.006
[0.008]
0.005
[0.005]
1729
117
0.050

Each column regresses a variable indicating whether a quota law was passed in a given year on potential predictors of quota adoption
suggested in the political science literature. Each specification includes year fixed effects and standard errors are clustered by
country. Overseas Development Assistance (ODA) measured as net inflows in current US dollars divided by GDP in current US
dollars is generated from the World Bank Data Bank. Peacekeepers (measured in 1000s) are from the IPI Peacekeeping Database,
changes in women’s rights refer to changes in economic rights for women as compiled by the CIRI Human Rights Data Project,
and political measures including the orientation of leader’s party, the time in power, Herfindahl Index of parties, vote shares and
regime types and changes are recorded by the Database of Political Institutions. Additional lags of relevant variables are included
in columns 2 and 3, and 5 and 6. * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.

45

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table A7: Estimates including all potential quota predictors
ln(Maternal Mortality Ratio) % Women in Parliament
Reserved Seats

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.096*
[0.051]

-0.109**
[0.052]
0.042
[0.073]
-0.002
[0.002]
-0.001
[0.006]
0.015
[0.038]
-0.064
[0.060]
-0.001
[0.001]
-0.062
[0.053]
-0.000
[0.000]
-0.023*
[0.013]
0.019
[0.048]
-0.021
[0.075]
-0.000
[0.003]
-0.001
[0.004]
0.003
[0.008]
-0.002
[0.006]

5.419**
[2.353]

6.465**
[2.876]
-4.288
[4.375]
0.052
[0.147]
0.257
[0.254]
-0.934
[0.696]
1.265
[0.833]
0.095**
[0.042]
1.318
[1.348]
-0.020
[0.013]
0.801
[0.506]
-1.698
[2.342]
0.169
[2.432]
-0.081
[0.207]
0.018
[0.178]
0.223
[0.292]
0.152
[0.206]

2310
113
0.610
N

1641
109
0.618
Y

2310
113
0.444
N

1641
109
0.479
Y

Overseas Development Assistance
Peace Keepers
Change in Women’s Rights
Right Wing Executive
Left Wing Executive
Years in Power
Herfindahl Index
Vote Share Opposition
Transitioning Regime
First Lag (ODA)
Second Lag (ODA)
First Lag (peace keepers)
Second Lag (peace keepers)
First Lag (∆ Womens Rights)
Second Lag (∆ Womens Rights)
Observations
Number of Countries
R-Squared
Proposed Predictors

The regressions include country and year fixed effects and controls for log GDP and a democracy index. All
potential predictors of quotas, described in Table A6, are included as controls. * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; ***
p<0.01.

46

0.096
0.117
0.098
0.200
0.097
4.397
3212
156
0.596
N

p-value Bootstrap
p-value Triangular Correction
p-value Triangular Correction by Country
p-value Normal Correction
p-value Normal Correction by Country

Mean of Dep. Var.
Observations
Number of Countries
R-Squared
Population Weights

4.389
3167
154
0.619
Y

0.115
0.149
0.118
0.226
0.113

-0.120

(3)

(5)

249.190
3212
156
0.373
N

0.040
0.044
0.046
0.055
0.069
249.707
3167
154
0.378
N

0.020
0.022
0.024
0.030
0.039

-102.169 -114.949

(4)

249.707
3167
154
0.449
Y

0.002
0.002
0.002
0.007
0.005

-106.907

(6)

Maternal Mortality Ratio

Difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of reserved seats in parliament on log of the maternal mortality ratio (columns 1-3),
and MMR in levels (columns 4-6) replicate results from Table A2 of the working paper. Point estimates are presented, and below
p-values associated with each point estimate, based on different procedures for re-sampling the uncertainty of measures of maternal
mortality. In each case, re-samples are taken over country clusters, as treatment is defined at the level of the country.

4.389
3167
154
0.587
N

0.090
0.112
0.091
0.190
0.092

-0.088 -0.093

(2)

Reserved Seats (Point Estimate)

(1)

ln(Maternal Mortality Ratio)

Table A8: Alternative Inference Procedures for Measures of Maternal Mortality in Principal Diff-in-Diff Specification
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

47

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Online Appendix – Not for Print
Maternal Mortality and Women’s Political Participation
Sonia Bhalotra, Damian Clarke, Joseph Gomes, Atheendar Venkataramani

A1

90

Life Expectancy (Years)
60
70
80

50

6

ln(GDP per capita)

Life Expectancy Female

8

10
Lowess Fit

(a) Female life expectancy

12

6
ln(GDP per capita)
Life Expectancy Male

8
Lowess Fit

10

(b) Male life expectancy

12

6

ln(GDP per capita)
Life Expectancy Ratio F/M

8

10
Lowess Fit

(c) Female/male life expectancy ratio

12

Notes: Life expectancy at birth and PPP-adjusted GDP per capita data are collated by the World Bank Data Bank. These indicators are SP.DYN.LE00.FE.IN (Female life expectancy)
SP.DYN.LE00.MA.IN (Male life expectancy) and NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.KD (PPP adjusted GDP per capita). The life expectancy ratio is calculated as female life expectancy divided by
male life expectancy for each country. Lowess fits are overlaid on scatter plots, using a bandwidth of 0.8 for local linear smoothing.

40

80
Life Expectancy (Years)
50
60
70
40

1.2
Life Expectancy Ratio
1.05
1.1
1.15
1

Figure B1: Life expectancy in 2010
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0

.01

.02

Density

.03

.04

.05

Figure B2: Proportion of women in parliament in all countries

0

20
40
Percent of Women in Parliament

60

Notes: Density plots describe the proportion of women in parliament in all countries and years under study.

A3

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

A4

1990

1990

1990

1990

1995

Quota: 5.3%

1995

Year

2005

Year

2005

2000

Year

2005

Swaziland

2000

Niger

2000

Quota: 10.0%

1995

2005

Eritrea

2000

Quota: 30.0%

1995

Year

Afghanistan

Quota: 27.3%

2010

2010

2010

2010

2015

2015

2015

2015

1990

1990

1990

1990

1995

Year

2005

Year

2005

2000
Year

2005

Tanzania

2000

Pakistan

2000

Quota: 29.1%

1995

2005

Haiti

Year

Algeria

2000

Quota: 17.5%

1995

Quota: 3.0%

1995

Quota: 20.0%

2010

2010

2010

2010

2015

2015

2015

2015

1990

1990

1990

1990

1995

2005

Year

2005

2000
Year

2005

Uganda

2000

Quota: 24.4%

1995

Year

Rwanda

2000

Quota: 30.0%

1995

2005

Iraq

2000

Quota: 25.0%

1995
Year

Bangladesh
Quota: 13.0%

2010

2010

2010

2010

2015

2015

2015

2015

1990

1990

1990

1990

1995

2005

Year

2005

2000
Year

2005

Zimbabwe

2000

Quota: 22.2%

1995

Year

Saudi Arabia

2000

Quota: 20.0%

1995

2005

Jordan

Year

Burundi

2000

Quota: 11.1%

1995

Quota: 30.0%

2010

2010

2010

2010

2015

2015

2015

2015

1990

1990

1990

1995

Year

2005

2000
Year

2005

South Sudan

2000

Quota: 25.0%

1995

2005

Kenya

Year

China

2000

Quota: 13.4%

1995

Quota: 22.0%

2010

2010

2010

2015

2015

2015

1990

1990

1990

1995

Year

2005

2000
Year

2005

Sudan

2000

Quota: 25.0%

1995

2005

Morocco

Year

Djibouti

2000

Quota: 15.2%

1995

Quota: 10.0%

2010

2010

2010

2015

2015

2015

Notes: In each panel, the vertical lines display the recorded date of the passage of a reserved seat quota for women in the national parliament, and the plots show the evolution of the
percentage of women in parliament. Each figure shares a common y-axis for ease of comparison.

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40
% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40
% Women in Parliament
0 10 20 30 40
% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40
% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40
% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40
% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40
% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40
% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40
% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40
% Women in Parliament
0
10 20 30 40

Figure B3: Country-specific changes in women in parliament after reserved seat quotas
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure B4: Alternative specification of quota event study
(b) ln(MMR) with GDP control only

(a) Women in parliament with GDP control only
15

.1

0

log(Maternal Deaths)

5

0

-.1

-.2
Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

ar
s

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

s
ar
-1

10

+

0+

Ye

Ye

8

Ye
10

+

0+
-1

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-.3

ar
s

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

Ye

ar

s

-5

-8

Women in Parliament

10

Time to Reform

Time to Reform

(c) Women in parliament with democracy control only

(d) ln(MMR) with democracy control only

15
.1

log(Maternal Deaths)

5

0

0

-.1

-.2
Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

Time to Reform

s
ar

8

Ye

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

10

+

0+

-8

s
Ye
ar

s

8

ar
+
10

-1

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-.3

Ye

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

0+

Ye
ar

s

-5

-1

Women in Parliament

10

Time to Reform

Notes: Alternative specifications of the event study shown in Figure 2. Specifications are shown with and without included controls, and
with only GDP or only democracy controls. Results are robust to population weights, and additionally controlling for health spending
per capita. Additional notes in Figure 2.

A5

0+
-1

s
ar

Ye

-10

-5

0

5

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

8
10

+

Ye

s

ar

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-

+
10

Ye

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

.3

s

ar

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

(b) ln(MMR)

4

6

8
10

+

s
ar
Ye

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

Notes: Identical specifications are estimated as in Figure 2, however now with countries passing candidate list quotas. Difference-in-difference estimates from a single-coefficient
model suggest an increase in 1.776 (standard error 2.172) in the proportion of women in parliament following reserved seat quotas, and a reduction of 0.017 (standard error 0.071)
in log(MMR). Analogous values for unweighted estimates are 3.569 (s.e. 1.180) for women in parliament, and 0.032 (s.e. 0.055) for log(MMR). Countries implementing candidate
list quotas in the period under study are Albania, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Croatia, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, France, Greece, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Indonesia, Ireland, South Korea, Kyrgyz Republic, Lesotho, Macedonia, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Nepal, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Tunisia and Uruguay.

Women in Parliament

10

(a) Women in parliament

log(Maternal Deaths)

Figure B5: Candidate List Quotas: Event studies for women in parliament and maternal mortality
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A6

-1

0+

s

ar

Ye

-.4

-.2

0

.2

-8

-6

-4

0

Time to Reform

-2

2

4

6

8
10

+

s

ar
Ye

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

log(Adult Male Mortality)
0+

-1

s
ar

Ye

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

(b) Male adult mortality

8
10

+

s
ar

Ye

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

0+

-1

s

ar

Ye

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

-8

-6

-4

0

Time to Reform

-2

2

4

6

(c) Female adult mortality

8
10

+

s
ar
Ye

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

Notes: Identical event studies are plotted to those in Figure 2 examining quota impacts on alternative health outcomes. These outcomes are the rate of death due to TB per 100,000
individuals, and infant mortality per 1,000 live births, male mortality per 1,000 adult males (ages 15–60), and female mortality per 1,000 adult females (ages 15–60). For comparison
with Figure 2b, the natural logarithm of each variable is used, with the exception of TB mortality, where an inverse sine transformation is used, given a small number of country-year
observations where a rate of zero is observed.

Tuberculosis Mortality

.4

(a) Tuberculosis mortality

log(Adult Female Mortality)

Figure B6: Event Studies for the impact of gender quotas on TB (gender neutral) and adult male and female mortality
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A7

2.691
3212
156
0.409
N

Mean of Dep. Var.
Observations
Number of Countries
R-Squared
Population Weights

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

2.680
3167
154
0.544
Y

5.391
3208
156
0.496
N

5.394
3163
154
0.491
N

5.394
3163
154
0.588
Y

4.925
3208
156
0.490
N

4.926
3163
154
0.484
N

4.926
3163
154
0.620
Y

-0.075*
[0.045]

(9)

ln(Female Mortality)

-0.018 -0.027 -0.027 -0.010 -0.047 -0.050
[0.090] [0.058] [0.061] [0.059] [0.056] [0.059]

(3)

ln(Male Mortality)

Difference in difference specification following that in Table A2, with identical controls and fixed effects. We now examine estimates
for impacts of gender quotas on tuberculosis and male and female mortality rates. Tuberculosis is measured as incidence per 100,000
people, and mortality is measured as per 1,000 adults of ages 15-60. Further notes are available in Table A2. Standard errors clustered
by country are displayed in parentheses. * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.

2.680
3167
154
0.403
N

0.084
0.110
[0.121] [0.124]

(2)

Reserved Seats

(1)

ln(TB Mortality)

Table B1: Gender quotas: DD impacts on TB mortality and Adult Mortality
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure B7: Robustness of impact of quotas on women in parliament to alternative measures and specifications
(b) Estimates with balanced samples

(a) Removing high income countries
15

15

10

Women in Parliament

Women in Parliament

10

5

0

5

0

-5
Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

ar
s

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

s
ar
-1

10

+

0+

Ye

Ye

8

Ye
10

+

0+
-1

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-10

ar
s

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

Ye

ar

s

-5

Time to Reform

Time to Reform

(c) Women in Parliament in levels (Figure 2a)

(d) Population-weighted estimates (No India/China)

15
15

Women in Parliament

0

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

15

15

10

10

s
ar
s
ar

8

-1

10

+

0+

Ye

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

s
Ye
ar

s

8

ar
10

+

0+
-1

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-5

Ye

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-5

-8

8

Ye
+
10

0

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-6

0

5

-8

5

s

6

(f) Clustering by country and time

Women in Parliament
Time to Reform

Time to Reform

(g) Estimates without time-varying controls

(h) Conditional on health expenditure

15

10

Women in Parliament

0

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

s
ar

8

6

4

2

Ye

Ye
-1

10

+

0+

Ye
10

+

0+
-1

-2

s
ar

s

8

ar

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

Ye

ar

s

-5

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-5

-4

0

5

-6

5

-8

10

0

Women in Parliament

4

Time to Reform

(e) No India/China samples

Ye
ar

2

0+
-1

Time to Reform

Women in Parliament

0

-2

s
Ye
ar

s

8

ar
+
10

-1

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-5

Ye

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

0+

Ye
ar

s

-5

-4

0

5

-6

5

10

-8

Women in Parliament

10

Time to Reform

Time to Reform

Notes: Plots replicates Figure 3 of the paper, however now showing the impact of quotas on women in parliament. Notes available in
Figure 3.

A9

-

+
10

s
ar
Ye

-10

0

10

20

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

8
10

+

Y

r
ea

s

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

-

+
10

s

ar

Ye

-10

0

10

20

-8

-6

-4

-2

Time to Reform

0

2

4

6

(b) ln(maternal mortality ratio)

8
10

+

rs
a
Ye

Point Estimate
95% CI
90% CI

Notes: Event studies replicate panels A and B of Figure 8 using non-interpolated data. Given the unbalanced coverage of antenatal care and attended birth measures by countries and
years, we present estimates for these outcomes pooling in 2 yearly bins, rather than yearly bins, to avoid unbalanced coverage in particular lag and lead terms where possible.

Antenatal Care Coverage

30

(a) Percent of women in parliament

Skilled Birth Attendance

Figure B8: Mechanisms: Event studies for impacts of quotas on non-interpolated antenatal care and birth attendance
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A10

(8)

82.641
500
132
0.725
Y

83.024
996
149
0.362
N

82.964
970
147
0.373
N

82.964
970
147
0.689
Y

24.489
3189
155
0.584
N

24.549
3144
153
0.579
N

24.549
3144
153
0.605
Y

-2.642***
[0.949]

(9)

Difference in difference models of intermediate outcomes as a function of the passage of gender quotas, where gender quotas is the second lag of
the passage of quota laws. In each case, we control for the log of PPP adjusted GDP per capita, and a democracy score. Antenatal care coverage
and birth attendance are newly harmonized data available for 1990-2015, however only available in a sub-sample of years for each particular
country. Birth rates are per 1,000 inhabitants. Unweighted, and population weighted specifications are displayed. When weighting, China and
India are removed from the estimation sample, to avoid regression results being largely driven by these two countries with a population an order
of magnitude larger than other countries. * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.

82.641
500
132
0.524
N

82.673
526
134
0.507
N

(7)

Mean of Dep. Var.
Observations
Number of Countries
R-Squared
Population Weights

(6)

5.168 8.229** 9.884*** 6.932** 9.597*** 8.214*** -1.121 -1.162
[3.544] [3.151]
[2.737]
[3.236]
[2.849]
[2.222] [0.731] [0.770]

(4)

(5)

(3)

(2)

Birth Rate

Reserved Seats

(1)

Attended Births

Antenatal Care

Table B2: Mechanisms: impacts of gender quotas on intermediate outcomes
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A11

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

A12
7.464
2439
130
0.441
Y

6.132
2586
155
0.229
N

6.157
2550
153
0.230
N

6.157
2550
153
0.451
Y

0.095
2445
127
0.126
N

0.095
2400
125
0.125
N

0.095
2400
125
0.231
Y

(11)

8.899
3212
156
0.458
N

8.910
3167
154
0.453
N

0.012 -0.024
[0.058] [0.046]

(10)

8.910
3167
154
0.668
Y

0.044
[0.052]

(12)

ln(GDP per capita)

Refer to notes to Table B2. Alternative regressions are shown, however now for the outcomes years of schooling, the proportion of development assistence earmarked for
maternal health, health expenditure as a % of GDP, and the log of GDP per capita. Full notes are available in Figure 8. * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.

7.464
2439
130
0.346
N

7.462
2480
132
0.357
N

(4)

Mean of Dep. Var.
Observations
Number of Countries
R-Squared
Population Weights

(3)

Development Assistance

0.588** 0.593** 1.321*** 0.735
0.740 -0.209 -0.024 -0.026 -0.085**
[0.259] [0.272]
[0.413] [0.478] [0.511] [0.344] [0.026] [0.027] [0.034]

(2)

Health Expenditure

Reserved Seats

(1)

Years of Schooling

Table B3: Mechanisms: impacts of gender quotas on intermediate outcomes

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

Data Appendix

Maternal Mortality Data We used recently released estimates of the maternal mortality ratio (MMR) per 100,000
live births produced by the Maternal Mortality Estimation Inter-Agency Group (MMEIG) and published in the
World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI, indicator SH.STA.MMRT). These data were made available
for the first time in the year 2016 and before that there were no reliable annual cross-country data on MMR. These
estimates were available for 183 countries annually for the period 1990–2015. Maternal mortality is identified
using ICD-10 codes O00-O99 (Pregnancy, childbirth and puerperium); the official definition is “the number of
women who die from pregnancy-related causes while pregnant or within 42 days of pregnancy termination per
100,000 live births.” These are widely considered the best MMR measures to date, as they address known measurement difficulties in survey and vital statistics data on maternal mortality using Bayesian methods applied to
multiple, complementary data sources including vital statistics, special inquiries, surveillance sites, populationbased household surveys and census files (Alkema et al., 2016, 2017). The world distribution of average MMR
for the period of 1990–2015 is in Figure A4.
Political Gender Quota Data We collated measures for each country of whether the country has a legislated
and binding reserved seat quota for women, its year of implementation, and the size of the quota measured as
number of seats divided by all seats in the uni- or bi-cameral chamber. To create the database, we started with
measures provided by Dahlerup (2005) and completed the most recent years from Global Database of Quotas for
Women database (available online at quotaproject.org), which is a repository developed and maintained by
the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (IDEA), the Inter-Parliamentary Union, and
Stockholm University.
Women in Parliament Data We used three distinct annual-level measures of women in parliament to construct
a comprehensive panel of the percentage of women occupying seats in the national parliament. These were the
WDI indicator SG.GEN.PARL.ZS (“Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments (%)”), The UN
Millennium Development Goals (MDG) Indicators (“Seats held by women in national parliament, percentage”),
and the Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) dataset compiled by (Paxton, Green
and Hughes, 2008) (“Women in Parliament, 1945–2003: Cross-National Dataset”). The first two of these datasets
had partially-complete coverage for the years 1990, and then 1997–2015, while the latter had partially-complete
yearly coverage for each year starting in 1945, and ending in 2003. In order to construct as comprehensive a
series as possible, we began with the WDI data, and then imputed missing years where available from the MDG
indicators, and Paxton, Green and Hughes (2008) data. When a missing WDI year was available in both the
MDG and the ICPSR dataset, we favored the MDG measure, which was estimated using the same sample and
year. Figures A5 and B2 present the distribution of the proportion of women in parliament pre- and post-quota
implementation in quota countries, as well as the full distribution of the proportion of women in parliament over
the period under study.
Covariates We adjusted for the natural logarithm of PPP adjusted GDP per capita measured in 2011 international
dollars, and a score for the level of democracy in the country, in all models. In additional sensitivity tests, we
also examined quota predictors as laid out in Krook (2010). These were the number of peacekeepers in a country
A13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

from The International Peace Institute, IPI Peacekeeping Database, Net Overseas Development Assistance (World
Bank Indicator DT.ODA.ODAT.CD), and a series of measures of political competition and landscape from (Beck
et al., 2001). Our measure of democracy was gleaned from the Polity IV project database. This database records
information on the political regime in 167 countries, between 1800 and 2014. The democracy indicator is available annually, and is a 0–10 scale based on measures of competitiveness of political participation, openness and
competitiveness of executive recruitment and constraints on executive powers. Higher values reflect more open,
democratic societies.
Health expenditure at the country-year level was taken from the World Health Organization the National Health
Accounts (NHA) data series. These provide a measure of total health expenditure as a percent of GDP, and are
available for the years 1995-2013.
The data on development assistance for health are based on the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
(IHME) Development Assistance for Health Database (1990–2017). These data are available at the source country
× receiver country × year level. We compute the proportion Development Assistance for Health to Maternal
Health as:

Development Assistance for Health to Maternal Health - All Program Areas (constant 2017 US dollars)
.
Development Assistance for Health disbursed from all channels (constant 2017 US dollars)

For the women’s economic rights variable we exploit a previously under-exploited cross-country rights data
from the Cingranelli, Richards and Clay (2013) data set, which provides data on three different variables measuring
Political, Economic and Social Rights of women, for the period of 1981 to 2011 for around 127 (in 1981) to 192
(in 2011) countries.
Maternal Care Inputs Data Recent data from the World Bank Data Bank allow us to examine the state of maternal
health care in a sub-set of countries and years. We use the two policy-relevant indicators measuring the percent
of pregnant women receiving prenatal care (indicator SH.STA.ANVC.ZS) and the percent of all births attended
by skilled health staff (indicator SH.STA.BRTC.ZS). These data are constructed and released by the World Bank
using comparable measures from each country: specifically data from UNICEF, the State of the World’s Children,
ChildInfo, and the Demographic and Health Surveys. As such, these measures are only available in years and
countries for which surveys were conducted, resulting in fewer observations than the yearly measures of maternal
mortality. In our analysis we use the full set of data released in the World Bank Data Bank.
Placebo Outcomes Data on male mortality for adults are available in the World Bank Data Bank (indicator
SP.DYN.AMRT.MA), based on measures from the United Nations Population Division, World Population Prospect
and University of California, Berkeley, and Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research. This is measured
as mortality between the ages of 15–60, per 1,000 male adults, and captures the likelihood that a male of age 15
dies by the age of 60. Tuberculosis mortality is measured as the number of deaths due to Tuberculosis among
HIV-negative people, and is measured per 100,000 population. The data are from the WHO and were downloaded
from: http://apps.who.int/gho/data/view.main.57020ALL?lang=en, accessed on 17/03/2016.

A14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B

Description of Resampling Procedure for MMR Uncertainty
Publicly available MMR data consist of a point estimate and the upper and lower points of the 80% uncer-

tainty interval. In order to estimate standard errors and p-values based on these data, we undertake the following
procedure:
Resample Algorithm
1. Take a clustered bootstrap resample from the original data b = 1, . . . , B, with B = 500
2. Generate a random vector of size N (where N is the sample in the regression) where each element is either
a) a draw of a normal variable where 80% of the probability mass falls between -1 and 1 (a draw from
N (0, 0.7803)), or b) a draw from a triangular distribution in the interval [-1,1]. Below this is ε, and in each
case, these integrate to 1.
3. Generate a resampled value of maternal mortality as: M M Rtb∗ = M M Rct + ε
LB
M M Rct

is the lower bound estimate and

UB
M M Rct

U B −M M RLB
M M Rct
ct
,
2

where

is the upper bound estimate; ie take the original mea-

sure, and draw a value from the uncertainty interval centred around this measure.
4. Estimate the original regression using the resampled data, with the re-resampled MMR measure. This results
in an estimate of interest βbb∗
5. if b < 500 return to step 1. Else go to step 6
6. Calculate the standard error of βb as the standard deviation of {βb1∗ , βb2∗ , . . . , βb500∗ }. This replaces the original
naive standard error, and similarly a p-value can be calculated associated with the null hypothesis of a null
impact, analogous to the p-value calculated based on a standard regression coefficient.
This procedure is only necessary when estimating impacts of quotas on maternal mortality, and not for women
in parliament as we are only adjusting for uncertainty in the dependent variable in cases where maternal mortality is
used. Note that in the above we are re-sampling maternal mortality to provide full coverage of the 80% uncertainty
interval, or indeed, to provide greater than full coverage in the case of the normal draw, for each country year pair.
In each case, the normal or triangular distribution places more weight on the likelihood of observing a value of
maternal mortality close to the stated estimate, and less weight on the likelihood of observing a value in the tails
of the distribution.
The above resampling procedure assumes that uncertainty in maternal mortality is independent between countries and years. It may also be the case that uncertainty is correlated across years within a country. When undertaking inference robust to uncertainty we thus present p-values associated with a range of cases as presented in
Table A8. These are:
1. Bootstrap: The bootstrap analogue of the original p-value (ie no uncertainty in MMR)

A15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000570; this version posted June 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2. Triangular Correction: Resamples from the MMR uncertainty range from the WHO data (80% coverage)
with a triangular distribution whose minimum and maximum are at the end points of the uncertainty range,
and whose centre is at the estimate
3. Triangular Correction by Country: Resamples as above, however now instead of taking uncertainty draws
by country and year, takes uncertainty draws only at the level of the country. This implies that uncertainty
with regards to MMR is perfectly correlated within a country over time. It is the limit case of assuming
correlation within a country in uncertainty in MMR measurement.
4. Normal Correction: Resamples from the MMR uncertainty range assuming a normal distribution, where
draws are taken so that the 10th /90th quintile of the normal are at the upper and lower end points of the
uncertainty range presented in the WHO data in each case. This allows for us to sample outside the 80%
confidence bounds presented in the original data, and will be the most demanding of all corrections.
5. Normal Correction by Country: Resamples as above, however now instead of taking uncertainty draws by
country and year, takes uncertainty draws only at the level of the country.

A16

