medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

1
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun

Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Disrupts Functional Dynamic
Attractors of Healthy Mental States
1

Victor M. Vergara, PhD, 2Harm J. van der Horn, MD, PhD, 3Andrew R. Mayer, PhD,
1
Flor A. Espinoza, PhD, 2Joukje van der Naalt, MD, PhD 1Vince D Calhoun, PhD

1Tri-institutional center for Translational Research in Neuroimaging and Data Science (TRenDS),
[Georgia State University, Georgia Institute of Technology, Emory University], 25 Park Place, Atlanta
GA 30303
2Dept of Neurology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands
3The Mind Research Network and Lovelace Biomedical and Environmental Research Institute, 1101
Yale Blvd. NE, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 87106

Abstract
The human brain has the ability of changing its wiring configuration by
increasing or decreasing functional connectivity strength between specific areas.
Variable but recurring configuration patterns in dynamic functional connectivity have
been observed during resting fMRI experiments, patterns which are defined as
dynamic brain states. The question arises whether in a regular healthy brain these
states evolve in a random fashion or in a specific sequential order. The current work
reveals both the specific state sequence in healthy brains, as well as the set of
disruptions in this sequence produced by traumatic brain injury. The healthy
sequence consists of oscillatory dynamic connectivity patterns that orbit an attractor
state in a high dimensional space. Using discovery (96 subjects) and replication (74
subjects) cohorts, this study demonstrated that mild traumatic brain injury results in
immediate orbital disruptions that recover over time. Brain dynamics enter a status of
disrupted orbits right after injury, with partial recovery at 4 weeks, and full recovery at
3 months post-injury. In summary, our results describe an aspect of neuronal
dysfunction in mild traumatic brain injury that is fully based on brain state dynamics,
and different from traditional brain connectivity strength measures.
Keywords: Traumatic brain injury, functional magnetic resonance imaging,
dynamic functional network connectivity, transition probabilities, dynamic attractors.

1. Introduction
Symptoms resulting from mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) produce
deleterious effects on cognitive and social functioning, and these deficits may last a
lifetime for a minority of patients. Commonly reported symptoms include dizziness,
vertigo, irritability, chronic headaches, difficulty concentrating, depression, and
impulsiveness (DeKosky et al., 2010). The fact that these symptoms are notoriously
difficult to objectify using current clinical measures provides a strong rationale for the
ongoing research that tries to uncover the different aspects of this disease (Levin
and Diaz-Arrastia, 2015). Previous studies suggested that functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) is a promising technique to provide biomarker features
(Vergara et al., 2017). Specifically, we showed that mTBI patients can be individually
differentiated
from healthy controls (HC) participants with high accuracy using
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun
dynamic functional network connectivity (dFNC), a measurement obtained from fMRI
imaging (Vergara et al., 2018). However, previous analyses did not make full use of
the temporal information in dFNC, limiting the method to extract features based on
assessments of connectivity strength. Studies of patterns of functional connectivity
transitions occurring in the brain are still an underexplored area. We predict that
observed connectivity differences in mTBI compared to HC are rooted in patterns of
dynamic transitions.
The varied accelerations of the head during a mTBI event affect the
microstructure of axons, resulting in varying patterns of deficient anatomical
connectivity (Huisman et al., 2004; Holli et al., 2010; Ling et al., 2012; Arenth et al.,
2014). In accordance with white matter damage, abnormal patterns of functional
connectivity have been found in several regions of the brain (Hillary et al., 2014;
Sharp et al., 2014; Mayer et al., 2015a). Functional connectivity exists when there is
temporal synchronicity of neuronal activation between two brain areas. Assessments
of functional connectivity throughout the literature indicate a consistent map of
functional connectivity abnormalities in mTBI. Resting state studies points towards
the default mode network (DMN) as one of the main affected brain networks
displaying a common pattern of weaker connectivity with other brain networks (Sours
et al., 2013; Vakhtin et al., 2013; Sharp et al., 2014; Palacios et al., 2017). In
contrast, increased functional connectivity within the DMN has been observed in
some cases (Nathan et al., 2015; Vergara et al., 2017). Another consistent
observation is increased functional connectivity that involves the cerebellum
(Pagulayan et al., 2018), and especially between the cerebellum and the
supplementary motor area (Nathan et al., 2015; Vergara et al., 2017; Vergara et al.,
2018). However, effects in other networks may seem to differ. In the executive
control network (ECN) increases (Borich et al., 2015) and decreases (Palacios et al.,
2017) of functional connectivity has been reported. While reduced subcortical
connectivity has been reported in mTBI (Vakhtin et al., 2013), thalamic connectivity
has also been observed to increase (Tang et al., 2011). All of these observations
have been made by considering that functional connectivity within a specific time
lapse can be described by a single summary assessment. In such cases functional
connectivity is assumed to have a quasi-static behavior with small variations that can
be averaged (Allen et al., 2014). However, challenging this assumption might lead to
an improvement of our understanding of brain mechanisms linked to TBI
Considering functional connectivity as a time evolving brain feature leads to
several hypotheses that need to be described. As a preamble, we must view the
brain as a dynamic system which is not always functionally connected in the same
way in spite of a time invariant anatomical wiring. It is known that the human brain
iterates among several patterns, also known as states, that can be identified using a
dynamic functional connectivity method (Allen et al., 2014). Figure 1a shows an
example of two different states and the two assumptions (Sharp and Smooth
dynamic transitions) focus of this discussion. The simplest model describes the
connectivity as unchanged through the duration of a state followed by a jump to the
next state. While it is known that time variations of connectivity occur, no
assessment of temporal nature is made within the state (Miller et al., 2016). We
believe a more realistic assumption is a time-related variation of connectivity strength

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun
within the state, which is our first hypothesis. Figure 1a presents this alternative
concept in a simplified manner. Second, we hypothesize the existence of oscillations
of weak and strong connectivity within particular states as exemplified in Figure 1b.
We propose to model these oscillations as a brain connectivity state that orbits
around a given attractor connectivity pattern. The center of such an orbit is related to
the state centroids as some examples have been previously identified in mTBI
(Vergara et al., 2018). To represent the attractor and orbit within a state, we have
chosen to display a double arrow from weak to strong and back. The third hypothesis
is that attractor states are part of the normal brain behavior belonging to healthy
controls as shown in Figure 1c. States not exhibiting oscillations may also be
present, representing an intermediate transition between attractor states. Finally, we
hypothesize that mTBI can disrupt the attractor states in such a way that no
oscillation is observed. This abnormality is illustrated in Figure 1d. Different from
previous assessments, these disruptions may not be directly related to connectivity
strength and may only be observed when using the more dynamic attractor model.
This study examined the existence of attractor states in the healthy brain and
attractor disruptions in subjects with mTBI. Two sample cohorts acquired by two
different research projects were used in a discovery (96 subjects) and replication
(123) scheme. A modified version of dynamic functional network connectivity (dFNC)
(Allen et al., 2014) was applied that includes the first order derivatives of the time
varying connectivity (Espinoza et al., 2018). Time derivatives impose an additional
temporal constraint for the dFNC algorithm aiding to identify the different attractor
sides illustrated in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Comparison of a sharp transition assumption and a smooth transition assumption in dynamic functional
network connectivity (dFNC). Part a) illustrates the differences between an assumption of time lapses with quasiconstant behavior and sharp dFNC state transitions versus a non-static connectivity change where the transition is
smoother. Part b) shows that instead of transitioning, the state can start a dFNC oscillation without changing the state.
The connectivity pattern is termed an attractor because it pulls the brain to remain in a specific dFNC state within a
particular dynamicity. Part c) shows the hypothesis that attractors are part of a healthy brain behavior. A traumatic brain
injury event can disrupt the attractor leading to abnormal brain dynamicity as illustrated in d).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun

2. Materials and methods
Two sample cohorts were used in this study. The discovery cohort was
obtained in New Mexico and used for hypothesis testing. The replication cohort was
obtained in the Netherlands and used to validate the results. A complete description
of scanned subject and data preprocessing for both cohorts is provided in the
supplementary documentation.

2.1.

Discovery Cohort

We performed eyes-open resting state fMRI scans in 48 subjects with mTBI
subjects and 48 age and sex matched healthy controls. Cohort’s mean age = 27.3 ±
9.0 years. The mTBI patients went through clinical (mean day post-injury = 13.9 ±
4.9 days) and brain imaging (mean day post-injury = 14.0 ± 5.3 days) evaluations
within 21 days of injury. These 96 scans have been previously used in several
studies, and extensive details of the clinical assessments can be found in the
corresponding publications (Mayer et al., 2011; Mayer et al., 2015b; Vergara et al.,
2017). Scans were used for dFNC analysis similar to a previous publication, where
four dynamic states were identified and a total of 48 brain networks of interest (NOIs)
were used (Vergara et al., 2018). The 48 NOIs were grouped in nine different
functional connectivity domains including subcortical (SBC), cerebellum (CER),

Figure 2. Connectivity patterns of ASWC and their derivatives identified as six different clusters using k-means
clustering. The top matrix of each centroid displays correlation patterns (ASWC) and the bottom one their derivatives. As
previously defined in (Vergara et al., 2018), brain regions of interest were grouped in the functional domains: subcortical
(SBC), cerebellum (CER), auditory (AUD), sensorimotor (SEN), visual (VIS), salience (SAL), default mode network (DMN),
executive control network (ECN) and language (LAN). Visually, there are some noticeable pairings of clusters with similar
correlation patterns having derivative patterns of opposite sign. The pairings are (1, 2) and (3, 4). To verify cluster pairings
we correlated cluster patterns, represented by , and made sure that ASWC patterns were highly correlated, while their
derivatives were highly anti-correlated (derivative of opposite sign).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

5
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun
auditory (AUD), sensorimotor (SEN), visual (VIS), salience (SAL), default mode
network (DMN), executive control network (ECN) and language (LAN). We provided
spatial maps of these NOIs in the Supplementary Figure. We will focus on the time
varying dynamic connectivity matrices of these NOIs. The dynamic analysis results
in one connectivity matrix per time point. Current preprocessing differs from the
previous publication (Vergara et al., 2018) as we used an artifact reduction
connectivity assessment termed average sliding window correlation (ASWC)
(Vergara et al., 2019) as well as temporal derivatives of ASWC (DASWC). In
summary, there is one connectivity matrix (ASWC) and one connectivity derivative
matrix (DASWC) for each time point.
The dFNC analysis identified lapses of time with a similar connectivity (ASWC) or
derivative (DASWC) patterns using a k-means algorithm. In the context of the
clustering output there are six clusters corresponding to six different derivative
patterns. As displayed in Figure 2, there are only four connectivity patterns since
cluster 1 and 2 exhibit the same whole-brain connectivity, despite of having different
derivatives, where the DMN is negatively correlated with other cortical areas. This
negative correlation is known to be the main characteristic of a resting state
experiment (Greicius et al., 2003; Greicius et al., 2009; Shirer et al., 2012), but this is
the first time that such pattern is observed split between two clusters. We say that
whole-brain connectivity is in State A when the brain is in this connectivity pattern
occurring during clusters 1 and 2. In a similar manner, State B is represented by the
connectivity pattern of clusters 3 and 4 where in this case the SBC domain is
negatively correlated with other cortical areas. Although it has not been the focus of
resting state studies, this negative correlation between cortical and SBC domains is
common occurrence in dFNC analysis (Allen et al., 2014). Matching of connectivity
patterns of clusters 1 and 2, as well as matching of clusters 3 and 4, was verified by
using correlation as illustrated in Figure 2. Clusters within state are different because
the pattern of their derivatives has opposite signs. The DMN plays an important role
in the clusters of State A, with DMN DASWC having an opposite sign compared to
other DASWCs. The SBC DASWC can highlight a different sign compared to the
other DASWCs through the brain for State B.
State C and State D are the two states with only one cluster. Their
connectivity and derivative patterns are not matched with other states. There is no
distinct functional domain to be highlighted in these states. The functional
connectivity pattern of State C is a generalized strong connectivity throughout the
whole-brain with a generalized strong negative derivative. This suggests a tendency
for the brain to diminish the highly connected brain probably looking for a
homeostatic equilibrium. The connectivity pattern of State D indicates a generalized
weak derivative with strong connectivity within domains and weak connectivity
between domains. State D was scarcely observed, which gives us reason to believe
State D does not have a strong influence in this sample.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun
The temporal sequence of brain patterns is an outcome of the k-means
clustering assigning a cluster index to each time point. It is then possible to
determine the order of appearance of clusters which have been indexed from 1 to 6.
For example, a temporal sequence of clusters
= [1, 1, 1, 2, 2, …] defines an
instance where the previous cluster
and the next is
. Instances
where the next cluster is not the
same as the previous are temporal
transitions from a cluster to the
next and can be mathematically
written as
.
Several
subjects
showed
oscillations
in
their
cluster
sequence, for example = [1, 1, 1,
2, 2,, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2 …]
which in the hypothetical picture of
Figure 1 indicates an attractor.
Since clusters 1 and 2 belong to
the same state, this behavior
keeps dynamic variations attracted
to the functional connectivity
pattern of clusters 1 and 2, or State
A as previously defined. We
Figure
3.
Cluster
transition
probability
matrices
estimated the probability of every
and most probable transition structures.
Clusters have been grouped using the matching from Figure 2.
transition
Significant differences between transition probabilities of HC and
through
their
frequency
of mTBI are indicated by a small circle on each colored matrix
box. This figure focuses on State A and State B displaying
occurrence within a given sample element
an attractor behavior. The diagrams for HC show a structure in
group. Figure 3 displays the which State A and State B are attractors since the included
transit to each other with highest probability. This attractortransition-matrices-results
along clusters
behavior gets disrupted in mTBI patients for State A and State B.
with the significant differences.

2.2.

Four Months Follow Up

A total of 23 mTBI scans of subjects from the discovery cohort were taken
four months post-injury (mean 111.3 ± 14.2 days post-injury). These scans were not
part of the initial dFNC analysis with 96 scans and they were separately analyzed.
We extracted temporal information from the available ROIs using a groupinformation-guided independent component analysis (GIG-ICA) (Du and Fan, 2013).
Similar to the previous analysis, ASWC and DASWC estimations were concatenated
at each time point. Data at each time point was correlated with each of the six
available centroids to determine the nearest cluster. Notice that this procedure does
not require k-means since centroids are already known from the previous k-means
analysis.

2.3.

Replication Cohort

The replication cohort consisted of 20 HC (mean age 36 (18-61), 70% male),
54 mTBI patients (mean age 37 (19-64), 67% male) scanned on average at 4 weeks
post-injury, and 49 mTBI patients also scanned 3 months post trauma (mean age 37
(19-62), 67% male) (van der Horn et al., 2017; van der Horn et al., 2018). We

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

7
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun
applied the same NOIs from the discovery sample. Temporal information of these
NOIs was obtained using the GIG-ICA method (Du and Fan, 2013) applied
independently to each subject in the replication cohort. This procedure allowed
applying ASWC and DASWC to estimate time dependent matrices of dynamic
functional connectivity and their derivatives.

2.4.

Statistical Analysis

The group test performed in this work focuses on transition probabilities which
consisted on a single assessment per group. To overcome this problem, we
employed a bootstrap procedure using 10k iterations. A random resample with
replacement was performed for each subject group (one for controls and one for
mTBI groups) and for each iteration. A group difference is then calculated for the
current iteration after estimating transition probabilities from the resample groups.
Finally, we estimated the probability that group difference is larger than zero using a
frequency estimate from the 10k bootstrap iterations.

3. Results
3.1.

Discovery Cohort

The most notable pattern is that opposite
derivative cluster pairs (1, 2) and (3, 4) transitions to
each other with the highest probability in healthy
controls. This type of transition corresponds to the
same dynamic state which is indicated by boxes
grouping cluster groups (1, 2) and (3, 4) in Figure 3.
State A and State B can be identified as two attractor
states in the HC group. The observation for mTBI
patients is different because clusters 1 and 2 go to 4
with the highest probability, thus indicating a
disruption in the dynamic behavior of brain State A.
In addition, clusters 3 and 4 go to cluster 5 with the
highest probability characterizing a disruption of the
dynamic attractor State B. The mTBI patients thus
suffer from disruption in both attractor states
identified for healthy brains.

3.2.

Four Months Follow Up

Transition probabilities are displayed in Figure
4. Cluster transitions present the same orbits
observed in healthy controls. At four months postinjury, the disrupted attractor behaviors of State A
and State B that were found at 2 weeks, are restored
(Figure 4). These results suggest timeline of initial
injury related disruption of brain state attractors with
subsequent recovery of attractor behavior.

Figure 4. Cluster transitions at 4
months post-injury. The orbits of the
two attractor states are intact. This
mTBI transition map shows similar State
A and State B transitions to those found
in the healthy control map of Figure 3.
Attractor states of mTBI patients have
been restored at four months when
compared to the mTBI transitions at 2
weeks.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

8
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun

3.3.

Replication Cohort

The set of centroids obtained from the discovery data set in Figure 2 was
used in the replication data set. At each time point, a matching procedure between
centroid and dynamic connectivity matrices was performed by selecting the nearest
centroid. Specifically, the centroid exhibiting higher correlation with the matrix at a
specific time-point was assigned to that time point. The rest of the analysis is the
same as in the discovery data set. As depicted in Figure 5, the HC samples in this
cohort replicated the dynamic characteristics of State A and State B as they are
again behaving as attractors. Two hypotheses were verified here: first the existence
of attractors, and second, that attractor-like behavior is a characteristic of a healthy
brain. Next, we can observe that mTBI samples at 4 weeks post injury exhibit a
disruption in attractor State B consistent with the hypothesis that brain injury might
change the behavior of attractors. Finally, all attractors at 3 months post injury
behave similar to HC transition dynamics. This result may suggest that healthy brain
connectivity dynamics is restored after three months post injury.

Figure 5. Replication of cluster transition probability matrices
and most probable transition structures.
Clusters have been grouped using the matching from Figure 2. In this cohort, resting-state fMRI scans (eyes-closed) were
obtained at two time points: Time Point 1 at 4 weeks average and Time Point at 3 months average. This figure focuses on State
A and State B displaying an attractor behavior. Attractor behavior of State A and State B (as shown in Figure 3) was replicated
in these HC. Regarding mTBI, State B was disrupted at Time Point 1, but the transition scheme at Time Point 2 shows
restoration of this dynamic brain-state.

4. Discussion
This work demonstrates the existence of attractors as an important
characteristic of brain functional dynamics, as well as disruption of these attractors
due to brain trauma. Presented evidence indicates that healthy whole brain
connectivity varies as a function of time, in an oscillatory manner orbiting an attractor
centroid. Whole brain connectivity was based on correlation estimates among NOIs
distributed throughout the brain. Thus, whole brain connectivity resides in a space

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

9
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun
with as many dimensions as the number of available correlations. An attractor exists
when multi-dimensional time-varying connectivity exhibits relatively small oscillatory
changes without a major shift in the overall connectivity pattern. Average dynamic
connectivity is then at the center of the multi-dimensional orbit, and useful for
representing the orbital functional connectivity structure. Multi-dimensional orbiting is
consistent with the hypothesized quasi-static behavior within a dFNC-state as
formerly described by Allen et al (Allen et al., 2014). Regarding non-healthy brain
dynamics, we verified in two different cohorts that brain injury disrupts healthy
attractor behaviors. The probability of dynamic connectivity completing a healthy
orbit is small when a particular attractor is disrupted. Two striking observations were
made in the mTBI discovery cohort: 1) there is a reduced orbiting behavior about
centroids (attractor disruptions); and 2) there are attractors present which are not
observed in healthy controls (abnormal attractors). Attractor disruption was also
observed in the replication mTBI group at four weeks post injury. This disruption
seems to have been resolved with time as healthy, 3 and 4 months post injury data
exhibited the same attractor characteristics.
The full set of results obtained in this work and presented in Figure 3, Figure 4
and Figure 5 has several implications that may be difficult to notice through the
transition matrices. One important result is that orbiting transitions within State A
(between clusters 1 and 2) and within State B (clusters 3 and 4) were highly similar
for the two HC groups. Once brain connectivity gets configured in cluster 1, results
demonstrate that it will vary with time until reaching the configuration of cluster 2 with
the highest probability, after which it will return to cluster 1 with the highest
probability. Connectivity dynamics will orbit within State A (oscillating between
clusters 1 and 2) until a yet not determined cause moves connectivity away from the
orbit of State A. One might wonder where dynamic connectivity moves after
abandoning attractor State A. Results from Figure 3 and Figure 5 indicate that it will
follow a path of clusters and state transitions until it falls into another state orbit. That
is, it will return to orbit State A or will be attracted towards orbiting State B
comprising clusters 3 and 4. Non-attractor states C and D are part of transient
pathways in-between the main-attractors. Attractor brain dynamics in this work can
thus be modeled as follows: Functional connectivity is not static during a resting fMRI
experiment; instead it moves through several quasi-static functional connectivity
states. Quasi-stationarity means there is a specific average connectivity pattern
around which there are specific patterns of temporal connectivity variations. One of
the observed time-varying patterns describes an orbit around a center described by
averaging all points in the orbit. The other type of time-varying patterns does not
describe orbits occurring in between orbits. This behavior is depicted in Figure 6 for
three different orbits selected from real data and their conceptual summary. For
further clarity, a supplementary movie displaying time varying connectivity from real
data is provided with this publication. Analyzed data showed evidence to consider
this orbiting behavior as healthy brain dynamics.
The resting state brain-dynamics-model described in the previous paragraph
is consistent with findings and hypotheses described in the literature. Functional
connectivity in State A follows an expected pattern shown in resting state
experiments, where the DMN is negatively correlated with other brain regions, but

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

10
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun
strongly internally connected (Greicius et al., 2003; Buckner et al., 2008; Raichle,
2015). This pattern has been linked to self-referential and mindfulness processing
due to the strong influence of ventro-medial prefrontal cortex and the posterior
cingulate (Raichle, 2015). In addition, fMRI experiments during a mindful breathing
task has shown that subjects with higher mindfulness disposition prefer connectivity
patterns similar to State A, consisting of anti-correlations between the DMN and
networks that are important for focused attention, with the latter being highly interconnected (Mooneyham et al., 2017). Thus, a disruption of State A in patients with
mTBI may lead to a reduced ability to be mindful and to engage in attentive mental
processes. It is likely that neuroplasticity attempts to reinstate this broken attractor,
and this type of brain healing in mTBI may even be stimulated by mindfulness
training rehabilitation techniques (Evans, 2012; Johansson et al., 2012; Niraj et al.,
2018).
The second main attractor-state, State B, exhibits stronger connectivity within
sensorial and motor domains VIS, AUD and SEN, all of which are negatively
correlated with the SBC domain composed of basal ganglia and thalamus areas. Our
results show that this state also gets disrupted after mTBI, with non-attractor state C
(cluster 5: which contains positive functional connections between subcortical
regions and cortical domains) becoming an attractor with cluster 4 (which contains
negative correlations between subcortical and cortical regions), forming a new
dynamic brain state. Patients with mTBI often report increased sensitivity to light,
sound, pain, and patients are easily overwhelmed by cognitively challenging stimuli
that are encountered during everyday life (de Koning et al., 2016). These symptoms
might be reflected by the change in state B, possibly indicating that processing of
various exteroceptive stimuli is increased. According to the study by Mooneyham et
al. (Mooneyham et al., 2017) there is a second possible mindset in addition to the
mindful/attentive mindset, namely one representing mind wandering which is
associated with a state of high connectivity between DMN and networks for focused
attention. Another study has shown that higher connectivity between these networks
is associated with lower mindfulness ability (Doll et al., 2015). As cluster 5 in our
current study also shows increased functional connections of the DMN and ECN with
other brain regions, such as the VIS, AUD and SEN domain, it could be argued that
the change in state B encompasses increased mind-wandering, and perhaps even
rumination, in response to increased bottom-up processing of exteroceptive stimuli.
These theories are supported by a study by Sours et al., that revealed increased
functional connectivity between sub-thalamic regions and various cortical areas
including those of sensory processing and the default mode network in patients with
mTBI (Sours et al., 2015). Other studies have also shown changes in connectivity
strength in thalamocortical areas, and increases in connectivity in a network of
subcortical structures including thalamus, hippocampus and amygdala after mTBI
(Tang et al., 2011) (Iraji et al., 2015). As cortico-striatal-thalamic-cortical loops are
involved in mental processes such as cognition, learning and memory, alterations of
attractor dynamics in state B may also have detrimental effects on cognitive
processes, explaining some of the known impairments and symptoms in mTBI, such
as mental fatigue (Helie et al., 2015; Makino et al., 2016; Shine et al., 2016) (Dikmen
et al., 2009). The third mindset described by Mooneyham and colleagues represents
a transitional mindset. The hypothetical existence of transitional mindsets is well

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

11
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun
supported by our hypotheses and our results, since non-attractor states (State C and
State D) seem to function as temporal bridges between attractor states, and might
even form new brain states after neural perturbations such as mTBI.
It has to be realized that there is a possibility that deviations from healthy
attractor states after mTBI in fact already reflect, or partly reflect, recovery processes
that are needed to return to a healthy brain state. It has been theorized that changes
in functional connectivity after traumatic brain injury, especially during the subacute
stage, are the natural brain reaction to the traumatic insult (Tang et al., 2011;
Vergara et al., 2018). A regeneration mechanism gets triggered by axonal damage of
white mater and thalamic projection fibers (Little et al., 2010). Neuroplasticity tries to
compensate by regenerating injured axons, through branching of unaffected axons
or remodeling the neural circuitry (Navarro, 2009; Chipman, 2016). Traumatic brain
injury causes alterations in hemodynamics characterized by hypoperfusion mainly in
the thalamus, but also in cortical regions (Kim et al., 2010). These healing
mechanisms likely change the dynamic interaction of functional connectivity. The
current study shows that both the attractors State A and State B are disrupted at
approximately 2 weeks post injury. This may suggest that both mindfulness and
wandering mental processes, as described by Mooneyham et al., are impaired as a
result of the different neuroplastic events necessary to restore normal brain function
(Mooneyham et al., 2017). Furthermore, an abnormal attractor between clusters 4
and 5 appears to replace State B (see Figure 3), suggesting that brain dynamics try
to retain an attractor like-behavior instead of a full chaotic disruption. Results at 4
weeks (late sub-acute) and 3 months (early chronic) describe the evolution of brain
healing after mild TBI. Attractor State A was restored at 4 weeks while attractor State
B was subsequently restored at 3 months.

Figure 6. Attractors in dynamic brain connectivity. a) Selected data of a 10 minute scan from a healthy subject moving from
the two orbits State A and State B. Dynamic connectivity was assessed using an average sliding window correlation and Zscored before plotting. These plots show some few examples selected from the vast amount of available data. b) Conceptual
depiction of healthy functional connectivity dynamics based on the real data attractor in a). Dynamic functional connectivity
varies in an Nth dimensional space where each dimension corresponds to an available correlation. For a total of n brain NOIs
there are N=n(n-1)/2 different correlations corresponding to all possible NOI pairs. The figure illustrates two orbits where the
connectivity increases (positive time derivatives) and decreases (negative time derivatives) in an oscillatory manner. Jumping
from one orbit to another may temporally elicit transitional connectivity states. This pattern was observed in healthy controls and
described by the state transitions with highest probability in discovery and replication datasets.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

12
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun

At this point, it is possible to draw a simplified timeline (by disregarding state
C and D) of dynamic disruption and restoration after mTBI as illustrated in Figure 7.
Immediately after injury, brain dynamics enters partial chaotic behavior where
abnormal attractor dynamics occurs. The brain eventually tries recovering normal
attractor dynamics, which is completed at three months post-injury. This timeline
successfully describes results from discovery and replication experiments, despite
being performed in different cohorts.
Discovery results presented here are from mTBI subjects in the subacute
stage. The observations made are then consistent with the establishment of
temporary neurodegenerative mechanisms short after brain injury. The replication
result allowed us to verify the healthy condition as well as observing longitudinal
dysfunctions after mTBI. Although attractor states behavior was replicated, results
for the non-attractor states were slightly different which could be partly explained by
the heterogeneity of mTBI cases. Our experimental design could not fully replicate or
explain details of these non-attractor states and more research is necessary to
elucidate their relevance in mTBI. As is true for any group analysis, it is still difficult
to particularize the results for specific subjects. Results can only explain effects in a
general sense. Part of this problem relies in the fact that not all clusters were
observed in all subjects. While using bootstrapping helped in overcoming this
limitation, a future study design could minimize this problem, possibly by taking
several fMRI scans on different days for the same subject at the same stage of
mTBI. This will increase the possibility of detecting the cluster transitions defined in
this work.

Figure 7. Devised timeline of brain dynamic behavior after brain injury. This figure is based on results from Figure 3 and
Figure 5. Healthy brains have a dynamics functional connectivity that orbits around specific connectivity patterns configured as
attractors. Brain injury disrupts the orbits and functional connectivity dynamics enters an abnormal phase. Some attractors
recover after four weeks. Complete attractor behavior was observed after three and four months.

5. Funding
This work was funded by the following NIH grants: R21NS064464/
R21NS064464/R01NS098494 to A.M. and P20GM103472/ 1R01EB006841/
R01REB020407 and by the National Science Foundation (#1539067) to V.C. For the
replication cohort, funding was obtained from the Dutch Brain Foundation (grant
number: Ps2012-06; to J.N.). No competing financial interests exist.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

13
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun

6. References
Allen EA, Damaraju E, Plis SM, Erhardt EB, Eichele T, Calhoun VD. Tracking whole-brain connectivity
dynamics in the resting state. Cereb Cortex 2014; 24(3): 663-76.
Arenth PM, Russell KC, Scanlon JM, Kessler LJ, Ricker JH. Corpus callosum integrity and
neuropsychological performance after traumatic brain injury: a diffusion tensor imaging study. The
Journal of head trauma rehabilitation 2014; 29(2): E1-E10.
Borich M, Babul AN, Yuan PH, Boyd L, Virji-Babul N. Alterations in resting-state brain networks in
concussed adolescent athletes. J Neurotrauma 2015; 32(4): 265-71.
Buckner RL, Andrews-Hanna JR, Schacter DL. The brain's default network: anatomy, function, and
relevance to disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2008; 1124(1): 1-38.
Chipman PH. Synapse-Specific Reinnervation in the Injured Brain. J Neurosci 2016; 36(40): 10239-41.
de Koning ME, Gareb B, El Moumni M, Scheenen ME, van der Horn HJ, Timmerman ME, et al.
Subacute posttraumatic complaints and psychological distress in trauma patients with or without
mild traumatic brain injury. Injury 2016; 47(9): 2041-7.
DeKosky ST, Ikonomovic MD, Gandy S. Traumatic brain injury—football, warfare, and long-term
effects. New England Journal of Medicine 2010; 363(14): 1293-6.
Dikmen SS, Corrigan JD, Levin HS, Machamer J, Stiers W, Weisskopf MG. Cognitive outcome
following traumatic brain injury. J Head Trauma Rehabil 2009; 24(6): 430-8.
Doll A, Holzel BK, Boucard CC, Wohlschlager AM, Sorg C. Mindfulness is associated with intrinsic
functional connectivity between default mode and salience networks. Front Hum Neurosci 2015; 9:
461.
Du Y, Fan Y. Group information guided ICA for fMRI data analysis. Neuroimage 2013; 69: 157-97.
Espinoza F, Damaraju E, Vergara V, Henke K, Turner J, Calhoun V. Characterizing whole brain
temporal variation of functional connectivity via zero and first order derivatives of sliding window
correlations. Sixth Biennial Conference on Resting State and Brain Connectivity; 2018.
Evans JJ. Positive Psychology and Brain Injury Rehabilitation. Brain Impairment 2012; 12(02): 117-27.
Greicius MD, Krasnow B, Reiss AL, Menon V. Functional connectivity in the resting brain: a network
analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2003;
100(1): 253-8.
Greicius MD, Supekar K, Menon V, Dougherty RF. Resting-state functional connectivity reflects
structural connectivity in the default mode network. Cerebral cortex 2009; 19(1): 72-8.
Helie S, Ell SW, Ashby FG. Learning robust cortico-cortical associations with the basal ganglia: an
integrative review. Cortex 2015; 64: 123-35.
Hillary FG, Rajtmajer SM, Roman CA, Medaglia JD, Slocomb-Dluzen JE, Calhoun VD, et al. The rich get
richer: brain injury elicits hyperconnectivity in core subnetworks. PLoS One 2014; 9(8): e104021.
Holli KK, Wäljas M, Harrison L, Liimatainen S, Luukkaala T, Ryymin P, et al. Mild traumatic brain
injury: tissue texture analysis correlated to neuropsychological and DTI findings. Academic radiology
2010; 17(9): 1096-102.
Huisman TA, Schwamm LH, Schaefer PW, Koroshetz WJ, Shetty-Alva N, Ozsunar Y, et al. Diffusion
tensor imaging as potential biomarker of white matter injury in diffuse axonal injury. American
Journal of Neuroradiology 2004; 25(3): 370-6.
Iraji A, Benson RR, Welch RD, O'Neil BJ, Woodard JL, Ayaz SI, et al. Resting State Functional
Connectivity in Mild Traumatic Brain Injury at the Acute Stage: Independent Component and SeedBased Analyses. J Neurotrauma 2015; 32(14): 1031-45.
Johansson B, Bjuhr H, Ronnback L. Mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) improves long-term
mental fatigue after stroke or traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj 2012; 26(13-14): 1621-8.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

14
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun
Kim J, Whyte J, Patel S, Avants B, Europa E, Wang J, et al. Resting cerebral blood flow alterations in
chronic traumatic brain injury: an arterial spin labeling perfusion FMRI study. J Neurotrauma 2010;
27(8): 1399-411.
Levin HS, Diaz-Arrastia RR. Diagnosis, prognosis, and clinical management of mild traumatic brain
injury. The Lancet Neurology 2015; 14(5): 506-17.
Ling JM, Peña A, Yeo RA, Merideth FL, Klimaj S, Gasparovic C, et al. Biomarkers of increased diffusion
anisotropy in semi-acute mild traumatic brain injury: a longitudinal perspective. Brain 2012; 135(4):
1281-92.
Little DM, Kraus MF, Joseph J, Geary EK, Susmaras T, Zhou XJ, et al. Thalamic integrity underlies
executive dysfunction in traumatic brain injury. Neurology 2010; 74(7): 558-64.
Makino H, Hwang EJ, Hedrick NG, Komiyama T. Circuit Mechanisms of Sensorimotor Learning.
Neuron 2016; 92(4): 705-21.
Mayer AR, Bellgowan PS, Hanlon FM. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of mild traumatic brain
injury. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 2015a; 49: 8-18.
Mayer AR, Ling JM, Allen EA, Klimaj SD, Yeo RA, Hanlon FM. Static and Dynamic Intrinsic Connectivity
following Mild Traumatic Brain Injury. J Neurotrauma 2015b; 32(14): 1046-55.
Mayer AR, Mannell MV, Ling J, Gasparovic C, Yeo RA. Functional connectivity in mild traumatic brain
injury. Human brain mapping 2011; 32(11): 1825-35.
Miller RL, Yaesoubi M, Turner JA, Mathalon D, Preda A, Pearlson G, et al. Higher Dimensional MetaState Analysis Reveals Reduced Resting fMRI Connectivity Dynamism in Schizophrenia Patients. PloS
one 2016; 11(3): e0149849.
Mooneyham BW, Mrazek MD, Mrazek AJ, Mrazek KL, Phillips DT, Schooler JW. States of Mind:
Characterizing the Neural Bases of Focus and Mind-wandering through Dynamic Functional
Connectivity. J Cogn Neurosci 2017; 29(3): 495-506.
Nathan DE, Oakes TR, Yeh PH, French LM, Harper JF, Liu W, et al. Exploring variations in functional
connectivity of the resting state default mode network in mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Connect
2015; 5(2): 102-14.
Navarro X. Chapter 27 Neural Plasticity After Nerve Injury and Regeneration. 2009; 87: 483-505.
Niraj S, Wright S, Powell T. A qualitative study exploring the experiences of mindfulness training in
people with acquired brain injury. Neuropsychol Rehabil 2018: 1-22.
Pagulayan KF, Petrie EC, Cook DG, Hendrickson RC, Rau H, Reilly M, et al. Effect of blast-related mTBI
on the working memory system: a resting state fMRI study. Brain Imaging Behav 2018.
Palacios EM, Yuh EL, Chang YS, Yue JK, Schnyer DM, Okonkwo DO, et al. Resting-State Functional
Connectivity Alterations Associated with Six-Month Outcomes in Mild Traumatic Brain Injury. J
Neurotrauma 2017; 34(8): 1546-57.
Raichle ME. The brain's default mode network. Annu Rev Neurosci 2015; 38: 433-47.
Sharp DJ, Scott G, Leech R. Network dysfunction after traumatic brain injury. Nat Rev Neurol 2014;
10(3): 156-66.
Shine JM, Bissett PG, Bell PT, Koyejo O, Balsters JH, Gorgolewski KJ, et al. The Dynamics of Functional
Brain Networks: Integrated Network States during Cognitive Task Performance. Neuron 2016; 92(2):
544-54.
Shirer W, Ryali S, Rykhlevskaia E, Menon V, Greicius M. Decoding subject-driven cognitive states with
whole-brain connectivity patterns. Cerebral cortex 2012; 22(1): 158-65.
Sours C, George EO, Zhuo J, Roys S, Gullapalli RP. Hyper-connectivity of the thalamus during early
stages following mild traumatic brain injury. Brain imaging and behavior 2015; 9(3): 550-63.
Sours C, Zhuo J, Janowich J, Aarabi B, Shanmuganathan K, Gullapalli RP. Default mode network
interference in mild traumatic brain injury–A pilot resting state study. Brain research 2013; 1537:
201-15.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007906; this version posted October 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

15
mTBI Disrupts Brain Connectivity Dynamics
VM Vergara, HJ van der Horn, AR Mayer, FA Espinoza, J van der Naalt,VD Calhoun
Tang L, Ge Y, Sodickson DK, Miles L, Zhou Y, Reaume J, et al. Thalamic resting-state functional
networks: disruption in patients with mild traumatic brain injury. Radiology 2011; 260(3): 831-40.
Vakhtin AA, Calhoun VD, Jung RE, Prestopnik JL, Taylor PA, Ford CC. Changes in intrinsic functional
brain networks following blast-induced mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj 2013; 27(11): 1304-10.
van der Horn HJ, de Haan S, Spikman JM, de Groot JC, van der Naalt J. Clinical relevance of
microhemorrhagic lesions in subacute mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Imaging Behav 2018; 12(3):
912-6.
van der Horn HJ, Scheenen ME, de Koning ME, Liemburg EJ, Spikman JM, van der Naalt J. The Default
Mode Network as a Biomarker of Persistent Complaints after Mild Traumatic Brain Injury: A
Longitudinal Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study. J Neurotrauma 2017; 34(23): 3262-9.
Vergara VM, Abrol A, Calhoun VD. An average sliding window correlation method for dynamic
functional connectivity. Hum Brain Mapp 2019.
Vergara VM, Mayer A, Kiehl KA, Calhoun VD. Dynamic functional network connectivity discriminates
mild traumatic brain injury through machine learning. NeuroImage: Clinical 2018.
Vergara VM, Mayer AR, Damaraju E, Kiehl KA, Calhoun V. Detection of Mild Traumatic Brain Injury by
Machine Learning Classification Using Resting State Functional Network Connectivity and Fractional
Anisotropy. J Neurotrauma 2017; 34(5): 1045-53.

