medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Explaining the outcomes of the 'Clean India' campaign: institutional behaviour
and sanitation transformation in India

Val Curtis

Author: val.curtis@lshtm.ac.uk
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
Keppel St, London WC1E 7HT
Tel: +44 207 927 2628

DRAFT: under review
Key words: Sanitation, open defecation, Theory of Change, Behaviour Centred Design
Word Count: 6854
Abbreviations:
COREQ: COnsolidated criteria for REporting on Qualitative research
DC: District Collector
ODF: Open Defaecation Free
MDWS: Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
SBM: Swachh Bharat Mission
SBM(G): Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin)

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Explaining the outcomes of the 'Clean India' campaign: institutional behaviour
and sanitation transformation in India
Val Curtis

Abstract
Introduction: Whilst many less developed countries are struggling to provide universal
access to safe sanitation, in the last five years India has almost reached its target of
eliminating open defaecation. The object of this study was to understand how the Indian
Government effected this sanitation transformation.
Methods: The study employed interviews with 17 actors in the Government’s ‘Clean India’
programme across the national capital and four states which were analysed using a theory of
change grounded in Behaviour Centred Design.
Results: The Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) claims to have improved the coverage of
toilets in rural India from 39% to over 95% of households between 2014 and mid 2019. From
interviews with relevant actors we constructed a theory of change for the programme in
which high-level political support and disruptive leadership changed environments in
districts, which led to psychological changes in district officials, which, in turn, led to
changed behaviour concerning sanitation programming. The Prime Minister’s setting of the
ambitious goal to eliminate open defecation by the 150th birthday of Mahatma Gandhi
(October 2019) galvanised government bureaucracy, while early success in 100 flagship
districts reduced the scepticism of government employees, a cadre of 500 young
professionals placed in districts imparted new ideas and energy, social and mass media was
used to engage and motivate the public and key players, and new norms of ethical behaviour
were demonstrated by leaders. As a result, district officials engaged emotionally with the
programme and felt pride at their achievements in ridding villages of open defecation.
Conclusions: Though many challenges remain, Governments seeking to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goal of universal access to safe sanitation can emulate the success
of India’s Swachh Bharat Mission.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

SUMMARY BOXES
What is already known?
• At least 47 countries are not on track to reach the Sustainable Development Goal of
universal access to safe sanitation by 2030 and some 0.6 billion people are still
defecating in the open.
• It is not clear how governments in low income countries can be galvanised to act to
resolve this pressing public health problem.
What are the new findings?
• The experience of the Clean India programme suggests that countries can almost
eliminate open defecation.
• The success of the programme was due to factors including: the setting of ambitious
targets; the use of modern communications strategies and monitoring technology; and
the provision of visible reward and recognition for employees.
What do the new findings imply?
• Disruptive leadership is needed to create working environments where sometimes
jaded civil servants are given an opportunity to make a difference.
• Politicians who embrace the cause of sanitation may find that there are votes in
toilets.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Explaining the outcomes of the 'Clean India' campaign: institutional behaviour
and sanitation transformation in India

Val Curtis
Author: val.curtis@lshtm.ac.uk
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine

“In a country as powerful as India – dreaming of space conquest, building roads,
development – the fact that the priority of the entire Indian administration is to end
open defecation is extraordinary.” (Interview #14)

INTRODUCTION

In 2007 readers of the BMJ chose the introduction of clean water and sewage disposal—“the
sanitary revolution”—as the most important medical milestone since 18401. Yet safe
sanitation, essential for the prevention of infectious disease, for child growth, for gender
equity and for human dignity 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 has yet to reach a quarter of the world’s
inhabitants11.
Most countries of South East Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa have struggled to improve their
rates of toilet ownership. One country, however, has bucked this trend. Once responsible for
60% of the world’s open defecators12, over the last five years rural India has been
transformed by a government-led programme named the Clean India Mission (Swachh
Bharat Mission (Gramin) or SBM(G). In 2014, fewer than four in ten rural Indian households
owned a toilet; by the middle of 2019, official figures put coverage at over 95%13. Whilst it is
hard to be certain of the actual numbers of toilets in such a vast and diverse country, it is
clear that a major national transformation has taken place. This is an unlikely success story,
both because Indian bureaucracy is not famous for its ability to create rapid change, and
because ending open defecation is a surprising target for a political campaign.
In this paper I aim to explain how this sanitation transformation happened. From interviews
with national, state and district actors, I deduce a theory of change for the behaviour of
government officials in districts and use this to draw lessons for other nations wishing to
emulate the success of the Clean India campaign.
METHODS
Study sample
I interviewed seventeen individuals chosen to represent a range of types of SBM(G) actors
operating at national, state, and district levels. Participants came from the capital and four
states, with varied performance on toilet coverage. Of the interviewees, six were career civil

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

servants, five were assigned to work in SBM(G), four were employed by partner
organisations outside of government, and two were academics. Of the total, four worked in
national government, four at state level and six at district level. The aim was to have
approximately four individuals in each type of position (some interviewees represented
several types) and to continue interviewing until saturation was reached14. Fifteen of the
seventeen interviewees were Indian nationals and seven were female. Eleven interviews took
place face-to-face and six over Skype; each lasted 60 to 80 minutes. Interviews took place
between May and July 2018. All of the people approached agreed to take part, although one
delegated the interview to a colleague. I also drew on my experience as an occasional adviser
on behaviour change to the Indian Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MDWS).
Study ethics
Interviewees were supplied with an information sheet about the study, were informed that
their participation would be anonymous and were asked to sign a consent form. Identifying
information was removed prior to transcription of interviews. Ethical approval was granted
by LSHTM (no 15261) and permission to conduct the study was granted by the MDWS.
Patient and Public Involvement
No patients or members of the public were involved in the design, analysis or reporting of
this study.
Data collection and analysis
The interviews followed a structured format that included a request to describe the SBM
programme, questions about administrative structures, decision-making systems, programme
financing, technical issues and specific challenges. I also asked participants about their own
circumstances and their motives relating to their work in SBM(G). I followed COREQ
guidelines for the design, analysis and reporting of qualitative research15.
Interviews were conducted in English and recorded. Following transcription, I employed the
steps of framework analysis, namely: (i) familiarisation, (ii) identifying a thematic
framework, (iii) indexing, (iv) charting, and (v) mapping and interpretation16. I employed the
framework of Behaviour Centred Design (BCD)17 to index and chart the data using NVivo
version 1118. Figure 1 shows the generic BCD Theory of Change framework, depicting how
interventions perturb the physical, biological and social environment of actors, these changes
affect their psychology (at an executive, motivated or habitual level), which leads to changes
in their behaviour. These behavioural changes, when compounded, lead to changes in the
state of the world, (for example, better toilet provision in India). These changes all take place
in a particular geographical, political, economic, and cultural context.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1. Generic Behaviour Centred Design Theory of Change

Political,
economic,
cultural,
geographical

CONTEXT

Interventions
(people,
money,
materials)

INPUTS

Operating
environment
(social,
physical,
biological)

ENVIRONMENT

Psychological
(executive,
motivated,
habitual)

Behaviour

State of the
World

BRAIN

BEHAVIOUR

IMPACT

RESULTS
Figure 2 shows the theory of change for SMB(G) constructed from the analysis of the
interviews using the BCD framework. On the right are the observed changes to the state of
the world (improved toilet coverage and use). Left of this, in grey, is the change in behaviour
of district officials, in blue are the psychological changes in these actors, brought about by
changes in their operating environments, shown in green. The orange boxes are the aspects of
the intervention (i.e., the activities of SBM(G) as led by the Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation that caused this cascade of changes. Below I detail these changes, working from
inputs to impact.
Figure 2. Theory of change for the Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin)

PM sets goal

100 Flagship
districts ODF

MDWS
Leadership

New norms in
MDWS

Finance,
comms
mobilised

Real-time
monitoring
systems

Partners
mobilised

Platforms for
visible success
and reward

Modernisation,
New
government,
SDGs,
Scepticism

CONTEXT

District
officials
believe in SBM

District
officials
motivated

District
officials
organise SBM
activities

85m toilets
built

BEHAVIOUR

IMPACT

District
officials
change
habits

Young blood

INPUTS

ENVIRONMENT

BRAIN

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Interventions (inputs to SBM(G))
All interviewees ascribed the initial impetus for the Swachh Bharat Mission to the Prime
Minister, Narendra Modi. In 2014, in his inaugural speech from the ramparts of the Red Fort
in Delhi Modi announced his plan for India to become free of open defection in five years, by
2nd October 2019, in honour of the 150th anniversary of the birth of Mahatma Gandhi. The
setting of this ‘Big Hairy Audacious Goal’19 made the need for radical changes in the
government’s normal approach evident:
“[We are in] mission mode delivery arrangement, where you have a sunset clause
that you have to achieve in a given time period… …So, it's a very different working
paradigm.” (01)
“[In normal practice] the government might have said that we have 10 years to make
India open defecation free. So we might have done squat for seven years and started
working in the 8th year and then asked for a 5 year no-cost extension.” (16)
Officials at all levels referred to the Prime Minister’s evident commitment to SBM:
“The major change is that the political leadership came from the Prime Minister’s
office… …to reach all the communities, civil societies, religious leaders, famous
people of India, actors, or people in sport. Involving everybody at the same time for a
National Cause under the lead of the PM”. (14)
“…the fact that this it is led by the Prime Minister – it is high on the agenda of every
District Collector. It has led to government functionaries being on their toes all the
time and also reaching out to the people in a way that has never happened before.”
(12)
And the PM kept up pressure over the life of the programme:
“So, it was not just a political announcement, but they backed it with serious attention
over last four years, I think that’s quite dramatic. That’s one big game changer.” (16)
“the PM referred to Swachh Bharat in 35 of his 50 addresses to the nation on All
India Radio between October 2014 and Dec 2018” (10)
Breaking with administrative norms to appoint staff on the basis of seniority, the Prime
Minister sought out a technocrat to lead SBM(G) within the Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation. The chosen Secretary was a sanitation specialist and was also unusual in having
worked both within the Indian Administrative Service, and outside of it in international
bodies. This gave him the ability not just to navigate the government hierarchy, but also to
see where it might be disrupted.
“In terms of technical leadership, this time the people put in place to lead this
campaign are people with global experience that have worked abroad. They are
aware of what is happening in the world in terms of sanitation programming,
successes and failures, so there is great openness to learning in this program.” (14)

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The ministry team led a consultation exercise with States to gather lessons from a succession
of previous sanitation campaigns, and to work out what it would cost to achieve the goal of
an ODF India. The total bill was estimated at some $20bn over 5 years, or about $4.00 per
head of the population per year20. In addition, the team negotiated a loan of $1.5bn from the
World Bank21. The ministry also asked the World Bank, UNICEF, WaterAid and other
support agencies to augment their technical assistance to states, and asked philanthropic
foundations (Tata Trusts and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation) to fund the recruitment
of consultants to a project management cell:
“The consultants have given a new dimension to the working of the Ministry.
Previously we were working like a Government setup, but with the coming of this
young blood… …they have given momentum to the program. (02)
Unusually for India, the management cell was integrated within the Ministry rather than
sitting outside of it. The SBM(G) team thus had access to government communications
channels as well as to the cabinet and Prime Minister:
“What Modi has done is picked up these bureaucrats and said you have direct access
to me...” (09)
A further input that distinguished SBM(G) from standard Indian government programmes
was a new strategy for communications. The team recognised early on that it was important
to constantly communicate; downwards through the government hierarchy to programme
actors, outwards to the population as a whole and to partners in the private and development
sectors, and also, critically, back upwards to SBM’s political masters. Key influencers had to
be kept on board:
“We started delivering and then we started communicating that to the people who
matter - like media, like the political masters, they need to feel that the thing is
moving. Then there are academics, the international community, the sort of people
who are influencers, who can spread the word. It's like chicken and egg: when you
start doing well then nothing succeeds like success, but it needs to be
communicated...” (11)
“So point is if you want political leadership and you get it, then you have to nurture
it…” (14)
Mass media played a major role in keeping all of these audiences supportive and engaged:
“…all of our communication has become much more world class. Indian Government
ads are [normally] easily identifiable from their look and feel -- they are dull, boring
and preachy and nobody wants to watch them. But in this ministry the ads are very
exciting and entertaining...” (10)
“Honestly I don't know if promoting stuff on social media is leading to behaviour
change in rural India, but it does make urban India more aware about what
happening in rural areas, for that is also important”. (12)
Changes to the environment in districts

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The Theory of Change depicts how these inputs (disruptive leadership, mobilisation of
human and financial resources, new modes of communication) changed the operating
environment for staff working in India’s more than 600 districts. The new leadership team in
the Ministry recognised that the first barrier to overcome was widespread staff scepticism,
engendered by the experience of having seen many previous campaigns falter22. They needed
to make district officials believe that change was possible. One hundred districts were
therefore targeted for an ‘early-win’ campaign. Their heads, the District Collectors, were
invited to national workshops, and were offered resources and, unusually, direct access to the
leadership, so as to be able to resolve any problems they encountered. By the end of 2016,
most of these flagship districts had declared that they were Open Defaecation Free (ODF).
This model was then duplicated across the country.
“That is one of the great achievements [of SBM], they really have made sure that
there is great support for any collector who wants to achieve this.” (17)
The new leaders of SBM disrupted social norms in districts by modelling behaviour that was
results-oriented and ethical. One interviewee recounted:
“If the Secretary is going to the field [normally], the collector’s job is to be the
protocol officer, to receive him at the airport, ensure his dietary requirements, see his
arrangements are proper. Your job is to carry his briefcase. But this Secretary
focuses on the task in hand, he asks the collector important questions, rather than
where to buy this handloom saree for his wife… This changes the professional ethics.
Then the administrators know that this guy will ask for results rather than where to
go shopping.” (09)
Several interviewees told of the surprise that they felt when they saw a photograph of a top
ministry official climbing into a toilet pit to empty it in the national newspapers23. One top
state official dug toilet pits herself. Another related her norm-violating initiation to the SBM
programme by a trainer:
“’Tatti’[shit] is the most disgusting and vile word in Hindi. And he was just like:
‘tatti tatti’… …and I could not stop giggling. It is not even a word you may use, you
may use this word at home, but not if there is a guest or someone.” (10)
Many interviewees felt that such activities had caused a change of norms in society, and by
extension, in districts:
“So this is quite unique… …five or six years back you could not even talk about open
defecation. And now you see that the whole of India is expert on the issue of open
defecation.” (14)
A further change to the operating environment of districts was the use of technology to
monitor and encourage progress. Collectors were set targets by the leadership in Delhi and
then, unusually, were then held to account. They were expected to report on progress in faceto-face meetings, in regular multi-participant video conferences and online.
“Video and satellite conferences were my two important communication tools to
connect with people and officials from across all the districts. I used video

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

conferences to get figures on how many toilets had been built and to handout targets.”
(15)
District Collectors were trained on and encouraged to sign up for social media, and to use
email:
“[It is] rare for a bureaucrat to reply within an hour to an email. That means he has
got email on his phone. Babus [bosses] still don’t do it to this day.” (10)
In addition, the MDWS created a live ‘dashboard’; a website displaying progress on
sanitation coverage showing the number of toilets built and the percentage of households
covered 24. In many states this system worked automatically via a mobile phone app that was
updated by village authorities in real time, as toilets were built and funds disbursed to
householders’ electronic bank accounts.
These improvements in communications technologies both provided an environment where
districts knew they could be held publicly to account, but also allowed districts an
opportunity to show off their success. Rather than being forgotten in remote corners of the
country, those collectors and their staff who did well were held up as examples on social
media, invited to receive awards at multiple ceremonies involving local, state or national
dignitaries and some were given awards by the prime minister himself.
“The secretary… …travels a lot to see what’s happening on the ground and he tweets
almost every day about the good things that are happening. So, this provides a lot of
motivation to the system.” (08)
“We had this workshop to felicitate the spouses which really touched all of them.
Many of these wives… …said that nobody has ever acknowledged the work that we
do.” (15)
A further means by which ‘business-as-usual’ in districts was disrupted was the introduction
of ‘fresh young blood’. Aside from deploying technical consultants, development partners
were asked to recruit a cadre of new, young and enthusiastic fellows. Five hundred preraks
were hired and assigned to support districts, where they took on a variety of roles.
“This is how the program works: they take fellows from districts which have become
ODF and put them in districts or states wherever it’s required according the skills
and the needs...” (08)
“The preraks are an astonishing innovation… They have been terrific…” (17)
Preraks described how they offered flexible support to districts, filling in where needed:
“I had a collector who would call me pretty much on daily basis. If I didn’t meet him,
he would text me and ask about the update. Eventually, I would run a lot of
workshops and he even sent me to different locations because [he said] ‘I can’t
understand what the problem is there, why don’t you go and check out what the
problem is and just address it...’” (07)
Preraks supported each other and shared solutions to problems, often using social media:

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“But in terms of everyday things that we needed to carry out, we were calling each
other on WhatsApp or email… ‘I heard that you guys have a lot of dysfunctional
toilets, how are you working on this?’ …that was on a WhatsApp group.” (08)

Psychological changes
In figure 2 innovations that changed the social and technological environments in districts led
to psychological changes (belief, motivation and habitual response) in the relevant officials.
First, staff had to believe that change was possible. Officials repeatedly described how they
had joined a civil service out of a desire to ‘serve’, but had been frustrated by bureaucracy
and stasis:
“It's just pushing up against the wall which is not going to move ever. So, why am
wasting the good years of my youth and all my energy and ideas on this?” (10)
But as they saw progress gathering in SBM, staff begun to believe that the sanitation situation
could be changed:
“Because it gives you so much conviction, you know, what the world thought is
impossible is being done in my time.” (01)
As the results of their work became more visible, district officials related their pride at their
achievements:
“So now when I travel with my family they say: ‘see what is happening to your
Swachh Bharat…’…I am ‘Swachh Bharat Champ’ they call me.” (03)
Staff described their motivation for working in SBM using emotive terms:
“There is a lot of passion for the first time in my sanitation business for many years.
This is the first time that I have seen such a powerful country being mobilized in such
a genuine and realistic way.” (14)
“…it is glamorous” (07)
“…disgust with the kind of situation people have lived in in our villages for such a
long time… (06)
“I think this whole country has been amazingly galvanized [by this] compelling
creation, amazing euphoria…, …the sanitation program is a very adventurous,
courageous and romantic venture.” (01)
However, the motive that was most often mentioned by staff working in districts was the
opportunity that working in the SBM had given to them to ‘make a difference’:
“It gives you satisfaction when you see that we are heading a program that is being
implemented and that is being successful and people are owning it.” (03)

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“Because here I think I can give my best output and can contribute in assisting my
bosses so that they can do it well too” (02).
The new technological environment also changed the habitual responses of officials, for
example, by making it easy for them to monitor progress closely:
“So now when you are in a village you log into the app [and] all the Swachh Bharat
mission toilets are mapped there with the beneficiary name, with the photographs,
everything is there.” (06)
Further, the new norms of behaviour set by national officials led to new working habits such
as abandoning air-conditioned offices and spending more time in the field:
“And then the districts which are very behind I visited all of them… I most often visit
those districts which are in need.” (03)

Changes in behaviour in districts
The cascade of changes in the operating environment and in the psychology of actors in SBM
led to new behaviour in districts – the level where staff have the mandate, operational staff
and budgetary autonomy to organise development activities. Interviewees reported that the
most important determinant of progress in latrine construction was the level of engagement of
the District Collector (DC). A DC who had taken on the challenge of SBM would typically
move into ‘campaign mode’, placing building toilets at the head of her/his priority list,
sometimes neglecting other activities to do so. Components of the work included reviewing
the sanitation status of blocks and villages, setting targets for toilet construction, organising
payments to self-help groups and contractors, training masons and huge numbers of social
mobilisers (Swachhagrahis), organising mobilisation events, monitoring results and verifying
the open defecation-free (ODF) status of villages.
DCs used a range of strategies to galvanise these activities; setting targets for blocks
(administrative units) and villages to become ODF, and for disbursement of funds, having
weekly problem-solving meetings with block staff and sometimes following up daily on
progress using social media.
“The commitment of some of these collectors is quite extraordinary. Some use
WhatsApp to call people at 4 in the morning to make sure they are up for the nigrani
samiti [morning visit to open defecation grounds]. Quite amazing!” (17)
“So they [block coordinators] feel happy and motivated as there is regular follow up.
And as I call them almost every day, so they also hold meetings almost every two to
three days.” (03)
Perhaps the biggest change in the behaviour of district level staff was the move from
‘business-as-usual’ to a personal engagement with the cause:
“If you are not out in the field, you are not present and people don’t see you, then
people will not get excited.” (11)

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“Everybody was more excited about the mission, because the collector himself was
sitting with us.” (08)
“So you try to inspire people, motivate people, appeal to them, persuade them to do it
fast, quickly and so on, in the mode of pulse polio [national eradication campaign],
where in matter of a week or 10 days you can simultaneously start the work of
construction and of triggering people.” (15)

Change in the State of the World (impact)
What, finally, was the overall impact of these changes in the administrative system under the
Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin)? The Government of India has made repeated efforts to
improve the sanitation conditions of its rural population. Fig 3 shows the results. After the
national census of 1981 put national sanitation coverage at only 1%, the Central Rural
Sanitation Program was launched in 1986. This increased coverage to 9% and evolved into
the Total Sanitation Campaign which began in 1991. In the following 20 years, coverage
improved by some 1% a year, reaching 31% by 201125. Despite a relaunch of the campaign,
as the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan, India failed to meet its Millennium Development Goal to
halve the rate of those with no access to sanitation by 201526.
By contrast, four years after the 2014 launch of Swachh Bharat official figures suggested that
over 80 million toilets had been built, 500 districts and almost half a million villages had
been declared to be free of open defaecation27. Figure 3 suggests that the rate of toilet
building in rural areas was around ten times that of previous campaigns. In tandem with
accelerating increases in sanitation coverage, government figures suggest that open
defecation has also decreased, dropping by 3% per year between 2000 and 2014 and by 12%
a year from 2015-201911.
A number of unpublished surveys suggest that the government monitoring system
overestimates the true levels of toilet coverage28 29. Interviewees gave reasons for
discrepancies between individual surveys and government figures that included inaccuracies
in the original government baseline against which progress is reported, the omission from the
SBM programme of households with old toilets which had fallen out of use, and systemic
incentives to overreport results. Nevertheless, interviewees described exceptional progress in
improving toilet coverage over the past four years, transforming India from a country where
the majority defecated in the open, to one where the majority of people have, and use, toilets.
“I don’t think there is any historic parallel of any country anywhere in the world,
shifting numbers on such a scale. That will change the global indicators. I think that
the story is not whether it is 85%, right, or 90%, right, the story is the fact that there
is a tremendous shift” (16)

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3: Household toilet coverage in India 1981-2018 according to surveys and the national
monitoring system

Whilst interviewees were positive about the gains made by the SBM, there were also worries
about the sustainability of these gains over the long term:
“we brought India from A to B which is an outstanding achievement but there is
recognition that behaviour change is complex, there is unfinished business and there
is necessity to invest beyond the campaign so that we have a real impact by the end of
the SDG era” (14)
As the final deadline for SBM looms, political attention to the unfinished last mile on
sanitation will inevitably shift to other pressing social issues such as rural water supply. In
the face of this the MDWS are trying to embed sanitation in national policy and plan to
continue to make funds available to complete and sustain the gains of SBM.
“On sustainability, of course the ministry is also aware; they have started focusing on
something called ODF Plus, which looks at the sustainability issue.” (13)

Context
Drawing transferable lessons from a programme’s Theory of Change requires understanding
its particular context30. The SBM(G) programme took advantage of opportunities presented
by the prevailing national political situation, of improvements in living conditions in rural
India and of the proliferation of communications technology. It also drew on the experience
of previous sanitation programmes, and on the global push to meet the Sustainable
Development Goals. Contextual factors that hindered progress, on the other hand, included a
general scepticism of government sponsored programmes, political division, where some

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

states were not supporters of the current Government, and the many other competing
demands for social investment in India.
Interviewees pointed out how the political context was key in the launch of SBM, where a
political swing towards nationalist and pro-Hindu party provided an opportunity to capitalise
on the symbolism of purity, cleanliness of the mother country and the example of Gandhi.
This was expected to translate into electoral support:
“Sanitation is something each family needs every day. And through his program,
Modi is able to reach out to the almost to all the households in the country. And a
toilet becomes synonymous with Modi. So, Modi is equal to Swachh Bharat and
Swachh Bharat is equal to a toilet. So, this has given him immense visibility, immense
publicity and immense connection with crores of households in India.” (01)
Indeed, observers have suggested that the Prime Minister’s evident commitment to rural
sanitation was a factor in the success of the ruling party at the 2019 general elections31 32.
“You see, good sanitation is good politics.” (01)
The new SBM goals were set in the context of a nation in the midst of modernisation, where
millions have emerged from poverty, and most people have improved their housing and
gained access to electricity, water, mass communications and education33. India was therefore
ready for modern toilets, and had the communications networks necessary to rapidly spread
this idea.
The SBM(G) programme did not emerge de novo but was set up in the context of a long line
of previous national sanitation campaigns. These had met with limited success, but had
provided experience concerning what worked and what did not.
“The Swachh Bharat mission is preceded by several other missions; the Total
Sanitation Mission, Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan and other campaigns. When the Swachh
Bharat mission started we were very much aware of this. We can't say that those
programs were a total failure, these contributed to building momentum and creating
awareness, and some of these toilets are still in use. …definitely they left imprints.”
(05)
Whilst the national context was favourable to SBM, so was the international context.
International agreement to meet the SDGs reminded Indian leaders that, though their country
had made progress on many issues, sanitation conditions still lagged far behind that of
countries with comparable levels of development.

DISCUSSION
Principal findings
Whilst it will still take some time to completely realise the ambition of an open defecation
free India, the country has made large strides in this direction over the last five years. In rural
areas of other low income countries there are still some 1.5 billion people who lack access to
basic sanitation services and 0.6 billion who defecate in the open34. This study offers insights

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

and lessons for the governments of countries that are looking to improve the sanitation
conditions of their populations:
1. There are votes in toilets. The Indian experience suggests that political engagement at
the head of government can galvanise an administration to a goal as unlikely as
ending open defecation, and that this may be rewarded politically
2. Disrupt institutional norms. From the outset, the leaders of SBM(G) set out to disrupt
the bureaucratic norms of government. The leadership modelled ethical norms of
commitment to progress, new enthusiastic young staff in districts helped to create
norms of adaptive learning, enthusiasm and personal engagement and the norm of
polite silence regarding matters faecal was repeatedly and deliberately violated
3. ‘Believe the impossible’. A key driver of the success programme was the ‘Big Hairy
Audacious Goal’ to make India ‘Open Defecation Free’ by October 2nd 2019.
Standard development programmes tend to be conservative; setting less risky but
more plausible goals (for example, the Tanzanian Government has set a target of 85%
coverage with improved toilets by 2030). However, such targets neither provide a
compelling vision nor a sense of urgency. SBM shows other countries that ambitious
plans for sanitation transformation can galvanise behaviour change in institutions.
4. Set targets and monitor them. Many development programmes set targets, but few
follow them up as relentlessly as did the Swachh Bharat team. Making use of
electronic data gathering and real-time, public dashboards, the ministry team
reviewed progress district by district, every month, sought to resolve any bottlenecks
that emerged and held district collectors to account for their results.
5. Reward and recognition: Once districts began to meet their targets, their progress was
deliberately and publicly celebrated. Officials from successful districts were lauded
and presented with awards at national, state and local events, and they, in turn, gave
awards to leaders and mobilisers in successful villages. Successful officials were
praised in tweets and Instagram posts. Partly as a result, officials were full of pride at
their achievements and were motivated to make efforts that went well beyond their
normal pattern of work.
6. Constant 3600 communications. Unusually for a government programme, the SBM(G)
embraced modern communication strategies and media technologies. The centre kept
relevant stakeholders, such as MPs, journalists, academics, development partners and
private sector players informed and engaged, using social media, mass media, high
profile events, conferences, teleconferences, and personal visits. District officials
learnt to use communications technologies such as email and social media to follow
progress, to short-circuit sometimes cumbersome official channels and to encourage
one another.
7. Focus on behaviour and sustainability. Learning from previous programmes in India
an elsewhere, the SBM made major efforts to support behaviour change through mass
training programmes and local innovation.
8. A passion for sanitation. A surprising finding from this research was the degree of
emotion shown by the respondents when they described their engagement with the
SBM programme. Motives driving their participation included justice, creativity,
nurture, status and disgust35. From top to bottom of the hierarchy, almost every
interviewee described the programme in emotive terms; whether as adventurous,
glamorous, exciting, fulfilling, pride-generating, satisfying, or humbling. According
to one interviewee:

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“I will be the living testimony to the fact that India will become ODF and I will be
making huge difference in lives of millions of people, because I am associated. The
difference that we will make in rural India, the profound impact it will have on the
lives of the poor people is very, very satisfying, inspiring, humbling.”( 01)
Whilst much has been written about many aspects of sanitation programming, such as the
choice of technology36, motives for the adoption of toilets37 38, provision of subsidy39 40,
community participation41 42, environmental factors43 and health outcomes of sanitation
programmes 44 45 46, only a few published studies have tried to unpick the successes and
failures of Government-led programmes.
A 2012 study of the of the previous Total Sanitation Campaign in India22 blamed its poor
results on a lack of political priority and leadership, a lack of confidence in the possibility of
success, the misuse of subsidies, poor monitoring systems, and a top-down supply-led
approach. The results of the current study suggests that SBM(G)’s leaders had learnt how to
resolve at least some of these problems; capitalising on political support, broadcasting the
successes of the programme, using electronic banking to pay subsidies direct to households,
employing technological platforms for monitoring and by emphasising behaviour change.
The use of electronic technology for progress monitoring is not new to India but has been
employed successfully in sanitation programmes in Indonesia 47 and Zambia 48. Whilst lack
of political will has long been lamented in the field of sanitation (for example in India 43,
Nepal 49 Tanzania 50 and Ghana 51) the SBM example suggests a reason why politicians
should engage – because there are votes in toilets.
The factors that were responsible for the success of SBM to some extent echo those that have
been identified as important for success in large scale health programmes more generally.
One survey of 20 proven programmes concluded that political will, technological innovation,
expert consensus around the approach, management that effectively uses information, and the
deployment of sufficient financial resources were critical 52. It also pointed to the importance
of Government ownership of development programmes if success is to be sustained.
Whilst the setting by the Government of ambitious, ‘not-quite achievable’ big hairy
audacious goals was undoubtedly one of the factors in the success of the SBM, the pursuit of
a success narrative can have what Rajkotia describes as an ugly side: “the high stakes, the
ambition and the expectation can instil a fear of failure, stifle risk-taking and innovation, and
lead to the fabrication of achievement.”53 In the case of SBM a high level of awareness of
previous failures actually led to innovation, for example in an attempt to focus on behaviour
change as well as on construction targets. The success narrative has also undoubtedly led to
inflated claims about SBM’s results. But, as Rajkotia also points out, aspirational targets are
important because they can rally governments and civil society to focus their energies on
social development. He suggests that it might thus be unfair to chastise them for failure to
completely achieve what was aspired to. For the future, countries should recognise that there
is a virtuous circle by which aspirational targets can drive success, both through success
itself, and by the learning that accrues from acknowledging, embracing and understanding
failure to achieve them, partially or completely54.
Even when toilets have been built, and counted, individuals may still not use them. A study in
Orissa suggested that whilst the Sanitation Campaigns of 1999-2012 increased latrine
coverage substantially, over a third of people with toilets were still not using them 55. Though
getting good data on usage is difficult, there are indications that the longer people have toilets
the more likely they are to use them56. Evidence suggests that of all the structural, cultural,
17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

psychological and material factors determining toilet acquisition and usage the most
important seems to be the perceived social norm of not defecating in the open38. Given the
much wider presence of toilets and the norm-changing national conversation about them that
has been engendered by SBM, it may be that toilet use has reached a tipping point, a point
beyond which toilet use will only increase in India. This open question requires vigilance
from government and close research attention in the coming years.
A novel aspect of this study was the attention paid to the settings and motives of civil
servants. Whilst this study documented many positive emotions associated with participation
in SBM(G), negative emotions have also been documented. Coffey and colleagues suggest
that a consequence of the pressure to achieve complete toilet coverage in SBM(G) has been
that some officials fear losing their jobs if they do not perform (Coffey, unpublished). In
Bangladesh, however, Hanchett found that a factor in the success of the national sanitation
programme was the enthusiasm and pride of union council chairmen, and experience sharing
among them57.
Strengths and weaknesses of the study
Courtesy bias may be partially responsible for the fact that interviewees were almost
unanimously positive about their experience of SBM. However the enthusiasm of the SBM
participants was clearly genuine. Given the huge size and heterogeneity of India, a larger
study with a broader range of interviewees from a broader range of states might have
provided further lessons, however, data saturation was achieved here with few new insights
emerging after about 12 interviews14.
This study was unusual in that it focused on the behaviour of district officials within
government institutions, rather than on the effect of sanitation programming on villages and
households. A more complete analysis might have analysed the factors leading to behaviour
change at every level in the hierarchy, from leaders, through Ministry, State, district, block
and village, through to householders. A future analysis of the factors leading to behaviour
change at the level of households in this programme could be expected to provide further rich
findings.
The study also focused purely on sanitation programming aimed at households in rural India.
How to achieve universal access to sanitation in urban settings in low income countries
remains a large and largely unsolved problem.
Looking at the context in which SBM achieved what it did, it may be asked how far is India a
special case, and how transferable are the results to other countries? India is one among many
countries in which modernisation is proceeding rapidly, Tusting et al show that housing is
improving across sub-Saharan Africa58, and our research in Tanzania suggests that toilet
promotion can be linked to this process of modernisation59. India is also one of many
countries in the Global South with political leaders with transformative ambitions, as was
demonstrated when 53 government delegations attended a summit on SBM held in Delhi in
October of 2018. India is different from many countries with unfinished sanitation agendas in
its low level of reliance on external budgetary assistance. Yet the, seemingly huge, amount it
made available for toilet building only amounted to some $4 per head per year, a sum that
could be recouped in financial savings associated with lower health care and other costs 60.
Case studies suggest that poverty is rarely a barrier to the achievement of public health

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

goals52. Hence it seems likely that other countries with the will to do so can emulate India’s
sanitation success.
Employing the Theory of Change perspective of Behaviour Centred Design, which was here
applied for the first time to behaviour change in institutions, provided a new, relatively
straightforward and insightful tool for understanding the behaviour of actors in government.
A novel aspect of the approach was the ability it gave to investigate the role of psychological
factors such as motives, as well as the social and physical factors in the operational
environment of the key actors. It allowed the creation of a structured and plausible theory of
change from which it was possible to derive lessons that should be of use to other institutions
desiring to make a step change in the quality and impact of public services.

Issues and future research
Whilst SBM has measured its success against a baseline set in 2013, interviewees pointed out
that many families had been left out of SBM. The Government will need to tackle the tough
‘last mile’ issue of remote and left-out rural households, as well as to find better sanitation
solutions for the urban poor, before it can fully claim to have met its objective to declare the
country free of open defecation. Questions remain concerning the sustainability of the
achievements of SBM. Much could be learnt by studying the different experience and
differing levels of success across India’s widely varied 600+districts. Future studies,
including the national census of 2021, will reveal the long term trajectory of the gains
claimed by SBM.
Finally, it is increasingly understood that individuals working in institutions are motivated to
act by a range of factors beyond immediate financial advantage61 62. As one interviewee said:
“All of us who are members of civil services, we joined the service with the vision for
the betterment of society.” (05)
A closer investigation of the pro-social motives of civil servants in national action
programmes such as the successful Swachh Bharat programme in India might reveal
important lessons about how best to stimulate and reward such activity. This could have
consequences beyond the urgent struggle to get safe sanitation to everyone on the planet.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Sources of funding: London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine
Competing interests: The author declares no competing interests
Acknowledgements: I wish to thank Robert Aunger, Sarah Bick, Kavita Chauhan, Ian Ross,
Astrid Thorseth and the interviewees.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1. Ferriman A. BMJ readers choose the “sanitary revolution” as greatest medical advance
since 1840: British Medical Journal Publishing Group, 2007.
2. Wolfe M, Kaur M, Yates T, et al. A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the
Association between Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Exposures and Cholera in CaseControl Studies. The American journal of tropical medicine and hygiene 2018
3. Pickering AJ, Djebbari H, Lopez C, et al. Effect of a community-led sanitation intervention
on child diarrhoea and child growth in rural Mali: a cluster-randomised controlled
trial. The Lancet Global health 2015;3(11):e701-11. doi: 10.1016/s2214109x(15)00144-8 [published Online First: 2015/10/18]
4. Hammer J, Spears D. Village sanitation and child health: Effects and external validity in a
randomized field experiment in rural India. Journal of Health Economics
2016;48:135-48. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2016.03.003
5. Prüss-Ustün A, Bartram J, Clasen T, et al. Burden of disease from inadequate water,
sanitation and hygiene in low- and middle-income settings: a retrospective analysis
of data from 145 countries. Tropical Medicine & International Health
2014;19(8):894-905. doi: 10.1111/tmi.12329
6. Sumpter C, Torondel B. A Systematic Review of the Health and Social Effects of Menstrual
Hygiene Management. PLOS ONE 2013;8(4):e62004. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0062004
7. Kjellén M, Pensulo C, Nordqvist P, et al. Global review of sanitation systems trends and
interactions with menstrual management practices - Report for the menstrual
management and sanitation systems project. . Stockholm, Sweden: Stockholm
Environment Institute (SEI), 2012.
8. Sahoo KC, Hulland KR, Caruso BA, et al. Sanitation-related psychosocial stress: A grounded
theory study of women across the life-course in Odisha, India. Social science &
medicine (1982) 2015;139:80-9. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.06.031 [published
Online First: 2015/07/15]
9. Routray P, Torondel B, Clasen T, et al. Women's role in sanitation decision making in rural
coastal Odisha, India. PLOS ONE 2017;12(5):e0178042. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0178042
10. UNICEF. Gender-Responsive Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: Key elements for effective
WASH programming: UNICEF, 2017.
11. UNICEF/WHO. Progress on household drinking water, sanitation and hygiene 2000-2017.
Special focus on inequalities. New York: United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and
World Health Organization (WHO), 2019.
12. WHO/Unicef. Progress on sanitation and drinking water - 2015 update and MDG
assessment. Geneva: WHO/Unicef, 2015.
13. India Go. National annual rural sanitation survey (NARSS) 2018-19 2019 [Available from:
http://www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/content/461686/national-annual-ruralsanitation-survey-narss-2018-19/ accessed 27th August 2019.
14. Sample size and saturation in PhD studies using qualitative interviews. Forum qualitative
Sozialforschung/Forum: qualitative social research; 2010.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

15. Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J. Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research
(COREQ): a 32-item checklist for interviews and focus groups. International journal
for quality in health care 2007;19(6):349-57.
16. Ritchie J, Spencer L, O’Connor W. Carrying out qualitative analysis. Qualitative research
practice: A guide for social science students and researchers 2003;2003:219-62.
17. Aunger R, Curtis V. Behaviour Centred Design: Towards an applied science of behaviour
change. Health Psychology Review 2016;10(4):1-22. doi:
10.1080/17437199.2016.1219673
18. Ltd QIP. NVivo qualitative data analysis software;. 2017;Version 11
19. Collins JC, Porras JI. Built to last: Successful habits of visionary companies: Random
House 2005.
20. Mehta M. Public finance at scale for rural sanitation–a case of Swachh Bharat Mission,
India. Journal of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Development 2018;8(3):359-73.
21. Bank W. World Bank Approves US$1.5 Billion to Support India’s Universal Sanitation
Initiatives 2015 [Available from: http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/pressrelease/2015/12/15/world-bank-approves-usd-1point5-billion-support-indiauniversal-sanitation-initiatives accessed 27th August 2019.
22. Hueso A, Bell B. An untold story of policy failure: the Total Sanitation Campaign in India.
Water Policy 2013;15(6):1001-17.
23. India To. Scooping out stigma: Bureaucrat cleans toilet pit in Warangal village 2017
[Available from: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/scooping-outstigma-bureaucrat-cleans-toilet-pit-in-warangal-village/articleshow/57229583.cms
accessed 27th August 2019.
24. India Go. Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) 2019 [Available from:
https://sbm.gov.in/sbmdashboard/ accessed 27th August 2019.
25. Ghosh A, Cairncross S. The uneven progress of sanitation in India. Journal of Water,
Sanitation and Hygiene for Development 2014;4(1):15-22.
26. Organization WH. Progress on drinking water, sanitation and hygiene: 2017 update and
SDG baselines. Progress on drinking water, sanitation and hygiene: 2017 update and
SDG baselines 2017
27. India Go. Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) 2018 [Available from:
https://sbm.gov.in/sbmdashboard/
accessed 2nd October 2018.
28. Institute r. Changes in open defecation in rural north India: 2014 – 2018 2019 [Available
from: https://riceinstitute.org/research/changes-in-open-defecation-in-rural-northindia-2014-2018-2/ accessed 27th August 2019.
29. Express I. CAG report picks holes in Gujarat’s Open Defecation-free claim 2018 [Available
from: https://indianexpress.com/article/india/cag-report-picks-holes-in-gujaratsopen-defecation-free-claim-5367438/ accessed 27th August 2019.
30. Bonell C, Fletcher A, Morton M, et al. Realist randomised controlled trials: a new
approach to evaluating complex public health interventions. Social science &
medicine 2012;75(12):2299-306.
31. Express I. Lok Sabha election results: NDA schemes resonate in 115 poor districts, bring
60% seats 2019 [Available from: https://indianexpress.com/elections/lok-sabhaelection-results-nda-schemes-resonate-in-115-poor-districts-bring-60-seats5745609/ accessed 27th August 2019.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

32. India To. Future shift: Welfare schemes may have worked well for Modi government, it
will need something more if re-elected 2019 [Available from:
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/blogs/toi-editorials/future-shift-welfareschemes-may-have-worked-well-for-modi-government-it-will-need-somethingmore-if-re-elected/ accessed 27th August 2019.
33. CIA. The World Factbook: India 2019 [Available from:
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/in.html accessed
27th August 2019.
34. Progress on household drinking water, sanitation and hygiene 2000-2017. Special focus
on inequalities. . New York: United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and World
Health Organization (WHO). 2019.
35. Aunger R, Curtis V. The anatomy of motivation: An evolutionary-ecological approach.
Biological Theory 2013;8(1):49-63.
36. Chunga RM, Ensink JH, Jenkins MW, et al. Adopt or adapt: sanitation technology choices
in urbanizing Malawi. PloS one 2016;11(8):e0161262.
37. Jenkins M, Curtis V. Achieving the 'good life': Why some people want latrines in rural
Benin. Social Science and Medicine 2005;61:2446-59.
38. Novotný J, Hasman J, Lepič M. Contextual factors and motivations affecting rural
community sanitation in low-and middle-income countries: A systematic review.
International journal of hygiene and environmental health 2018;221(2):121-33.
39. Pattanayak SK, Yang J-C, Dickinson KL, et al. Shame or subsidy revisited: social
mobilization for sanitation in Orissa, India. Bulletin of the World Health Organization
2009;87:580-87.
40. Guiteras R, Levinsohn J, Mobarak AM. Encouraging sanitation investment in the
developing world: A cluster-randomized trial. Science 2015;348(6237):903-06.
41. Chambers R, Kar K. Handbook on Community-Led Total Sanitation. Brighton: IDS 2008.
42. Venkataramanan V, Crocker J, Karon A, et al. Community-Led Total Sanitation: A MixedMethods Systematic Review of Evidence and Its Quality. Environmental Health
Perspectives 2018;126(2):026001. doi: doi:10.1289/EHP1965
43. O’Reilly K, Louis E. The toilet tripod: Understanding successful sanitation in rural India.
Health & place 2014;29:43-51.
44. Clasen T, Boisson S, Routray P, et al. The effect of improved rural sanitation on diarrhoea
and helminth infection: design of a cluster-randomized trial in Orissa, India.
Emerging themes in epidemiology 2012;9(1):7.
45. Humphrey J, Mbuya M, Ntozini R. Sanitation Hygiene Infant Nutrition Efficacy (SHINE)
Trial Team. Independent and combined effects of improved water, sanitation, and
hygiene, and improved complementary feeding, on child stunting and anaemia in
rural Zimbabwe: a cluster-randomised trial. Lancet Glob Health 2019;7:e132-47.
46. Tofail F, Fernald LC, Das KK, et al. Effect of water quality, sanitation, hand washing, and
nutritional interventions on child development in rural Bangladesh (WASH Benefits
Bangladesh): a cluster-randomised controlled trial. The Lancet Child & Adolescent
Health 2018;2(4):255-68.
47. Mukherjee N. Building environments to support sustainability of improved sanitation
behaviours at scale: levers of change in East Asia. Sustainable Sanitation for All:
Experiences, challenges, and innovations 2016:53.
48. Osbert N, Manchikanti S, Hoehne A, et al. Real time monitoring of rural sanitation at
scale in Zambia using Mobile-to-Web technologies. 2015

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19004689; this version posted September 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

49. McMichael C. Toilet Talk: Eliminating Open Defecation and Improved Sanitation in
Nepal. Medical Anthropology 2018;37(4):294-310. doi:
10.1080/01459740.2017.1371150
50. Jiménez A, Mtango FF, Cairncross S. What role for local government in sanitation
promotion? Lessons from Tanzania. Water Policy 2014;16(6):1104-20.
51. Mariwah S. Sanitation: the neglected Siamese twin of water in achieving the millennium
development goals (MDGs) in Ghana. GeoJournal 2018;83(2):223-36.
52. Levine R. Case studies in global health: millions saved: Jones & Bartlett Publishers 2007.
53. Rajkotia Y. Beware of the success cartel: a plea for rational progress in global health.
BMJ global health 2018;3(6):e001197.
54. Storeng KT, Abimbola S, Balabanova D, et al. Action to protect the independence and
integrity of global health research: BMJ Specialist Journals, 2019.
55. Barnard S, Routray P, Majorin F, et al. Impact of Indian Total Sanitation Campaign on
Latrine Coverage and Use: A Cross-Sectional Study in Orissa Three Years following
Programme Implementation
. PloS One 2013;8 e71438.
56. Novotný J, Ficek F, Hill JK, et al. Social determinants of environmental health: A case of
sanitation in rural Jharkhand. Science of The Total Environment 2018;643:762-74.
57. Hanchett S. Sanitation in Bangladesh: revolution, evolution, and new challenges.
Sustainable Sanitation for All: Experiences, challenges, and innovations 2016:31.
58. Tusting LS, Bisanzio D, Alabaster G, et al. Mapping changes in housing in sub-Saharan
Africa from 2000 to 2015. Nature 2019;568(7752):391.
59. Czerniewska A, Muangi WC, Aunger R, et al. Theory-driven formative research to inform
the design of a national sanitation campaign in Tanzania. PLOS ONE
2019;14(8):e0221445.
60. Hutton G, Haller L. Evaluation of the costs and benefits of water and sanitation
improvements at the global level: Water, Sanitation, and Health, Protection of the
Human Environment, World Health Organization 2004.
61. Wilson DS, Hayes SC, Biglan A, et al. Evolving the future: Toward a science of intentional
change. The Behavioral and brain sciences 2014;37(4):395.
62. Thaler RH, Sunstein CR. Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and
happiness: Yale Univ Pr 2008.

24

