medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A Needs Analysis of Parents Following Sudden Cardiac Death
in the Young
Kristie McDonald, BPsych(Hons) MClinPsych,1,2 Louise Sharpe, PhD 2 Laura Yeates BSc
GradDipGenCouns,1,3, 4 Christopher Semsarian MBBS MPH PhD, 1,3,4 Jodie Ingles,
GradDipGenCouns MPH PhD1,3,4

1

Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology at Centenary Institute, University of
Sydney, Australia;
2

School of Psychology, University of Sydney, Sydney Australia;

3

Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia;

4

Department of Cardiology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

Running title: Parents needs after sudden death in the young

WORD COUNT: 3800 (Including references)
TYPE: Original Research
NO CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Address for Correspondence:
Associate Professor Jodie Ingles
Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology
Centenary Institute
Locked Bag 6
Newtown NSW 2042 Australia
Email: j.ingles@centenary.org.au
Key words: Sudden cardiac death, needs analysis, psychological wellbeing
1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ABSTRACT
The sudden cardiac death (SCD) of a young person is a devastating event for any parent.
Inherited heart disease is often either identified or assumed to be the cause. Few studies
have explored the psychosocial impact to the surviving at-risk family members. We sought
to investigate the needs of parents who have experienced the SCD of their child (≤45
years). A quantitative needs analysis questionnaire was developed based on semistructured interviews, including one focus group, and a review of relevant literature. There
were 38 parents who completed a cross-sectional quantitative survey. Parents’ perceived
needs for information and support spanned medical, psychosocial, spiritual and financial
domains. Medical information and support needs were identified as the most important
domains, followed by psychosocial, spiritual and financial information and support needs.
Importantly, psychosocial information and support needs were reported as the most unmet
need, endorsed by 54% of parents. Medical information and support needs were reported
as unmet by almost one third of parents. The two most endorsed needs were “To have the
option of whether or not you would pursue genetic testing for yourself or family members”
and “To understand what happened”. This work demonstrates for the first time, the
multifactorial needs of parents after SCD in the young. With the greatest unmet need
reported as psychosocial needs, there is clear necessity to find ways of integrating
psychological support in to the care of families after SCD in the young.

Key words: Sudden cardiac death, needs analysis, psychological wellbeing

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

KEY QUESTIONS

What is already known about this subject?
There is currently very little known about the needs of families following a sudden cardiac
death due to inherited heart diseases. We know there is significant risk of poor
psychological outcomes including posttraumatic stress and prolonged grief, even years
after the death, however this is one of the first studies to formally evaluate the needs of
parents during this time.

What does this study add?
We show that medical information and support needs are ranked very highly, but
psychosocial support needs are the most unmet. Our findings provide a platform for
developing an approach to delivering psychosocial support interventions in this population.

How might this impact on clinical practice?
Currently clinical and research efforts in this setting focus on clinical and genetic aspects
of care. Here we show the critical need to also focus on the psychological care needs in
this population. These data will help to guide services in integrating psychological support
in to their multidisciplinary clinic models.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION
The loss of a young family member is one of the most tragic events for an individual to
endure, particularly when the death is sudden, unexpected, unexplained and possibly
heritable. Sudden cardiac death (SCD) in the young has an annual incidence of 1.3 per
100,000 individuals in Australia and New Zealand every year.1 Inherited heart diseases
account for a large majority of SCD in the young, with 40% being unascertained at
postmortem examination and presumed due to inherited arrhythmia syndromes, while
identifiable structural causes such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic right
ventricular cardiomyopathy and dilated cardiomyopathy make up approximately 16% of
cases.1

First-degree relatives who have experienced the SCD of a young relative report
significantly greater stress, anxiety and depression compared to the general population.2
Clinically significant symptoms of posttraumatic stress and/or prolonged grief were
reported by almost half of family members, on average 6 years after the death.3 Whilst
these findings provide a brief insight into the psychological difficulties experienced by
families, we are yet to understand a family’s needs in the wake of the SCD of a young
person.

Prior research to understand the needs of Swedish parents after the SCD of their 15-35
year old child identified four needs using a qualitative approach. These included evidence
of the death, understanding the circumstances through reconstruction, medical
explanation, and a sensitive approach by professionals.4 The focal goal of being
understood by health professionals and themselves understanding what was going on was
highlighted as important. With greater emphasis and awareness of the familial nature of
SCD in the young, we sought to comprehensively understand the needs of parents whose

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

child (≤ 45 years) experienced a SCD that was thought to be due to an inherited heart
disease, through development and distribution of a needs questionnaire.
METHODS
Participants
This was a cross-sectional survey study. Parents were recruited from the Genetic Heart
Disease Clinic, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital (RPA) in Sydney, Australia. We included
parents whose child had died suddenly aged ≤ 45 years with an inherited heart disease
identified (or presumed to be the cause) at postmortem examination. Only cases where
there was no premorbid diagnosis of an inherited heart disease were eligible. We required
a sufficient level of written English skills, as self-nominated by the participant. The local
human research ethics committee approved this study and all participants gave written
informed consent prior to commencement of the interviews and questionnaire.

Questionnaire Development
We developed the SCD Parental Needs Questionnaire based on one semi-structured
focus group and nine semi-structured interviews. Thematic analysis was employed to elicit
descriptive data concerning the needs that parents had experienced from their own
perspective. The needs identified by parents who were interviewed and other previously
designed needs assessments including in oncology,5 cardiac patients6 and parents
bereaved in pediatric intensive care literature7 were reviewed to develop the content and
format of the needs assessment. The questionnaire included an inventory of 45 items
assessing the met and unmet needs reported by parents after SCD in the young. Fortyfour needs questions were presented to each respondent. A single screening question
was presented to each respondent, assessing whether a gene variant was identified, and
for parents whom answered ‘yes’ to this, an additional five follow up needs questions were
displayed. Each needs question had a dichotomous yes/no response. If ‘yes’ was
selected, an additional two items were presented, assessing the importance of the need,
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

measured on a three-point scale (low, moderate, high) and whether the need had been
met (Figure 1). One of the 45 items was a screening question and only relevant to parents
for whom a gene variant was identified. For this item, if parents selected ‘yes’ from the
dichotomous response, an additional five follow up questions were shown, in the same
format as all other need questions.

In addition, demographic questions were included about the respondent (name, age and
marital status), and their deceased child (gender, age at death, year of death and cause of
death). Statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS v21. Missing data were not
included. Descriptive statistics were used to investigate frequency of endorsed need, the
importance and whether the needs were met.

SCD Parental Needs Questionnaire
Based on the qualitative analyses, 4 domains of need were included in the SCD Parental
Needs Questionnaire:
1. Medical information and support needs
2. Psychosocial information and support needs
3. Financial information and support needs
4. Spiritual information and support needs

1. Medical information and support needs
This domain encompassed parent’s interactions with medical professionals at the time of
and in the aftermath of the death. Professionals included paramedics, police, medical
doctors, nurses and administrative support, and those involved in later care including
general practitioners and cardiac specialists. Six sub-categories were established: 1)
information about cause of death; 2) information about heritability and consequent
discussion of genetic testing; 3) information about the medical ramifications for self and
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

family; 4) appropriate and timely referrals e.g., to cardiac specialists and/or genetic
counsellors; 5) opportunity to view the body and 6) an empathic and supportive approach
by all.

2. Psychosocial information and support needs
This domain described psychological and social support identified by parents. Within this
domain, six sub-categories were established; 1) support from family; 2) support from
friends; 3) support from work, including time off work and understanding of ongoing
impact; 4) support from the community, including understanding by school of impact on
siblings; 5) information about and access to individual therapy and 6) information about
support groups.

3. Financial information and support needs
This domain was utilized to comprise monetary needs. Two sub-categories were
established: 1) needs relating to the young person’s estate (both dealings with insurance
and bank accounts) and 2) medical costs (including clear emphasis on what appointments
and tests were reimbursed by insurance).

4. Spiritual information and support needs
This domain encompassed all needs participants identified as relevant to: 1) their own
religiosity/spirituality;

2)

their

family’s

religiosity/spirituality

and

3)

their

child’s

religiosity/spirituality.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

RESULTS
Participants
One hundred and twenty-four parents were directly approached, with social media
recruitment used to increase participation. A total of 38 parents completed the
questionnaire. Participants were approached through postal mail (19% response rate;
24/124), telephone (12% response rate; 3/25), email (42% response rate; 11/26) and a
Facebook advertisement (n = 2). Characteristics of the participants and the decedent are
shown in Table 1. There were 8 (21%) male participants and mean age was 59 ± 11 years.
In terms of the decedent, the mean age at death was 23 ± 10 years and 28 (74%) were
male. The time since death ranged from 2-17 years and 26 (68%) had no clear cause of
death identified at postmortem examination.

Needs across the domains
The mean of the responses across the 4 domains are shown in Figure 1. Of the 36 items
relating to medical information and support needs, on average 71% endorsed the items as
a need and 75% rated these needs as having high importance. Overall 32% reported at
least one need in the medical information and support domain as unmet. There were 11
items relating to psychosocial information and support, with on average 52% reporting
these as a need and of those, 68% felt the importance was high and 54% report these
needs as unmet. The spiritual need was ranked as the 38th most important need, being
endorsed by 46% of parents, and 94% subsequently rating it as of moderate to high
importance. There were 38% of parents who reported this need as unmet. The financial
need was rated as the 46th most important need, being endorsed by 34% of parents; with
62% rating the importance as high and 38% reported this need as being unmet.

Frequently endorsed needs

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

All needs items are shown in Supplementary Table 1. Twelve needs were endorsed by

≥80%. Of these, 11 were medical information and support needs, while one was a
psychosocial information and support need. Between 63%-93% reported these 12 needs
as being of “high” importance. The two most endorsed needs were “To have the option of
whether or not you would pursue genetic testing for yourself or family members”, with 33%
identifying this need as unmet; and “To understand what happened”, which was reported
unmet by 60% of participants.

Unmet needs
Psychosocial needs were considered the most unmet. The items “For support from your
family” and “For access to professional counselling or psychological services to deal with
your bereavement” were reported as needs by 89% and 74%. The most unmet needs
were “For a health professional or resources to provide you with advice for dealing with
people who expected you to be ‘back to normal’ after your child’s death” by 75%; and “For
medical professionals to provide you with the opportunity to ask questions about your
child’s death” and “For referral to someone to talk to who understands and has been
through a similar experience” by 69%. Of note, the item “To understand the genetic cause
of your child’s death” was regarded as a need by 72%, and 67% of participants reported
this as unmet.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DISCUSSION
We show the greatest needs of families after SCD in the young are medical information
and support needs, particularly relating to understanding the cause of the death. The
greatest unmet needs were focused in the psychological domain, with participants
reporting a need for health professionals, family and friends to have a clearer
understanding of the unique clinical experience they are confronted with. As we better
elucidate the clinical and genetic underpinnings of SCD in the young, our study suggests
optimising the specialised multidisciplinary clinic model could potentially have an important
impact on ensuring needs of surviving family members are met.

All needs in our survey were endorsed by at least 26% of participants, indicating their
overall relative importance. Medical information and support needs were the most
commonly endorsed overall, consistent with previous research highlighting that sensitive
and empathic communication of the reason for the death is of paramount importance for
parents.4, 8 Understanding the cause of death was considered a key need for many, and
overall was largely unmet. Given the unexpected nature of SCD in the young, whereby a
large proportion of deaths remain unexplained, this is not surprising but puts even greater
emphasis on the positive impact that our continuing research efforts to understand the
causes of SCD in the young will have. In particular, many participants indicated access to
genetic testing or understanding the genetic cause to be an important need, highlighting
the importance of maintaining realistic expectations regarding the diagnostic yield of
postmortem genetic testing with our families.9 At present, this is likely not greater than
15% and there is a high likelihood of uncertain genetic findings especially with increasing
gene panel sizes.1, 10

While there was a clear need for understanding the cause of death, it should be noted that
these families were recruited from a specialised multidisciplinary clinic where there is a
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

strong interest in understanding SCD in the young. It could be argued this patient group
have had even greater opportunity for a cause of death to be established, access to
experienced health professionals including cardiac genetic counsellors who develop a
relationship with the family and provide in-depth pre- and post-test genetic counselling.
The needs relating to understanding the cause of death, including genetic testing options
are therefore likely underestimated in our study.

Management of families after a young SCD ideally should be performed in a specialised
multidisciplinary clinic, including cardiologists and genetic counsellors to explore clinical
screening and genetic testing options. There are known challenges commonly
encountered when caring for families after SCD of a young relative. In particular there is a
high prevalence of clinically significant symptoms of posttraumatic stress and prolonged
grief.3 Reluctance to undergo clinical surveillance is also not uncommon, especially
amongst mothers of the decedent.11, 12 Cardiac genetic counsellors have evolved to play a
key role in the management of families after SCD in the young.13 Indeed, previous
research has highlighted the benefits of genetic counselling, conceptualising it as a highly
circumscribed form of psychotherapy.14 Thus, increased emphasis on genetic counselling
is essential to continuation of care and communication with health services. Of note, one
critical role for genetic counsellors in this setting should be identification of individuals who
require assessment by a clinical psychologist.

Psychosocial needs were, on average, the domain of second most importance and overall
considered the most unmet. Such results shed light on the current gap in service provision,
with the implication that parents are asking for, and not receiving, sufficient psychosocial
support to help cope with bereavement. Whilst previous research has both proposed the
need for and demonstrated the benefits of a multidisciplinary team in the care of families
with inherited cardiovascular diseases,12 further research is needed to understand how to
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

best deliver psychosocial support to SCD parents and their families. Exploring approaches
such as individual counselling, for example meaning-making narrative therapy,15 and the
benefits of support groups such as affiliation and emotion support through a sense of
belonging, instrumental support in the form of a safe place for discussion, practical aid in
the form of informational support and normalisation and social comparison, may be
beneficial.16 The role of family and friends in providing support to grieving individuals is
already well-described.17 Examining ways this could be further encouraged or explored
with families may likewise be helpful.

When considering how to communicate information effectively to parents, educational
interventions such as the GRIEV_ING death notification protocol18 may be useful within
the SCD context. The GRIEV_ING mnemonic encourages professionals to ‘Gather’ all
family members, provide ‘Resources’, ‘Identify’ yourself, your patient and the state of
knowledge, ‘Educate’ the family about the events, ‘Verify’ that death has occurred, ‘_’
provide space to process and absorb information, ‘Inquire’ about questions, provide ‘Nuts
and bolts’ about practical tasks (e.g., organ donation and funeral services), and ‘Give’
access to information and support for questions that may arise later. Given the limited
understanding of the cause of death, there may be limited ability to confidently and
empathically provide information and support. Future research may evaluate how such an
educational intervention model can be utilized during later stages of grieving, when cause
of death is established or remains unascertained. Additionally, future research may benefit
from exploring how families cope with the ambiguity surrounding SCD.

Our study was limited by the modest sample size, and despite best efforts the response
rate was relatively low. The difficulty and sensitivities of recruiting this unique patient
population cannot be underestimated, and the final results provide a framework for
considering what needs are considered important. How these might apply more broadly,
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

particularly to the population who do not have access to specialised clinics should be
examined.

Conclusion
Understanding the multifactorial needs of parents after SCD in the young is paramount for
informing health care professionals in how to best assist and support this vulnerable
population. Unmet psychosocial needs shed light on the current gap in service provision,
with the implication that parents are asking for, and not receiving, sufficient psychosocial
support to help cope with bereavement. Identifying how to best deliver psychosocial
support to families is important, including exploring approaches such as individual
counselling and the benefits of support groups in providing affiliation and emotion support
through a sense of belonging, instrumental support in the form of a safe place for
discussion, practical aid such as informational support and normalisation, may be
beneficial.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
CS is the recipient of a National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC)
Practitioner Fellowship (#1059156). JI is the recipient of an NHMRC Career Development
Fellowship (#1162929). This study is funded in part by an NHMRC Project Grant
(#1059515) and National Heart Foundation Future Leader Fellowship (#100833).

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

REFERENCES

1.
Bagnall RD, Weintraub RG, Ingles J, Duflou J, Yeates L, Lam L, Davis AM,
Thompson T, Connell V, Wallace J, Naylor C, Crawford J, Love DR, Hallam L, White J,
Lawrence C, Lynch M, Morgan N, James P, du Sart D, Puranik R, Langlois N, Vohra J,
Winship I, Atherton J, McGaughran J, Skinner JR and Semsarian C. A Prospective Study
of Sudden Cardiac Death among Children and Young Adults. N Engl J Med.
2016;374:2441-52.
2.
Yeates L, Hunt L, Saleh M, Semsarian C and Ingles J. Poor psychological wellbeing
particularly in mothers following sudden cardiac death in the young. Eur J Cardiovasc
Nurs. 2013;12:484-91.
3.
Ingles J, Spinks C, Yeates L, McGeechan K, Kasparian N and Semsarian C.
Posttraumatic Stress and Prolonged Grief After the Sudden Cardiac Death of a Young
Relative. JAMA Intern Med. 2016;176:402-5.
4.
Wisten A and Zingmark K. Supportive needs of parents confronted with sudden
cardiac death--a qualitative study. Resuscitation. 2007;74:68-74.
5.
Azoulay E, Pochard F, Chevret S, Lemaire F, Mokhtari M, Le Gall JR, Dhainaut JF,
Schlemmer B and French FG. Meeting the needs of intensive care unit patient families: a
multicenter study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001;163:135-9.
6.
Asadi-Lari M, Packham C and Gray D. Psychometric properties of a new health
needs analysis tool designed for cardiac patients. Public Health. 2005;119:590-8.
7.
Meert KL, Templin TN, Michelson KN, Morrison WE, Hackbarth R, Custer JR,
Schim SM, Briller SH and Thurston CS. The Bereaved Parent Needs Assessment: a new
instrument to assess the needs of parents whose children died in the pediatric intensive
care unit*. Crit Care Med. 2012;40:3050-7.
8.
van der Werf C, Onderwater AT, van Langen IM and Smets EM. Experiences,
considerations and emotions relating to cardiogenetic evaluation in relatives of young
sudden cardiac death victims. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014;22:192-6.
9.
Bates K, Sweeting J, Yeates L, McDonald K, Semsarian C and Ingles J.
Psychological adaptation to molecular autopsy findings following sudden cardiac death in
the young. Genet Med. 2018.
10.
Lahrouchi N, Raju H, Lodder EM, Papatheodorou E, Ware JS, Papadakis M,
Tadros R, Cole D, Skinner JR, Crawford J, Love DR, Pua CJ, Soh BY, Bhalshankar JD,
Govind R, Tfelt-Hansen J, Winkel BG, van der Werf C, Wijeyeratne YD, Mellor G, Till J,
Cohen MC, Tome-Esteban M, Sharma S, Wilde AAM, Cook SA, Bezzina CR, Sheppard
MN and Behr ER. Utility of Post-Mortem Genetic Testing in Cases of Sudden Arrhythmic
Death Syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:2134-2145.
11.
Yeates L, Hunt L, Saleh M, Semsarian C and Ingles J. Poor psychological wellbeing
particularly in mothers following sudden cardiac death in the young. Eur J Cardiovasc
Nurs. 2013;12:484-91.
12.
Caleshu C, Kasparian NA, Edwards KS, Yeates L, Semsarian C, Perez M, Ashley
E, Turner CJ, Knowles JW and Ingles J. Interdisciplinary psychosocial care for families
with inherited cardiovascular diseases. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2016;26:647-53.
13.
Ingles J and James C. Psychosocial care and cardiac genetic counseling following
sudden cardiac death in the young. Progress in Pediatric Cardiology. 2017;45:31-36.
14.
Austin J, Semaka A and Hadjipavlou G. Conceptualizing genetic counseling as
psychotherapy in the era of genomic medicine. J Genet Couns. 2014;23:903-9.
15.
Neimeyer RA. Reauthoring life narratives: Grief therapy as meaning reconstruction.
The Israel Journal of Psychiatry and Related Sciences. 2001;38.
16.
Health Behavior and Health Education: Theory, Research and Practice. 3rd ed. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2002.
17.
Binderman J. A Burden of Choice: The Ripple Effect: Parents’ Grief
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and the Role of Family and Friends. In: J. P. Galst and M. S. Verp, eds. Prenatal and
Preimplantation Diagnosis: The Burden of Choice Switzerland: Springer International
Publishing; 2015: 323-36.
18.
Hobgood C, Harward D, Newton K and Davis W. The educational intervention
"GRIEV_ING" improves the death notification skills of residents. Acad Emerg Med.
2005;12:296-301.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

TABLE 1: Characteristics of the parents and decedent

Participant characteristics

n (%)

Male gender

8 (21)

Mean age, years

59 ± 11

Married/De facto

31 (82)

Decedent characteristics

n (%)

Male gender

28 (74)

Age at death, years

23 ± 10

Time since death, years
2-6 years

13 (34)

7-11 years

18 (47)

12-17 years

7 (18)

Known

12 (32)

Unknown

26 (68)

Cause of death

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000877; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 1: Summary of needs by domain

Domain (number of

Need endorsed, %

Rating of need, %

Met or Unmet, %

Yes: 71

Low: 6

Met: 68

No: 29

Moderate: 17

Unmet: 32

items)
Medical Information &
Support
(n=36)
Psychosocial
Information & Support

High: 75
Yes: 52

Low: 5

Met: 46

No: 48

Moderate: 27

Unmet: 54

(n=11)
Spiritual Information &
Support

High: 68
Yes: 46

Low: 6

No: 54

Moderate: 47

(n=1)
Financial Information &
Support
(n=1)

High: 47
Yes: 34

Low: 8

No: 66

Moderate: 31
High: 61





Met: 62.5
Unmet: 37.5







Met: 62
Unmet: 38





18

