medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1
2

Quantitative Analysis of Ablation Technique Predicts Arrhythmia Recurrence Following
Atrial Fibrillation Ablation

3
4

Lior Jankelson MD PhD, Matthew Dai MD, Scott Bernstein MD, David Park MD, Douglas
Holmes MD, Anthony Aizer MD, Larry Chinitz MD, Chirag Barbhaiya MD

5
6
7

Leon H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York University

8

School of Medicine, New York, USA

9
10

Corresponding Author:

11

Lior Jankelson MD, PhD

12

Department of Cardiac electrophysiology, Leon H. Charney

13

Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York

14

University School of Medicine

15

550 1st Avenue, NYU 10016, USA

16

Tel: +1 212 263 5555

17

Fax: +1 212 263 8685

18

Email: lior.jankelson@nyumc.org

19
20

Word count: 3409

21
22

Key Words: Ablation, Stability, Excursion, Impedance

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1
Abstract:
Background: Optimal ablation technique, including catheter-tissue contact during atrial fibrillation (AF)
radiofrequency (RF) ablation is associated with improved procedural outcomes. We used a custom

5

developed software to analyze high frequency catheter position data to study the interaction between
catheter excursion during lesion placement, lesion-set sequentiality and arrhythmia recurrence.
Methods: 100 consecutive patients undergoing first time RF ablation for paroxysmal AF were analyzed.
Spatial positioning of the ablation catheter sampled at 60 Hz during RF application was extracted from the
CARTO3 system (Biosense Webster Inc., USA) and analyzed using custom developed MATLAB software

10

to determine precise catheter spatial 3D excursion during RF ablation. The primary end point was
freedom from atrial arrhythmia lasting longer than 30 seconds after a single ablation procedure.
Results: At one year, 86% of patients were free from recurrent arrhythmia. There was no significant
difference in clinical, echocardiographic or ablation characteristics between patients with and without
recurrent arrhythmia. Analyzing 15,356,998 position data-points revealed that lesion-set sequentiality and

15

mean lesion catheter excursion were predictors of arrhythmia recurrence. Analyzing arrhythmia
recurrence by mean single-lesion catheter excursion (excursion > 2.81mm) and by sequentiality (using
46% of lesions with inter-lesion distance >6mm as cutoff) revealed significantly increased arrhythmia
recurrence in the higher excursion group (23% vs. 6%, p=0.03) and in the less sequential group (24% vs.
4%, p=0.02).

20

Conclusion: Ablation lesion sequentiality measured by catheter inter-lesion distance and catheter
stability measured by catheter excursion during lesion placement are potentially modifiable factors
affecting arrhythmia recurrence after RF ablation for AF.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Background
Pulmonary vein isolation (PVI) is foundational to catheter ablation procedures for prevention of
1
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF) . Optimal catheter-tissue contact-force (CF) during RF ablation is

associated with reduction in arrhythmia recurrence following AF ablation, 2-4 which remains common

5

despite utilization of force-sensing ablation catheters.5 While CF instability, often indirectly defined by
6

average CF or standard deviation of CF is associated with poor lesion quality, The extent to which spatial
instability - measured directly during single lesion RF application - contributes to ineffective lesion
formation and arrhythmia recurrence is unknown. Similarly, it is unclear if differences in the sequentiality
of lesion placement technique is impacting procedure outcomes. In the present study we retrospectively

10

applied a custom developed computational tool to quantitatively analyze ablation catheter spatial position
during RF ablation of paroxysmal AF, with the following aims: 1) evaluate the interaction between ablation
catheter spatial position, both in terms of lesion-set sequentiality as well as stability during individual
lesion placement, and the clinical outcomes of RF ablation in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation,
and 2) assess the interaction between spatial catheter stability and ablation parameters.

15

Methods
Patients and procedure. We retrospectively analyzed 100 consecutive patients undergoing first time RF
ablation for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation in our center, included in our prospective AF ablation registry. All
procedures were performed under general anesthesia with mechanical ventilation and using respiratory
gating to adjust positional data for respiratory motion. Patients were ablated in sinus rhythm with atrial

20

pacing at 600 ms cycle length to enhance catheter stability. Surface and intracardiac electrocardiograms
were recorded and stored (EP Workmate, St. Jude Medical, Inc., USA). A detailed left atrial
electroanatomical map in sinus rhythm was created using a circular mapping catheter or a five-spline
mapping catheter (Lasso or PentaRay, Biosense Webster, Inc., USA) and 3-D electroanatomic mapping
system (CARTO3, Biosense Webster, Inc. USA). Wide antral PVI was then performed using a 3.5mm tip

25

force-sensing RF ablation catheter (ThermoCool SmartTouch, Biosense Webster, Inc., USA), set to 35
Watts for a force-time integral value of 400 g*s on the anterior wall and 200 g*s on the posterior wall.
Lesions were placed using point-by-point technique with no dragging allowed. No visual gaps in the PVI

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

were allowed in the end of the case. ViziTag lesion settings were set to 2mm/5sec motion and 5 gr of
minimal force. Esophageal temperature probe was used in all patients for monitoring (Truer Medical,
USA). Electrical isolation of the pulmonary veins, both entrance and exit block, was confirmed using
pacing and Adenosine administration.

5

Ablation Data analysis. Data was extracted from the electroanatomical mapping system and analyzed
using custom MATLAB software (Mathworks, USA). Catheter 3D position and impedance sampled at
60Hz were registered for each ablation lesion. Patient specific spatial catheter stability, represented by
catheter excursion was determined as follows: for each ablation lesion, continuous 3D catheter position
was extracted and the displacement of the catheter tip relative to the center of each lesion was

10

determined (Figure 1). Catheter excursion was defined as following: maximal excursion was defined as
the farthest distance from the center of a single ablation lesion, which the catheter traveled during a
single lesion. Mean excursion was defined as the average distance the catheter from the center of the
lesion during a single ablation lesion. Catheter stability was then calculated for each case as the average
excursion (maximal and mean, separately) during all RF lesions applied during a single procedure in a

15

single patient. To study the implication of lesion placement-order on ablation outcomes, we defined the
variable “lesion-sequentiality” (Figure 1D). In each patient, we calculated the percent of temporally
sequential lesion pairs (i.e. 2 lesions place immediately one after another), which were spatially nonsequential, i.e. placed greater than 6 mm apart. This variable represents the order of lesion placement: in
cases where the operator tended to move the catheter more frequently between different atrial locations,

20

lesion sequentiality was lower (more temporally sequential lesion pairs were placed >6mm apart).
Regardless of lesion sequentility, all lesion sets in all patients were complete, with lesions overlapping
and no gaps permitted along the PVI lines.
Clinical Endpoint. All patients underwent two-week event-monitoring at 3, 6 and 12 months post
procedure. The primary endpoint of the study was freedom from AF lasting more than 30 seconds,

25

1
following a 3-month blanking period .

Statistical analysis. All statistical analysis was performed using SPSS Statistics 23 (SPSS Inc., USA)
and graphs were constructed using Prism 7 (GraphPad Software, Inc., USA). Continuous variables were

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

expressed as either mean ± standard deviation for tables or mean ± standard error of the mean for
figures. Categorical variables were expressed as percentages. Normality of samples with continuous
variables was assessed using Shapiro-Wilk test. Two sample hypotheses testing for continuous variables
was performed using either Student’s t-test if samples had normal distributions or Mann-Whitney U test if

5

samples did not have normal distributions. Hypothesis testing with multiple samples was performed using
non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test with subsequent pairwise comparison using Mann-Whitney U test and
Dunn-Bonferroni correction to significance level α = 0.05. For non-composite data point comparisons
performed, we used an additional mixed-design analysis of variance (split-plot ANOVA) to account for
both random and fixed effects introduced by clusterization. For categorical variables, hypothesis testing

10

was performed using Fisher’s exact test. Logistic regression was performed to identify predictors of
arrhythmia recurrence. This approach was also performed to identify predictors of catheter instability. For
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis, the median maximal excursion (2.81mm) was chosen as the cut-off value
to divide the dataset into two equal groups. Significance analysis between groups was performed using
log-rank test.

15

All patients provided written informed consent for their procedures, and all data collection and analysis
were performed in accordance with the NYU Langone Medical Center Institutional Review Board.
No extramural funding was used to support this work. The authors are solely responsible for the design
and conduct of this study, all study analyses, the drafting and editing of the paper and its final contents
Results

20

Patient characteristics and procedural outcomes
Of 100 consecutive cases included, fourteen (14%) had continuous implantable monitoring with either a
PPM (n=7), or implantable loop recorder (n=7). The remaining patients received an average of 2.1±1.0
two-week monitors during the follow-up period. Patient characteristics are presented in table 1.
At 1-year follow-up, overall Kaplan-Meier estimated arrhythmia free survival was 86%. There were no

25

differences in baseline characteristics, including age, gender, EF and LA size, between patients with and
without arrhythmia recurrence.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A total of 14,703 ablation lesions with an average of 1044±525 position data-points per lesion were
studied, for a total of 15,356,998 position data-points. Mean catheter excursion and maximal catheter
excursion were significantly greater in the recurrence group versus the arrhythmia-free group
(1.08±0.13mm vs. 0.98±0.17mm p=0.01 and 3.07±0.38mm vs. 2.80±0.40mm respectively, p=0.03).

5

Percent lesions with inter-lesion distance > 6mm was significantly higher in the arrhythmia recurrence
group (53±9% vs. 46±8, P<0.001), Figure 2. There were no differences between groups in all other
ablation parameters (Table 2), including number of PVs, RF time, average power delivered, ablation
catheter average CF or standard deviation of CF, lesion duration, FTI or impedance decline.
Predictors of arrhythmia recurrence

10

Significant predictors of arrhythmia recurrence by logistic regression (Table 3) were greater percent
lesions with >6mm inter-lesion distance, increased catheter excursion, (for maximal catheter excursion
OR 5.15 per 1mm maximal excursion increase, 95% CI 1.21-21.9, p=0.04) and lower ejection fraction.
Arrhythmia recurrence by spatial catheter excursion
Maximal catheter excursion (meadian, 2.81mm) and lesion sequentiality (median percent lesion pairs with

15

> 6mm inter-lesion distance) were used separately to evaluate arrhythmia recurrence (figure 3). KaplanMeier estimated arrhythmia free survival was significantly greater in patients with lesser than median
maximal catheter excursion, compared to patients with greater than median maximal catheter excursion
(94% vs. 77% respectively, p=0.02). Arrhythmia free survival was significantly higher in patients with
greater lesion sequentiality, evident by smaller percent of lesion pairs > 6mm apart (96% vs. 76%,

20

p=0.01).
Predictors of ablation catheter spatial stability
Comparing clinical and ablation parameters categorically using median maximal excursion (2.81mm) as a
cutoff for defining catheter stability, increased body surface area (BSA), increased body weight and the
presence of CHF were associated with greater catheter excursion (Supplemental Table 1). Logistic

25

regression demonstrated that decreased body weight and LA size were significant predictors of catheter
stability, as well as ablation by specific operators (Supplemental Table 2). Ablation parameters associated

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

with better catheter spatial stability were decreased lesion number, longer lesion duration and lower
percent lesions with >6mm inter-lesion distance. No differences in CF, standard deviation of CF, FTI,
Impedance decline or total RF time were observed between groups. No association was found between
CF and catheter stability when assessed by quartiles of CF.

5

Catheter spatial stability and impedance
Spatial stability, FTI, CF and standard deviation of CF all demonstrated poor correlation with impedance
decline (r = 0.15, 0.14,0.07 and 0.02 respectively, p < 0.001 for all pairs). Figure 4 illustrates an example
of closely-spaced pair of lesions, where large differences in spatial stability and impedance decline are
observed, without significant difference in CF.

10
Discussion
In this study of 100 consecutive patients undergoing RF ablation for paroxysmal AF, we found that:
1. Predictors of arrhythmia recurrence following paroxysmal AF ablation were:
a. Ablation catheter single lesion spatial stability during lesion placement, measured using

15

high frequency catheter excursion data
b. Lesion sequentiality, measured by percent of temporally sequential lesion pairs placed >
6mm apart, and
c.

lower ejection fraction

2. Impedance decline during RF lesion delivery was poorly associated with ablation parameters,

20

including catheter stability and contact-force.
Ablation catheter spatial stability and lesion-set sequentiality predict arrhythmia recurrence
In the present work, we studied ablation catheter quantitative spatial stability, which we defined and
evaluated by analyzing over 15 million catheter position data-points stored by the electroanatomical
mapping system. The ability to precisely analyze positioning data is possible due to high spatial resolution

25

of the mapping system, less than 1mm7 over the entire applied field. We used custom MATLAB code

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

applied over CARTO system output to rapidly extract, analyze and graphically present ablation catheter
positional data. We show that using a more sequential technique in placing the ablation lesions is
associated with reduced arrhythmia recurrence. We also demonstrate that relatively small differences in
catheter excursion during lesion placement are significant in predicting arrhythmia recurrence. We found

5

that the clinical variables associated with diminished catheter stability are increased body weight and the
presence of CHF. We did not find significant differences in potential modifiers of ablation outcome such
as the number of lesions, average force or FTI, between patients with and without recurrence. It is
possible that increased cardiac motion associated with increased cardiac size, as seen in both patients
with higher body weight as well as CHF, translates to more significant catheter motion. The procedural

10

markers characterizing cases with diminished catheter stability were less sequential lesion-set, increased
number of lesions and shorter lesion duration. To date, in both pre-clinical 6, 8 and clinical studies, catheter
stability was assessed indirectly using CF variability (CF standard deviation) which was found to be
associated with suboptimal lesion formation and clinical outcomes

9, 10 11

. However, irrespective of CF and

its variability, cardiac and respiratory motion may result in spatial displacement of the ablation electrode

15

relative to underlying tissue. This spatial displacement of the ablation electrode, which may not be
reflected in CF variability, may impact lesion quality and increase the likelihood of arrhythmia recurrence.
Concordant with our findings, in a post-hoc analysis of automated lesion annotation in the SMART-AF
study, gaps between lesion markers created using strict stability criteria predicted arrhythmia
12
recurrence . While we identified increased BSA (driven by body weight) as predictor of catheter spatial

20

instability, it did not predict arrhythmia recurrence. In the analysis of ablation parameters by catheter
stability (rather than by arrhythmia recurrence), cases with lower stability were associated with less
sequential lesion-set, greater lesion number and shorter lesion duration. This finding may imply that
operators were aware and responded to catheter instability. Indeed, improving spatial catheter stability
may be a mechanism by which interventions such as high frequency jet ventilation and the use of a

25

deflectable sheath improve clinical outcomes13-15. Additional proposed measures that may improve spatial
catheter stability during RF application are rapid pacing and the use of periodic apnea16. The rhythm
during AF ablation is another modifier of catheter stability recently shown to modulate catheter contact

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

force, and may be a potential strategy for increasing catheter stability17. The optimal means by which to
evaluate and modify intra-procedural spatial catheter instability require further evaluation.
Impedance change during RF ablation
Decrease in the unipolar impedance of the ablation electrode circuit during RF application is widely used

5

as surrogate marker for effective lesion creation. This, is based on both pre-clinical and clinical studies
demonstrating a positive correlation between the magnitude of impedance decline and CF, lesion size,
and ablation outcomes18, 19 20. However, the strength of correlation between CF and impedance decline
varies widely between clinical studies

21, 22

, and over the narrow range of CF observed in the present

analysis, we found the correlation to be weak. In this perspective, previously unacknowledged variability

10

in spatial stability may help explain the large discrepancies in correlations of impedance decline and CF
reported in previous studies, where wide range of impedance decline was recorded over different ranges
21, 23

of CF

.

Taken together, these data suggest that the factors that contribute to impedance decline during RF
application remain incompletely understood.

15
Limitations
This study was a retrospective analysis of a prospective registry enrolling all patients undergoing AF
ablation at our institution; this however, is partially mitigated by the all-comer, consecutive nature of the
study, offsetting the potential for selection bias. We were not able to assess first-pass PV isolation nor the

20

cause of arrhythmia recurrence in the 14 patients with post ablation arrhythmia, and it is possible that the
mechanism of recurrence was non-PV related. However, inadequate lesion quality may create the
relevant substrate for both PV reconnection as well as for non-PV related tachyarrhythmia, including AF
and AT. Further assessment of the mechanism of recurrence may be addressed in a future study.
Although significantly different and predictive, values of catheter stability and sequentiality demonstrated

25

overlap between the groups with and without recurrence. Hence, a prospective study on a larger
population would be required to validate our findings. Lastly, 14 patients were monitored with ILRs, while

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

86 patients were monitored with conventional, guideline-directed Holters. Although arrhythmia recurrence
and ablation parameters did not vary between patients with and without an ILR, under-detection of
arrhythmic events is possible.

5

Conclusion
Ablation catheter spatial instability and decreased lesion sequentiality are predictors of arrhythmia
recurrence in patients undergoing RF ablation for paroxysmal AF, separately resulting in nearly 3-fold risk
of arrhythmia recurrence. Additional studies are required to further define the importance of quantitative
real-time monitoring of catheter stability and lesion placement technique, and the utility of interventions

10

aimed at improving them.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Mr. Morris Ziv-Ari (Biosense Webster Inc., USA) for his assistance with
MATLAB scripting.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

Calkins H, Hindricks G, Cappato R, Kim YH, Saad EB, Aguinaga L, et al. 2017
HRS/EHRA/ECAS/APHRS/SOLAECE expert consensus statement on catheter and surgical ablation
of atrial fibrillation: Executive summary. J Arrhythm 2017;33(5):369-409.
Reddy VY, Shah D, Kautzner J, Schmidt B, Saoudi N, Herrera C, et al. The relationship between
contact force and clinical outcome during radiofrequency catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation
in the TOCCATA study. Heart Rhythm 2012;9(11):1789-1795.
Sotomi Y, Inoue K, Kikkawa T, Tanaka K, Toyoshima Y, Oka T, et al. Clinical impact of contact
force and its regional variability on efficiency and effectiveness of pulmonary vein isolation for
atrial fibrillation. J Cardiol 2016;68(4):335-41.
Natale A, Reddy VY, Monir G, Wilber DJ, Lindsay BD, McElderry HT, et al. Paroxysmal AF catheter
ablation with a contact force sensing catheter: results of the prospective, multicenter SMART-AF
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;64(7):647-56.
Neuzil P, Reddy VY, Kautzner J, Petru J, Wichterle D, Shah D, et al. Electrical Reconnection After
Pulmonary Vein Isolation Is Contingent on Contact Force During Initial Treatment Results From
the EFFICAS I Study. Circ-Arrhythmia Elec 2013;6(2):327-333.
Shah DC, Lambert H, Nakagawa H, Langenkamp A, Aeby N, Leo G. Area under the real-time
contact force curve (force-time integral) predicts radiofrequency lesion size in an in vitro
contractile model. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2010;21(9):1038-43.
Gepstein L, Evans SJ. Electroanatomical mapping of the heart: basic concepts and implications
for the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 1998;21(6):1268-78.
Olson MD, Phreaner N, Schuller JL, Nguyen DT, Katz DF, Aleong RG, et al. Effect of catheter
movement and contact during application of radiofrequency energy on ablation lesion
characteristics. J Interv Card Electr 2013;38(2):123-129.
Kumar S, Chan M, Lee J, Wong MC, Yudi M, Morton JB, et al. Catheter-tissue contact force
determines atrial electrogram characteristics before and lesion efficacy after antral pulmonary
vein isolation in humans. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2014;25(2):122-9.
Squara F, Latcu DG, Massaad Y, Mahjoub M, Bun SS, Saoudi N. Contact force and force-time
integral in atrial radiofrequency ablation predict transmurality of lesions. Europace
2014;16(5):660-7.
Shurrab M, Di Biase L, Briceno DF, Kaoutskaia A, Haj-Yahia S, Newman D, et al. Impact of Contact
Force Technology on Atrial Fibrillation Ablation: A Meta-Analysis. J Am Heart Assoc
2015;4(9):e002476.
Vivek Y. Reddy SP, Bruce D. Lindsay, Thomas McElderry, Andrea Natale, Charan Kantipudi,
Moussa Mansour, Daniel P. Melby, Dhanunjaya Lakkireddy, Tzachi Levy, David Izraeli, Chithra
Sangli, David Wilber. Relationship Between Catheter Stability and 12-Month Success After
Pulmonary Vein Isolation. A Subanalysis of the SMART-AF Trial. JACC: Clinical Electrophysiology
2016;2(6):691-700.
Hutchinson MD, Garcia FC, Mandel JE, Elkassabany N, Zado ES, Riley MP, et al. Efforts to
enhance catheter stability improve atrial fibrillation ablation outcome. Heart Rhythm
2013;10(3):347-53.
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

Goode JS, Jr., Taylor RL, Buffington CW, Klain MM, Schwartzman D. High-frequency jet
ventilation: utility in posterior left atrial catheter ablation. Heart Rhythm 2006;3(1):13-9.
Errahmouni A, Latcu DG, Bun SS, Rijo N, Dugourd C, Saoudi N. Remotely controlled steerable
sheath improves result and procedural parameters of atrial fibrillation ablation with magnetic
navigation. Europace 2015;17(7):1045-50.
Kumar S, Barbhaiya CR, Balindger S, John RM, Epstein LM, Koplan BA, et al. Better Lesion
Creation And Assessment During Catheter Ablation. J Atr Fibrillation 2015;8(3):1189.
De Ponti R, Marazzi R, Doni LA, Marazzato J, Baratto C, Salerno-Uriarte JA. Optimization of
catheter/tissue contact during pulmonary vein isolation: the impact of atrial rhythm. Europace
2018;20(2):288-294.
Haines DE, Verow AF. Observations on electrode-tissue interface temperature and effect on
electrical impedance during radiofrequency ablation of ventricular myocardium. Circulation
1990;82(3):1034-8.
Strickberger SA, Vorperian VR, Man KC, Williamson BD, Kalbfleisch SJ, Hasse C, et al. Relation
between Impedance and Endocardial Contact during Radiofrequency Catheter Ablation. Am
Heart J 1994;128(2):226-229.
Chinitz JS, Kapur S, Barbhaiya C, Kumar S, John R, Epstein LM, et al. Sites With Small Impedance
Decrease During Catheter Ablation for Atrial Fibrillation Are Associated With Recovery of
Pulmonary Vein Conduction. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2016;27(12):1390-1398.
Makimoto H, Lin T, Rillig A, Metzner A, Wohlmuth P, Arya A, et al. In vivo contact force analysis
and correlation with tissue impedance during left atrial mapping and catheter ablation of atrial
fibrillation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 2014;7(1):46-54.
Kumar S, Haqqani HM, Chan M, Lee J, Yudi M, Wong MC, et al. Predictive value of impedance
changes for real-time contact force measurements during catheter ablation of atrial arrhythmias
in humans. Heart Rhythm 2013;10(7):962-9.
Yokoyama K, Nakagawa H, Shah DC, Lambert H, Leo G, Aeby N, et al. Novel contact force sensor
incorporated in irrigated radiofrequency ablation catheter predicts lesion size and incidence of
steam pop and thrombus. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 2008;1(5):354-62.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013318; this version posted November 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure legends:
Figure 1. (A-D): A, catheter motion during a single RF lesion sampled at 60Hz is represented by the

dotted fine pink line, each dot representing a discrete sampled position. Outer blue line represents
maximal catheter excursion (the farthest point from the center of the lesion which the catheter reached
during single lesion placement) and the dashed green line represents mean catheter excursion (average
distance from the center of the lesion during lesion placement). The PVI lesion maps of unstable (B) and
stable (C) ablation cases are presented. In these panels, mean catheter excursion is represented by
sphere size, where a smaller sphere represents a more stable lesion. Note the larger spheres evident in
the unstable relative to the stable map. (D) illustration of lesion sequentiality. The posterior left atrium
is presented, with 2 lines consisting of 4 ablation lesions, numbered by their order of placement. In the
left line, lesions were placed sequentially: the distance between any 2 sequential lesions (i.e. 1 to 2, 2 to
3, 3 to 4) is always < 6mm. In the right ablation line, lesions were placed non-sequentially: lesion 2 was
placed > 6mm away from lesion 1, and lesion 3 was placed > 6mm away from lesion 2. Note that in both
cases there are no gaps in the lesion-sets.
Figure 2. (A) mean excursion by arrhythmia recurrence and (B) mean interlesion distance by arrhythmia

recurrance. *p < 0.01 by Mann-Whitney U test. Dashed line represents the mean value in the cohort.
Figure 3. Kaplan Meier arrhythmia-free survival curve, separated by (A) median maximal catheter

excursion (2.81mm) and by (B) percent of lesion pairs with > 6mm interlesion distance.
Figure 4. (A-D): typical example from a patient undergoing AF ablation. In A, the right PV lesion set is

shown. B, 2 lesions with inter-lesion distance of 5.21mm are magnified. Note the differences in spatial
instability, represented by sphere diameter. C, Larger impedance decline is noticed in lesion A relative to
B, despite lesion B being more stable. D, the nearly 2-fold impedance decline in lesion A vs. B is
accompanied by high and overlapping CF in both lesions.

13

