medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Towards a differential diagnosis of cochlear
synaptopathy and outer-hair-cell deficits in mixed
sensorineural hearing loss pathologies
Viacheslav Vasilkov1,2 and Sarah Verhulst∗1
1

Hearing Technology @ WAVES, Dept. of Information Technology,
Ghent University, 9052, Belgium
2

Medizinische Physik, Dept. of Medical Physics and Acoustics,
Oldenburg University, 26129, Germany
November 3, 2019

Short title: Hearing loss maps for synaptopathy and OHC damage
abstract (204 words), introduction (1030 words), discussion (1930 words), 9 figures, 1 table

∗ Corresponding

author: s.verhulst@ugent.be

1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Damage to the auditory periphery is more widespread than predicted
by the gold-standard clinical audiogram. Noise exposure, ototoxicity and
aging can destroy cochlear inner-hair-cell afferent synapses and result in a
degraded subcortical representation of sound while leaving hearing thresholds unaffected. Damaged afferent synapses, i.e. cochlear synaptopathy,
can be quantified using histology, but a differential diagnosis in living humans is difficult: histology cannot be applied and existing auditory evoked
potential (AEP) metrics for synaptopathy become insensitive when other
sensorineural hearing impairments co-exist (e.g., outer-hair-cell damage
associated with elevated hearing thresholds). To develop a non-invasive
diagnostic method which quantifies synaptopathy in humans and animals
with normal or elevated hearing thresholds, we employ a computational
model approach in combination with human AEP and psychoacoustics.
We propose the use of a sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) map which
comprises two relative AEP-based metrics to quantify the respective degrees of synaptopathy and OHC damage and evaluate to which degree
our predictions of AEP alterations can explain individual data-points in
recorded SNHL maps from male and female listeners with normal or elevated audiometric thresholds. We conclude that SNHL maps can offer
a more precise diagnostic tool than existing AEP methods for individual
assessment of the synaptopathy and OHC-damage aspect of sensorineural
hearing loss.

Significance Statement
Hearing loss ranks fourth in global causes for disability and risk factors include
noise exposure, ototoxicity and aging. The most vulnerable parts of the cochlea
are the inner-hair-cell afferent synapses and their damage (cochlear synaptopathy) results in a degraded subcortical representation of sound. While synaptopa2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

thy can be estimated reliably using histology, it cannot be quantified this way in
living humans. Secondly, other co-existing sensorineural hearing deficits (e.g.,
outer-hair-cell damage) can complicate a differential diagnosis. To quantify
synaptopathy in humans and animals with normal or elevated hearing thresholds, we adopt a theoretical and interdisciplinary approach. Sensitive diagnostic
metrics for synaptopathy are crucial to assess its prevalence in humans, study
its impact on sound perception and yield effective hearing restoration strategies.

Abbreviations
ABR - auditory brainstem response; AEP - auditory evoked potentials; AM amplitude modulation; AM DT - amplitude modulation detection threshold; AN
- auditory-nerve; BB - broadband; BM - basilar membrane; BW - bandwidth;
CF - characteristic frequency; CN - cochlear nucleus; EFR - envelope following
response; H/M/LSR - high/medium/low spontaneous rate fibers; HI - hearingimpaired; IC - inferior colliculus; IHC - inner-hair-cell; MD - modulation depth;
NF - noise floor; NH - normal-hearing; OAE - otoacoustic emission; OHC - outer
hair cell; peSPL - peak-equivalent sound pressure level; SAM tone - sinusoidal
amplitude-modulated tone; SNHL - sensorineural hearing loss;

Introduction
Inner-hair-cell (IHC) afferent synapses are the most vulnerable structures in the
cochlea as they can be permanently damaged after noise exposure, ageing and
ototoxicity while leaving the hair-cell bodies and mechanoreceptors intact, resulting in cochlear synaptopathy (Kujawa and Liberman, 2009; Bourien et al.,
2014; Parthasarathy and Kujawa, 2018). Since its discovery, cochlear synaptopathy has been confirmed in a range of species (mice, guinea pigs, gerbils, rats,
rhesus monkeys; Kujawa and Liberman, 2009; Furman et al., 2013; Bourien et
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

al., 2014; Möhrle et al., 2016; Suzuki et al., 2016; Valero et al., 2017) including
humans (Makary et al., 2011; Viana et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2018). However,
its prevalence in humans and role for sound perception remain unclear. Synaptopathy does not affect objective hearing-threshold measures derived from earcanal-recorded distortion-product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs; Trautwein
et al., 1996) or scalp-electrode-recorded auditory evoked potentials (AEPs; Kujawa and Liberman, 2009). By extension, the behavioral pure-tone audiogram is
expected to be insensitive to synaptopathy as objective and perceptual hearing
threshold metrics correlate well (Van der Drift et al., 1987; Boege and Janssen,
2002). The insensitivity of threshold measures to synaptopathy can explain
why synaptopathy is left undiagnosed in clinical practise and why its role in
degrading sound perception for people with normal audiograms (“Hidden Hearing Loss”; Schaette and McAlpine, 2011; Plack et al., 2014) remains unclear.
Because the onset of age-induced synaptopathy occurs prior to outer-hair-cell
(OHC) damage associated with elevated hearing thresholds (e.g., in mice or in
human post-mortem material Sergeyenko et al., 2013; Parthasarathy and Kujawa, 2018; Makary et al., 2011; Viana et al., 2015), the prevalence of synaptopathy in humans is expected to be high, especially because abnormal audiograms
are a normal consequence of the human aging process (ISO 7029).
The development of a non-invasive diagnostic test for synaptopathy in humans is both necessary and urgent, and several studies have proposed methods
on the basis of auditory brainstem response (ABR) or envelope-following response (EFR) alterations observed in animals with synaptopathy. The ABR is
a transient-evoked AEP of which the first five wave peaks reflect synchronous
aggregate neural information from ascending peripheral auditory processing centers (Picton, 2010) and reduced ABR wave-I amplitudes reflect the degree of
histological synaptopathy in animal models for stimulus levels above the hear-

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ing threshold (Kujawa and Liberman, 2009; Furman et al., 2013; Möhrle et al.,
2016). The EFR is an AEP to sustained stimulation with amplitude-modulated
sound and its magnitude reflects neuronal population coding to the stimulus
envelope. For modulation frequencies above 80 Hz, the sources of the EFR have
been assigned to subcortical neuronal populations in the auditory-nerve (AN),
cochlear nucleus (CN) and inferior colliculus (IC) (Dolphin and Mountain, 1992;
Kuwada et al., 2002; Purcell et al., 2004; Bidelman, 2015). Several studies have
shown that the EFR is compromised by synaptopathy (for modulation frequencies between 700 and 1000 Hz; Shaheen et al., 2015; Parthasarathy and Kujawa,
2018), and that its magnitude correlates to performance in a behavioral temporal envelope detection task in listeners with normal audiograms (Bharadwaj
et al., 2015). The EFR might thus be a good candidate for synaptopathy diagnosis in humans. However, a direct translation of animal-based AEP metrics
to human synaptopathy diagnostics has proven difficult because a direct quantification of synaptopathy is only possible via histology and hence impossible
in living humans. Secondly, inter-individual differences in neural backgroundnoise level, sex and head size (Trune et al., 1988; Mitchell et al., 1989; Hickox et
al., 2017) can confound the interpretation of AEP amplitudes in terms of hearing status and require differential AEP metrics (e.g., Bharadwaj et al., 2015;
Verhulst et al., 2016; Guest et al., 2018; Bramhall et al., 2019). Lastly, AEP
metrics are not only compromised by synaptopathy, OHC damage is also known
to affect the AEP (e.g., Gorga et al., 1985; Herdman and Stapells, 2003; Chen
et al., 2007; Garrett and Verhulst, 2019). This renders any interpretation of
AEP amplitudes in terms of synaptopathy impossible without controlling for
the degree of OHC damage as well.
As OHC damage is common in humans, and existing AEP-based metrics for
synaptopathy assessment have so far mostly focused on animals and humans

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

with normal hearing thresholds, it is crucial to understand to which degree
co-existing OHC damage affects the AEP metrics and compromises their diagnostic sensitivity. To this end, this study adopts an interdisciplinary approach
which combines computational modeling with human AEP recordings to study
how synaptopathy and OHC damage affect AEP metrics commonly used in
synaptopathy studies. On the basis of these results, we propose the use of
a sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) map which comprises two relative AEP
metrics to maximally separate and quantify the synaptopathy aspect of hearing
loss. Modeling can surpass experimental limitations in human studies and offers
a means to transfer insight from animal histology to human applications with
a number of advantages: (i) the respective impact of each impairment (OHC
and different AN fiber types) on the AEP can be studied separately and in
combination, which is difficult to establish experimentally as this would require
different cochlear damage manipulations in a single animal. (ii) Models can
connect changes in single-unit physiology to its alteration in population AEP
responses directly, which is experimentally challenging. Lastly (iii), because
human models of cochlear mechanics can be adopted to simulate SNHL and
AEPs, the study results can directly be applied to humans and hence avoid
experimental inter-species AEP differences (Hickox et al., 2017). We first adopt
a modelling approach to study how different types of SNHL affect the AEP
to basic stimuli applied in synaptopathy studies, after which we evaluate how
AEPs can be used to diagnose synaptopathy in people with normal or abnormal
audiograms. We focus this study on AEP metrics used in clinical practice (the
ABR) and those adopted in several synaptopathy studies in subjects/animals
with normal hearing sensitivity (the EFR; Bharadwaj et al., 2015; Shaheen et
al., 2015; Guest et al., 2018; Parthasarathy and Kujawa, 2018). This approach
maximizes the clinical uptake of our methods, while allowing for a comparison

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

of our model predictions with existing animal synaptopathy data and human
reference recordings.

Materials and Methods
Computational model of the human auditory periphery.
The auditory periphery model (Fig.1) we adopted for this study accurately captures human aspects of cochlear filter tuning, the level-dependence of ABR and
EFR responses, and can simulate hearing impairments related to OHC damage and synaptopathy (Verhulst et al., 2018, model implementation v1.2). The
model simulates how the ascending auditory pathway processes acoustic input,
and includes middle-ear filtering, a nonlinear transmission-line representation of
human cochlear mechanics (Verhulst et al., 2012; Altoè et al., 2014), a biophysical model of the IHC-AN complex (Altoè et al., 2018), as well as a phenomenological description of ventral cochlear nucleus (CN) and inferior colliculus (IC)
neurons (Nelson and Carney, 2004). The model is suited for the purpose of
this study as it reasonably captures how OHC damage and synaptopathy affect
human ABRs and EFRs for different sound intensities (Verhulst et al., 2016,
2018). Additionally, because the model includes a transmission-line description
of the cochlear mechanics (Zweig, 1991; Altoè et al., 2014), it simulates human
otoacoustic emissions (OAEs), which were used to calibrate the tuning characteristics of the simulated cochlear filters across the cochlear partition (Shera et
al., 2010; Verhulst et al., 2012).

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Simulating outer-hair-cell damage
The adopted cochlear mechanics model allows for a straightforward implementation of frequency-specific OHC damage (Verhulst et al., 2016, 2018) caused
by damaged mechano-receptors or presbycusis associated with wider cochlear
filters and reduced hearing sensitivity. OHC damage was simulated by reducing
cochlear filter gain relative to the models’ normal-hearing filter gain (in dB HL)
at low stimulus levels and at characteristic frequencies (CFs) corresponding to
the audiometric testing frequencies. The relationship between cochlear filter
gain and the value of the double-pole of the cochlear admittance of the model
is described in Verhulst et al. (2016) and Fig. 2a (left) shows examples of the
different sloping high-frequency cochlear gain loss profiles considered here. In
analogy to the behavioral audiogram, the models’ detection sensitivity is reduced by an amount corresponding to the applied dB HL filter gain reduction.
We limited our simulations to a range of common sloping high-frequency gain
loss profiles characterized by the dB HL loss difference between 1 and 4-kHz
and included one sloping profile with a normal gain up to 4-kHz, but a 35 dB
HL loss at 8-kHz to simulate extended high-frequency (EHF) hearing loss.
The cochlear gain loss profiles depicted in Fig. 2a only indirectly correspond
to human audiograms as changes in behavioral detection thresholds were not
simulated. However, a direct comparison between the OHC integrity of the
model and that of the study participants is possible through DPOAE thresholds and their alterations as a function of the cochlear gain loss profile (models)
or audiogram (humans). Reference DPOAEs were recorded from study participants with audiograms shown in Fig. 2b,c (left) who were separated into two
groups (normal-hearing: NH and hearing-impaired: HI) on the basis of a better (Fig. 2b) or worse than 20 dB HL (Fig. 2c) 4-kHz audiometric threshold.
DPOAE thresholds were derived from recorded DPOAE level series for an f2 of

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4 kHz and a f2 /f1 ratio of 1.2. L2 levels ranged in 6-dB steps between 24-66
dB for NH and 30-72 dB for HI participants and L1 levels were set according
to the L1 =44 + 0.45 L2 level paradigm (Neely et al., 2005). DPOAE thresholds (Fig. 2b,c; right) were determined as the L2 level at which a cubic fitting
function through the data-points reached a level of -25dB SPL (human; Boege
and Janssen, 2002) or 0 dB SPL (model). Additional details on the human
experimental procedures and fitting function are given in Verhulst et al. (2016).
The right panel of Fig. 2a depicts simulated DPOAE threshold shifts along
with supra-threshold DPOAE level reductions (L2 of 70 dB) relative to the NH
model, and shows that both simulated DPOAE thresholds and levels decrease
by up to 40 dB as the cochlear gain loss amount increases. Human DPOAE
thresholds and level differences were computed relatively to the strongest measured DPOAE, and fell within the range of simulated DPOAE shifts. We hence
conclude that the simulated cochlear gain loss profiles capture a variety of OHC
deficits and associated DPOAE reductions which corroborates DPOAE observations in human subjects with audiograms in Figs. 2b&c.
Simulating cochlear synaptopathy
Cochlear synaptopathy was modeled by selectively reducing the number of AN
fibers of different types that synapse onto single IHC at each simulated tonotopic location. The NH model had 19 fibers with different spontaneous rates
synapsing onto each IHC: 3 low (LSR), 3 medium (MSR) and 13 high (HSR)
fibers, following the empirical ratio observed in cats (Liberman, 1978). Four
synaptopathy profiles were implemented by removing the following fiber types
across the tonotopic axis: (i) all LSR fibers (HI synapt0L,3M,13H ), (ii) all LSR
and MSR fibers (HI synapt0L,0M,13H ), (iii) all LSR, MSR and 50 % of the HSR
fibers (HI synapt0L,0M,07H ), and (iv) all LSR, MSR and 80 % of the HSR fibers
(HI synapt0L,0M,03H ). We limited our simulations to uniform CF-independent
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

synaptopathy profiles akin to the assumption of using a broadband stimulus to
evoke cochlear synaptopathy. Aside from synaptopathy, no other IHC-specific
dysfunctions were simulated as synaptopathy was shown to occur without destroying the sensory cells in several studies (Kujawa and Liberman, 2009; Lin
et al., 2011; Furman et al., 2013; Shaheen et al., 2015).
Simulating evoked potentials
Capturing a variety of AN fiber types and their respective adaptation properties
is essential for the simulation of EFRs to sustained amplitude-modulated stimuli
(Verhulst et al., 2018). To this end, we adopted an IHC-AN synapse model
which realistically captures IHC saturation and AN firing rate properties in
response to pure tones and sinusoidally amplitude-modulated (SAM) tones of
increasing stimulus intensity (Altoè et al., 2018). At each tonotopic location,
instantaneous firing rates from 19 AN fibers of three SR types which synapse
onto a single IHC were summed and projected to a single CN unit of the same
CF. The postsynaptic activity of a single CN unit served as an input to a single
IC unit. A same-frequency inhibition and excitation model for CN and IC units
which captures the modulation filtering and onset enhancement characteristics
of auditory brainstem and midbrain neurons was adopted (Nelson and Carney,
2004). Population responses were simulated by adding up activity across a
tonotopic array of 401 IHC-AN/CN/IC units with CFs between 112 Hz and 12
kHz (distributed according to the frequency-position map Greenwood, 1990) at
three processing stages: the AN (after summing up 19 AN fibers across each IHC
with different CFs) which yields the W-I response in Fig. 1, and the CN and IC
model stages yielding the W-III and W-V response respectively. Each simulated
ABR wave peak (i.e., wave-I, AN activity; wave-III, CN activity; wave-V, IC
activity) was scaled in amplitude according to NH human reference ABR data
(Table 8-1 in Picton, 2010; Verhulst et al., 2018) and ABR waves were treated
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

separately as their peaks did not overlap in time. For EFR simulations, the
scaled population responses from the AN, CN and IC stage were added up to
capture the different subcortical sources that contribute to the EFR (Dolphin
and Mountain, 1992; Kuwada et al., 2002).

Evoked potential recordings and data analysis
AEPs were recorded from a total of 46 participants with audiometrically normalhearing (NH; n=25, age: 25.9 ± 4.3, 16 females) and hearing-impaired (HI;
n=21, age: 66.2 ± 7.6, 9 females) thresholds. HI listeners were recruited on
the basis of a sloping high-frequency audiogram that exceeded 20 dB HL at
4-kHz. For visual clarity, Figure 2b,c shows individual audiograms of a subset
of participants for whom ABRs, EFRs, DPOAEs and psychoacoustic thresholds
were collected within one of two experimental sessions. The audiograms were
devised in NH (Fig. 2b, n=11, age: 26.7 ± 3.9, 7 females) and HI (Fig. 2c,
losses > 20 dB HL, n=9, age: 70.9 ± 5.5, 3 females) groups. The audiometric
thresholds, gender and ages of all listeners who participated in the ABR and
EFR experiments within both PT and BB sessions (i.e., with EFRs evoked by
SAM pure tone and broadband noise, respectively), but not necessarily in the
psychoacoustic experiment, are listed in Table I. Participants received written
and oral information about the experiments, and protocols were approved by
the ethics commission of Oldenburg University. Subjects volunteered for the
study, gave a written informed consent, and were paid for their participation.
All stimuli were digitized with a sampling rate of 48 kHz for the AEP study
and of 100 kHz for the model simulations. Both EFRs and ABRs were recorded
in a single 1.5 hr recording session using a 32-channel EEG amplifier (BioSemi)
with a sampling rate of 16384 Hz and a custom-built triggerbox. The electrodes were positioned equidistantly with center at Cz. Common-mode-sense

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

and driven-right-leg (CMS/DRL) electrodes were placed on top of the head near
Cz and two reference electrodes were placed on the earlobes. The Cz-channel
potentials were re-referenced to the mean of the two earlobe electrode potentials
to yield the AEP waveform. The Raw recordings are part of the data collection
reported in Verhulst et al. (2016); Garrett and Verhulst (2019), which provide
further detail on the recording configuration.
ABRs were recorded to 7000 repetitions of a 80-µs condensation click presented monaurally with a rate of 33.3 Hz using a uniformly distributed 10%
jitter on the recording window duration. Four stimulus levels were considered:
70, 80, 90, and 100 dB peSPL. ABR recordings were bandpass filtered between
200 Hz and 1.5 kHz, epoched within a -5 to 20 ms window relative to the
stimulus onset, baseline corrected, epoch rejected (with 40 µV threshold) and
averaged using MATLAB. For each participant and stimulus condition, average
ABR waveforms were estimated using a bootstrap procedure with 200 averages
of 6000 randomly chosen epochs per estimate. ABR wave-V amplitudes [in µV]
were determined as the trough-to-peak difference between the global maximum
(for 70 dB peSPL stimulus, within the [4-7.5] or [5-10] ms window for NH or
HI listeners, respectively) and the waveform minimum which preceded the peak
within 3 ms (Picton, 2010) or 4 ms window in NH and HI listeners, respectively).
The longer window for HI listeners was applied to account for potentially less
synchronized responses with increased peak latencies in this test group. This
procedure was implemented as an automatic procedure and labeled peaks and
troughs of the IV-V complex were visually inspected afterwards. No changes
were made to automatically selected peaks and troughs after visual inspection
(although HI subject #23 showed strong fluctuations before and after stimulus
onset which could have affected the estimated ABR amplitudes). The standard
deviation for ABR amplitudes was calculated using the propagation of error

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

method based on the combination of deviations for the ABR wave-V maximum
and minimum stemming from the 200 bootstrapped average waveforms.
EFRs were recorded in response to monaurally presented 600-ms long sinusoidally amplitude-modulated stimuli that were followed by a uniformly distributed random silence jitter (>90 and <110 ms; mean = 100 ms). The modulation depth was 0 dB re 100% modulation and the modulation-frequency was
120 Hz. Two carrier types were considered in the study: (i) a 4-kHz pure tone
(PT condition; applied to 11 NH and 9 HI participants from the cohort; Fig. 2
b,c) and (ii) a white noise carrier with a 20-20000 Hz bandwidth (broadband
(BB) condition, applied to 23 NH and 15 HI participants). Stimuli were ramped
with a 5% tapered cosine (Tukey) window. Stimulus levels were 70 and 75 dB
SPL for the PT and BB conditions, respectively. 800 stimulus repetitions (i.e.,
400 of each polarity) were presented for the PT condition and 600 stimulus
repetitions were presented for the BB condition. The earlobe-referenced EFR
recordings were visually inspected to ensure that the Cz channel data was successfully recorded and eyeblink-artifacts were removed (further preprocessing
details can be found in Garrett and Verhulst, 2019). The artifact-free data
were 60-Hz high-pass and 650-Hz low-pass filtered using a 4th order IIR Butterworth filter, epoched in 600-ms windows following stimulus onset, and baseline
corrected. The EFR data were pre-processed using Python and MNE-Python
scripts (Gramfort et al., 2013, 2014).
Average time-domain waveforms and EFR magnitudes as well as standard
deviations and noise-floor estimates were obtained by implementing a bootstrapping method (Zhu et al., 2013) in MATLAB. Magnitude spectra (in µV)
were calculated from applying the fast (discrete) Fourier transform to the timedomain response of each bootstrapped average. The noise floor was calculated
from 1000 averages of the total number of randomly sampled epochs (available

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

after artifact rejection) in which half of the randomly drawn epochs were rotated in phase by 180◦ . Mean EFR magnitude and standard deviations were
computed based on the magnitude spectra for 200 averages of randomly sampled epochs with replacement. Figure 3a shows an example of an averaged
EFR magnitude spectrum and corresponding noise floor estimate for a NH listener in the cohort. For each average, spectral peaks (Fn ) at the stimulus
modulation frequency (f0 =120 Hz) and harmonics (f(k−1) =k*f0 , k=[1..5 ]) were
identified, and corrected for by subtracting the respective estimated noise-floor
value (NFn ). The EFR magnitude was obtained after performing an inverse
fast (discrete) Fourier transformation which included the noise-floor corrected
peaks (Fn − NFn ) and their corresponding phase angle values (θn ) to yield a
time-domain signal which only contains energy at the modulation frequencies
and harmonics. Energy at other frequencies were removed. The EFR magnitude was defined as half the peak-to-peak amplitude of the reconstructed time
domain-signal waveform:

peak-to-peak

1
N

EFRPtN =

NP
−1
n=0

2

(Fn − NFn ) e

iθn


;
(1)

if n 6=

kf0
N, then Fn , NFn = 0, for k = [1..5],
fs

where N corresponds to the length of the magnitude spectrum, and fs is the
sampling rate.
The EFR magnitude definition in Eq.1 differs from how existing studies
have quantified it. Common approaches include using the magnitude of f0 (e.g.,
Kuwada et al., 1986, 2002; Dolphin and Mountain, 1992; Purcell et al., 2004;
Dimitrijevic et al., 2016; Shaheen et al., 2015; Bharadwaj et al., 2015; Guest

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

et al., 2018), the signal-to-noise ratio of the f0 (i.e., a relative EFR metric;
van der Reijden et al., 2004; Luts et al., 2006; Garrett and Verhulst, 2019), or
the phase-locking value to f0 (Zhu et al., 2013; Bharadwaj et al., 2015; Shaheen
et al., 2015).
Figure 3b shows the benefit of using a Fourier analysis approach to reconstruct the recorded EFR waveform (gray) using Eq.1 for all available harmonics
(f0 -f4 ; dark-blue) against reconstructing the waveform from the f0 magnitude
peak (light blue). Figure 3c shows a magnification of both recorded and reconstructed EFRs, and shows that the proposed signal reconstruction method captures the overall amplitude of the response, as well as its response peaks which
are much sharper than the stimulus envelope. Aside from improved signalreconstruction quality, the EFRPtN metric in Eq.1 is a relative metric which
subtracts the individual noise floor from the spectral peaks to maintain the
purely stimulus-driven response. This approach minimizes how inter-individual
confounds such as head size, sex, and neuro-electrical noise can affect AEP magnitudes (Trune et al., 1988; Mitchell et al., 1989) and may improve the sensitivity
of the metric in quantifying individual differences in synaptopathy.

Behavioral AM detection experiment
A subset of subjects with audiograms depicted in Fig. 2b,c also participated in
a behavioral experiment which assessed their amplitude-modulation detection
threshold (AM DT, i.e. the minimum AM depth for which an AM tone can
be differentiated from a pure tone of the same level). Insert ER-2 headphones
(Eytmotic) connected to a TDT-HB7 (Tucker-Davis) and Fireface UCX Soundcard (RME) were used for sound delivery. 500-ms long sinusoidally amplitudemodulated (100-Hz) 4-kHz pure-tones or pure-tones of 70 dB SPL were presented (with inter-stimulus intervals of 500 ms) to the same ear as tested in the

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

AEP study. An alternative-forced choice (AFC) procedure with a 1-up-2-down
protocol was followed to determine the AM DT (Levitt, 1971), and the threshold was calculated as the mean over the last six reversals at the smallest step
size (i.e., 1 dB). The initial modulation depth (MD) was 50% (i.e. -6 dB re
100% modulation) and varied adaptively with step-sizes of 10, 5, 3, 1 dB across
a single trial. To remove loudness cues between the reference pure-tone and AM
stimuli in the AFC task, the rms levels of the reference and AM stimuli were
normalized for different MDs. AM DTs were determined in one practice trial
and in three trial repetitions from which the average AM DT and standard deviation was computed. It should be noted that the modulation frequency of the
AM detection task was 100 Hz and not 120 Hz as used for the AEP recordings.
We only realized after the start of the behavioral study that adopting a modulation frequency with a multiple of 50-Hz might be prone to line-noise artifacts
in the AEP recordings. We avoided this potential confound by increasing the
modulation frequency of the AEP stimuli to 120 Hz, and motivate that this
difference is not expected to yield substantial differences in the interpretation of
results. EFRs to 100/120-Hz SAM tones were both shown to be consistent with
sources stemming from the IC or more peripheral generators based on an EFR
group delay analysis (Kuwada et al., 2002; Purcell et al., 2004). Secondly, the
sidebands of 100/120-Hz SAM tones were shown to fall within a single perceptual auditory filter at 4 kHz (i.e., equivalent rectangular bandwidth of 457 Hz;
Glasberg and Moore (1990); resulting in unresolved components; Kohlrausch et
al., 2000).

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Results
EFR magnitude and its relationship to behavioral AM detection
We use EFR magnitudes as a marker which is sensitive to cochlear synaptopathy based on results from animal studies which related EFR magnitudes
to histologically quantified synaptopathy (Shaheen et al., 2015; Parthasarathy
and Kujawa, 2018), we adopt the EFRPtN metric for human recordings (Eq.1)
which removes the individual noise-floors and regards all available harmonics to
maximize signal-to-noise ratio (Fig. 3). First, we tested whether the proposed
EFRPtN marker of synaptopathy maintained a relationship to behavioral temporal envelope encoding sensitivity as characterized by the amplitude-modulation
detection threshold. An earlier study showed that the EFR magnitude (defined using f0 ) predicted the AM detection threshold in listeners with normal
audiograms, and we repeated this experiment for a subset of listeners to assess
whether our EFR marker remains predictive of a behavioral marker of temporal
envelope encoding in the same listeners.
The relationship between AM DTs (in dB re 100% modulation) and different
EFR metrics was investigated in Fig. 4 for f0 -based EFR magnitudes without
(panel a) or with noise-floor correction (panel b), or for EFRPtN magnitudes
based on Eq.1 (panel c). Where the f0 -based EFR magnitude did not predict
performance in the AM DT task (Pearson correlation R=-0.19, p=0.48, n=17),
the noise-floor correction in the (f0 -NF0 )-based EFR magnitude improved the
sensitivity of the relationship (Pearson’s R=-0.4, p=0.12, n=17). This result
corroborates the initially reported relationship between the EFR (for -4 dB
modulated stimulus) and the AM DT in NH listeners (Bharadwaj et al., 2015).
Moreover, after applying the proposed EFRPtN metric (Fig. 4c), a stronger sig-

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

nificant correlation (Pearson’s R=-0.57, p=0.017, n=17) was observed between
AM DTs and the EFRPtN metric. Therefore, approximating the temporal envelope of the time-domain EFR signal by adding up the f0 and available harmonics can predict AM DTs in NH and HI listeners and the EFRPtN can hence be
considered as a relative and perceptually relevant neural marker of subcortical
temporal envelope encoding (for comparable stimuli presented over the same
setup).

EFR sensitivity to sensorineural hearing loss
Because it is presently not clear whether degraded EFRPtN magnitudes solely reflect synaptopathy or whether OHC damage also plays a role, we simulated their
respective contribution to the EFR. Figures 5a,b show simulated EFRPtN,PT and
EFRPtN,BB magnitudes to a 120-Hz SAM stimulus with a 4-kHz tone or broadband white noise carrier, respectively, for different configurations of synaptopathy (different symbols) and cochlear gain loss (along the x-axis). The simulated
cochlear gain loss profiles correspond to those in Fig. 2a and simulated EFR
magnitudes for the reference NH model (no synaptopathy and no cochlear gain
loss) are marked by the green filled circle in Fig.5a,b. In line with experimental
data from animal synaptopathy studies (Shaheen et al., 2015; Parthasarathy and
Kujawa, 2018), the simulations show that increasing the degree of synaptopathy
resulted in smaller EFR magnitudes. In the model, these EFRPtN reductions
resulted from fewer intact IHC-AN synapses which yielded a reduced input to
the CN and IC processing stages involved in the EFR generation. A loss of all
simulated LSR (15% of the AN population) and MSR (15% of the AN population) fibers (HI synapt0L,0M,13H profile) yielded a 20% reduction of the NH
EFRPtN,PT and a 22% reduction of the NH EFRPtN,BB . An additional loss of
50% of the HSR fibers (HI synapt0L,0M,07H ) reduced the EFRPtN,PT magnitude

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

by an additional 37% and EFRPtN,BB by 36%, showing that HSR AN fibers are
more important for determining the EFRPtN magnitude than LSR and MSR AN
fiber types. At the same time, and in agreement with experimental studies (Kale
and Heinz, 2010; Dimitrijevic et al., 2016), simulated cochlear gain loss had an
opposite effect and increased the EFRPtN,PT by 17% and EFRPtN,BB by 45% for
the simulated audiometric profiles with low-to-moderate high-frequency sloping
loss. The contribution from different tonotopic locations along the cochlear partition (i.e., as characterized by the AN fibers’ CF) to the EFR is important to
understand this result.
Figure 6 illustrates how different CFs of simulated cochlear excitation patterns to the PT or BB SAM stimulus (panel a) contribute to AM encoding in
the IC (panel b) for simulated normal-hearing (dark-blue) or high-frequency
cochlear gain loss (dark-red) and different synaptopathy profiles (different symbols). In agreement with several studies (Encina-Llamas et al., 2019; Shaheen et
al., 2015; Joris and Yin, 1992), the model predicts that the relative contribution
of off-CF fibers (approximately with CFs> 6 kHz for the 70-dB PT stimulus) is
greater than that of on-CF fibers for the NH EFR. On-CF HSR fibers have the
largest input (see Fig. 6a) and hence operate close to the saturated region of
the AN rate-level function (Liberman, 1978; Joris and Yin, 1992). Differently,
off-CF HSR fibers receive attenuated cochlear excitation input and operate in
the non-saturated region of the rate-level curve, which causes HSR fibers to
capture AM information in the low-level tails of the cochlear excitation pattern. Thus, even though LSR and MSR fibers contribute considerably to on-CF
AM sensitivity, their contribution to the overall EFRPtN,PT magnitude (which
reflects AM information across CF) was only in the order of 20% (Fig. 5a,
synapt0L,0M,13H ). Due to the prominent contribution of HSR fibers to the EFR
magnitude, removing a 50% of available HSR fibers (synapt0L,0M,7H ) reduced

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the EFR magnitude strongly and, resulted in halving the simulated EFRPtN,PT
(Fig. 5a).
Simulated cochlear gain loss mostly increased AM contributions from the
on-CF region and yielded a greater relative contribution of on-CF versus offCF fibers than observed for the NH profile (Fig. 6b,d; compare red and blue
PT traces). The enhanced on-CF AM encoding resulted from a reduced and
linearized cochlear input to the IHC/AN complex which caused AN fibers to
operate in a more sensitive range for AM encoding at fixed stimulation levels (see Fig. 6c,d; and experimental observations in Joris and Yin, 1992; Kale
and Heinz, 2010). The BB SAM excitation pattern was broader than the PT
SAM pattern and hence cochlear gain loss resulted in stronger EFR enhancement for the BB than PT carrier (compare Fig. 5b and Fig. 5a). Consequently,
for the same degree of cochlear synaptopathy, Fig. 5a,b shows that both simulated EFRPtN,PT and EFRPtN,BB magnitudes increased when greater degrees of
high-frequency cochlear gain loss were introduced. The EFR enhancement associated with cochlear gain loss became smaller for larger degrees of synaptopathy
(Fig. 5a,b; compare circles and diamonds) due to the overall smaller number of
AN fibers contributing to the EFR (Fig. 6b,d). Therefore, cochlear gain loss
can equalize EFRPtN magnitudes towards NH values when a combination of
impairments is present (e.g., compare the green circle with red upward triangles
in Fig. 5a or red downward triangles in Fig. 5b). The observed equalization is
particularly important for quantifying selective LSR/MSR fiber synaptopathy,
whose effect on the EFR magnitude can be fully compensated by the co-existing
OHC dysfunction.
Human reference EFRPtN,PT and EFRPtN,BB magnitudes are plotted as a
function of the audiometric hearing threshold in Fig. 5d,e for listeners with
normal (blue gradient) and hearing-impaired (red gradient) audiograms. For

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the EFRPtN,PT recordings (Fig. 5d, filled symbols), the hearing threshold at 4
kHz was reported, which corresponds to the carrier frequency of the SAM tone,
whereas for the EFRPtN,BB results, the audiometric threshold average across the
standard frequency range (PTA; see also Table 1.) was reported (Fig. 5e, open
symbols). Reference EFR magnitudes were generally smaller for older HI (triangles) than for young NH (circles) participants for both stimulus paradigms: a
two-sample T-test (p=0.022, passing the Anderson- Darling test for the normaldistribution assumption) was applied to test the EFRPtN,PT samples and a twosided Wilcoxon rank test (p=0.0001) was used to test the EFRPtN,BB samples.
At the same time, we did not observe a consistent EFR decrement as the PTA
increased from 10 to 40 dB HL for HI listeners (open triangles). Instead, we
observed increased EFR magnitudes which approached NH values in line with
our model predictions and with AN (Kale and Heinz, 2010) and EFR (Dimitrijevic et al., 2016) studies showing increased envelope coding for subjects
with elevated ABR or audiometric hearing thresholds, respectively. A correlation analysis showed a positive non-significant trend (Fig. 5e; RBB,HI =0.503,
p=0.056, N=15) for recorded HI EFRPtN,BB (for which the model predicted
stronger OHC-loss-induced magnitude enhancement; Fig. 5b). Lastly, it should
be noted that NH listeners with elevated audiometric thresholds (see PTA >
10; Fig. 5e, circles) also had strong EFR magnitudes which can degrade with
age for similar PTA values (e.g. compare NH subject #20 and NH #23 with
the most elevated PTA; Fig. 5e and different age; Table 1.)

ABR sensitivity to sensorineural hearing loss
The ABR wave-I (1-2 ms after transient sound onset) is generated near the
VIII−th nerve (Picton, 2010) and its strength depends on the available AN fiber
population (Kujawa and Liberman, 2009). However, wave-I is small in humans

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

and might yield unreliable measurements for the vertex electrode configuration
(Plack et al., 2016; Mehraei et al., 2016; Garrett and Verhulst, 2019). For this
reason, we focus on how sensorineural hearing loss affects the ABR wave-V,
which can be recorded robustly in NH and HI humans (Gorga et al., 1985;
Verhulst et al., 2016; Madsen et al., 2018; Garrett and Verhulst, 2019). The
ABR wave-V for NH listeners occurs 5-7 ms after sound onset and reflects the
ascending input activity to the IC (Møller and Burgess, 1986; Melcher and
Kiang, 1996; Picton, 2010; Bidelman, 2015). By focusing on the ABR wave-V,
we thus assume that any peripheral hearing impairment affecting the WaveI would propagate along the ascending auditory pathways and influence the
ABR wave-V as well. Fig. 5c depicts simulated W-V amplitudes to a 70-dBpeSPL click for the considered hearing loss profiles (Fig. 2a) and shows that both
cochlear gain loss and synaptopathy can cause ABR amplitude reductions. This
result corroborates several synaptopathy studies which report degraded suprathreshold compound action potential and ABR wave-I amplitudes (Kujawa and
Liberman, 2009; Furman et al., 2013; Sergeyenko et al., 2013; Bourien et al.,
2014; Kujawa and Liberman, 2015; Valero et al., 2017). Additionally, selective
OHC damage induced by styrene exposure was shown to reduce the compound
action potential amplitude for stimulation levels below 90 dB SPL (Chen et
al., 2008), in line with our reduced ABR wave-V amplitudes for cochlear gain
loss. The simulations in Fig. 5b clearly show the cumulative and degrading
effect synaptopathy (≈80% reduction for simulated synaptopathy profiles) and
cochlear gain loss (≈55% reduction for simulated audiograms) have on the ABR
amplitude. Although we consider wave-V amplitudes in Fig.5c, reductions of the
same order (≈80% and ≈50% for simulated synaptopathy and cochlear gain loss
profiles) were also observed for the simulated ABR wave-I amplitudes (Fig.7a),
and the results of this study can hence be translated to recorded ABR wave-I

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

amplitudes of sufficient signal quality.
To better understand how SNHL affects the ABR generators, Fig. 6c shows
how simulated IC peak activity in different CF units contribute to the ABR.
LSR/MSR fiber loss (i.e., HI synapt0L,0M,13H ) mostly affected those CF regions
which contributed strongly to the ABR in the NH model. A loss of HSR fibers
(i.e., HI synapt0L,0M,07H ) resulted in a substantial across-CF reduction in the
simulated IC response, as earlier observed for the simulated EFRs. Cochlear
gain loss reduced the contribution from all fiber types in the CF regions affected by the loss (Fig. 6c). ABR amplitudes can be reduced similarly by
synaptopathy or OHC damage (Fig. 5c), but Fig. 6c shows that different SNHL
aspects affect different CF regions. Simulated uniform across-CF synaptopathy
mostly reduced the 2-5 kHz frequency contribution to the ABR because of the
generally-larger IC response in this range due to the middle-ear filter properties.
Differently, simulated high-frequency cochlear gain loss had a strong effect on
reducing the high-frequency CF contributions.
Recorded ABR wave-V amplitudes to a 70-dB peSPL condensation click are
plotted as a function of the audiometric hearing threshold in Fig. 5f: the 4 kHz
threshold was used for ABRs recorded in the same session as the EFRPtN,PT
(Fig. 5d, filled symbols) and the pure-tone average was used for ABRs recorded
in the EFRPtN,BB session (open symbols). ABR W-V amplitudes were significantly greater for NH subjects than for HI subjects (open symbols: two-sample
T-test, p=0.000001, passing the Anderson-Darling test for normality; filled symbols: two-sided Wilcoxon rank test, p=0.0008), and fell in range with simulated
amplitudes for the different SNHL profiles.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Isolating cochlear gain loss from evoked potentials
Because the simulations in Fig. 5a,b showed that both cochlear gain loss and
synaptopathy affect simulated ABR and EFRs, another approach is required
to adopt AEPs as a sensitive diagnostic tool for synaptopathy when potential
OHC damage is also present. Specifically, if EFR magnitudes can be considered
together with a metric which is only sensitive to OHC damage in the individual
listener, the synaptopathy and OHC aspects of SNHL can be separated. To this
end, we first introduce an AEP ratio which is sensitive to supra-threshold OHC
impairment and insensitive to synaptopathy:

20log10

ABRW −V
EF RP


[dB]

(2)

No noise-floor correction was applied to yield the EFRP in the ratio, as the
individual noise floor is expected to contribute similarly to both the EFR and
ABR metrics in the same recording session. The proposed ratio and its sensitivity to OHC damage is based on the following arguments: (i) Synaptopathy was
in Figs. 5a,b shown to reduce the EFR and ABR amplitudes similarly, which
means that its influence will not affect the ratio. As can be observed from the
simulations in Fig. 8 (a,b,c), synaptopathy only has a minor influence on the
ratio and the observed ratio decrements are mainly caused by cochlear gain loss.
(ii) any non-hearing-related individual characteristics contributing to both the
EFR and ABR (e.g., sex, head size, noise floor) are canceled in the ratio. Lastly,
(iii), any compensatory gain mechanism which could yield normal wave-V amplitudes for reduced wave-I amplitudes after AN fiber reduction (e.g., homeostatic
gain changes; Schaette and McAlpine, 2011; Chambers et al., 2016; Möhrle et
al., 2016), would affect both the EFR and ABR wave-V generators which stem
from similar stages of the auditory system (Melcher and Kiang, 1996; Picton,
2010; Bidelman, 2015) and would hence cancel out in the ratio.
24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The cochlear gain loss degree estimated using the ABRW-V /EFRP ratio
refers to supra-threshold gain loss associated with OHC damage and targets
similar cochlear frequency regions as the adopted supra-threshold EFRPtN metric for synaptopathy. The ratio estimates gain loss using a 70-75 dB stimulus,
hence the estimated OHC loss is not necessarily identical to the loss estimated
using DPOAE, ABR, or behavioral hearing threshold metrics. While OHC
damage can reduce BM vibration across the entire stimulus level range, BM
response reductions are different at low and high stimulus intensities (e.g. see
input-output function slope; Ruggero and Rich, 1991). It is also expected that
the ABRW-V /EFRP ratio is sensitive to the shape of the audiogram due to the
broad tonotopic range which contributes to AEPs for high SPLs. The simulations in Fig.8a illustrate this point by showing that steeper high-frequency
cochlear gain loss slopes can yield different ABR W-V/EFR ratios even though
the audiometric thresholds at 4-kHz (corresponding to the EFRPT stimulus)
were matched (e.g. 0 dB at 4 kHz and 35 dB at 8 kHz; compare dashed orange
vs solid dark blue).
From the supra-threshold gain perspective, we further explored the theoretical relationship (Fig.8b) between the ABRW-V /EFRP ratio and the simulated
supra-threshold DPOAE magnitude shift (L2 = 70 dB SPL corresponding to
the SAM PT stimulus intensity) for different cochlear gain loss configurations
and compared our simulations against recorded data (Fig.8e, L2 = 66 dB, i.e.
max L2 for both NH and HI participants). As predicted, smaller ratios were
obtained for larger degrees of sloping cochlear gain loss, although the relationship was not linear for the model (Fig.8b). Applying the ABRW-V /EFRP,PT
ratio to the study participants (Fig. 8e) yielded a negative trend and, overall,
the experimental values were in range with the simulated ABR/EFR ratio and
supra-threshold DPOAE magnitudes.

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Lastly, to better match the cochlear frequency regions targeted by the ABR
and EFR stimuli in the ratio, we also calculated the ABR/EFR ratio from the
EFRP,BB which was evoked by SAM broadband noise and had a tonotopic contribution comparable to that evoked by the click (compare Fig.6c and Fig.6d). In
agreement with the theoretical prediction, both simulated (Fig.8c) and recorded
(Fig.8f) ABRW-V /EFRP,BB ratios decreased as audiometric threshold increased,
showing a significant negative trend for the human data. Low-frequency audiometric loss did not substantially influence the EFRs and ABRs for the considered
stimulus parameters (see reduced tonotopic contribution for low CFs; Fig.6c,d),
while the PTA metric did capture these low-frequency hearing sensitivity differences. This mismatch between the PTA and estimated OHC loss from AEPs
might explain the observed variability across ABRW-V /EFRP,BB ratios for HI
listeners with similar PTAs (e.g. compare ratios for HI #2, 10, 13 and for HI
#1, 5 with the similar PTA ≈ 20 dB, but elevated or normal low-frequency
audiometric thresholds, respectively; Fig.8f and see Table I for across-frequency
audiometric thresholds).

A Sensorineural Hearing Loss Map (SNHL Map)
Even though the largest EFRPtN magnitude decrements were associated with
synaptopathy in the model simulations (Fig. 5a,b), cochlear gain loss was also
seen to affect this metric and can compensate the EFR magnitude decrement
caused by cochlear synaptopathy as the degree of OHC damage increases. Consequently, we propose to use the EFR in combination with a second AEP metric
which is sensitive to cochlear gain loss (i.e., the ABRW-V /EFRP ratio) to yield a
correct interpretation of the supra-threshold EFRPtN marker in terms of synaptopathy.
Figure 9 shows that combining the EFRPtN marker with the ABRW-V /EFRP

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ratio (or supra-threshold DPOAE magnitude) can separate the simulated hearing pathologies, where deviations along the horizontal dimension capture variations in the synaptopathy degree and where deviations along the vertical dimension capture individual differences in supra-threshold cochlear gain loss. The
normal-hearing reference (circles in the model-derived scheme; Fig. 9d) is characterized by: (i) a strong EFRPtN magnitude which is smaller than for cochlear
gain loss profiles without synaptopathy, and (ii), a high DPOAE magnitude
(Fig. 9c) or large ABRW-V /EFRP ratio which is somewhat smaller than for selective LSR/MSR synaptopathy. The latter fiber types contribute more strongly
to the sustained EFR response than to the ABRW-V resulting in an imperfect
cancellation of synaptopathy in the ratio.
Based on the model simulations in Fig. 9 (see overlaid model-derived grids
in a-c), it is possible to map an individual on the SNHL map as follows: (i) determine their vertical position according to the OHC-sensitive ABRW-V /EFRP
ratio, and (ii), determine their horizontal direction based on the EFRPtN magnitude. The closest vertical gridline to the mapped data-point will yield the
individual synaptopathy profile. Figure 9a shows a SNHL map for subjects
with audiograms in Fig. 2b,c using the same stimulus protocols as adopted
for the model simulations: i.e., a 70-dB-peSPL, 80-µs click and a 70-dB-SPL
120-Hz 100%-SAM tone with 4-kHz carrier. The color scheme illustrates different degrees of cochlear gain loss at 4 kHz according to the color scheme
adopted in Figs. 2b,c. There is qualitative agreement between the model simulations (see model-derived grid) and reference data, however, individual absolute EFRPtN,PT magnitudes were overall smaller than simulated. Nevertheless,
the general trends of how the experimental metrics changed when SNHL was
introduced, corroborated the predictions. Reduced ABRW-V /EFRP,PT ratios
were observed for HI compared to NH listeners, consistent with reduced hearing

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

sensitivity associated with OHC damage. Whereas the cochlear gain loss and
synaptopathy simulations yielded individual EFRPtN magnitudes spanning the
whole horizontal range of recorded EFRPtN magnitudes (i.e. from no to severe synaptopathy), the HI reference data clustered near the bottom left of the
SNHL map. This clustering can theoretically occur when older listeners with
more severe degrees of OHC loss suffer from the worst degrees of synaptopathy
as well. Whereas this statement cannot be proven using the human dataset at
hand, there are animal physiology studies which agree with this predictions by
showing that synaptopathy occurs earlier in time than OHC damage as a consequence of the aging process (Sergeyenko et al., 2013; Fernandez et al., 2015;
Parthasarathy and Kujawa, 2018).
We also constructed a SNHL map with simulated and recorded DPOAEs
for the same listeners as in Fig. 9a to compare SNHL maps constructed using supra-threshold DPOAE (Fig. 9a) or AEP metrics (Fig. 9a). Consistent
with the observed ABRW-V /EFRP,PT ratio reduction, Fig. 9c shows degraded
supra-threshold DPOAE magnitudes for HI listeners with elevated audiometric
thresholds.
To optimize the accuracy of the ABRW-V /EFRP,PT metric, it is crucial that
both metrics in the ratio have comparable cochlear sources (and CFs) contributing to the population response. This was not the case for the EFRP,PT
evoked by a 4-kHz SAM tone used in combination with the broadband click
ABR which had generators from a broad CF range down to 0.5-1 kHz for suprathreshold stimulation (Fig. 6c; Eggermont and Don, 1980; Abdala and Folsom,
1995). To account for this potential incorrect cancellation, we constructed a
SNHL map in which an EFRP,BB metric was derived from the response to a
75-dB-SPL 100%-SAM broadband white noise (Fig. 9b). This stimulus yielded
a broad tonotopic excitation along the BM similar which was similar to that

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

of a click stimulus (compare Fig. 6c and d) Simulated and recorded EFRBB
magnitudes were overall larger compared to the EFRPT response and off-CF
cochlear regions contributed less to the potential mismatch between simulated
and reference EFRs (compared to the EFRPT ) yielding comparable absolute
EFRsBB magnitudes (Fig.5b and e). The simulated SNHL map for the EFRBB
metric (Fig. 9b(grid),d) demonstrated similar trends to the SNHL map constructed for the EFRPT (Fig. 9a(grid)), while preserving a good quantitative
agreement with the reference data. Figure. 9b shows a human SNHL map using
the EFRP,BB metric for a larger group of study participants (n=38, 23 NH and 15
HI listeners; Table I) than which participated in the EFRP,PT experiment. The
simulated degree of synaptopathy (from NH to HI synapt0L,0M,03H ) captured
the horizontal spread in individual EFRPtN,BB magnitudes well and individual ABRW-V /EFRP,BB ratios were clustered within the predicted range for the
simulated sloping high-frequency hearing loss profiles. Simulated EFRBB magnitudes showed a notable rightward skewing as cochlear gain loss increased for
the NH or synaptopathy models (Fig. 9b(grid),d). Consequently, the EFRPtN,BB
magnitude can be greater for increasing cochlear gain loss degrees and compensate co-existing degrees of synaptopathy (e.g. compare green-filled symbol and
dark-red downward triangles; Fig. 9d). This effect is caused by the interplay between (i) OHC damage increasing the EFRPtN,BB as a consequence of gradually
more unsaturated AN fibers, and (ii), by removing those saturated AN fibers
as a consequence of increasing degrees of synaptopathy (compare lines of the
same color with different markers in Fig. 6d). In agreement with the simulated
rightward skewing, the NH and HI data showed enhanced EFRPtN,BB magnitudes as the ABRW-V /EFRP,BB ratio decreased. Moreover, similar than for the
EFRPT -based SNHL map, the HI data clustered towards the bottom left corner
of the SNHL map indicating co-existing synaptopathy and OHC damage. To

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

summarize, two independent measurement sets showed the same trend in both
SNHL maps and captured how the SNHL map is predicted to alter when the
stimulus characteristics changed from PT to BB.
Figure 9d schematically summarizes four main extremes on the SNHL map
with supra-threshold AEP metrics based on the EFRBB condition. The horizontal direction reflects cochlear synaptopathy changes while the vertical direction
estimates the degree of supra-threshold cochlear gain loss. The exact shape
of the map is influenced by the bandwidth and level of the adopted EFR and
ABR stimuli (e.g., see difference between EFRPtN,PT and EFRPtN,BB maps;
Fig. 9a,b, grids). The extremes of the SNHL map reflect the following four categories: Normal Hearing: NH participants show large ABRW-V /EFRP ratios
and high EFRPtN magnitudes which cluster towards the top-right corner of the
SNHL map (green filled marker). Synaptopathy: participants with synaptopathy but no OHC dysfunction show reduced EFRPtN magnitudes and slightly
larger than normal ABRW-V /EFRP ratios which cluster towards the top-left
corner of the map. No Synaptopathy & Cochlear gain loss results in reduced
ABRW-V /EFRP ratios and enhanced EFRPtN magnitudes due to OHC damage
in the absence (or for a fixed degree) of synaptopathy (SNHL profiles cluster
towards the bottom-right of the map). Synaptopathy & Cochlear gain loss: In
the presence of OHC damage, the degree of synaptopathy can be established
by first mapping the ABRW-V /EFRP ratio in the vertical direction, after which
the corresponding EFRPtN magnitude determines the degree of synaptopathy.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Discussion
Sensitivity of the SNHL map to different stimulus characteristics
From a sensitivity point of view, it is possible to further optimize the stimulus
characteristics and yield AEP metrics in the ABRW-V /EFRP ratio stemming
from identical cochlear regions e.g. by combining the EFRPT with tone-burst
ABRs. The SNHL maps presented here offer a single quantification of suprathreshold cochlear gain loss and synaptopathy across a rather broad tonotopic
region, whereas it might be possible to build a range of frequency-specific SNHL
maps using bandwidth-limited stimuli. EFR magnitudes to 100% modulated
stimuli were shown to be an effective metric to build the SNHL map, but the
concept could be further refined to target sensitivity to different subtypes of
synaptopathy (e.g. by using the EFR slope metric targeting LSR fibers; Bharadwaj et al., 2014, 2015). Given that a considerable amount of off-CF HSR fibers
were shown to contribute to the supra-threshold SAM-tone evoked EFRPtN,PT
(Fig. 6b; Encina-Llamas et al., 2019), presenting the stimuli in different types
of noise maskers might also be an option to suppress off-CF HSR contributions
and yield an EFR metric which reflects the on-CF fiber contributions more
strongly (Bharadwaj et al., 2014). Whether more advanced band-limited SNHL
maps (using e.g., tone-bursts, narrow-band noise carriers, masking noise) would
yield satisfactory evoked potential signal quality in NH and HI human listeners
remains to be explored.

Potential central gain compensation
We propose the use of the ABR wave-V in our ABRW-V /EFRP ratio, but several
studies have suggested that homeostatic gain can increase along the ascending

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

auditory pathway after synaptopathy or IHC lesions (Schaette and McAlpine,
2011; Möhrle et al., 2016; Chambers et al., 2016; Hesse et al., 2016) and yield
normal wave-V amplitudes in the presence of reduced wave-I amplitudes. The
central gain hypothesis questions the use of ABR waves beyond wave-I for synaptopathy diagnosis. However, the data on homeostatic gain is still sparse and
several studies report evidence that synaptopathy can reduce both the suprathreshold ABR wave-I and later wave-V/(IV) amplitudes. Even though the
reductions were less strong for the wave-IV, than wave-I the Hesse et al. (2016)
study shows that both the supra-threshold IC firing rate (strongly associated
with the generation of the ABR wave-V(IV) complex; Picton, 2010) and the
ABR wave-IV were reduced compared to control recordings after noise-induced
AN deafferentation without permanent hearing-threshold shifts. Similarly, the
Chambers et al. (2016) ouabain-induced cochlear denervation study shows that
IC firing rates did not recover back to the control condition after 30 days,
whereas auditory cortical responses did. From a physiological perspective, a
straightforward interpretation of these findings with respect to homeostatic gain
is difficult, because if brainstem/midbrain gain changes after cochlear denervation, the IC firing rate should be restored back to normal.
Moreover, central gain changes have experimentally been characterized using the ABR wave-I/V(IV) amplitude ratio which can be influenced by (i) the
frequency-dependence of the ABR generators (i.e. the CF mismatch between
wave-I and wave-V(IV) generators; Don and Eggermont, 1978), and (ii), the
frequency-specific audiogram shape (Verhulst et al., 2016). This means that a
direct interpretation of the ABR wave-I/V(IV) ratio might be difficult without a careful estimation of the audiometric thresholds (including EHFs) for
NH subjects and older listeners with elevated hearing tresholds. The model we
adopted captures the frequency-dependence of the ABR wave-I and V genera-

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

tors (Verhulst et al., 2015, 2018) and hence predicts that OHC damage can yield
ABR wave-I/V(IV) deviations, even in the absence of simulated synaptopathy
or homeostatic gain. Figure 7b illustrates how the ABR wave-I/V(IV) ratio
first increases and later decreases as the degree of high-frequency sloping hearing loss is increased. Additionally, there is a large difference between the ABR
wave-I/V(IV) ratio for a model with a normal 4-kHz threshold which either had
EHF cochlear gain loss or not (Fig. 7b; compare green-filled and yellow markers). These simulations illustrate how EHF OHC damage can influence the ratio
using a model which simulated CN and IC neuron transfer functions (Nelson
and Carney, 2004) but did not include specific homeostatic gain mechanisms
between the AN and IC model stages (e.g., unlike the model of Schaette and
McAlpine, 2011).
Based on the above arguments, and in the absence of a full physiological
understanding of homeostatic gain processes and their effect on ABR waves,
we refrained from introducing this concept in our model simulations. We also
opted to use SNHL maps on the basis of the ABR wave-V because this response
can be recorded reliably in NH and HI human listeners with higher signal-tonoise ratio than the ABR wave-I in the vertex electrode configuration (e.g.,
Gorga et al., 1985; Madsen et al., 2018; Garrett and Verhulst, 2019). Even if
future physiology studies confirm a compensating brainstem or midbrain gain
mechanism after synaptopathy, its potential effect is expected to be minimal
for our SNHL maps as we consider the ABR wave-V amplitude in a ratio with
the EFRP magnitude. Because both responses are generated within similar
subcortical stages of the auditory system (Moller, 2007; Picton, 2010; Bidelman,
2015), homeostatic gain should influence both metrics and hence cancel out in
the ratio. In case homeostatic gain would only affect the ABR but not EFRP ,
the proposed ABRW-V /EFRP ratio could be re-designed to include ABR wave-I

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

amplitudes. This would imply adopting a more sensitive electrode configuration
than conventional ABR setups provide (e.g. using ear-canal tiptrodes; Bauch
and Olsen, 1990; Liberman et al., 2016; Mehraei et al., 2016; Prendergast et al.,
2018)
Lastly, it might be that homeostatic plasticity restores both the mean and
modulated firing rate of brainstem/midbrain neurons due an imbalance of excitatory and inhibitory synapses and/or intrinsic neuronal excitability (Schaette
and McAlpine, 2011).

In this case, homeostatic gain could also affect the

synaptopathy-sensitive EFRPtN metric. However, this suggestion disagrees with
well-established experimental evidence showing that the modulated response decreases when the mean response rate increases for supra-threshold stimulation
(e.g., Joris and Yin, 1992, see single-unit rate-level curves at CF). At the same
time, several experimental studies reported reduced EFR magnitudes associated
with histologically-verified synaptopathy (Shaheen et al., 2015; Parthasarathy
and Kujawa, 2018) and question a possible EFR restoration mechanism related
to brainstem/midbrain homeostatic gain.

Limitations of the model-based approach
Despite the advantages of model-based approaches in exploring how various
SNHL profiles affect the sensitivity of hearing diagnostic metrics within a broad
parameter space, models only constitute a compromised description of the different stages and nonlinear features of the auditory system. The model adopted
here included a detailed cochlear description (Verhulst et al., 2012; Altoè et al.,
2014) and biophysical IHC-AN model (Altoè et al., 2018), but only included
a phenomenological description of the CN and IC nuclei (Nelson and Carney,
2004). Even thought the same-frequency excitatory-inhibitory CN/IC model
captures fundamental physiological observations (Nelson and Carney, 2004),

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

a more detailed description for the brainstem/midbrain structures can be included in future modeling work. Another possible shortcoming of the model is
seen when simulating absolute EFRPT magnitudes. Even though there was a
qualitative agreement between how SNHL affected the simulated and recorded
responses, absolute EFRPtN,PT magnitudes were smaller than simulated for both
NH and HI subjects (Fig. 5a,d). This inconsistency likely stems from the extended contribution of off-CF cochlear regions which resulted in unrealistically
high synchronized activity in the tails of the excitation patterns. Biological
noise would have suppressed these off-CF contributions in the recordings, hence
causing the mismatch in absolute magnitudes between recorded and simulated
EFRPT s. The smaller experimental EFRPtN,PT magnitudes also resulted in
larger ABRW-V /EFRP,PT ratios. These off-CF contributions did not affecting
the simulated EFRBB s, which showed a good qualitative and quantitative match
with the recordings.
Lastly, we constrained the simulations to two independent, but often coexisting, factors that can alter AEP characteristics: cochlear gain loss resulting
from OHC damage, and synaptopathy reflecting IHC afferent synapse damage.
There are other factors which may also alter the AEP (such as the medial
olivocochlear reflex or middle-ear muscle reflex) and which were beyond the
scope of this study. Understanding the influence of these other aspects on
AEPs, can further help refine the sensitivity of proposed metrics.

Near and supra-threshold cochlear amplification
Our study outcomes suggest the need to account for OHC integrity to make a
precise synaptopathy quantification based on the supra-threshold EFRPtN metric. However, cochlear amplification (and consequently its influence on suprathreshold AEPs) is lower for moderate-to-high sound levels than to low sound

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

levels, as characterized by the BM input/output function at CF (Ren et al.,
2011; Robles and Ruggero, 2001; Recio et al., 1998). Moreover, the relationship
between near- and supra-threshold hearing impairment associated with OHC
damage is not necessary straightforward due to individual variability of the
stimulus-level dependent compressive growth of cochlear responses (Dorn et al.,
2001; Neely et al., 2003; Schairer et al., 2006). Therefore, it is expected that,
despite a significant relationship between the supra-threshold ABRW-V /EFRP
metric and audiometric thresholds, there is substantial individual variability
between these two measures relationship (Fig. 8d,f). The observed variability
of ABRW-V /EFRP for a fixed audiometric threshold was greater than predicted
by the model, because the model simulations did not account for individual differences in cochlear compression characteristics and applied a CF-independent
OHC compression ratio which steepened as a function of cochlear gain loss
(Verhulst et al., 2015, 2018). Furthermore, the supra-threshold ABRW-V /EFRP
metric has a broader frequency sensitivity (as compared to the adopted threshold metrics) and can hence be affected by the audiogram shape (Fig. 8a). The
SNHL map concept is not bound by the supra-threshold ABR/EFR ratio and
can also be constructed using the supra-threshold DPOAE magnitude, although
DPOAEs should be recorded across the whole tonotopic range relevant to suprathreshold AEPs. It can be informative to quantify both the degree of near and
supra-threshold cochlear gain loss (using the proposed ABRW-V /EFRP,BW ratio) to determine the available dynamic range of hearing and to decide which
hearing restoration strategies might be most successful in individual listeners.

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Translation of model insights and experimental evidence to
clinical applications
We adopted an interdisciplinary approach to suggest the use of SNHL maps in
the diagnosis of synaptopathy, which focused on stimuli which are commonly
adopted in clinical practice and in animal studies of synaptopathy. In its present
format, the proposed SNHL map provides a sensitive estimate of synaptopathy
and supra-threshold OHC impairment with two stimulus conditions, yielding
a 15-min recording. This offers a considerable benefit for its potential clinical
uptake, especially given that EFRs and ABRs can already be recorded using
clinical AEP devices. Another strong motivator of our approach is that other
labs can map their previously collected ABR and EFR data onto a SNHL map
to provide histological support and to obtain a more sensitive objective metric
for synaptopathy which can be used to better understand individual differences
in supra-threshold sound perception (e.g., Bharadwaj et al., 2015; Yeend et al.,
2017; Prendergast et al., 2017a; Grose et al., 2017; Prendergast et al., 2017b;
Guest et al., 2018; Valderrama et al., 2018).
However, it should be emphasized that this study is only a step towards a
diagnostic paradigm for synaptopathy screening that can be used in a clinical
context. Subsequent development to allow a translation into clinical practice
requires rigorous testing with a large number of study participants with various
degree of co-existing hearing pathologies to yield normative data and a precise
continuum of the data distribution on the proposed SNHL maps. It may well be
that preliminary stages of the clinical validation process will have an iterative
character and will require further protocol adjustment or stimulus tuning to
enhance the signal-to-noise ratio of the EFR metrics for measurement in clinical
research.

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) Priority Program 1608 “Ultrafast and temporally precise information processing:
Normal and dysfunctional hearing” VE924/1-1 (VV) and European Research
Council (ERC) under the Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme
(grant agreement No 678120 RobSpear; SV).

Author contributions
V.V. and S.V. designed research, V.V. and S.V. performed research, V.V. analyzed data; S.V and V.V. wrote the paper.

References
Abdala C, Folsom RC (1995) Frequency contribution to the click-evoked auditory brain-stem response in human adults and infants. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 97:2394–2404.
Altoè A, Pulkki V, Verhulst S (2014) Transmission line cochlear models: improved accuracy and efficiency. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 136:EL302–EL308.
Altoè A, Pulkki V, Verhulst S (2018) The effects of the activation of the innerhair-cell basolateral k+ channels on auditory nerve responses. Hearing research 364:68–80.
Bauch CD, Olsen WO (1990) Comparison of abr amplitudes with tiptrode and
mastoid electrodes. Ear and hearing 11:463–467.
Bharadwaj HM, Masud S, Mehraei G, Verhulst S, Shinn-Cunningham BG (2015)

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Individual differences reveal correlates of hidden hearing deficits. Journal of
Neuroscience 35:2161–2172.
Bharadwaj HM, Verhulst S, Shaheen L, Liberman MC, Shinn-Cunningham BG
(2014) Cochlear neuropathy and the coding of supra-threshold sound. Frontiers in systems neuroscience 8:26.
Bidelman GM (2015)

Multichannel recordings of the human brainstem

frequency-following response: scalp topography, source generators, and distinctions from the transient abr. Hearing research 323:68–80.
Boege P, Janssen T (2002)

Pure-tone threshold estimation from extrapo-

lated distortion product otoacoustic emission i/o-functions in normal and
cochlear hearing loss ears. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 111:1810–1818.
Bourien J, Tang Y, Batrel C, Huet A, Lenoir M, Ladrech S, Desmadryl G,
Nouvian R, Puel JL, Wang J (2014) Contribution of auditory nerve fibers to
compound action potential of the auditory nerve. Journal of neurophysiology 112:1025–1039.
Bramhall N, Beach E, Epp B, LePrell CG, Lopez-Poveda EA, Plack C, Schaette
R, Verhulst S, Canlon B (2019) The search for noise-induced cochlear synaptopathy in humans: Mission impossible? Hearing research .
Chambers AR, Resnik J, Yuan Y, Whitton JP, Edge AS, Liberman MC, Polley
DB (2016) Central gain restores auditory processing following near-complete
cochlear denervation. Neuron 89:867–879.
Chen GD, Chi LH, Kostyniak PJ, Henderson D (2007) Styrene induced alterations in biomarkers of exposure and effects in the cochlea: mechanisms of
hearing loss. Toxicological sciences 98:167–177.

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Chen GD, Tanaka C, Henderson D (2008) Relation between outer hair cell loss
and hearing loss in rats exposed to styrene. Hearing research 243:28–34.
Dimitrijevic A, Alsamri J, John MS, Purcell D, George S, Zeng FG (2016)
Human envelope following responses to amplitude modulation: effects of aging
and modulation depth. Ear and hearing 37:e322.
Dolphin W, Mountain D (1992) The envelope following response: scalp potentials elicited in the mongolian gerbil using sinusoidally am acoustic signals.
Hearing research 58:70–78.
Don M, Eggermont J (1978) Analysis of the click-evoked brainstem potentials
in man using high-pass noise masking. The journal of the acoustical society
of America 63:1084–1092.
Dorn PA, Konrad-Martin D, Neely ST, Keefe DH, Cyr E, Gorga MP (2001)
Distortion product otoacoustic emission input/output functions in normalhearing and hearing-impaired human ears. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America 110:3119–3131.
Eggermont J, Don M (1980) Analysis of the click-evoked brainstem potentials
in humans using high-pass noise masking. ii. effect of click intensity. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 68:1671–1675.
Encina-Llamas G, Harte JM, Dau T, Shinn-Cunningham B, Epp B (2019) Investigating the effect of cochlear synaptopathy on envelope following responses
using a model of the auditory nerve. Journal of the Association for Research
in Otolaryngology pp. 1–20.
Fernandez KA, Jeffers PW, Lall K, Liberman MC, Kujawa SG (2015) Aging
after noise exposure: acceleration of cochlear synaptopathy in “recovered”
ears. Journal of Neuroscience 35:7509–7520.

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Furman AC, Kujawa SG, Liberman MC (2013) Noise-induced cochlear neuropathy is selective for fibers with low spontaneous rates. Journal of neurophysiology 110:577–586.
Garrett M, Verhulst S (2019) Applicability of subcortical eeg metrics of synaptopathy to older listeners with impaired audiograms. Hearing Research .
Glasberg BR, Moore BC (1990)

Derivation of auditory filter shapes from

notched-noise data. Hearing research 47:103–138.
Gorga MP, Worthington DW, Reiland JK, Beauchaine KA, Goldgar DE (1985)
Some comparisons between auditory brain stem response thresholds, latencies,
and the pure-tone audiogram. Ear and Hearing 6:105–112.
Gramfort A, Luessi M, Larson E, Engemann DA, Strohmeier D, Brodbeck C,
Goj R, Jas M, Brooks T, Parkkonen L et al. (2013) Meg and eeg data analysis
with mne-python. Frontiers in neuroscience 7:267.
Gramfort A, Luessi M, Larson E, Engemann DA, Strohmeier D, Brodbeck C,
Parkkonen L, Hämäläinen MS (2014) Mne software for processing meg and
eeg data. Neuroimage 86:446–460.
Greenwood DD (1990)

A cochlear frequency-position function for several

species—29 years later.

The Journal of the Acoustical Society of Amer-

ica 87:2592–2605.
Grose JH, Buss E, Hall III JW (2017) Loud music exposure and cochlear
synaptopathy in young adults: Isolated auditory brainstem response effects
but no perceptual consequences. Trends in hearing 21:2331216517737417.
Guest H, Munro KJ, Prendergast G, Millman RE, Plack CJ (2018)

Im-

paired speech perception in noise with a normal audiogram: No evidence

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

for cochlear synaptopathy and no relation to lifetime noise exposure. Hearing
research 364:142–151.
Herdman AT, Stapells DR (2003) Auditory steady-state response thresholds of
adults with sensorineural hearing impairments: Umbrales de las respuestas
auditivas de estado estable en adultos con hipoacusia sensorineural. International Journal of Audiology 42:237–248.
Hesse LL, Bakay W, Ong HC, Anderson L, Ashmore J, McAlpine D, Linden J,
Schaette R (2016) Non-monotonic relation between noise exposure severity
and neuronal hyperactivity in the auditory midbrain. Frontiers in neurology 7:133.
Hickox AE, Larsen E, Heinz MG, Shinobu L, Whitton JP (2017) Translational
issues in cochlear synaptopathy. Hearing research 349:164–171.
Joris PX, Yin TC (1992)

Responses to amplitude-modulated tones in the

auditory nerve of the cat. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 91:215–232.
Kale S, Heinz MG (2010) Envelope coding in auditory nerve fibers following
noise-induced hearing loss. Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology 11:657–673.
Kohlrausch A, Fassel R, Dau T (2000) The influence of carrier level and frequency on modulation and beat-detection thresholds for sinusoidal carriers.
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 108:723–734.
Kujawa SG, Liberman MC (2009) Adding insult to injury: cochlear nerve
degeneration after “temporary” noise-induced hearing loss. Journal of Neuroscience 29:14077–14085.

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Kujawa SG, Liberman MC (2015) Synaptopathy in the noise-exposed and aging
cochlea: Primary neural degeneration in acquired sensorineural hearing loss.
Hearing research 330:191–199.
Kuwada S, Anderson JS, Batra R, Fitzpatrick DC, Teissier N, D’Angelo WR
(2002)

Sources of the scalp-recorded amplitude-modulation following re-

sponse. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology 13:188–204.
Kuwada S, Batra R, Maher VL (1986) Scalp potentials of normal and hearingimpaired subjects in response to sinusoidally amplitude-modulated tones.
Hearing research 21:179–192.
Levitt H (1971) Transformed up-down methods in psychoacoustics. The Journal
of the Acoustical society of America 49:467–477.
Liberman MC (1978) Auditory-nerve response from cats raised in a low-noise
chamber. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 63:442–455.
Liberman MC, Epstein MJ, Cleveland SS, Wang H, Maison SF (2016) Toward a
differential diagnosis of hidden hearing loss in humans. PloS one 11:e0162726.
Lin HW, Furman AC, Kujawa SG, Liberman MC (2011) Primary neural degeneration in the guinea pig cochlea after reversible noise-induced threshold
shift. Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology 12:605–616.
Luts H, Desloovere C, Wouters J (2006) Clinical application of dichotic multiplestimulus auditory steady-state responses in high-risk newborns and young
children. Audiology and Neurotology 11:24–37.
Madsen SM, Harte JM, Elberling C, Dau T (2018) Accuracy of averaged auditory brainstem response amplitude and latency estimates. International
journal of audiology 57:345–353.

43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Makary CA, Shin J, Kujawa SG, Liberman MC, Merchant SN (2011) Agerelated primary cochlear neuronal degeneration in human temporal bones.
Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology 12:711–717.
Mehraei G, Hickox AE, Bharadwaj HM, Goldberg H, Verhulst S, Liberman MC,
Shinn-Cunningham BG (2016) Auditory brainstem response latency in noise
as a marker of cochlear synaptopathy. Journal of Neuroscience 36:3755–3764.
Melcher JR, Kiang NY (1996) Generators of the brainstem auditory evoked
potential in cat iii: identified cell populations. Hearing research 93:52–71.
Mitchell C, Phillips DS, Trune DR (1989) Variables affecting the auditory
brainstem response: audiogram, age, gender and head size. Hearing research 40:75–85.
Möhrle D, Ni K, Varakina K, Bing D, Lee SC, Zimmermann U, Knipper M,
Rüttiger L (2016) Loss of auditory sensitivity from inner hair cell synaptopathy can be centrally compensated in the young but not old brain. Neurobiology
of aging 44:173–184.
Møller AR, Burgess J (1986) Neural generators of the brain-stem auditory
evoked potentials (baeps) in the rhesus monkey. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology/Evoked Potentials Section 65:361–372.
Moller A (2007) Neural generators for auditory brainstem evoked potentials. Auditory evoked potentials: Basic principles and clinical application pp. 336–354.
Neely ST, Gorga MP, Dorn PA (2003) Cochlear compression estimates from
measurements of distortion-product otoacoustic emissions. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 114:1499–1507.
Neely ST, Johnson TA, Gorga MP (2005) Distortion-product otoacoustic emis-

44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

sion measured with continuously varying stimulus level. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 117:1248–1259.
Nelson PC, Carney LH (2004) A phenomenological model of peripheral and
central neural responses to amplitude-modulated tones. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 116:2173–2186.
Parthasarathy A, Kujawa SG (2018)

Synaptopathy in the aging cochlea:

Characterizing early-neural deficits in auditory temporal envelope processing. Journal of Neuroscience pp. 3240–17.
Picton TW (2010) Human auditory evoked potentials. San Diego, CA: Plural
Publishing.
Plack CJ, Barker D, Prendergast G (2014) Perceptual consequences of “hidden”
hearing loss. Trends in hearing 18:2331216514550621.
Plack CJ, Léger A, Prendergast G, Kluk K, Guest H, Munro KJ (2016)
Toward a diagnostic test for hidden hearing loss.

Trends in hear-

ing 20:2331216516657466.
Prendergast G, Guest H, Munro KJ, Kluk K, Léger A, Hall DA, Heinz MG,
Plack CJ (2017a) Effects of noise exposure on young adults with normal
audiograms i: Electrophysiology. Hearing research 344:68–81.
Prendergast G, Millman RE, Guest H, Munro KJ, Kluk K, Dewey RS, Hall DA,
Heinz MG, Plack CJ (2017b) Effects of noise exposure on young adults with
normal audiograms ii: Behavioral measures. Hearing research 356:74–86.
Prendergast G, Tu W, Guest H, Millman RE, Kluk K, Couth S, Munro KJ,
Plack CJ (2018) Supra-threshold auditory brainstem response amplitudes in
humans: Test-retest reliability, electrode montage and noise exposure. Hearing research 364:38–47.
45

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Purcell DW, John SM, Schneider BA, Picton TW (2004) Human temporal
auditory acuity as assessed by envelope following responses. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 116:3581–3593.
Recio A, Rich NC, Narayan SS, Ruggero MA (1998) Basilar-membrane responses to clicks at the base of the chinchilla cochlea. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 103:1972–1989.
Ren T, He W, Gillespie PG (2011) Measurement of cochlear power gain in the
sensitive gerbil ear. Nature communications 2:216.
Robles L, Ruggero MA (2001) Mechanics of the mammalian cochlea. Physiological reviews 81:1305–1352.
Ruggero MA, Rich NC (1991) Furosemide alters organ of corti mechanics:
evidence for feedback of outer hair cells upon the basilar membrane. Journal
of Neuroscience 11:1057–1067.
Schaette R, McAlpine D (2011) Tinnitus with a normal audiogram: physiological evidence for hidden hearing loss and computational model. Journal of
Neuroscience 31:13452–13457.
Schairer KS, Ellison JC, Fitzpatrick D, Keefe DH (2006) Use of stimulusfrequency otoacoustic emission latency and level to investigate cochlear mechanics in human ears.

The Journal of the Acoustical Society of Amer-

ica 120:901–914.
Sergeyenko Y, Lall K, Liberman MC, Kujawa SG (2013) Age-related cochlear
synaptopathy: an early-onset contributor to auditory functional decline. Journal of Neuroscience 33:13686–13694.
Shaheen LA, Valero MD, Liberman MC (2015) Towards a diagnosis of cochlear

46

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

neuropathy with envelope following responses. Journal of the Association for
Research in Otolaryngology 16:727–745.
Shera CA, Guinan JJ, Oxenham AJ (2010) Otoacoustic estimation of cochlear
tuning: validation in the chinchilla. Journal of the Association for Research
in Otolaryngology 11:343–365.
Suzuki J, Corfas G, Liberman MC (2016) Round-window delivery of neurotrophin 3 regenerates cochlear synapses after acoustic overexposure. Scientific reports 6:24907.
Trautwein P, Hofstetter P, Wang J, Salvi R, Nostrant A (1996) Selective inner
hair cell loss does not alter distortion product otoacoustic emissions. Hearing
research 96:71–82.
Trune DR, Mitchell C, Phillips DS (1988) The relative importance of head
size, gender and age on the auditory brainstem response.

Hearing re-

search 32:165–174.
Valderrama JT, Beach EF, Yeend I, Sharma M, Van Dun B, Dillon H
(2018) Effects of lifetime noise exposure on the middle-age human auditory brainstem response, tinnitus and speech-in-noise intelligibility. Hearing
research 365:36–48.
Valero M, Burton J, Hauser S, Hackett T, Ramachandran R, Liberman M (2017)
Noise-induced cochlear synaptopathy in rhesus monkeys (macaca mulatta).
Hearing research 353:213–223.
Van der Drift J, Brocaar M, Van Zanten G (1987) The relation between the
pure-tone audiogram and the click auditory brainstem response threshold in
cochlear hearing loss: Relation entre l’audiogramme et le seuil des réponses

47

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

évoquées du tronc cérébral au clic dans les surdités de perception. Audiology 26:1–10.
van der Reijden CS, Mens LH, Snik AF (2004) Signal-to-noise ratios of the auditory steady-state response from fifty-five eeg derivations in adults. JOURNAL
of the American Academy of Audiology 15:692–701.
Verhulst S, Altoè A, Vasilkov V (2018) Computational modeling of the human
auditory periphery: Auditory-nerve responses, evoked potentials and hearing
loss. Hearing research 360:55–75.
Verhulst S, Bharadwaj HM, Mehraei G, Shera CA, Shinn-Cunningham BG
(2015) Functional modeling of the human auditory brainstem response to
broadband stimulation.

The Journal of the Acoustical Society of Amer-

ica 138:1637–1659.
Verhulst S, Dau T, Shera CA (2012) Nonlinear time-domain cochlear model for
transient stimulation and human otoacoustic emission. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 132:3842–3848.
Verhulst S, Jagadeesh A, Mauermann M, Ernst F (2016) Individual differences
in auditory brainstem response wave characteristics: relations to different
aspects of peripheral hearing loss. Trends in hearing 20:2331216516672186.
Viana LM, O’Malley JT, Burgess BJ, Jones DD, Oliveira CA, Santos F, Merchant SN, Liberman LD, Liberman MC (2015) Cochlear neuropathy in human
presbycusis: Confocal analysis of hidden hearing loss in post-mortem tissue.
Hearing research 327:78–88.
Wu P, Liberman L, Bennett K, De Gruttola V, O’Malley J, Liberman M (2018)
Primary neural degeneration in the human cochlea: evidence for hidden hearing loss in the aging ear. Neuroscience .

48

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Yeend I, Beach EF, Sharma M, Dillon H (2017) The effects of noise exposure and
musical training on suprathreshold auditory processing and speech perception
in noise. Hearing research 353:224–236.
Zhu L, Bharadwaj H, Xia J, Shinn-Cunningham B (2013) A comparison of spectral magnitude and phase-locking value analyses of the frequency-following
response to complex tones. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 134:384–395.
Zweig G (1991) Finding the impedance of the organ of corti. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 89:1229–1254.

49

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure captions
Figure 1. An overview of the computational model of the human auditory
periphery (Verhulst et al., 2018) which was used to simulate ABR and EFRs.
Acoustic stimuli pass through a middle-ear and transmission-line cochlear model
which computes the BM velocity over N=401 CFs spaced between 112 Hz and
12 kHz along the cochlear partition. At each CF, BM velocity passes through a
biophysical model of the IHC-AN complex (Altoè et al., 2018) which simulates
responses for 3 LSR, 3 MSR and 13 HSR fibers, whose responses are summed
and passed to a functional model of the CN and IC (Nelson and Carney, 2004).
ABR W-I and W-V were simulated by adding up responses across the simulated
CFs at the AN and IC layers, respectively. The EFR was obtained by summing
up activity across the same CFs and three layers of processing (i.e., at the output of AN, CN and IC) after which an FFT magnitude spectrum was computed
to derive the EFR metrics.

Figure 2. Left: a Cochlear gain loss profiles, which were used to simulate OHC damage. The degree of cochlear filter gain reduction is indicated
using a dark blue to dark red color gradient and is labeled according to the
dB HL values at 4-kHz. One sloping hearing loss profile with a 35 dB HL at
8-kHz was also considered (orange). b Measured pure-tone audiograms for 11
normal-hearing listeners (blue) and c 9 listeners with elevated high-frequency
audiometric thresholds (red) who participated in both the SAM-tone AEP and
behavioral AM DT experiments. Individual listeners are labeled can be followed
across experiments. Right: a Simulated and b,c reference DPOAE threshold
(Th.) and supra-threshold DPOAE magnitude (Mag.) shifts relative to the
model NH profile or the best measured DPOAE (NH subject #26), respectively.

50

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. a Magnitude spectrum (gray) of the AEP recorded from subject
NH#2 in response to a 70-dB SPL 120-Hz modulated 4-kHz pure tone. The
EFR frequency response of subject NH#2 showed strong EFR components at
the fundamental (f0 ) and harmonics (f1 -f4 ) of the stimulus AM frequency. The
estimated frequency dependent noise floor is depicted in pink. b 600 ms (i.e.,
the whole epoch duration) and c 100 ms-scaled time domain representation of
the averaged EFR waveform of subject NH#2 (gray). Time-domain EFR reconstructions based on f0 (light-blue) and a sum of f0 -f4 harmonics with the
corresponding phase angle values (dark blue) are also shown. The positive part
of the stimulus envelope (indicated by

(+)

) in [Pa] is superimposed in black.

Figure 4. Relationship and corresponding Pearson correlation coefficient
between individual AM detection thresholds (in dB re. 100% modulation) and
EFR magnitudes calculated from a, the f0 -magnitude of the raw EEG spectrum,
b, the f0 -magnitude with subtracted NF0 and c, the sum of available harmonic
components at f0 -f4 with the corresponding phase information and subtracted
NF values (see Eq.1). The circles and triangles correspond to NH and HI subjects with the degree of audiometric threshold elevation at 4 kHz depicted (in
agreement with Figure 2b,c) by the blue color gradient (from darker to lighter
blue) and red color gradient (from light to dark red), respectively. Data from the
two crossed symbols were omitted from the correlation analysis due to a weak
EFRPtN signal (after NF subtraction) for the 100% modulated SAM tone only,
while stronger magnitudes for more shallow 63% and 40% conditions were seen
in these subjects. This pattern of results was not observed in reference studies
(Bharadwaj et al., 2015; Guest et al., 2018) and point to recording problems for
these particular subjects in the 100% modulation depth condition.

51

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 5. a,d: EFRPT magnitude evoked by SAM tone, b,e: EFRBB magnitude evoked by SAM broadband noise, and c,f : click-evoked ABR wave-V
amplitude as a function of cochlear gain loss for the recordings (right) and
model simulations (left). Open and filled symbols illustrate the AEPs as a
function of threshold elevation at 4-kHz and pure tone average (PTA) across
standard audiometric frequency range, respectively. Simulations were performed
for different synaptopathy profiles: no synaptopathy (circles), no LSR fibers
(upward triangles, HI synapt0L,3M,13H ), no LSR&MSR fibers (downward triangles, HI synapt0L,0M,13H ), LSR&MSR and 50% HSR fibers removed (squares,
HI synapt0L,0M,6H ), LSR&MSR and 80% of HSR fibers removed (diamonds, HI
synapt0L,0M,3H ). Simulations: The reference NH model (no cochlear gain loss
or synaptopathy) is depicted by the green filled marker and the color gradient
reflects cochlear gain loss degree (abscissa values). Recordings: circles and
downward triangles indicate EFRPtN magnitudes for NH and HI subjects, respectively. Recordings from two subjects depicted with crossed symbols and
near-zero EFRPtN were excluded from the ABRW-V /EFRPT ratio calculation
as well as SNHL map construction in Fig. 8d,e.

Figure 6. a Simulated BM motion; b,d modulated and c peak IC responses
across CFs evoked by a 70-dB SPL 120-Hz SAM tone with a 4-kHz carrier (PT),
a 75-dB SPL 120-Hz SAM broadband white noise (BB) and a 70-dB-peSPL,
80µs click, respectively. Simulations were performed for the normal-hearing
model (NH; dark-blue), high-frequency sloping cochlear gain loss (HI; dark-red)
as well as different degrees of synaptopathy (HI; different symbols).

Figure 7. Simulated a ABR wave-I and b ABR wave-I / ABR wave-V ratio
as a function of cochlear gain loss for different synaptopathy profiles.

52

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 8. Simulated (left) and recorded (right) ABRW-V /EFRP ratios as a
function of a,d cochlear gain loss at 4-kHz; b,e supra-threshold DPOAE magnitude shifts at 4-kHz (re. model NH profile, L2 = 70 dB SPL or the best
measured NH DPOAE, L2 = 66 dB SPL); and c,f pure tone average (PTA)
across standard audiometric frequency range.

Figure 9. Simulated (overlaid grids) and reference sensorineural hearing loss
maps based on a,b the ABRW-V /EFRP ratio or c supra-threshold DPOAE magnitude shifts at 4-kHz and EFRPtN magnitude evoked by a,c 70-dB SPL 120-Hz
SAM tone with a 4-kHz carrier or b 75-dB SPL 120-Hz SAM broadband noise.
d Colored scheme based on supra-threshold BB stimuli which summarises four
main extremes on the SNHL map: the NH reference and combinations of synaptopathy and cochlear gain loss associated with OHC damage.

53

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table captions
Table I. Participant profiles. Gender (G), age (A, years), and pure-tone audiometric thresholds (dB HL) for the tested ear and audiometric testing frequencies as well as the pure tone average (PTA, dB HL) across presented frequencies
(kHz).

54

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

f0

0

FFT

f1
0

120

{

W-V

..........................

W-III

..........................

W-I

.......... . .............

f2

240
360
Frequency [Hz]

Stimulus
(SAM tone)
120 Hz

OAE

Inferior Colliculus

Cochlear Nucleus

different
SR AN Fibers
480
600

{

IHC-AN complex

N

EFR= fn

Cochlear
Synaptopathy

3-store diffusion model
+ refractoriness
AN synapse
exocytosis model
Biophysical IHC
transduction model

N=401
..........
CF............

Middle
ear
model

Figure 1:

55

Transmission-line
cochlear model

Cochlear Gain Loss

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

-10

-10

10

20

20

30

70
0.125

0.250

0.5

50
60

1

Frequency [kHz]

2

4

8

Th.

Mag.

70

-10

-10
1

0

2

4

5

7

10

26

10

8

20

20

22

30
40
50
60
70
0.125

30
Aud.Th.@4kHz<=00 dB
Aud.Th.@4kHz=05 dB
Aud.Th.@4kHz=10 dB
Aud.Th.@4kHz=15 dB
Aud.Th.@4kHz=20 dB
Aud.Th.@4kHz=25 dB
Aud.Th.@4kHz=30 dB
Aud.Th.@4kHz=35 dB
Aud.Th.@4kHz>=40 dB
Mean values

0.250

0.5

40
50
60

1

Frequency [kHz]

2

4

8

Th.

Mag.

-10
0

b

21

10
Hearing loss [dB HL]

0

24

[dB]

60

40

#26

50

30
NH (00 dB @ all freq.)
HI slope (05 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (10 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (15 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (20 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (25 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (30 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (35 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (35 dB @8kHz)

DPOAE@4kHz re. NH [dB]

10

40

a

0

DPOAE@4kHz re. NH

Simulated cochlear gain loss [dB]

0

70
-10
0

1

c

20

16
15

30

30
17

40

40

23
20

50

50

60

60

70
0.125

0.250

0.5

1

Frequency [kHz]

2

4

Figure 2:

56

8

Th.

Mag.

70

#26

10

18
2

20

DPOAE@4kHz re. NH

Hearing loss [dB HL]

10

[dB]

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

0.05

f1

0.04

Magnitude [µV]

a

EEG spectrum
(stimulus: 100% SAM tone)
noise floor

f0

0.03

f2

0.02

f3
0.01

f4
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Frequency [kHz]

0.8

1.0

b

0.3
0.2

Amplitude [µV]

0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
0

0.2

Time [s]

0.4

0.6

c

0.3
0.2

Amplitude [µV]

0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
recorded EFR
stimulus envelope(+) [Pa]
f 0 reconstruction

-0.3
-0.4

f 0-4 reconstruction

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

Time [s]

57
Figure 3:

0.08

0.1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

-10

R(17)=-0.185, p=0.478

AM detection threshold [dB]

NH

-15

HI

a

17

16

20

18
5

15

10

2

-20

24

21
1

26

4

-25

7

8
1

22

5

-30

2

-35

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

f magnitude [µV]

0.08

0.1

0

AM detection threshold [dB]

-10

-15

R(17)=-0.395, p=0.116

b

17

16

20

18
5

15

-20

10
2

24

21
1

26

4

-25

7

8
1

22

5

-30

2

-35

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

(f -NF ) magnitude [µV]
0

0.1

0

-10

AM detection threshold [dB]

0.08

R(17)=-0.571, p=0.017

17

-15

16

20

18
15

-20

5

10
2

24

21
1

26

4

-25

7

8
1

22

5

-30

2

-35

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

EFRPtN magnitude [µV]

58

Figure 4:

0.08

0.1

c

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Recordings
Simulations
(stimulus: 70-dB-SPL 100%-SAM tone)

a

NH
HI synapt 0L,3M,13H
HI synapt 0L,0M,13H

d
NH (EFR PtN, PT)
HI (EFR

0.15

magnitude [µV]

0L,0M,03H

PtN,PT

0.1

0.05

PtN, PT

)

0.1
2
26

0.05

EFR

EFRPtN,PT magnitude [µV]

0.15

HI synapt 0L,0M,07H
HI synapt

7

4

24
1
20

22
10
5

16

21

23

17
18
2

5
15

1

8

0

0
0

10

20

30

0

40

10

b

30

40

e

(stimulus: 75-dB-SPL 100%-SAM BB noise)
NH (EFR PtN, BB )
HI (EFR
)
PtN, BB

0.15

PtN,BB

0.1

RBB,HI=0.503, p = 0.056

10
11

19

0.1
4

20

18

11

16
6

10

7 15212 1
14
17

5

1

8
22

0.05

21

13
5

3
12

EFR

0.05

23
3

magnitude [µV]

0.15

EFRPtN,BB magnitude [µV]

20

Hearing Loss @ 4 kHz [dB HL]

Cochlear gain loss @ 4 kHz [dB]

0

6

22

14

13

2

94 8

7

0
0

10

20

30

40

0

10

Cochlear gain loss @ 4 kHz [dB]

20

30

40

Hearing Loss (PTA) [dB HL]

(stimulus: 70-dB-peSPL 80-µs click)

c

0.4

0.4

f
NH (ABR PT)
HI (ABR )

3

PT

2
10

NH (ABR

2
16

HI (ABR

ABRW-V amplitude [µV]

ABRW-V amplitude [µV]

10

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.3

)

)

21
12
111 19
9

6
18

8
8

17

0.2

4
7
14
5
24
7

1

4
21

14

23
10

26
9

5

23

20

15

8
13

22
22

2

13

3
12
22

0.1

5

1

1

7
5

16

59
0

BB

BB

11

17
18
15

20

6

4

2

0
0

10

20

30

40

Cochlear gain loss @ 4 kHz [dB]

0

10

Hearing Loss

Figure 5:

20
(@4kHz

PT

30
or PTA

BB

)

40

[dB HL]

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Cochlear responses to 70-dB-SPL SAM tone

c

NH (PT)
NH (BB)
HI (PT) slope35 dB @ 4kHz

6

HI (BB) slope

4

2

CFPT

0

4

x103

6

4

2

8-kHz,
Oﬀ-CFPT

8

0

12

4

8

12

Characteristic frequency [kHz]

Characteristic frequency [kHz]

Tonotopic IC response to 70-dB-SPL SAM tone

Tonotopic IC response to 75-dB-SPL SAM BB noise

b

d

x103

3

2

NH
HI synapt 0L,0M,13H

1
CFPT

0

x103

4

ICP,BB response [a.u.]

4

ICP,PT response [a.u.]

8

35 dB @ 4kHz

Peak IC response [a.u.]

RMS velocity of BM motion [m/s]

a

Tonotopic IC response to 70-dB-peSPL click

x10-7

35dB

+ synapt

0L,0M,13H

HI slope 35dB + synapt 0L,0M,07H

4

8

2

1

HI synapt 0L,0M,07H
HI slope 35dB
HI slope

3

0

12

Characteristic frequency [kHz]

4

8

Characteristic frequency [kHz]

Figure 6:

60

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

a
NH
HI synapt 0L,3M,13H
HI synapt 0L,0M,13H
HI synapt 0L,0M,07H
HI synapt

0L,0M,03H

0.1

ABR

W-I

amplitude [µV]

0.2

0
0

10

20

30

40

Cochlear gain loss @ 4 kHz [dB]

ABR

W-I

/ ABR

W-V

ratio [a.u.]

b 0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

NH (00 dB @ all freq.)
HI slope (05 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (10 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (15 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (20 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (25 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (30 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (35 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (35 dB @8kHz)

0.2
0.1
0

0

10

20

30

Cochlear gain loss @ 4 kHz [dB]

Figure 7:

61

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Recordings

Simulations
20

NH
HI synapt 0L,3M,13H

[dB]

HI synapt 0L,0M,07H

P,PT

HI synapt 0L,0M,03H

re. EFR

10

W-V

5

0

0

10

20

30

RAll =-0.588, p = 0.010
HI
NH

10

HI synapt 0L,0M,13H

15

-5

15

1
5

2

10

5

5
16

0

10

[dB]
P,PT
W-V

5

0

0

DPOAE

10

20

@4kHz, L =70 dB SPL

30

15

30

40

e

RAll =-0.508, p = 0.031
HI
NH
1

5

2

10

4
22

24

23
15

1

7

5
17
18

26

5
16

2

20

0

-5

40

re. NH [dB]

0

DPOAE

10

20

30

@4kHz, L =66 dB SPL

re. NH

2

40

#26

[dB]

(stimuli: 75-dB-SPL 100%-SAM BB noise / 70-dB-peSPL 80-µs click)

20

RAll =-0.447, p = 0.005
NH
HI

HI synapt 0L,0M,13H

15

[dB]

HI synapt 0L,0M,07H

P,BB

HI synapt 0L,0M,03H

re. EFR

10

W-V

5

62

0

f

20

NH
HI synapt 0L,3M,13H

ABR

[dB]
P,BB

re. EFR
W-V

20

21

2

ABR

20

0

10

re. EFR

10

c

2

20

ABR

[dB]
P,PT

re. EFR

17
18

26

Hearing Loss @ 4 kHz [dB HL]

NH (00 dB @ all freq.)
HI slope (05 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (10 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (15 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (20 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (25 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (30 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (35 dB @4kHz)
HI slope (35 dB @8kHz)

15

W-V

15
1

(stimuli: 70-dB-SPL 100%-SAM tone / 70-dB-peSPL 80-µs click)

b 20

ABR

23

4
22

24
7

-5

40

21

Cochlear gain loss @ 4 kHz [dB]

-5

d

(stimuli: 70-dB-SPL 100%-SAM tone / 70-dB-peSPL 80-µs click)

20

ABR

ABRW-V re. EFR P,PT [dB]

a

15
21

2

14

10

12
517

9

16
8
1

8

6

2

7

1018
4
1411 3
19
13

5

15

13
7

10

22
12

20

22
3

4

23
1
5

0

6
11

9

-5

0

10

20

30

40

Cochlear gain loss @ 4 kHz [dB]

-5

0

10

20

30

Hearing Loss (PTA) [dB HL]

Figure 8:

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

10

7

26

5

5
2

16
20

0

-5

0

0

0.05

EFR

PtN,PT

0.1

magnitude [µV]

0.15

-5
0.35

0.3

[dB]
#26

7
4

1
17
18

20

5

2

23
2
5
15

30
16

20

40
0

0.05

EFR

PtN,PT

0.1

magnitude [µV]

0.15

Synaptopathy

b

20

20

NH
HI synapt

d
0L,3M,13H

HI synapt 0L,0M,13H

15

5

0

HI synapt

15

HI synapt

Synaptopathy

5

0
Synaptopathy

NO Synaptopathy

Cochlear gain loss (mild)

Cochlear gain loss (mild)

&

0.3

Figure 9:

63

0L,0M,03H

Normal
Hearing

10

9

-5
0.35

0L,0M,07H

Cochlear Gain Loss

10

[µV]

17
18

P,BB

24

24

22

re. EFR

22

5

21
10

10

W-V

10

4

re. NH

2

23
15

26

2

15

1

5
21

ABR

ABR

W-V

re. EFR

P,PT

[dB]

10

15

c
0

@4kHz, L =66 dB SPL

20

DPOAE

a 20

-5

0

0.05

&

0.1

EFRPtN,BB magnitude [µV]

0.15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19008680; this version posted November 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Subj#

G

A

0.125

0.25

0.5

0.75

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
26

m
f
f
f
m
f
f
f
m
f
f
f
f
m
f
f
f
f
m
m
f
m
m
f
m

26.7
27.9
25.5
20.2
25.2
25.1
24
32.4
28.6
21.2
26.3
29.1
21.5
24.7
28.9
21.4
23.7
14.3
24.6
35.1
31.4
27.3
25.6
30.4
26.8

-5
-5
0
5
-5
5
-5
0
-5
-5
-5
0
-5
0
0
0
-5
0
-5
10
0
0
10
5
10

Audiometrically
-5
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
-5
0
5
5
0
0
5
5
0
0
0
0
-5
-5
0
0
0
0
-5
0
0
-5
5
5
0
0
5
5
-5
0
10
15
0
5
5
5
10
15
5
5
5
5

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
20
22
23

m
f
m
m
f
f
f
f
f
f
f
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
f
m
m

65
62.9
55.3
54.4
75.5
73.8
65
65.8
62.7
64.1
68.8
60.4
68.4
48.3
71.2
74.6
63.8
72.4
74.7
66.3
77.6

5
5
0
0
0
20
20
0
-5
10
20
0
10
5
35
15
10
5
10
15
5

Participants with impaired
0
5
5
5
10
15
20
20
0
0
10
0
0
5
0
5
5
10
20
15
15
20
25
35
25
20
0
5
5
5
0
0
5
0
10
20
20
25
25
30
35
30
10
10
15
10
10
5
15
20
0
0
5
5
45
45
35
25
15
20
25
25
20
30
35
40
0
0
0
5
64 30
5
25
30
5
10
20
5
10
15
20
25
Table 1:

1

1.5

3

4

6

8

PTA

group
5
5
0
0
5
0
0
0
5
0
0
5
0
0
10 10
0
0
5
0
0
5
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
5
0
5
0
0
0
0
5
5
5
0
5
15 15
0
0
5
0

0
5
5
5
0
5
0
5
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
10
5
5
20
0
5

5
5
5
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
5
5
0
0
5
10
0
0
20
5
20
20
25
0
5

10
0
5
0
0
0
0
5
5
0
5
5
0
5
0
5
0
0
5
20
10
20
10
0
15

1.82
0.45
1.36
0.91
-0.45
3.18
-0.91
5.45
0.45
0.91
0.45
0.91
-0.45
-0.45
0.00
5.00
0.00
1.82
1.82
11.25
6.11
5.45
15.00
2.73
5.45

thresholds
5
10 25
15 20 10
15 20
5 25
20 20 35
10 20 20
25 20 25
5
5 20
15 10 10
20 20 25
35 30 35
15 15 20
15 20 15
5
5
5
20 20 25
20 15 25
35 35 25
5
10 10
30 40 45
0
5 10
35 30 40

25
25
25
25
30
25
25
20
25
20
25
25
25
20
35
20
35
35
40
20
40

50
40
40
25
40
40
40
30
35
25
35
30
35
25
25
30
40
25
65
25
50

60
30
40
10
65
60
65
30
20
35
55
35
60
15
25
30
45
40
70
50
60

17.73
19.09
16.67
10.56
20.91
24.09
29.55
11.36
10.46
20.91
32.27
16.82
20.91
8.18
30.46
21.82
31.82
12.27
35.46
15.00
30.00

normal hearing
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
-5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
5
0
0
-5
0
5
5
5
5
0
0
0
5
5
0
0
0
-5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
-5
0
0
0
10
5
5
0
0
0
5
0
0
5
0
0
15
5
0
0
0
15
20 10
5
5
5
5
5
0

2

