medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Utilization of Family Planning and Associated Factors among Reproductive Age Women
with Disability in Arba Minch Town, Southern Ethiopia
YibeltalMesfinYesgat*1, Feleke G/Meskel2, WubshetEstifanous3Yordanos Gizachew4
Seid Jemal5 Natneal Atnafu6 Keyirden Nuriye7
1

Department of Midwifery, College of medicine and health sciences, Wolkite University,

Wolkite Ethiopia
2

Department of public health, college of medicine and health sciences, Arba Minch

University, Arba Minch, Ethiopia
3

Department of Nursing, College of medicine and health sciences, Arbaminch University,

Arbaminch Ethiopia
4

Department of Nursing, College of medicine and health sciences, Arbaminch University,

Arbaminch Ethiopia
5

Department of Midwifery, College of medicine and health sciences, Wolkite University,

Wolkite Ethiopia
6

Department of midwifery, College of medicine and health sciences, Wolaita Sodo

University, Wolyita Sodo Ethiopia
7

Department of Midwifery, College of medicine and health sciences, Wolkite University,

Wolkite Ethiopia
* Yibeltal MesfinYesgat E-mail: hazardkuku@gmail.com
Feleke G/Meskel E-mail:fgfpeace@gmail.com
Wubshet Estifanous E-mail:estifo.wubshet@gmail.com
Yordanos Gizachew, E-mail: yordanos.gizachew@yahoo.com
Seid Jemal, E-mail: seidovjemal@gmail.com
Natnael Atnafu E-mail: natnaelatnafu89@gmail.com
Keyredin Nuriye E-mail: kmetebo@gmail.com

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ABSTRACT
Introduction globally, one type of contraceptive was used by around 63 percent of
women. Women with disabilities account for 10 percent of all women and make up threequarters of the disabled people in low and middle-income countries.
Objective to assess utilization of family planning and associated factors among
reproductive-age women with disability group in Arba Minch town, southern Ethiopia
from 1st March to April 15, 2019.
Methods community-based cross-sectional study with simple random sampling was used
to select 4l8 reproductive age women with disabilities. Data were collected using a
structured questionnaire and interview by eight trained females who completed grade
twelve two of which communicate by speaking and sign language. Data were entered
using Epi info 7 and exported to SPSS version 20 for analysis. A statically significant
variable in the final model was declared by AOR, 95%CI and p-value <0.05.
Result in the current study family planning utilization among all reproductive-age women
with disabilities was 33.7%. Family planning utilization was 2.2 times higher among those
who have employed compared with those with not employed (AOR2.2 95% CI, 1.774.15). Women who had a positive attitude were 2.3 times more likely to use family planning
than negative attitudes (AOR 2.3:95% CI, 1.21- 3.87). Besides these women who got
married were almost four times more likely to use family planning methods than unmarried
(AOR 3.9:95% CI, 2.31-6.63).
Conclusion The level of family planning utilization was low among reproductive women
with disabilities and factors associated were attitude, marital status, & employed status,
therefore governmental and non-governmental organization should promote for women with
disabilities to change the attitude and creating job opportunities.
Keyword: Family planning utilization, Reproductive age, disability

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Family planning allows individuals and couples to anticipate and attain their desired
number of children and the spacing and timing of their births. It is achieved through the
use of contraceptive methods and the treatment of involuntary infertility (1).
Access to and uptake of family planning is important directly or indirectly, for achieving
the recently launched Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). It can contribute to
reducing chronic poverty and hunger, increasing access to quality education, Address the
Challenges of Climate Change, and ensure sustainable consumption, enhancing
gender equality, improving and maternal health and reducing childhood mortality
through its role in preventing unwanted pregnancy and reducing fertility rate as a whole
(2, 3)
Family planning is used by the majority of married or in-union women in almost all parts
of the world. Worldwide in 2017, 63 percent of married or in-union women of
reproductive age were using some form of contraception, including any modern or
traditional methods of contraception. From this woman with disabilities comprise 10
percent of all women and make up three-quarters of the disabled people in low and
middle-income countries (4, 5)
In Africa, 36% of reproductive-age women use any form of contraceptive but still 22 % to
unmet need for modern contraception of this the major proportion is shared by SubSaharan Africa which is highest in the world(6, 7).
Even those reports of 2016 Ethiopia demographic health survey (EDHS) don’t report
contraceptive use of disabilities women separately 36 percent of currently married women
and 58 % unmarried sexually active women use any form of contraceptive (8).
Family planning among disabled is neglected but disabled have the same need for
reproductive health care as a general population. Persons with disabilities face many
barriers to care and information about SRH. The most frequent assumption that persons
with disabilities are not sexually active and do not needs SRH service (11, 12).
Factors associated with failure to meet need family planning for disabled women vary
from country to country when compared with non-disabled women. According to World
Health Organization (WHO) the highlighted reasons are: limited choice of family
planning methods, limited access to contraception, poorness, fear or experience of having
side-effects, cultural or religious opposition, poor quality of available family planning
services and gender-based barriers pregnancy ,concern of health problems, lack of
disability-related clinical services, and stigma and discrimination(13).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In many sub-Saharan African(SSA) countries including Ethiopia factors affecting use
contraceptive are situations like level of education, desire more children, age, side effect
of contraception, transportation problems, lack mass media avail for disable and husband
and communities attitude barriers to health services include: lack of physical
access, including transportation and/or proximity to clinics and, within clinics, lack
of ramps, adapted examination tables, and the like; lack of information and
communication materials (e.g. lack of materials in Braille, large print, simple
language, and pictures; lack of sign language interpreter)(14-16).
Finally, in our country, there were a lot of studies that were conducted to assess the
magnitude of family use and associated factors among reproductive-age women in
general but few kinds of research only addressed women with disabilities. Specifically,
research conducted previously are institution based which focus on women with
disabilities supported by association with the sexual and reproductive health ( SRH)
service facility for disabled avail and also those article miss some important factors like
attitude. Therefore, this study aimed to assess the utilization of family planning and the
factor associated with women with disabilities in Arba Minch town.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

METHODS AND MATERIALS
Study design and setting
A community-based cross-sectional study was conducted from 1st March to 15, April,
2019Arba Minch town is found in the Gamo zone, the Southern Nations, Nationalities

and Peoples Region. It is located at 505km distance south of Addis Ababa (the capital
city of Ethiopia) and 275km southwest of Hawassa (capital town of the regional
state). Based on 2007 census Arba Minch town has a population of 74,879 of which
39,208 (52.36%) are men and 35,671 (47.64%) are women from this the proportion of people
living with disabilities in Arba Minch town was about 638 and increased to 1561 in 2018
from these women in reproductive age occupied 462.
Study population
Reproductive age women with disabilities group live in Arba Minch town known by Arba
Minch town labors and social affairs
Sample size determination
The minimum sample size was calculated by using a single population proportion formula
with P = 44.4 %( proportion of utilization of family planning in Addis Ababa city).Level of
significance 5% (α=0.05), the margin of error 5% (d=0.05), and 10% non-responses rate
Thus, a total sample of 418 women with reproductive age with the disability group
participated.
Sampling procedure
Based on the report of the Arba Minch town administrative labor and social affairs disabled
person female gender was selected and registered with an excel sheet by their identification
card (ID) and age. Sampling frames were developed by selecting 462 reproductive age
women with disabilities to form a list obtained from the Arba Minch town administration,
labor and social affairs with their age. Finally with the help of their ID numbers of each 418
women select by lottery methods
Data collection tool
Data was collected by adopting Ethiopian Demographic and Health Survey. Semi structured
questionnaire was first prepared in English and then translated into the Amharic language
then back to English for checking language consistency(8). The main components of the
questionnaire are socio-demographic characteristics, knowledge of the respondents towards

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

family planning methods, attitude, and reproductive health-related factor and client-related
factors.
Data collection procedures
Data was gathered using eight grade twelve complete. Two of the collectors were able to
communicate by sign language to obtain information from the deaf. The data collectors
were trained for two days before the actual data collection on interview strategy and data
recording. Lecturing, mock interview and actual field practice were used to train data
collectors. The data collection was done under close supervision
The interview was used for data collection. To collect data from the deaf the two females
who can speak sign language were used and for the blind since the questionnaire was
interviewed their blindness was not affecting the process.
Data processing and analysis
All filed questioners were cheeked for completeness, consistency, and accuracy, then the
data were entered into Epi info version 3.7 then exported to statically package of social
science (SPSS) version 20 for data analysis.
Bivariate analysis with a crude OR (COR) of 95% CI was used to assess the degree of
association between each independent variable and the outcome variable by using binary
logistic regression. Independent variables with a P-value of ≤0.25 were included in the
multivariable analysis to control confounding factors. Multicollinearity was checked to
see the linear correlation among the independent variables by using the variance inflation
factor (VIF) and standard error (SE). Variables with a VIF of >10 and a SE of >2 were
dropped from the multivariable model. The fitness of the model was checked by HosmerLemeshow goodness of fit test not statically significant p-value.0.679. Crude and adjusted
odds ratios along with 95% of confidence interval were used to identify factors associated
with the outcome variable. The level of statistical significance was declared at a p-value of
less than 0.05.
.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Result
Socio-demographic characteristics of the respondents
A total of three hundred ninety-eight reproductive age women with disability groups
have participated with a response rate of 95.2%. The age of women ranges from 15 - 40,
with the mean age of 23.15 (SD ± 5.1) years. About ninety-six women (24.1%) of women
and twenty-four (15.1%) of partners of those who are married/union never been enrolled
in formal education. A total of one hundred twenty respondents were employed
represented by (31.2%) while 118(29.6%) was a student and 107(26.9%) were
unemployed. Respondents who were protestant followers accounted for 288(72.4%),
followed by 99(24.9%) who were orthodox and the rest were others including Muslim,
Catholic, Adventist 11(2.9%). About 76(19.1%) of the respondents were categorized as
having low household income and 86(21.6%) as moderate while 236(59.3%) were
categorized as having high household income (table 1).
Reproductive health characteristics of the study population
A total of two hundred forty women of those has started sexual intercourse. Eighty-five
respondents have given birth of which only 11.76% of the respondents had experienced
child loss or death. A majority (63%) of the women reported having the desire to have
children after two years and 8.8% desired no or no more children while the remaining
28.2% want within two years (table2).
Client characteristics related factors
One hundred forty women with disabilities discuss with their partner. On the other end,
69.2% supported by their partner to use family planning. Majority disabilities around 71
percent of the women are physically disabled.
One hundred eighty-seven reproductive age women with disabilities are exposed to media
and the rest are not.
General knowledge about family planning
The collected information regarding knowledge of contraceptive methods was after
describing each method and asking respondents if she had heard of it. Using this
approach, interviewers collected information about 9 modern family planning methods
and two traditional methods. Knowledge of at least one method of contraception likely to
have about it is 79.9%.
Attitude towards family planning use

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Concerning the level of attitude towards family planning, about 41 % of the respondents
have negative Attitudes. More than half of the respondents (59%) had positive attitudes
towards family planning use
Facility related factor
Almost more than half of reproductive-age women with disabilities think SRH serves was
not friendly.
The proportion of family planning use
Around(one-third of the participants )134 (33.7 %:95% CI, 0.29-0.38)) of all
reproductive-age women with disabilities are currently using a contraceptive. The most
frequently used contraceptive methods are injectable 50% (n=67) followed by implants
25% (n=34).
Reason for not using contraceptive
Study participants were asked why they are not currently using family planning. From the
multiple reasons they have given the highest reason was being single with 134
frequencies.
Factors affecting family planning utilization
Variables Age of the women , Marital status, women education, Media exposure,
Occupation women, Household income, Attitude, Parity , knowledge and thinking
sexual and health service friendly signify who are significantly associated with dependent
variable at bivariate analysis and P-value <0.25 were further analyzed in the multivariate
analysis to identify their related effects with family planning.
The odds of women to use family planning methods were AOR=2.2(1.77- 4.15) times
higher among those who have employed compared with those with not employed.
Women with disabilities who had were positive attitude AOR=2.4(1.43-3.98) time to use
family planning methods compared with those who were a negative attitude
The study also indicated that the odds of family planning use were AOR=3.95 (2.336.70) times higher among those women with disabilities who had currently married on the
use of family planning methods compared with those who did not have currently
married(table3).

Discussion
This community-based research aimed to identify the use of family planning and
associated factor in Arba Minch town among women of reproductive age with disability
Finding from this study showed that the use of family planning was 33.7 percent and
factors that contribute for use of family planning were occupation, marital status, and
attitude.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In this study, the rate of usage for family planning was 33.7 percent (n=134) of all women
of reproductive age with disabilities group. This outcome is greater than the research
carried out in Bahirdar was 25.2 percent among 337 females of reproductive age with
disabilities(10). This may be justified by increased access and inclusive sexual
reproductive health services for the past four years.
In contrast, Addis Ababa's study was greater than this finding, with contraceptive use
being used by 44.4 percent of all women with disabilities in reproductive age(9). The
reason for this difference may be the sample size and availability of health care facilities
and disability-related family planning facilities in Addis Ababa.
This finding showed that the women with disabilities to use family planning methods
were 2.2 times higher among those who have employed compared with those with not
employed. This agrees with the Shembela refugee camp, Northern Ethiopia among
reproductive-age women which favor being unemployed was 79 percent less likely to use
contraceptive than employed(17). This suggesting that the ability of a woman to become
employed empowered her to participate and take control of household decisions,
including those regarding ideal family size and contraceptive use.
With regard to marital status, this study also indicated that the chances of family planning
use among women of reproductive age with disabilities who presently married using
family planning methods were almost four times greater than those who currently did not
marry who endorsed by a study in the Oyo State, Nigeria of the married women were
approximately four times more likely to use contraception than the single women(18).
To favor marital status study in the Dembia district, the use of married women in North
West Ethiopia was 2.81 times more probable than unmarried females to use current
contraceptives

(19). The findings show the significance of couple inspiration in

reproductive health problems including fertility and contraception through instruction and
masculine involvement.
The other stronger factor for the grandstanded need for family planning was an attitude.
Women with disabilities who had a positive attitude 2.4 time more likely to use family
planning methods relative to those who had an negative attitude this finding almost
similar to cross-sectional studies in the Nationalities of the Southern Nations and the
People's Region, Ethiopia among women of reproductive age group who state that
positive attitudes towards contraceptives were almost twice than negative attitude (20).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

However, this study is lower than study in Ghana and higher from Juba, South Sudan
among reproductive-age women(21, 22). The possible reason for this difference may be
socio-demographic character and the difference in the status of women's habits of each
country.
Finally, this study had some limitations since the data collection instrument addressed
many questions concerning the use of contraceptives and sexual activity by interview for
visual and hearing impairment respondent that it may be possible that they did not
precisely respond. However, we try to fill the gap by using a female data collector.

Conclusion
This finding showed around 33.7% of disabled women of reproductive age in Arba Minch
town use any methods of family planning. Factors that are found to have associated with
family planning use were women's work status, marital status, and attitude. So we
recommend that the Arba Minch town administration better enhance the employment
status of women with disabilities. Persons with disability (PWD) Organizations, other
governmental and NGOs should strengthen their family planning and SRH friendly
service with special focus on unmarried women. The health extension workers and
community nurses should increase their encouraged, educated women with disabilities to
enhance a positive attitude for family planning.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Declaration
List of abbreviations
AOR: Adjusted odds ratio; EDHS: Ethiopian demographic health survey, CI: Confidence
interval, COR: Crude odds ratio, FMOH: Federal ministry of health, SRH: sexual and
reproductive health, PWD, the people with a disability
Ethical clearance and consent to participate
Ethical clearance was obtained from an ethical clearance committee of Arba Minch
University College of Medicine and Health Science. A permission letter was written to the
Arba Minch town administration to conduct the study and another permission letter was also
obtained from the Arba Minch town administration. Finally informed verbal and written
consent was obtained from each respondent.
Availability of data and materials
Full data set and other materials relating to this study can be obtained from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request
Competing interests
The authors declare that there is no financial and non-financial conflict of interest
regarding the publication of this paper.
Funding
This research work is funded by Arba Minch university research, community service, and
industry linkage vice president office.

Author contributions
All authors contributed to data analysis, drafting or revising the article, gave final
approval of the version to be published, and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the
work.
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my deepest appreciation Arba Minch University, College of
Health Sciences, Department of Nursing for providing this opportunity. I am very grateful
Arba Minch town labor and social affairs Administration and Arba Minch special need
school staff for their great support. Finally, we would like to appreciate our data collectors,
supervisors, questionnaire translators, and study participants; without them, the research
would not be possible

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Reference
1. WHO/UENFPA. unmet need for family planning in health. WHO 2015
2. Starbird E, Norton M, Marcus R. Investing in family planning: the key to achieving
sustainable development goals. Global Health: Science and Practice. 2016;4(2):191-210.
3. Lang R, Kett M, Groce N, Trani J-F. Implementing the United Nations Convention on
the rights of persons with disabilities: principles, implications, practice, and limitations.
ALTER-European Journal of Disability Research/Revue Européenne de Recherche le
Handicap. 2011;5(3):206-20.
4.

Alkema L, Kantorova V, Menozzi C, Biddlecom A. National, regional, and global

rates and trends in contraceptive prevalence and unmet need for family planning between
1990 and 2015: a systematic and comprehensive analysis. The Lancet.
2013;381(9878):1642-52.
5. World health organization. World report on disability. disability in 2011.
6.

DoEaS A. World Family Planning In: social, editor. online Afaris DoEas; 2017.

7.

Anderson T. Providing family planning services to women in Africa. Bulletin of

the World Health Organization. 2017;95(9):614.
8. Central Statistical Agency - CSA/Ethiopia, ICF. Ethiopia Demographic and Health
Survey 2016. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: CSA and ICF, 2017.
9.

Abera S. The Assessment of Determinants of Family Planning Use and Unmet

Need among Women of Reproductive Age Group with Disabilities in Addis Ababa:
Addis Ababa University; 2016.
10.

Tessema AL, Bishaw MA, Bunare TS. Assessment of the Magnitude and

Associated Factors of Unmet Need for Family Planning among Women of Reproductive
Age Group with Disabilities in Bahir Dar City, Amhara Region, North West Ethiopia.
Open Journal of Epidemiology. 2015;5(01):51.
11.

WHO/UNFPA. Promoting sexual and reproductive health for persons with

disabilities. 2014.
12. McColl MA, Jarzynowska A, Shortt SED. Unmet health care needs of people with
disabilities: population-level evidence. Disability & Society. 2010;25(2):205-18.
13. Organization WH. WHO global disability action plan 2014-2021: Better health for all
people with a disability: World Health Organization; 2015.
14.

Mosher W, Bloom T, Hughes R, Horton L, Mojtabai R, Alhusen JL. Disparities in

receipt of family planning services by disability status: New estimates from the National

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Survey of Family Growth. Disability and health journal. 2017;10(3):394-9. Epub
2017/04/06.
15. Sedgh G, Ashford LS, Hussain R. Unmet need for contraception in developing
countries: examining women's reasons for not using a method. The Guttmacher Institute,
2016.
16. Wulifan JK, Brenner S, Jahn A, De Allegri M. A scoping review on determinants of
unmet need for family planning among women of reproductive age in low and middleincome countries. BMC women's health. 2015;16(1):2.
17. Seyife A, Fisseha G, Yebyo H, Gidey G, Gerensea HJPo. Utilization of modern
contraceptives and predictors among women in the Shimelba refugee camp, Northern
Ethiopia. 2019;14(3):e0212262.
18. Adeyemi AS, Olugbenga-Bello AI, Adeoye OA, Salawu MO, Aderinoye AA, Agbaje
MA. Contraceptive prevalence and determinants among women of the reproductive age
group in Ogbomoso, Oyo State, Nigeria. Open Access J Contracept. 2016;7:33-41.
19.

Andualem Samuel AU, Birke Olle, Desalech Dambe, Melkinesh Nigatu and

Mende Mensa Sorato*. Assessment of Modern Contraceptive Method Utilization and
Associated Factors Among Women of Reproductive Age Group in Arba Minch
Town,SNNPR, Ethiopia: Community based cross-sectional study. Open Journal of
Epidemiology. 2017;15(6):367-74.
20. Endriyas M, Eshete A, Mekonnen E, Misganaw T, Shiferaw M, Ayele S.
Contraceptive utilization and associated factors among women of the reproductive age
group in Southern Nations Nationalities and Peoples' Region, Ethiopia: a cross-sectional
survey, mixed-methods. Contraception and reproductive medicine. 2017;2:10-.
21.

Beson P, Appiah R, Adomah-Afari AJBWsH. Modern contraceptive use among

reproductive-aged women in Ghana: prevalence, predictors, and policy implications.
2018;18(1):157.
22.

Obwoya JG, Wulifan JK, Kalolo AJIJoPR. Factors Influencing Contraceptives

Use among Women in the Juba City of South Sudan. 2018;2018.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19013821; this version posted December 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Tables and legends
Table 1 Frequency distribution of reproductive age women with disability by their
background characteristics in Arba Minch town, 2019
Table 2 Distribution of reproductive age women with disability by reproductive healthrelated characteristics, Arba Minch town, 2019
Table 3 Factors associated with family planning, utilization among women with disability
in Arba Minch town, 2019

