medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Cerebrospinal fluid and plasma biomarkers in individuals at
risk for genetic prion disease
Sonia M Vallabh1,2,3,4,†, Eric Vallabh Minikel1,2,3,4, Victoria J Williams2, Becky C Carlyle2,
Alison J McManus2, Chase D Wennick2, Anna Bolling2, Bianca A Trombetta2, David Urick2,
Chloe K Nobuhara2, Jessica Gerber2, Holly Duddy2, Ingolf Lachmann5, Christiane Stehmann6,
Steven J Collins6, Kaj Blennow7, Henrik Zetterberg7,8,9,10, Steven E Arnold1,2,†
1.

Henry and Allison McCance Center for Brain Health, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114,
USA
2. Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 02114, USA
3. Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA
4. Prion Alliance, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
5. AJ Roboscreen GmbH, Leipzig, 04129, Germany
6. Australian National CJD Registry, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 3010, Australia
7. Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg,
Mölndal, S-431 80, Sweden
8. Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, S-431 80, Sweden
9. UK Dementia Research Institute, University College London, London, WC1N 3BG, UK
10. Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, WC1N 3BG, UK

†Address correspondence to: searnold@mgh.harvard.edu or svallabh@broadinstitute.org

ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND: Fluid biomarkers are important in the development of therapeutics to delay or
prevent prion disease, but have not been systematically evaluated in pre-symptomatic
individuals at risk for genetic prion disease.
METHODS: We recruited pre-symptomatic individuals with pathogenic mutations in the prion
protein gene (PRNP; N=27) and matched controls (N=16), to donate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
and blood at multiple timepoints to a cohort study at Massachusetts General Hospital. We
quantified total prion protein (PrP) and real-time quaking-induced conversion (RT-QuIC) prion
seeding activity in CSF, and the neuronal damage markers total tau (T-tau) and neurofilament
light chain (NfL) in both CSF and plasma. We compared these markers cross-sectionally
between mutation carriers and controls, evaluated short-term test-retest reliability over 2-4
months, and conducted a pilot longitudinal study over 10-20 months for a subset of participants.
FINDINGS: CSF PrP levels were stable on test-retest with a mean coefficient of variation of 7%
both over 2-4 months in N=29 participants and over 10-20 months in N=10 participants. RTQuIC was negative in 22/23 mutation carriers. The sole individual with positive RT-QuIC
seeding activity at two study visits had steady CSF PrP levels and slightly increased tau and NfL
concentrations compared with others, though still within the normal range, and remained
asymptomatic one year later. Overall, tau and NfL showed no significant differences between
mutation carriers and controls in either CSF or plasma.
INTERPRETATION: CSF PrP will be interpretable as a pharmacodynamic readout of the effects
of a PrP-lowering therapeutic in pre-symptomatic individuals, and may serve as a surrogate
biomarker in a “primary prevention” trial paradigm. In contrast, current markers of prion seeding
activity and of neuronal damage do not reliably cross-sectionally distinguish mutation carriers
from controls, arguing against the feasibility of a “secondary prevention” paradigm in which trials
specifically recruit pre-symptomatic participants with prodromal evidence of pathology.
1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

BACKGROUND
The well-defined pathobiology of prion disease, with prion protein (PrP) as the sole causal
agent1, has spurred the preclinical development of rational therapeutics to lower PrP expression
in the brain2. However, the rapid progression of prion disease, which is typically fatal in under a
year3, presents a challenge for drug development, as symptomatic patients may be profoundly
debilitated by the time of diagnosis and enrollment4,5. Individuals with mutations in the prion
protein (PRNP) gene, many of which are highly penetrant6, may be aware of their risk decades
in advance of symptom onset7, creating an opportunity for early intervention for primary
prevention. However, as the highly variable and unpredictable age of onset precludes
randomizing individuals to a treatment arm for years or decades until manifest disease8,
surrogate biomarker trial endpoints will be essential for drug development.
In “secondary prevention” paradigms, trials may recruit pre-symptomatic individuals with
prodromal biomarker evidence of a disease process underway and aim to stabilize or reverse
progression of those pathological biomarkers9. This approach may be useful in slowly
progressive dementias including Alzheimer’s disease and Huntington’s disease thanks to
decades-long phases of prodromal pathology during which imaging and fluid biomarkers are
progressive10,11 To date in prion disease, however, longitudinal imaging and neurophysiological
studies have uncovered at most subtle changes in a small number of individuals only around
one year before disease onset12–14, and systematic characterization of fluid biomarkers in presymptomatic individuals at risk has not been described.
One proposed primary prevention paradigm for prion disease involves lowering native PrP
levels in the brain, a goal in principle achievable by targeting the prion protein gene, its RNA, or
the PrP protein product prior to misfolding15. In this scenario, reduction of the causative fuel for
pathogenic prion formation prevents or delays its ignition into a fulminant disease. Presymptomatic individuals at known high genetic risk but with no requirement of prodromal
pathology could be treated and a therapeutic could be evaluated based solely on a
pharmacodynamic biomarker. In this case, CSF PrP is a promising biomarker candidate given
the absolute necessity of PrP to the disease process15. To enable development of such primary
preventions, it is essential to be able to measure PrP precisely and to understand the natural
intra-individual variability of PrP levels in pre-symptomatic individuals. We previously described
the technical precision and pre-analytical factors that might affect measurements of PrP levels
in CSF, as well as their biotemporal stability within non-mutation carrying individuals with mild
cognitive impairment over the short term (approximately 8 weeks)16.
Here we set out to recruit and characterize a cohort of pre-symptomatic individuals at risk for
genetic prion disease, and controls, some of whom we have followed for over a year. Our goal
was to evaluate the within-subject stability of PrP in CSF fluid biomarkers and to characterize
other emerging fluid biomarkers of neurodegeneration in pre-symptomatic at-risk individuals for
their potential utility in either primary or secondary prevention paradigms.

RESULTS
Individuals recruited to the study included (see Methods): 1) confirmed mutation carriers of
PRNP variants, 2) untested individuals at risk of carrying a PRNP variant, usually established
through confirmed mutation status of a first-degree relative and a family history of autopsy2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

proven prion disease; and 3) non-carrier controls. All participants were genotyped to establish
PRNP mutation carrier status. Mutation carriers and controls were demographically wellmatched (Table 1). All participants scored 20/20 points at each visit on the prion diseasespecific MRC functional rating scale17, and carriers performed comparably to controls on the
Montreal Cognitive Assessment18. In total, a battery of 20 cognitive, neuropsychological,
psychiatric and motor tests and inventories established that all participants performed within
established normative ranges, with no significant differences between mutation carriers and
controls, supporting the carriers’ pre-symptomatic status (Table S1). The research lumbar
puncture (LP) was well-tolerated, and the N=24 participants for whom this was the first LP
generally reported lower anxiety about undergoing future LPs than they had felt about the first
LP (Figure S1).
PRNP
mutation
carriers
27
44.2±15.2
10
17
0
12
7
4
4
7
9
11

N
Age at first visit
Sex
PRNP
genotype
Number of
completed
study visits

Assessments

Male
Female
Wild type
E200K
D178N
P102L
Other
1 visit
2 visits
3 visits

Non-carrier controls
16
44.5±12.7
5
11
16
0
0
0
0
4
9
3

PRNP
mutation
carriers

Noncarrier
controls

P value

P value
(Bonferroni
corrected)

MRC prion
disease rating
scale

20.0±0.0

20.0±0.0

1

1

Montreal
cognitive
assessment

27.7±1.6

28.5±1.7

0.20

1

Table 1: Demographic overview of study participants. Participant number, age, sex, PRNP
genotype, total number of study visits at time of analysis, and scores on two basic assessments
of daily and cognitive functioning. Corrected P values account for all 20 assessments performed.
The “other” category includes four distinct mutations, two of which are of low penetrance and
two of which are highly penetrant6,8; to protect participant confidentiality, the exact mutations are
not disclosed.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Within subject test-retest stability of CSF PrP
To confirm the short-term within-subject stability of CSF PrP levels in genetic prion disease
mutation carriers and controls, we quantified PrP levels in CSF samples given by study
participants at 2-4 month intervals using an Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) that
we have previously shown appropriate for this purpose16. Following collection, CSF used for this
analysis was handled uniformly according to an established protocol that includes addition of
0.03% CHAPS detergent to maintain PrP solubility16. CSF PrP levels were stable over this
interval and similar between carriers (mean CV = 6.8%) and controls (mean CV = 7.5%) (Figure
1A). CSF PrP concentration showed a significant difference between genotypes (p=0.016, oneway ANOVA) driven by lower PrP in D178N mutation carriers (Figure 1A; see discussion). While
all reasonable efforts were made to standardize CSF collection, in some cases clinical
variations were noted, including use of drip collection rather than aspiration and lower sample
yields. On average, the six individuals whose CSF was handled differently between the two
visits showed greater, though still reasonable, variation in CSF PrP levels (mean CV = 12.6%)
compared to all other participants (mean CV = 5.8%).
At the time of analysis, ten individuals had completed a longitudinal study visit 10-20 months
after their initial study visit, enabling a longer-term analysis of CSF PrP test-retest stability.
Across eight mutation carriers and two controls, CSF PrP levels were again steady with a mean
CV of 7.2% across all three visits (Figure 1B). This variability is far lower than we have
previously observed in test-retest CSF samples from retrospective cohorts lacking uniform
sample handling16 (Figure 1B), consistent with pre-analytical factors being a major source of
variability in those cohorts. Across all participants, CSF PrP was modestly correlated with CSF
total protein (r=0.35, p=0.0052, two-sided Spearman's correlation), replicating previous
reports16,19.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 1: Test-retest stability of CSF PrP. Uniformly processed CSF samples were collected
from lumbar punctures performed by one of two investigators (SEA, AJM). CSF PrP levels were
quantified by ELISA. Dots represent means, and line segments 95% confidence intervals, of
measurements within dynamic range with 2 technical replicates each. A. 29 individuals gave two
CSF samples at an interval of 2-4 months. B) Ten participants with the noted genotypes gave
three CSF samples at the following intervals: initial visit, 2-4 month follow-up visit, 10-20 month
follow-up visit. For each subject, PrP levels for all visits have been normalized to levels at the
first visit, such that the first LP is defined as 100%. Grey lines show PrP test-retest stability for
CSF samples from previously reported retrospective cohorts without uniform sample handling to
minimize pre-analytical variability, reproduced from Vallabh et al16.
Disease process biomarkers in CSF
To assess levels of emerging markers of neuronal damage or neurodegeneration in carrier and
control CSF, we measured total tau (T-tau) and neurofilament light (NfL) levels in participant
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

CSF by ELISA. Uniformly handled CSF aliquots with no additive were used for these assays
and all CSF assays that follow. Both CSF T-tau and CSF NfL were highly elevated in positive
control CSF from symptomatic prion disease patients (p=2.6 x 10-10 for T-tau; p=1.6 x 10-11 for
NfL, 2-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test; Figures 2A-B). In contrast, levels of these markers in
mutation carrier and non-carrier control CSF were similar. CSF T-tau appeared nominally higher
in non-carrier controls (mean 251.8±84.5 pg/mL) than in mutation carriers (224.5±112.3 pg/mL)
(uncorrected p=0.015, 2-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test), while CSF NfL was indistinguishable
between the two groups (p=0.61, 2-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test). CSF T-tau and NfL were
independently measured by ELISA at a second site, and values showed good correlation with
those values initially obtained (T-tau, r=0.80, p=3.5 × 10-9; NfL, r=0.89. p=3.0 ×10-14), again with
no difference between carriers and controls (Figure S2).
To assess potential changes over time in markers of neuronal damage, we quantified total T-tau
and NfL in the longer-term serial CSF samples available for the N=10 longitudinal participants
spanning 10-20 months by ELISA. Across all visits (10-20 months), levels of both proteins
remained low with no significant change over time within individuals (p=0.51 for T-tau, p=0.91
for NfL, linear regression; Figures 2C-D). The mean CV over all visits was 7.8% for CSF T-tau
and 9.9% for CSF NfL.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 2: Candidate markers of neuronal damage in carrier and control CSF (Broad
Institute). CSF A) T-tau and B) NfL levels were measured by ELISA for N=39 participants who
have made at least one study visit, for whom genotypes were available at time of analysis, and
where appropriate CSF aliquots were available. For each participant included, samples were
taken from the most recent visit at time of analysis. Symptomatic prion disease CSF samples
(red, N=24 for T-tau, N=19 for NfL) were included from both sporadic and E200K genetic prion
disease. The operator was masked to mutation status. Dots represent means, and line
segments 95% confidence intervals, of measurements within dynamic range with 2 technical
replicates each. C and D) For N=10 participants who had completed a longitudinal visit ≥10
months after their first visit, both T-tau and NfL were measured by ELISA across all visits to
assess longitudinal dynamics. As in Figure 1B, CSF from the following three timepoints is
represented for each participant: initial visit, 2-4 month follow-up visit*, 10-20 month follow-up
visit. (*The 2-4 month follow-up visit was missing for N=1 participant in C and D).
Recent reports have demonstrated that in addition to being detectably elevated in the CSF of
symptomatic prion disease patients, T-tau and NfL are also elevated in blood20–23. Levels of both
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

analytes were therefore measured in participant plasma using the Simoa platform21,24. Plasma
T-tau measurements showed a relatively high level of within-subject fluctuation over a short time
frame (mean CV = 38%), limiting interpretability (Figure S3A). Plasma NfL, on the other hand,
showed better within-subject reliability over the same interim of 2-4 months (mean CV = 18%;
Figure S3B). Group-wise, plasma NfL levels were not significantly different between controls
and carriers (p=0.46, two-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test; Figure 3A), and all individuals were
within normal ranges, well below the typical values reported in symptomatic genetic prion
disease patients20,21. We observed no temporal trend in plasma NfL among participants who
made three visits over 10-20 months (p=0.91, linear regression, Figure 3B).

Figure 3: NfL levels in carrier and control plasma. Plasma NfL levels were measured by
Quanterix Simoa assay. A) For N=43 participants who have made at least one study visit,
samples were taken from the most recent visit at time of analysis. Dots represent singlicate
measurements. Dashed lines for “symptomatic reference ranges” represent mean values
reported for symptomatic genetic prion disease patients20,21 or median values reported for
symptomatic sporadic prion disease patients22,23. B) For N=14 participants who had completed
three visits, plasma NfL levels were measured by Quanterix Simoa for all three visits to assess
longitudinal dynamics. As in Figure 1B, CSF from the following three timepoints is represented
for each participant: initial visit, 2-4 month follow-up visit, 10-20 month follow-up visit.
We measured prion seeding activity in participant CSF samples, using the real-time quaking
induced conversion (RT-QuIC) assay now in widespread clinical diagnostic use25. Using
established pre-specified criteria25, positive reactions were defined as those where at least 2/4
replicates reached a predetermined fluorescence threshold within 24 hours of initiation of the
assay. Under these conditions, positive controls including CSF from both sporadic and genetic
post-mortem confirmed prion disease cases were identified as positive with 88% sensitivity. This
is comparable to reported results25–27 (Figure 4A). Non-carrier control samples were negative
(Figure 4B), as were 22/23 carrier samples (Figures 4C-4F). One E200K mutation carrier had a
positive result (Figure 4E) and is discussed in greater detail below.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 4: RT-QuIC seeding activity in carrier and control CSF, using SHaPrP substrate.
RT-QuIC was performed on CSF from 39 participants who made at least one study visit. For
each participant, samples were taken from the most recent visit at time of analysis. RT-QuIC
was performed following an established protocol for second-generation CSF RT-QuIC using
SHaPrP substrate. Reactions were seeded with 20μL CSF from N=26 symptomatic prion
disease cases and N=39 MGH study participants, with each reaction run in quadruplicate.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Kinetic curves – normalized thioflavin T (ThT) fluorescence (y axis) vs. time in hours (x axis) –
are shown for each sample, averaged across four replicates.
Because RT-QuIC has shown more limited sensitivity for symptomatic genetic prion disease
CSF under standard conditions26,27 than sporadic prion disease, we also tested recombinant
bank vole prion protein (BvPrP), which was reported as a seemingly universal substrate for RTQuIC detection of diverse prion strains in brain homogenate28, though its utility for CSF has not
been explored. Per published criteria28, positive samples were those for which at least 2/4
replicates reached a predetermined fluorescence threshold within 50 hours of initiation of the
assay. With these conditions and criteria, this assay exhibited nominal, albeit weak positives in
10/19 (53%) of positive control CSF samples from symptomatic prion disease cases, and
spontaneous reactions in 2/16 mutation-negative controls (Figure S4), limiting interpretability of
this version of the assay.
RT-QuIC positive pre-symptomatic carrier
One participant, a carrier of the E200K mutation of age ≥60, showed RT-QuIC seeding activity
upon analysis of CSF from their second visit. We subsequently performed additional analysis in
order to fully assess RT-QuIC seeding activity, CSF T-tau and NfL levels, and plasma NfL levels,
from both visits 1 and 2 for this individual. 4/4 RT-QuIC replicates were positive at both visits.
CSF NfL remained in the normal range, comparing both to within-study normal controls and
published reference ranges20,21. CSF T-tau and plasma NfL were modestly higher, for both visits,
than controls and other mutation carriers in our study, consistent with age (Table 2; see
Discussion). This participant’s score on the MRC prion disease rating scale remained stable.
While their score on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) declined nominally between
visits 1 and 2, from 27 to 25 out of a possible 30, fluctuation of one to three points was common
between first and second visits in our participants, with differences of up to six points noted;
furthermore, ten other participants scored 25 or less on the MoCA at least once over their first
two visits. A full battery of 20 tests spanning cognitive, psychiatric, motor and daily living
assessments revealed no striking or consistent changes (Table S2). This individual remained
asymptomatic >1 year after their second visit. CSF PrP levels were in the middle of the
observed range, and were stable between visits 1 and 2.

Fluid
biomarkers
Assessments

CSF PrP (ng/mL)
CSF T-tau (ng/mL)
CSF NfL (ng/mL)
Plasma NfL (pg/mL)
RT-QuIC (positive replicates)
MRC prion disease rating scale
Montreal Cognitive Assessment

Visit 1
287
0.57
1.27
23.5
4/4
20
27

Visit 2
296
0.60
1.48
28.8
4/4
20
25

Table 2: Comparison of visits for one RT-QuIC-positive study participant. RT-QuIC
replicates were designated as positive based on criteria described above, in methods, and
elsewhere25. CSF T-tau, NfL, and PrP were measured by ELISA as described in Figures 1 and
2. Plasma NfL was measured by Simoa as described in Figure 3.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

DISCUSSION
Here we describe interim results from an ongoing longitudinal clinical study characterizing
genetic prion disease mutation carriers and mutation-negative controls. We evaluate candidate
fluid biomarkers for primary and secondary prevention trial designs in pre-symptomatic genetic
prion disease.
PrP-lowering therapeutics are now in preclinical development, so CSF PrP will be important as
a pharmacodynamic biomarker at a minimum, and regulators have expressed openness to its
use as a surrogate endpoint in pre-symptomatic individuals15. Productive use of this marker in
trials, however, will require dependable performance, including a stable baseline, which might
not exist if CSF PrP exhibits high biotemporal variability or if pre-symptomatic individuals exhibit
decline in CSF PrP, similar to the lowered CSF PrP levels seen in symptomatic prion disease
patients16,29–31. Our findings address both of these concerns.
Most historical cohorts in which CSF PrP has been evaluated exhibit large variability in CSF PrP
levels16,29–31, but we previously reported tight 8-11 week test-retest reliability (mean CV=13%)
among uniformly handled samples, suggesting that PrP can be reliably measured if preanalytical factors are well controlled. Here, we validate this hypothesis prospectively, observing
a mean CV of only 7% over 10-20 months among samples handled with exquisite uniformity
and early addition of detergent to minimize adsorption to plasticware. This level of biotemporal
stability is comparable to that reported for core CSF biomarkers including amyloid beta (Aβ) 138, Aβ 1-40, T-tau, and NfL over a similar term32. In addition, whereas our previous report was
based on patients suffering from non-prion mild cognitive impairment16, in whom progressive
reduction of CSF PrP due to disease would not be expected, here we confirm that CSF PrP
concentration is stable even among individuals at high risk of developing prion disease in their
lifetimes.
PrP levels in the CSF of symptomatic D178N individuals have been reported to be lower than in
individuals with other PRNP mutations or no mutation31, a finding replicated here among presymptomatic carriers. This difference has been interpreted by some to indicate a prodromal
disease process underway31. However, other reports suggest that preferential degradation of
D178N mutant PrP may occur constitutively, independent of initiation of the disease process33–36,
leading to lower baseline PrP levels in carriers of this mutation. Our data support the latter
interpretation. Relatively lower CSF PrP levels in D178N carriers appear to be stable over short
(Figure 1A) and longer terms (Figure 1B), suggesting that this level is constant rather than a
dynamic function of approaching symptom onset, which to date has not been observed for any
study participant. Notably, CSF PrP levels were stable even in one E200K mutation carrier with
RT-QuIC seeding activity (Table 2). Thus, the decline in CSF PrP levels seen in symptomatic
disease likely emerges later in the disease process, and should not confound CSF PrP stability
in carriers with no observable pathology.
Broadly, these findings suggest that CSF PrP levels are stable enough in any one individual,
regardless of PRNP mutation, to informatively report on a PrP-lowering therapeutic such as a
PrP-lowering antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) in the central nervous system, over time frames
likely to be of relevance to dose-finding and biomarker-based trials. In a Phase I/II trial of the
huntingtin-lowering ASO HTTRx (RG6042), mutant huntingtin protein was reduced by a mean of
40% in CSF in the two highest dose cohorts37; our data suggest that a similar reduction in PrP
levels, if achievable, would be reliably detected in CSF. The LP tolerability data we were able to
collect suggests that intrathecal delivery of a drug will not be a barrier to treatment among pre11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

symptomatic carriers of PRNP mutations. While our study is biased toward highly motivated
carriers willing to participate in research, this same bias will likely apply to trial recruitment,
supporting the relevance of these data.
Across the assays employed, most carriers could not be distinguished from non-carrier controls.
Put differently, the present data do not support analogies between the disease state of the
average adult carrier and the clinically silent incubation phase of prion disease observed in
animals experimentally inoculated or horizontally infected with prions, during which subclinical
pathology is evident38–40. Both previous cohort studies and case reports have identified
anecdotal prodromal imaging and physiological signatures of prion disease in single individuals
no more than roughly a year in advance of symptomatic onset12–14,41–44. Our findings suggest a
similar picture may be true for fluid biomarkers. Prion seeding activity is detectable in 1/23 presymptomatic carriers, appearing to pre-date symptom onset in this case by at least one year.
While RT-QuIC findings in this individual were clear, with 4/4 replicates positive in both CSF
samples tested, biomarkers of neuronal damage in this individual were not abnormal. Plasma
NfL and CSF T-tau appeared marginally elevated relative to other participants in our study, but
these values still fall within published ranges for age-matched healthy controls45–47 and far below
the average levels reported for symptomatic genetic prion disease patients20,21,48.
To our knowledge, ours is the first report of RT-QuIC seeding activity in the absence of prion
disease symptom onset. These data may suggest that for individuals harboring the E200K
mutation, RT-QuIC seeding activity may offer an early sign of pathological change, before
behavioral or cognitive scales can detect changes in performance. But this finding should be
interpreted with caution. One previous report found that an E200K individual converted from RTQuIC negative to positive between 2 and 4 months after symptom onset49. This difference could
reflect differences in RT-QuIC protocol employed, or variability in conversion time relative to
symptom onset between individuals. Moreover, 9/10 E200K carriers and 13/13 carriers of other
mutations were negative by RT-QuIC. Detectable seeding activity is therefore unlikely to be
consistently present for a long period prior to onset.
Our study has several limitations. Here we chose to focus on a small set of fluid biomarkers with
the best-established association with the prion disease process. Future analyses could explore
other potential sentinel markers of prion disease. Our study is relatively young, and our
analyses to date provide only short- to medium-term and cross-sectional findings. Moving
forward, participants will be seen at annual intervals where feasible, with an eye to enhancing
the longitudinal analysis of CSF PrP and enabling longitudinal tracking of pathological
biomarkers. Complementary perspectives on the above may be provided by two other efforts,
as yet unpublished, to systematically characterize healthy individuals carrying genetic prion
disease predisposing mutations: the UK National Prion Monitoring Cohort17 and UCSF Early
Diagnosis of Human Prion Disease50. Age of onset is highly variable in genetic prion disease,
we have no means to predict time to onset for any individual carrier in our cohort, and annual
hazard for any given individual is low8; prior experience suggests that observing even a handful
of conversions in a prospective carrier cohort could take between ten and twenty years. For this
reason, in the near term a study of this nature is better positioned to report on the state of the
average carrier at a given time than on the dynamics of conversion to the disease state.
A strength of our study is that the highly penetrant prion disease-causing mutations most
common in the general population6 are also those most represented in our cohort. Our
characterization may therefore provide a reasonable cross-sectional snapshot of carriers
available for recruitment for research or trials. At present, our findings regarding disease stage
biomarkers suggests that a “secondary prevention” strategy may not be feasible in genetic prion
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

disease: any prodromal period may be too subtle, too brief, or present in too few individuals at
any given time to enable recruitment of a large enough prodromal cohort to enable trials. It
remains possible that a fluid biomarker that reliably presages symptom onset further in advance
could emerge from further study, particularly in more slowly progressive genetic prion disease
variants, allowing subclinical pathology to be tracked in a small cohort of carriers and leveraged
toward a secondary prevention trial design. However, our present findings may reflect where the
field is likely to stand as therapeutics presently in development approach clinical trials. In this
context, pre-symptomatic trials in genetic prion disease may be better served by a primary
prevention model based on genetic risk.

METHODS
Study design, participants, and ethical approval. The study was conceived and designed
with the pre-specified, publicly announced51 primary goal of evaluating the test-retest stability of
CSF PrP concentration in individuals at risk for genetic prion disease. This study was approved
by the Partners Institutional Review Board in April 2017 (protocol #2017P000214). Participants
were recruited through IRB-approved advertisements hosted by Massachusetts General
Hospital and Prion Alliance. News of the study was often shared by word of mouth in the prion
disease community or by social media accounts run by Prion Alliance and the CJD Foundation.
Participants included known mutation carriers, individuals at risk (typically 50/50 risk with an
affected first-degree relative), and controls including genetic prion disease family members who
had already tested negative for a mutation, spouses, and unrelated but demographically
matched local controls. Participation required two study visits to Boston and the absence of any
contraindication to lumbar puncture (LP). All participants were cognitively sound and provided
written informed consent at the time of study enrollment. This study did not provide predictive
genetic testing for genetic prion disease. If at-risk participants did not know their own genetic
status, the clinical team was masked to their status. The research team performed PRNP
genotyping on de-identified samples for research purposes only. For analyses conducted at
MGH (assessments, post-LP survey, CSF total protein), participant data were collected and
stored using REDCap52. To protect participant privacy, mutations carried by only one individual
are grouped as “Other”, and the dates of participants’ second and third visits were scrambled by
the addition of a normally distributed random variable (mean = 0, standard deviation = 2 weeks
or 2 months, for second and third visits respectively). The study was originally designed to
recruit 10 mutation carriers and 10 controls, a number expected to be sufficient to characterize
test-retest reliability of CSF PrP as a descriptive statistic; enrollment was subsequently
expanded as funding allowed. Of N=69 volunteers who contacted the study staff, N=26 were
excluded due to LP contraindication (N=2), intercurrent illness (N=1), long travel distance for
known mutation-negative participant (N=6), or non-responsiveness to follow-up (N=17). Of the
43 participants who enrolled and completed at least one visit, N=3 have been lost to follow-up
after a first visit (N=1) or second visit (N=2), and N=4 are in touch but currently not participating
due to intercurrent illness (N=2), LP contraindication (N=1), or unavailability to schedule another
visit (N=1). An additional N=2 participants have missed one study visit due to pregnancy. Data
points are omitted from analysis where missing due to missed visits or unsuccessful LPs.
Assessments of cognitive, neuropsychiatric, motor and daily functioning. At each study
visit, participants completed a battery of cognitive tests and standardized assessments of mood,
neuropsychiatric symptoms, motor function, and activities of daily living. The cognitive battery
consisted of standard paper and pencil neuropsychological measures including the Montreal
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)18, Verbal Fluency and Color Word Interference subtests within
the Delis-Kaplan Executive Functioning System (D-KEFS)53, the Grooved Pegboard test54,
Trailmaking Test Parts A and B55, and the DCTclock test, which is a digitized version of the
standard clock drawing test56. Participants also completed computerized testing on an iPad
consisting of the following subtests from the National Institute of Health (NIH) Toolbox Cognition
Battery57: 1) Dimensional Change Card Sort, 2) Flanker Inhibitory Control and Attention Test, 3)
Picture Sequence Memory Test, 4) List Sorting Working Memory Test, 5) Pattern Comparison
Processing Speed Test, 6) Picture Vocabulary Test, 7) Reading Recognition Test and 8)
Auditory Verbal Learning Test (Rey), with supplemental 20 minute delayed recall administered
after completion of the toolbox. Raw scores obtained from cognitive measures were converted
to standardized scores based on population-based normative data published for each test.
Administered self-report questionnaires included the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)58, Beck
Depression Inventory (BDI)59, Measurement of Everyday Cognition- Short Version (ECog12)60,61, Epworth Sleepiness Scale62, National Prion Monitoring Cohort MRC Scale17, Motor
Aspects of Experiences of Daily Living section of the Movement Disorders Society-Unified
Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS M-EDL)63, and the clinician-administered
Neuropsychiatric Inventory – Questionnaire (NPI-Q)64.
Blood processing. Blood was collected in EDTA tubes, then centrifuged at 1000 rpm to
separate plasma for aliquotting into 0.5 mL aliquots. DNA was extracted from whole blood
collected on the first study visit. All samples were codified for analysis. Genotypes were used for
research purposes only. PRNP single nucleotide variants were identified at the Broad Institute
Genomics Platform using a custom targeted capture platform developed by Twist Bioscience
combined with deep Illumina sequencing. These genotypes were then confirmed, and the
presence or absence of octapeptide repeat insertions determined, using a previously described
sequencing and gel analysis protocol65 implemented by Genewiz and/or Quintarabio. Briefly,
this analysis uses primers Int5: 5’-TgCATgTTTTCACgATAgTAACgg-3’, DG2: 5’gCAgTCATTATggCgAACCTTggCTg-3’, and 3'Sal: 5’gTACTgAggATCCTCCTCATCCCACTATCAggAAgA-3’. A DG2/3'Sal PCR product (wild-type:
804bp) is subjected to Sanger sequencing while a DG2/Int5 PCR product (wild-type: 464bp) is
run on a 2% agarose gel to identify large indels.
Lumbar puncture and CSF processing. The lumbar puncture (LP) for CSF collection was
performed using a standardized protocol with a 24G atraumatic Sprotte needle. The time of day
for LP was kept consistent across subjects and 20 mL CSF was collected per subject where
possible. Following collection, CSF was handled uniformly according to an established protocol
designed to minimize PrP loss to plastic through measures including i) highly controlled and
minimized plastic exposure, ii) uniform storage in aliquots no smaller than 40 μL, and iii) addition
of 0.03% CHAPS detergent to a subset of CSF to maintain PrP solubility16. Samples were then
frozen and banked at the Broad Institute where they were stored at -80°C until analysis. CSF
aliquots containing 0.03% CHAPS were used for PrP quantification by ELISA; neat CSF aliquots
with no additive were used for T-tau ELISA, NfL ELISA, and RT-QuIC. Because some LPs were
anomalous or unsuccessful, for some participants CHAPS CSF, neat CSF, or both were not
available. These individuals were excluded from the corresponding analyses. All analyses were
performed by researchers blinded to participant identity and carrier/control status.
Samples from symptomatic prion disease patients. N=26 anonymized pre-mortem
cerebrospinal fluid samples from symptomatic sporadic (N=22) and genetic (N=4, all E200K)
prion disease cases collected between 2001 and 2017 were shared by the Australian National
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Registry (ANCJDR). All cases were autopsy-confirmed as prion
disease, except for N=2 genetic cases, which due to the presence of the mutation are highly
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

likely to have been prion disease. Originally received in ~0.5 mL aliquots, samples were thawed
once following receipt, aliquotted to 100 μL volume, refrozen at -80°C, and thereafter thawed
only immediately preceding experimental use. Due to sample volume limitations, not all positive
controls were utilized in all assays.
Post-LP survey. Following each LP, participants completed a brief survey that we designed to
assess the experience, either on paper or via iPad. They were asked whether they had
previously had an LP, and if so, how many. Participants were then asked to mark an X on a 14cm Likert-type scale to indicate 1) their level of anxiety before the LP procedure, and 2) their
current feelings at the prospect of a future LP. In both cases, the response was marked on a
continuous spectrum bounded by the two extremes of “Not anxious at all” and “Extremely
anxious.” Responses were normalized to the full length of the scale.
PrP ELISA. PrP levels were quantified at the Broad Institute using the BetaPrion Human ELISA
assay, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AnalytikJena, Leipzig, Germany). As
described previously,16 to maintain PrP in solution, CSF samples used for this analysis were
handled with close attention to uniformity, and were spiked with 0.03% CHAPS detergent
immediately after collection. All samples were diluted 1:50 in blocking buffer (0.05% Tween, 5%
BSA, 1x PBS) and assayed in duplicate, with samples from the same individual co-located on
the same plate to facilitate comparison. Following termination of the colorimetric development
reaction, absorbance per well was measured at 450 nm as well as at 620 nm for background
subtraction using a FLUOStar Optima absorbance plate reader, then fit to an internal standard
curve to generate PrP concentrations in ng/mL. The operator was blinded to mutation status.
Total tau ELISA (Broad Institute and University of Gothenburg). CSF T-tau was measured
using the INNOTEST hTau Ag ELISA kit (Fujirebio, Malvern, PA, USA and Ghent, Belgium)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Study samples were diluted 1:4; positive control
symptomatic prion disease samples were diluted 1:10. All samples were assayed in duplicate
with samples from the same individual co-located on the same plate to facilitate comparison.
Following termination of the colorimetric development reaction, absorbance per well was
measured at 450 nm as well as at 620 nm for background subtraction using a FLUOStar Optima
absorbance plate reader, then fit to an internal standard curve. The operator was blinded to
mutation status.
NfL ELISA (Broad Institute). CSF NfL was measured using the NF-light RUO ELISA (Uman
Diagnostics, IBL International, Umea, Sweden) according the manufacturer’s instructions. Study
samples were diluted 1:2; positive control symptomatic prion disease samples were diluted 1:5.
All samples were assayed in duplicate with samples from the same individual co-located on the
same plate to facilitate comparison. Following termination of the colorimetric development
reaction, absorbance per well was measured at 450 nm as well as at 620 nm for background
subtraction using a FLUOStar Optima absorbance plate reader, then fit to an internal standard
curve. The operator was blinded to mutation status.
NfL ELISA (University of Gothenburg). Following CSF collection and processing as described
above, uniformly handled 0.5 mL CSF aliquots with no additive were stored at - 80°C until
shipment on dry ice to the University of Gothenburg for analysis. CSF neurofilament light (NfL)
was measured using an in-house developed ELISA as previously described66.
Simoa analysis of plasma. Following blood processing as described above, 0.5 mL plasma
aliquots were stored at - 80°C until shipment on dry ice to the University of Gothenburg for
analysis. Plasma NfL and total tau levels were measured using the Single molecule array
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

(Simoa) HD-1 Analyzer (Quanterix, Billerica, MA, USA). For T-tau, the commercially available
Tau 2.0 kit was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Quanterix). For NfL, a
previously described in house Simoa assay was used24. Calibrators were run in duplicate and
obvious outlier calibrator replicates were masked before curve fitting. Samples were run in
singlicate with 4-fold dilution. Two quality control samples were run in duplicate at the beginning
and end of each run.
RT-QuIC (Syrian hamster prion protein substrate). The real-time quaking induced
conversion (RT-QuIC) assay was performed according to an established RT-QuIC protocol for
detection of prion seeds in CSF25 that is widely used for diagnosis of symptomatic prion disease
patients. Briefly, truncated recombinant Syrian hamster prion protein (SHaPrP 90-230) was
purified from E. coli according to established protocols67, then frozen at -80°C following
determination of concentration by NanoDrop. On the day of use, PrP was thawed and
centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 5 minutes at 4C in a PALL 100 kDa filter tube. 80 μL of reaction mix
and 20 μL of CSF were combined in each well of a black 96-well plate with a clear bottom (Nunc)
with final concentrations as follows: 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM phosphate buffer, 1 mM EDTA, 10
uM thioflavin T, 0.002% SDS, 1 mg/mL SHaPrP. All samples were loaded in quadruplicate with
each plate containing negative control CSF (healthy mutation-negative individuals) and positive
control CSF (symptomatic prion disease patients). After sealing (Nalgene Nunc International
sealer), plates were incubated in a BMG FLUOstar Optima plate reader at 55°C for 40h with
continuous cycles of 60 s shaking (700 rpm, double-orbital) and 60 s rest, and ThT fluorescence
measurements every 45 min (excitation 450 nm, emission 480 nm, bottom read.) Following
termination of the experiment, fluorescence readings were merged per well to generate kinetic
curves, and the threshold for a positive well was set as the mean value of all negative wells plus
10 standard deviations. A sample was considered overall positive if at least two of four
replicates crossed this threshold. The operator was blinded to mutation status.
RT-QuIC (bank vole prion protein substrate). For the BvPrP alternative protocol, RT-QuIC
was performed according to the protocol described by Orru et al28, with the key modification that
20 μL CSF seed was used per well, rather than 2 μL brain homogenate seed. The total reaction
volume remained 100 μL per well. As above, full-length recombinant bank vole prion protein
(BvPrP 23-230) was purified from E. coli according to established protocols, then frozen at 80°C following determination of concentration by NanoDrop. On the day of use, PrP was thawed
and centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C in a PALL 100 kDa filter tube. 80 μL of
reaction mix and 20 μL of CSF were combined in each well of a black 96-well plate with a clear
bottom (Nunc) with final concentrations as follows: 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM phosphate buffer, 1
mM EDTA, 10 μM thioflavin T, 0.002% SDS, 1 mg/mL BvPrP. All samples were loaded in
quadruplicate with each plate containing negative control CSF (healthy mutation-negative
individuals) and positive control CSF (symptomatic prion disease patients). After sealing
(Nalgene Nunc International sealer), plates were incubated in a BMG FLUOstar Optima plate
reader at 42°C for 50h with continuous cycles of 60 s shaking (700 rpm, double-orbital) and 60 s
rest, and ThT fluorescence measurements every 45 min (excitation 450 nm, emission 480 nm,
bottom read.) Following termination of the experiment, fluorescence readings were merged per
well to generate kinetic curves, and the threshold for a positive well was set as the mean value
of all negative wells plus 10 standard deviations. A sample was considered overall positive if at
least two of four replicates crossed this threshold. The operator was blinded to mutation status.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Data availability
R source code for this study is available in a public repository:
https://github.com/ericminikel/mgh_prnp_fluid_biomarkers De-identified data will be made
available to qualified investigators upon request.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by Prion Alliance, CJD Foundation (the Michael H. Cole, Cheryl
Molloy, José A. Piriz and Sonia E. Piriz, Jeffrey A. Smith, and Mercies in Disguise Memorial
Grants), the Broad Institute (Broad Next Gen Fund and direct donations to Prions@Broad), the
National Science Foundation (GRFP 2015214731 to SMV), the National Institutes of Health
(F31 AI122592 to EVM and R21 TR003040 to SEA), and an anonymous organization. We thank
Brendan Blumenstiel and Anna Koutoulas for assistance with DNA sequencing. We are grateful
to all of the volunteers who participated in this research study.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceived and designed the study: SMV, EVM, SEA
Performed the experiments: SMV, EVM, VJW, BCC, AJM, CDW, AB, BAT, CKN, HD, DU, JG
Provided key samples and reagents: CS, SJC, IL
Supervised the research: CS, SJC, KB, HZ, SEA
Drafted the manuscript: SMV, EVM
Reviewed, edited, and approved the final manuscript: All authors

COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
SEA has received honoraria and/or travel expenses for lectures from Abbvie, Biogen, EIP
Pharma, Roche, and Sironax; has received fees for consulting and/or advisory boards from
Athira, Biogen, Cassava, Cognito, Cortexyme, Sironax and vTv; and has received grant support
from Abbvie, Amylyx, EIP Pharma and Merck. SMV has received speaking fees from Illumina
and has received research support in the form of unrestricted charitable contributions from
Charles River Laboratories and Ionis Pharmaceuticals. EVM has received research support in
the form of unrestricted charitable contributions from Charles River Laboratories and Ionis
Pharmaceuticals and has consulted for Deerfield Management and Guidepoint. KB holds the
Torsten Söderberg Professorship, has served as a consultant or on advisory boards for
Abcam, Axon, Biogen, Lilly, MagQu, Novartis and Roche Diagnostics, and is a cofounder of
Brain Biomarker Solutions in Gothenburg AB, a GU Ventures-based platform company at the
University of Gothenburg. HZ is a Wallenberg Academy Fellow, a cofounder of Brain Biomarker
Solutions in Gothenburg A.B., a GU Ventures-based platform company at the University of
Gothenburg, and has served on advisory boards for Roche Diagnostics, Wave, Samumed and
CogRx.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1.

Prusiner SB. Prions. PNAS. 1998 Nov 10;95(23):13363–13383. PMID: 9811807

2.

Raymond GJ, Zhao HT, Race B, Raymond LD, Williams K, Swayze EE, Graffam S, Le J,
Caron T, Stathopoulos J, O’Keefe R, Lubke LL, Reidenbach AG, Kraus A, Schreiber SL,
Mazur C, Cabin DE, Carroll JB, Minikel EV, Kordasiewicz H, Caughey B, Vallabh SM.
Antisense oligonucleotides extend survival of prion-infected mice. JCI Insight [Internet].
2019 Aug 22 [cited 2019 Aug 29];4(16). Available from:
https://insight.jci.org/articles/view/131175 PMID: 0

3.

Pocchiari M, Puopolo M, Croes EA, Budka H, Gelpi E, Collins S, Lewis V, Sutcliffe T,
Guilivi A, Delasnerie-Laupretre N, Brandel J-P, Alperovitch A, Zerr I, Poser S, Kretzschmar
HA, Ladogana A, Rietvald I, Mitrova E, Martinez-Martin P, de Pedro-Cuesta J, Glatzel M,
Aguzzi A, Cooper S, Mackenzie J, van Duijn CM, Will RG. Predictors of survival in
sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and other human transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies. Brain. 2004 Oct;127(Pt 10):2348–2359. PMID: 15361416

4.

Paterson RW, Torres-Chae CC, Kuo AL, Ando T, Nguyen EA, Wong K, DeArmond SJ,
Haman A, Garcia P, Johnson DY, Miller BL, Geschwind MD. Differential Diagnosis of
Jakob-Creutzfeldt Disease. Arch Neurol. 2012 Dec;69(12):1578–1582. PMCID:
PMC4401069

5.

Haïk S, Marcon G, Mallet A, Tettamanti M, Welaratne A, Giaccone G, Azimi S, Pietrini V,
Fabreguettes J-R, Imperiale D, Cesaro P, Buffa C, Aucan C, Lucca U, Peckeu L, Suardi S,
Tranchant C, Zerr I, Houillier C, Redaelli V, Vespignani H, Campanella A, Sellal F,
Krasnianski A, Seilhean D, Heinemann U, Sedel F, Canovi M, Gobbi M, Di Fede G,
Laplanche J-L, Pocchiari M, Salmona M, Forloni G, Brandel J-P, Tagliavini F. Doxycycline
in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: a phase 2, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
The Lancet Neurology. 2014 Feb;13(2):150–158.

6.

Minikel EV, Vallabh SM, Lek M, Estrada K, Samocha KE, Sathirapongsasuti JF, McLean
CY, Tung JY, Yu LPC, Gambetti P, Blevins J, Zhang S, Cohen Y, Chen W, Yamada M,
Hamaguchi T, Sanjo N, Mizusawa H, Nakamura Y, Kitamoto T, Collins SJ, Boyd A, Will
RG, Knight R, Ponto C, Zerr I, Kraus TFJ, Eigenbrod S, Giese A, Calero M, Pedro-Cuesta
J de, Haïk S, Laplanche J-L, Bouaziz-Amar E, Brandel J-P, Capellari S, Parchi P, Poleggi
A, Ladogana A, O’Donnell-Luria AH, Karczewski KJ, Marshall JL, Boehnke M, Laakso M,
Mohlke KL, Kähler A, Chambert K, McCarroll S, Sullivan PF, Hultman CM, Purcell SM,
Sklar P, Lee SJ van der, Rozemuller A, Jansen C, Hofman A, Kraaij R, Rooij JGJ van,
Ikram MA, Uitterlinden AG, Duijn CM van, (ExAC) EAC, Daly MJ, MacArthur DG.
Quantifying prion disease penetrance using large population control cohorts. Science
Translational Medicine. 2016 Jan 20;8(322):322ra9. PMID: 26791950

7.

Owen J, Beck J, Campbell T, Adamson G, Gorham M, Thompson A, Smithson S, Rosser
E, Rudge P, Collinge J, Mead S. Predictive testing for inherited prion disease: report of 22
years experience. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Dec;22(12):1351–1356.

8.

Minikel EV, Vallabh SM, Orseth MC, Brandel J-P, Haïk S, Laplanche J-L, Zerr I, Parchi P,
Capellari S, Safar J, Kenny J, Fong JC, Takada LT, Ponto C, Hermann P, Knipper T,
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Stehmann C, Kitamoto T, Ae R, Hamaguchi T, Sanjo N, Tsukamoto T, Mizusawa H,
Collins SJ, Chiesa R, Roiter I, de Pedro-Cuesta J, Calero M, Geschwind MD, Yamada M,
Nakamura Y, Mead S. Age at onset in genetic prion disease and the design of preventive
clinical trials. Neurology. 2019 Jun 6; PMID: 31171647
9.

Sperling R, Mormino E, Johnson K. The evolution of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease:
Implications for prevention trials. Neuron. 2014 Nov 5;84(3):608–622. PMCID:
PMC4285623

10. Bateman RJ, Xiong C, Benzinger TLS, Fagan AM, Goate A, Fox NC, Marcus DS, Cairns
NJ, Xie X, Blazey TM, Holtzman DM, Santacruz A, Buckles V, Oliver A, Moulder K, Aisen
PS, Ghetti B, Klunk WE, McDade E, Martins RN, Masters CL, Mayeux R, Ringman JM,
Rossor MN, Schofield PR, Sperling RA, Salloway S, Morris JC. Clinical and Biomarker
Changes in Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer’s Disease. New England Journal of Medicine.
2012 Aug 30;367(9):795–804. PMID: 22784036
11. Ross CA, Aylward EH, Wild EJ, Langbehn DR, Long JD, Warner JH, Scahill RI, Leavitt BR,
Stout JC, Paulsen JS, Reilmann R, Unschuld PG, Wexler A, Margolis RL, Tabrizi SJ.
Huntington disease: natural history, biomarkers and prospects for therapeutics. Nat Rev
Neurol. 2014 Apr;10(4):204–216. PMID: 24614516
12. Cortelli P, Perani D, Montagna P, Gallassi R, Tinuper P, Provini F, Federica P, Avoni P,
Ferrillo F, Anchisi D, Moresco RM, Fazio F, Parchi P, Baruzzi A, Lugaresi E, Gambetti P.
Pre-symptomatic diagnosis in fatal familial insomnia: serial neurophysiological and 18FDGPET studies. Brain. 2006 Mar;129(Pt 3):668–675. PMID: 16399807
13. Cohen OS, Chapman J, Korczyn AD, Nitsan Z, Appel S, Hoffmann C, Rosenmann H,
Kahana E, Lee H. Familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease with the E200K mutation: longitudinal
neuroimaging from asymptomatic to symptomatic CJD. J Neurol. 2015 Mar;262(3):604–
613. PMID: 25522698
14. Rudge P, Jaunmuktane Z, Hyare H, Ellis M, Koltzenburg M, Collinge J, Brandner S, Mead
S. Early neurophysiological biomarkers and spinal cord pathology in inherited prion
disease. Brain. 2019 Jan 28; PMID: 30698738
15. Vallabh SM. Antisense oligonucleotides for the prevention of genetic prion disease. PhD
dissertation. Harvard University; 2019.
16. Vallabh SM, Nobuhara CK, Llorens F, Zerr I, Parchi P, Capellari S, Kuhn E, Klickstein J,
Safar JG, Nery FC, Swoboda KJ, Geschwind MD, Zetterberg H, Arnold SE, Minikel EV,
Schreiber SL. Prion protein quantification in human cerebrospinal fluid as a tool for prion
disease drug development. PNAS. 2019 Apr 1;116(16):7793–7798. PMID: 30936307
17. Thompson AGB, Lowe J, Fox Z, Lukic A, Porter M-C, Ford L, Gorham M, Gopalakrishnan
GS, Rudge P, Walker AS, Collinge J, Mead S. The Medical Research Council prion
disease rating scale: a new outcome measure for prion disease therapeutic trials
developed and validated using systematic observational studies. Brain. 2013 Apr;136(Pt
4):1116–1127. PMID: 23550114
18. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bédirian V, Charbonneau S, Whitehead V, Collin I, Cummings
JL, Chertkow H. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: A Brief Screening Tool For
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Mild Cognitive Impairment. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2005;53(4):695–
699.
19. Minikel EV, Kuhn E, Cocco AR, Vallabh SM, Hartigan CR, Reidenbach AG, Safar JG,
Raymond GJ, McCarthy MD, O’Keefe R, Llorens F, Zerr I, Capellari S, Parchi P, Schreiber
SL, Carr SA. Domain-specific quantification of prion protein in cerebrospinal fluid by
targeted mass spectrometry. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2019 Sep 26; PMID: 31558565
20. Steinacker P, Blennow K, Halbgebauer S, Shi S, Ruf V, Oeckl P, Giese A, Kuhle J,
Slivarichova D, Zetterberg H, Otto M. Neurofilaments in blood and CSF for diagnosis and
prediction of onset in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Scientific Reports. 2016 Dec 8;6:38737.
21. Kovacs GG, Andreasson U, Liman V, Regelsberger G, Lutz MI, Danics K, Keller E,
Zetterberg H, Blennow K. Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid tau and neurofilament
concentrations in rapidly progressive neurological syndromes: a neuropathology-based
cohort. Eur J Neurol. 2017 Nov;24(11):1326-e77. PMID: 28816001
22. Thompson AGB, Luk C, Heslegrave AJ, Zetterberg H, Mead SH, Collinge J, Jackson GS.
Neurofilament light chain and tau concentrations are markedly increased in the serum of
patients with sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, and tau correlates with rate of disease
progression. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2018 Feb 27;jnnp-2017-317793. PMID:
29487167
23. Staffaroni AM, Kramer AO, Casey M, Kang H, Rojas JC, Orrú CD, Caughey B, Allen IE,
Kramer JH, Rosen HJ, Blennow K, Zetterberg H, Geschwind MD. Association of Blood and
Cerebrospinal Fluid Tau Level and Other Biomarkers With Survival Time in Sporadic
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease. JAMA Neurol. 2019 Aug 1;76(8):969–977.
24. Gisslén M, Price RW, Andreasson U, Norgren N, Nilsson S, Hagberg L, Fuchs D, Spudich
S, Blennow K, Zetterberg H. Plasma Concentration of the Neurofilament Light Protein (NFL)
is a Biomarker of CNS Injury in HIV Infection: A Cross-Sectional Study. EBioMedicine.
2015 Nov 22;3:135–140. PMCID: PMC4739412
25. Orrú CD, Groveman BR, Hughson AG, Zanusso G, Coulthart MB, Caughey B. Rapid and
sensitive RT-QuIC detection of human Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease using cerebrospinal fluid.
MBio. 2015;6(1). PMCID: PMC4313917
26. Franceschini A, Baiardi S, Hughson AG, McKenzie N, Moda F, Rossi M, Capellari S,
Green A, Giaccone G, Caughey B, Parchi P. High diagnostic value of second generation
CSF RT-QuIC across the wide spectrum of CJD prions. Sci Rep. 2017 Sep 6;7(1):10655.
PMCID: PMC5587608
27. Foutz A, Appleby BS, Hamlin C, Liu X, Yang S, Cohen Y, Chen W, Blevins J, Fausett C,
Wang H, Gambetti P, Zhang S, Hughson A, Tatsuoka C, Schonberger LB, Cohen ML,
Caughey B, Safar JG. Diagnostic and prognostic value of human prion detection in
cerebrospinal fluid. Ann Neurol. 2017 Jan;81(1):79–92. PMCID: PMC5266667
28. Orrú CD, Groveman BR, Raymond LD, Hughson AG, Nonno R, Zou W, Ghetti B, Gambetti
P, Caughey B. Bank Vole Prion Protein As an Apparently Universal Substrate for RTQuIC-Based Detection and Discrimination of Prion Strains. PLOS Pathogens. 2015 Jun
18;11(6):e1004983.
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

29. Abu Rumeileh S, Lattanzio F, Stanzani Maserati M, Rizzi R, Capellari S, Parchi P.
Diagnostic Accuracy of a Combined Analysis of Cerebrospinal Fluid t-PrP, t-tau, p-tau, and
Aβ42 in the Differential Diagnosis of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease from Alzheimer’s Disease
with Emphasis on Atypical Disease Variants. J Alzheimers Dis. 55(4):1471–1480. PMCID:
PMC5181677
30. Dorey A, Tholance Y, Vighetto A, et al. Association of cerebrospinal fluid prion protein
levels and the distinction between alzheimer disease and creutzfeldt-jakob disease. JAMA
Neurol. 2015 Mar 1;72(3):267–275.
31. Villar-Piqué A, Schmitz M, Lachmann I, Karch A, Calero O, Stehmann C, Sarros S,
Ladogana A, Poleggi A, Santana I, Ferrer I, Mitrova E, Žáková D, Pocchiari M, Baldeiras I,
Calero M, Collins SJ, Geschwind MD, Sánchez-Valle R, Zerr I, Llorens F. Cerebrospinal
Fluid Total Prion Protein in the Spectrum of Prion Diseases. Mol Neurobiol. 2018 Jul 30;
PMID: 30062673
32. Trombetta BA, Carlyle BC, Koenig AM, Shaw LM, Trojanowski JQ, Wolk DA, Locascio JJ,
Arnold SE. The technical reliability and biotemporal stability of cerebrospinal fluid
biomarkers for profiling multiple pathophysiologies in Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS One
[Internet]. 2018 Mar 5 [cited 2019 Mar 27];13(3). Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5837100/ PMCID: PMC5837100
33. Parchi P, Petersen RB, Chen SG, Autilio-Gambetti L, Capellari S, Monari L, Cortelli P,
Montagna P, Lugaresi E, Gambetti P. Molecular pathology of fatal familial insomnia. Brain
Pathol. 1998 Jul;8(3):539–548. PMID: 9669705
34. Petersen RB, Parchi P, Richardson SL, Urig CB, Gambetti P. Effect of the D178N mutation
and the codon 129 polymorphism on the metabolism of the prion protein. J Biol Chem.
1996 May 24;271(21):12661–12668. PMID: 8647879
35. Watts JC, Giles K, Bourkas MEC, Patel S, Oehler A, Gavidia M, Bhardwaj S, Lee J,
Prusiner SB. Towards authentic transgenic mouse models of heritable PrP prion diseases.
Acta Neuropathol. 2016 Oct 1;132(4):593–610.
36. Jackson WS, Borkowski AW, Watson NE, King OD, Faas H, Jasanoff A, Lindquist S.
Profoundly different prion diseases in knock-in mice carrying single PrP codon
substitutions associated with human diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013 Sep
3;110(36):14759–14764. PMCID: PMC3767526
37. Tabrizi SJ, Leavitt BR, Landwehrmeyer GB, Wild EJ, Saft C, Barker RA, Blair NF, Craufurd
D, Priller J, Rickards H, Rosser A, Kordasiewicz HB, Czech C, Swayze EE, Norris DA,
Baumann T, Gerlach I, Schobel SA, Paz E, Smith AV, Bennett CF, Lane RM. Targeting
Huntingtin Expression in Patients with Huntington’s Disease. New England Journal of
Medicine [Internet]. 2019 May 6 [cited 2019 Jun 11]; Available from:
https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1900907
38. Orrù CD, Hughson AG, Race B, Raymond GJ, Caughey B. Time Course of Prion Seeding
Activity in Cerebrospinal Fluid of Scrapie-Infected Hamsters after Intratongue and
Intracerebral Inoculations. J Clin Microbiol. 2012 Apr;50(4):1464–1466. PMCID:
PMC3318555

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

39. Tamgüney G, Francis KP, Giles K, Lemus A, DeArmond SJ, Prusiner SB. Measuring
prions by bioluminescence imaging. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009 Sep 1;106(35):15002–
15006. PMCID: PMC2736416
40. Llorens F, Barrio T, Correia Â, Villar-Piqué A, Thüne K, Lange P, Badiola JJ, Schmitz M,
Lachmann I, Bolea R, Zerr I. Cerebrospinal Fluid Prion Disease Biomarkers in Pre-clinical
and Clinical Naturally Occurring Scrapie. Mol Neurobiol. 2018 Nov;55(11):8586–8591.
PMID: 29572672
41. Satoh K, Nakaoke R, Nishiura Y, Tsujino A, Motomura M, Yoshimura T, Sasaki K,
Shigematsu K, Shirabe S, Eguchi K. Early detection of sporadic CJD by diffusion-weighted
MRI before the onset of symptoms. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011 Aug;82(8):942–
943. PMID: 20542932
42. Verde F, Ticozzi N, Messina S, Calcagno N, Girotti F, Maderna L, Moda F, Scola E, Falini
A, Tagliavini F, Silani V. MRI abnormalities found 1 year prior to symptom onset in a case
of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. J Neurol. 2016 Mar;263(3):597–599. PMID: 26872662
43. Terasawa Y, Fujita K, Izumi Y, Kaji R. Early detection of familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
on diffusion-weighted imaging before symptom onset. J Neurol Sci. 2012 Aug 15;319(1–
2):130–132. PMID: 22640903
44. Zanusso G, Camporese G, Ferrari S, Santelli L, Bongianni M, Fiorini M, Monaco S,
Manara R, Cagnin A. Long-term preclinical magnetic resonance imaging alterations in
sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Ann Neurol. 2016 Oct;80(4):629–632. PMID:
27501375
45. Mattsson N, Rosén E, Hansson O, Andreasen N, Parnetti L, Jonsson M, Herukka S-K, van
der Flier WM, Blankenstein MA, Ewers M, Rich K, Kaiser E, Verbeek MM, Olde Rikkert M,
Tsolaki M, Mulugeta E, Aarsland D, Visser PJ, Schröder J, Marcusson J, de Leon M,
Hampel H, Scheltens P, Wallin A, Eriksdotter-Jönhagen M, Minthon L, Winblad B, Blennow
K, Zetterberg H. Age and diagnostic performance of Alzheimer disease CSF biomarkers.
Neurology. 2012 Feb 14;78(7):468–476. PMCID: PMC3280049
46. Mattsson N, Andreasson U, Zetterberg H, Blennow K. Association of Plasma
Neurofilament Light With Neurodegeneration in Patients With Alzheimer Disease. JAMA
Neurol. 2017 May;74(5):557–566. PMCID: PMC5822204
47. Sjögren M, Vanderstichele H, Agren H, Zachrisson O, Edsbagge M, Wikkelsø C, Skoog I,
Wallin A, Wahlund LO, Marcusson J, Nägga K, Andreasen N, Davidsson P, Vanmechelen
E, Blennow K. Tau and Abeta42 in cerebrospinal fluid from healthy adults 21-93 years of
age: establishment of reference values. Clin Chem. 2001 Oct;47(10):1776–1781. PMID:
11568086
48. Abu-Rumeileh S, Capellari S, Stanzani-Maserati M, Polischi B, Martinelli P, Caroppo P,
Ladogana A, Parchi P. The CSF neurofilament light signature in rapidly progressive
neurodegenerative dementias. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2018 Jan 11;10(1):3. PMCID:
PMC5784714
49. Sano K, Satoh K, Atarashi R, Takashima H, Iwasaki Y, Yoshida M, Sanjo N, Murai H,
Mizusawa H, Schmitz M, Zerr I, Kim Y-S, Nishida N. Early Detection of Abnormal Prion
22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Protein in Genetic Human Prion Diseases Now Possible Using Real-Time QUIC Assay.
PLOS ONE. 2013 Jan 25;8(1):e54915.
50. Takada LT, Kim M-O, Cleveland RW, Wong K, Forner SA, Gala II, Fong JC, Geschwind
MD. Genetic prion disease: Experience of a rapidly progressive dementia center in the
United States and a review of the literature. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet.
2017 Jan;174(1):36–69. PMID: 27943639
51. Vallabh S. Prion Alliance sponsors MGH research study [Internet]. PrionAlliance.org. 2017
[cited 2017 Sep 29]. Available from: http://www.prionalliance.org/2017/07/19/prion-alliancesponsors-mgh-research-study/
52. Harris PA, Taylor R, Minor BL, Elliott V, Fernandez M, O’Neal L, McLeod L, Delacqua G,
Delacqua F, Kirby J, Duda SN, REDCap Consortium. The REDCap consortium: Building
an international community of software platform partners. J Biomed Inform. 2019
Jul;95:103208. PMID: 31078660
53. Delis DC, Kaplan E, Kramer JH. Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System® (D-KEFS®):
Examiner’s manual: flexibility of thinking, concept formation, problem solving, planning,
creativity, impulse control, inhibition. Pearson; 2001.
54. Strauss E, Sherman EMS, Spreen O. A Compendium of Neuropsychological Tests:
Administration, Norms and Commentary. 3rd ed. Oxford Univeristy Press; 2006.
55. Reitan RM, Wolfson D. Halstead-Reitan Neuropsychological Battery. Tucson, AZ:
Neuropsychology Press; 1993.
56. Souillard-Mandar W, Davis R, Rudin C, Au R, Libon DJ, Swenson R, Price CC, Lamar M,
Penney DL. Learning Classification Models of Cognitive Conditions from Subtle Behaviors
in the Digital Clock Drawing Test. Mach Learn. 2016 Mar;102(3):393–441. PMCID:
PMC4821477
57. Weintraub S, Dikmen SS, Heaton RK, Tulsky DS, Zelazo PD, Bauer PJ, Carlozzi NE,
Slotkin J, Blitz D, Wallner-Allen K, Fox NA, Beaumont JL, Mungas D, Nowinski CJ, Richler
J, Deocampo JA, Anderson JE, Manly JJ, Borosh B, Havlik R, Conway K, Edwards E,
Freund L, King JW, Moy C, Witt E, Gershon RC. Cognition assessment using the NIH
Toolbox. Neurology. 2013 Mar 12;80(11 Suppl 3):S54–S64. PMCID: PMC3662346
58. Leyfer OT, Ruberg JL, Woodruff-Borden J. Examination of the utility of the Beck Anxiety
Inventory and its factors as a screener for anxiety disorders. J Anxiety Disord.
2006;20(4):444–458. PMID: 16005177
59. Beck AT, Steer RA, Ball R, Ranieri WF. Comparison of Beck Depression Inventories-IA
and-II in Psychiatric Outpatients. Journal of Personality Assessment. 1996 Dec
1;67(3):588–597. PMID: 8991972
60. Farias ST, Mungas D, Reed BR, Cahn-Weiner D, Jagust W, Baynes K, DeCarli C. The
Measurement of Everyday Cognition (ECog): Scale Development and Psychometric
Properties. Neuropsychology. 2008 Jul;22(4):531–544. PMCID: PMC2877034

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

61. Farias ST, Mungas D, Harvey DJ, Simmons A, Reed BR, DeCarli C. The Measurement of
Everyday Cognition (ECog): Development and validation of a short form. Alzheimers
Dement. 2011 Nov;7(6):593–601. PMCID: PMC3211103
62. Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: the Epworth sleepiness
scale. Sleep. 1991 Dec;14(6):540–545. PMID: 1798888
63. Goetz CG, Tilley BC, Shaftman SR, Stebbins GT, Fahn S, Martinez-Martin P, Poewe W,
Sampaio C, Stern MB, Dodel R, Dubois B, Holloway R, Jankovic J, Kulisevsky J, Lang AE,
Lees A, Leurgans S, LeWitt PA, Nyenhuis D, Olanow CW, Rascol O, Schrag A, Teresi JA,
Hilten JJ van, LaPelle N. Movement Disorder Society-sponsored revision of the Unified
Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS): Scale presentation and clinimetric
testing results. Movement Disorders. 2008;23(15):2129–2170.
64. Cummings JL, Mega M, Gray K, Rosenberg-Thompson S, Carusi DA, Gornbein J. The
Neuropsychiatric Inventory: comprehensive assessment of psychopathology in dementia.
Neurology. 1994 Dec;44(12):2308–2314. PMID: 7991117
65. Capellari S, Vital C, Parchi P, Petersen RB, Ferrer X, Jarnier D, Pegoraro E, Gambetti P,
Julien J. Familial prion disease with a novel 144-bp insertion in the prion protein gene in a
Basque family. Neurology. 1997 Jul;49(1):133–141. PMID: 9222181
66. Gaetani L, Höglund K, Parnetti L, Pujol-Calderon F, Becker B, Eusebi P, Sarchielli P,
Calabresi P, Di Filippo M, Zetterberg H, Blennow K. A new enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay for neurofilament light in cerebrospinal fluid: analytical validation and clinical
evaluation. Alzheimers Res Ther [Internet]. 2018 Jan 23 [cited 2019 Sep 10];10. Available
from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6389166/ PMCID: PMC6389166
67. Orrù CD, Groveman BR, Hughson AG, Manca M, Raymond LD, Raymond GJ, Campbell
KJ, Anson KJ, Kraus A, Caughey B. RT-QuIC Assays for Prion Disease Detection and
Diagnostics. Methods Mol Biol. 2017;1658:185–203. PMID: 28861791

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

SUPPLEMENT

Figure S1: Pre- and post-procedure anxiety in participants experiencing their first lumbar
puncture. Following the lumbar puncture procedure, participants were asked to quantitatively
rank both their anxiety before the procedure and their post-procedure anxiety when
contemplating a future LP, using a Likert-type scale. Responses are normalized to the length of
the scale and shown only for first study visits, for N=24 individuals who had not undergone a
previous LP.

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure S2: Markers of neuronal damage in carrier and control CSF (University of
Gothenburg). CSF A) T-tau and B) NfL and C) glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) were
measured by ELISA for N=28 participants who had made at least one study visit, for whom
genotypes were available at time of analysis, and where appropriate CSF aliquots were
available. For each participant included, samples were taken from the most recent visit at time
of analysis. The operator was masked to mutation status. Dots represent means, and line
segments 95% confidence intervals, of measurements within dynamic range with 2 technical
26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

replicates each. D-F) For N=22 participants who had completed two visits at time of analysis,
both total tau and NfL were measured by ELISA for both visits to assess within-subject
variability over a 2-4 month timeframe. E-F) Correlation between results obtained from two
independent ELISA analyses at different sites (performed using different assays for NfL, and the
same commercial assay for T-tau; see Methods) for N=36 samples from N=27 individuals (G)
and N=39 samples from N=27 individuals (H).

Figure S3: Short-term test-retest stability of markers of neuronal damage in carrier and
control plasma (University of Gothenburg). Plasma T-tau and NfL levels were measured by
Quanterix Simoa assay. For N=30 participants (T-tau) or N=31 participants (NfL) who have
made at least two study visits, samples were taken from the initial two study visits, completed 24 months apart. Dots represent singlicate measurements. For participants with exactly two visits,
the NfL measurement from the second visit displayed here is also displayed in Figure 3.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure S4: RT-QuIC results with recombinant bank vole PrP. RT-QuIC was performed on
CSF from 39 participants who have made at least one study visit, selected to match the
samples used in the SHaPrP RT-QuIC analysis (Figure 4). RT-QuIC was performed following a
published protocol for RT-QuIC using BvPrP substrate, intended for prion detection in brain
homogenate. Reagent concentrations were adjusted to accommodate 20 μL CSF in a final
reaction volume of 100 μL. N=22 prion disease cases or N=39 MGH study participants were

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

assayed, with each reaction run in quadruplicate. Kinetic curves – normalized thioflavin T (ThT)
fluorescence (y axis) vs. time in hours (x axis) – are shown for each replicate.
Table S1. Measures of cognitive, psychiatric, motor and daily functioning in all MGH
study participants. Scores are averaged across group (carrier vs. non-carrier) at first
completed study visit. P values are from two-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests. Bonferroni
corrected p values account for a multiple testing burden of N=20 for all measures shown. Raw
scores are provided according to the methods standard for each test, with the exception of the
NIH Toolbox overall cognition composite score, and the digital clock drawing test, where digitally
recorded features were compiled into a composite score as previously described56.

Montreal Cognitive
Assessment
NIH Toolbox Overall Cognition

Assessment
scores

Questionnaire
scores

Digital clock-drawing test
Trailmaking test, Part A
Trailmaking test, Part B
DKEFS Color-word
interference test, inhibition time
DKEFS Color-word
interference test, switching
time
DKEFS Letter Fluency
DKEFS Category Fluency
DKEFS Category Switching
Grooved pegboard test,
dominant hand
Grooved pegboard test, nondominant hand
RAVLT – delayed recall
MRC prion disease rating
scale
Epworth Sleepiness Scale
Athens Insomnia Scale
Motor Aspects of Experience
Beck Anxiety Inventory
Beck Depression Inventory
Everyday Cognition

PRNP
mutation
carriers

Non-carrier
controls

P
value
(raw)

P value
(Bonferroni
corrected)

27.6±1.6
103.5±12.1
73.8±20.3
21.7±7.0
57.3±29.4

28.4±1.8
115.2±14.1
73.5±23.7
22.0±8.2
46.6±11.8

0.16
0.029
0.58
0.31
0.22

1
0.59
1
1
1

53.0±13.7

49.9±11.6

0.58

1

60.3±14.6
40.3±12.6
42.7±10.5
14.6±2.5

57.6±16.4
48.2±10.1
44.9±10.8
15.7±2.2

0.52
0.11
0.46
0.9

1
1
1
1

72.2±15.1

62.9±9.6

0.062

1

82.0±21.5
8.8±3.2

69.1±14.5
10.0±2.8

0.018
0.42

0.36
1

20.0±0.2
6.4±3.5
5.9±4.6
1.3±2.1
7.5±7.6
6.0±6.0
13.0±2.6

20.0±0.0
5.4±3.5
4.9±5.1
0.2±0.5
3.6±4.6
4.3±6.2
12.2±0.5

1
0.84
0.97
0.16
0.048
0.64
0.93

1
1
1
1
0.96
1
1

National Institute of Health (NIH); Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System (DKEFS); Rey
Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT).

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table S2. Additional measures of cognitive, psychiatric, motor and daily functioning for
one RT-QuIC positive MGH study participant. Visits were separated by two months.
Normative scores (based on normative data matched by age, gender, and education) are
provided according to the published standard for each test.

Visit 1
Raw

Standard
(%ile)
---0.11 (54)
-1.75 (4)

Visit 2
Raw

Standard
(%ile)
----0.67 (25)
-0.45 (33)

Reliable
Change
Interval

Montreal Cognitive Assessment
27
25
+2.47
NIH Toolbox Overall Cognition
109
104
+10.17
Digital clock drawing test
51
56
+16.04
Trailmaking test, Part A
40
51
+8.49* (¯)
Trailmaking test, Part B
178
120
+13.17* (­)
DKEFS Color-word interference
63
12 (75)
70
10 (50)
+12.80
Assesstest, inhibition time
ment
DKEFS Color-word interference
86
9 (37)
73
11 (63)
+11.90* (­)
scores
test, switching time
DKEFS Letter Fluency
43
12 (75)
37
11 (63)
+16.11
DKEFS Category Fluency
38
12 (75)
36
11 (63)
+14.27
DKEFS Category Switching
12
10 (50)
14
11 (63)
+3.37
Grooved pegboard test,
122
-2.14 (2)
131
-2.60 (<1)
+11.42
dominant hand
Grooved pegboard test, non157 -2.67 (<1)
155
-2.59 (<1)
+13.59
dominant hand
RAVLT– delayed recall
6
-0.42 (34)
6
-0.42 (34)
+3.20
Epworth Sleepiness Scale
3
-2
--Athens Insomnia Scale
7
-1
--Question- Motor Aspects of Experience
1
-0
--naire
Beck Anxiety Inventory
9
-5
--scores
Beck Depression Inventory
4
-6
--Everyday Cognition
12
-12
--Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System (DKEFS); Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT);
Standard scores for DKEFS subtests are presented as scaled scores (M=10, SD=3); Standard scores for
Trailmaking test, Grooved pegboard, and RAVLT are presented as z-scores (M=0, SD=1). The reliable
change interval was calculated based on the standard deviation of the residuals predicting time 2 scores
from time 1 scores (using a two-tailed 90% confidence interval) within the non-carrier control group. After
raw scores were standardized based on published age and gender norms for each test, this individual
performed within the average range for the majority of cognitive measures administered at both time 1
and time 2. The notable exception is the grooved pegboard test where this individual’s performance
consistently fell within the impaired range for both dominant and non-dominant hands, and likely
represents an area of relative weakness that is consistent over time. Although performance on
Trailmaking Test Part B was also impaired at time point 1, performance significantly improved across the
retest interval and the score was within the average range at time 2. *Tests falling outside of the
confidence interval of reliable change between visits with accompanying arrows indicating whether
performance at visit 2 was better (­) or worse (¯) than performance at visit 1.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

STROBE Statement
checklist of items that should be included in reports of observational studies

Title and abstract

Item
No
1

Introduction
Background/rationale

2

Objectives

3

Methods
Study design

4

Setting

5

Participants

6

Variables

7

Data sources/
measurement

8*

Bias

9

Study size
Quantitative variables

10
11

Recommendation
(a) Indicate the study’s design with a commonly
used term in the title or the abstract
(b) Provide in the abstract an informative and
balanced summary of what was done and what was
found

Page
No
1
1

Explain the scientific background and rationale for
the investigation being reported
State specific objectives, including any prespecified
hypotheses

2

Present key elements of study design early in the
paper
Describe the setting, locations, and relevant dates,
including periods of recruitment, exposure, followup, and data collection
(a) Cohort study—Give the eligibility criteria, and the
sources and methods of selection of participants.
Describe methods of follow-up
Case-control study—Give the eligibility criteria, and
the sources and methods of case ascertainment and
control selection. Give the rationale for the choice of
cases and controls
Cross-sectional study—Give the eligibility criteria,
and the sources and methods of selection of
participants
(b) Cohort study—For matched studies, give
matching criteria and number of exposed and
unexposed
Case-control study—For matched studies, give
matching criteria and the number of controls per
case
Clearly define all outcomes, exposures, predictors,
potential confounders, and effect modifiers. Give
diagnostic criteria, if applicable
For each variable of interest, give sources of data
and details of methods of assessment
(measurement). Describe comparability of
assessment methods if there is more than one
group
Describe any efforts to address potential sources of
bias
Explain how the study size was arrived at
Explain how quantitative variables were handled in

2

31

2, 13

1
3,13

3

3,4,5,7,8
13-15

11
13
3-8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Statistical methods

Results
Participants

Descriptive
data

Outcome data

Main results

Other analyses
Discussion
Key results
Limitations

12

the analyses. If applicable, describe which
groupings were chosen and why
(a) Describe all statistical methods, including those
used to control for confounding
(b) Describe any methods used to examine
subgroups and interactions
(c) Explain how missing data were addressed
(d) Cohort study—If applicable, explain how loss to
follow-up was addressed
Case-control study—If applicable, explain how
matching of cases and controls was addressed
Cross-sectional study—If applicable, describe
analytical methods taking account of sampling
strategy
(e) Describe any sensitivity analyses

3-8
N/A
13
13

N/A

13* (a) Report numbers of individuals at each stage of study—eg
numbers potentially eligible, examined for eligibility, confirmed
eligible, included in the study, completing follow-up, and analysed
(b) Give reasons for non-participation at each stage
(c) Consider use of a flow diagram
14* (a) Give characteristics of study participants (eg demographic,
clinical, social) and information on exposures and potential
confounders
(b) Indicate number of participants with missing data for each
variable of interest
(c) Cohort study—Summarise follow-up time (eg, average and
total amount)
15* Cohort study—Report numbers of outcome events or summary
measures over time
Case-control study—Report numbers in each exposure category,
or summary measures of exposure
Cross-sectional study—Report numbers of outcome events or
summary measures
16 (a) Give unadjusted estimates and, if applicable, confounderadjusted estimates and their precision (eg, 95% confidence
interval). Make clear which confounders were adjusted for and
why they were included
(b) Report category boundaries when continuous variables were
categorized
(c) If relevant, consider translating estimates of relative risk into
absolute risk for a meaningful time period
17 Report other analyses done—eg analyses of subgroups and
interactions, and sensitivity analyses

3,13

18
19

3-8
12

Summarise key results with reference to study objectives
Discuss limitations of the study, taking into account sources of
potential bias or imprecision. Discuss both direction and
32

13
3
3-8
1,3
N/A

N/A

N/A

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.19014217; this version posted December 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Interpretation

20

Generalisability

21

Other information
Funding
22

magnitude of any potential bias
Give a cautious overall interpretation of results considering
objectives, limitations, multiplicity of analyses, results from similar
studies, and other relevant evidence
Discuss the generalisability (external validity) of the study results
Give the source of funding and the role of the funders for the
present study and, if applicable, for the original study on which
the present article is based

1113
12
17

*Give information separately for cases and controls in case-control studies and, if applicable, for
exposed and unexposed groups in cohort and cross-sectional studies.
Note: An Explanation and Elaboration article discusses each checklist item and gives
methodological background and published examples of transparent reporting. The STROBE
checklist is best used in conjunction with this article (freely available on the Web sites of PLoS
Medicine at http://www.plosmedicine.org/, Annals of Internal Medicine at http://www.annals.org/,
and Epidemiology at http://www.epidem.com/). Information on the STROBE Initiative is available
at www.strobe-statement.org.

33

