medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006908; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1

Noise-Assisted MEMD-Based PhaseConnectivity Analysis to Personalize
Closed-Loop DBS Therapy in
Epilepsy Patients
Sina Farahmand, Member, IEEE, Tiwalade Sobayo, Member, IEEE
and David J. Mogul, Member, IEEE

Abstract— Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a treatment that
has been explored for controlling seizures in patients with
intractable epilepsy. Many clinical and pre-clinical studies using
DBS therapy determine stimulation parameters through trial and
error. The same stimulation parameters are often applied to the
whole cohort, which consequently produces mixed results of
responders and non-responders. In this paper, an adaptive nonlinear analytical methodology is proposed to extract stimulation
frequency and location(s) from endogenous brain dynamics of
epilepsy patients, using phase-synchrony and phase-connectivity
analysis, as seizures evolve. The proposed analytical method was
applied to seizures recorded using depth electrodes implanted in
hippocampus and amygdala in three patients. A reduction in
phase-synchrony was observed in all patients around seizure
onset. However, phase-synchrony started to gradually increase
from mid-ictal and achieved its maximum level at seizure
termination. This result suggests that hyper-synchronization of
the epileptic network may be a crucial mechanism by which the
brain naturally terminates seizure. Stimulation frequency and
locations that matched the network phase-synchrony at seizure
termination were extracted using phase-connectivity analysis.
One patient with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) had a stimulation
frequency ~15 Hz with the stimulation locations confined to the
hippocampus. The other two patients with extra-temporal lobe
epilepsy (ETE) had stimulation frequency ~90 Hz with at least
one stimulation location outside of hippocampus. These results
suggest that DBS parameters should vary based on the patient's
underlying pathology. The proposed methodology provides an
algorithm for tuning DBS parameters for individual patients in
an effort to increase the clinical efficacy of the therapy.
Index Terms—Epilepsy, closed-loop deep brain stimulation
(DBS), noise-assisted multivariate empirical mode decomposition
(NA-MEMD), intrinsic mode function (IMF), phase-synchrony
dynamics, phase-connectivity, phase locking value (PLV).

*Research supported by National Institute of Health, United States, (R01
NS092760) to DJM.
S. Farahmand has joined BioSig Technologies, Inc., Los Angeles, CA
90025, USA, (e-mail: sfarahmand@biosigtech.com). He was with Laboratory
of Neural Engineering Research, Biomedical Engineering Department, Illinois
Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL, 60616-3793 USA.
T. Sobayo, and D. J. Mogul are with Laboratory of Neural Engineering
Research, Biomedical Engineering Department, Illinois Institute of
Technology, Chicago, IL, 60616-3793 USA, (e-mail: Mogul@ iit.edu).

I. INTRODUCTION

E

pilepsy is a chronic disorder of the brain characterized by
recurrent, spontaneous, and abnormal brain activity called
epileptic seizures [1]. Epilepsy patients may undergo unusual
behavior, sensations, or loss of consciousness during seizures.
Approximately, 70 million people worldwide are living with
epilepsy, in which about one-third of them do not respond to
antiepileptic medications or become drug-resistant [2], [3].
Epilepsy surgery is an alternative treatment for these drugrefractory patients, in which regions of the brain responsible
for generating seizures are resected [4], [5]. However, only
patients with well-localized epileptogenic zones in an area out
of the eloquent cortex are surgical candidates. For drugrefractory epilepsy patients who do not benefit from resecting
surgery, an alternative therapeutic approach is needed.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has been widely evaluated
for controlling intractable seizures [6]-[8]. DBS involves
delivering electrical impulses to electrodes implanted within
specific areas of the brain. DBS has the capacity to modulate
brain activity in a controlled and reversible manner [9]-[11].
Although the therapeutic mechanisms underlying DBS are not
well understood, it is the only effective therapy for many
people suffering from refractory neurological disorders.
Open-loop DBS and closed-loop DBS are the two, primary
approaches that have been utilized in order to control seizures
over the last decade [12], [13]. In open-loop DBS, electrical
stimulation is delivered to the target location(s) in a preprogrammed manner and independent of a patient’s brain
dynamics and clinical symptoms [14], [15]. That is, there is no
embedded unit in open-loop stimulation devices to record and
analyze endogenous brain activities of patients and adjust the
stimulation parameters accordingly in order to improve seizure
control. In open-loop DBS systems, electrical stimulation is
applied either continuously or intermittently based on a clockdetermined cycle [16]. SANTE (Stimulation of the Anterior
Nuclei of Thalamus for Epilepsy) study using Medtronic DBS
device, Activa PC, (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was
performed in an open-loop manner to reduce the frequency of
seizures in epilepsy patients [17]. This clinical study reported

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006908; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2

Fig. 1. Conceptual front-end of the proposed (a) phase-synchrony analysis, and (b) phase connectivity analysis.

that those patients who responded to the therapeutic thalamic
stimulation experienced approximately 41% reduction in their
seizure frequency, over 4 months of DBS, relative to baseline
seizure frequency prior to the start of stimulation [17].
Alternatively, in an ideal closed-loop DBS, stimulation
parameters are tuned based on a patient’s brain activity and
clinical symptoms. Electrical stimulation is triggered in
response to seizure detection [18]. NeuroPace Responsive
Neurostimulator System (RNS), (NeuroPace, Mountain View,
CA, USA), has been used in a closed-loop manner to reduce
the frequency of seizures in epilepsy patients [19]. The RNS
delivers DBS upon seizure detection or imminent onset;
however, stimulation parameters are pre-determined and
independent of a patient’s endogenous brain dynamics. The
RNS clinical trials reported an approximately 50% reduction
in seizure frequency in about 54% of patients [19].
In most of the clinical and pre-clinical studies using DBS
therapy, electrical stimulation parameters such as frequency
and amplitude are derived based on trial and error [20], [21].
Alternatively, a therapeutic DBS protocol based on real-time
seizure dynamics measured and evaluated prior to the next
seizure could potentially improve clinical efficacy and may
potentially result in personalizing and optimizing DBS therapy
for individual epilepsy patients. In our previous study, we
validated the effectiveness of employing this approach in
terminating seizures in a freely moving chronic rat model of
limbic epilepsy [22].
It has been widely shown that synchrony among neuronal
oscillators could be altered in epilepsy, which itself may
underlie seizure onset [23]-[25]. Therefore, evaluating the
synchrony dynamics within an epileptic network may provide
essential insight into seizure dynamics as they evolve.
However, identifying the synchrony level between non-linear,
non-stationary neuronal oscillators extracted from intracranial
electroencephalographic (iEEG) data represents a challenge.
Furthermore, it has been shown that phase synchronization can
be detected among non-linear, coupled oscillators even if their
amplitudes are not synchronized [26]. Therefore, it is critical
to utilize non-linear methods to measure instantaneous phasesynchrony. In our previous study, an analytical methodology
based on noise-assisted multivariate empirical mode
decomposition (NA-MEMD) was utilized to quantitatively

evaluate the phase-synchrony dynamics in patients with
temporal and frontal lobe epilepsy [27]. In this study, a
reduction in the phase-synchrony was observed around seizure
onset. However, the network phase-synchrony started to
gradually increase towards seizure termination and achieved
its maximum at seizure offset. The synchrony dynamics
observed in this study were consistent with several previous
studies in the literature [28]-[30]. The phase-synchronization
observed as seizures naturally end may be an endogenous
mechanism for seizure termination.
This study reports on developing an adaptive, non-linear
analytical methodology that merges the phase-synchrony and
phase-connectivity analyses in order to extract frequency and
locations of stimulation that match the synchronized networkdynamics at seizure termination.
In this study, a DBS protocol using the extracted frequency
and locations matching the hyper-synchronization dynamics
observed in epilepsy patients as seizures naturally terminate is
proposed that could be used to potentially revert the network
desynchronization observed around seizure onset in order to
immediately terminate pathological electrical activity.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section II,
specifications of the adopted iEEG dataset, along with the
framework of the proposed phase-connectivity analysis are
described. Next, experimental results of extracting stimulation
parameters in all patients using phase-connectivity analysis are
presented in section III. Finally, section IV discusses the
results and provides conclusions to this paper.
II. DATASET AND METHODS
The conceptual framework of the proposed instantaneous
phase-synchrony analysis is shown in Fig. 1(a). Multi-channel
iEEG data, recorded from different brain regions of epilepsy
patients using implanted depth electrodes, were used as input
to the analytical signal processing procedure. A set of finite
neuronal oscillators, IMFs, were extracted using NA-MEMD
from raw iEEG data. Next, Hilbert transform was performed
on the decomposed neuronal oscillators in order to measure
their instantaneous phases and frequencies. A combination of
mean-phase coherence analysis and eigenvalue decomposition
technique was then employed to evaluate the phase-synchrony
dynamics among neuronal oscillators as seizures evolved.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006908; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

TABLE I
PATIENT CLINICAL DATA AND SIGNAL ACQUISITION INFORMATION

IEEG Portal
Patient ID
Subject
Age at Onset
Sex
No. of Seizures
Sampling Rate (Hz)
No. of Depth Elec.
Seizure Type
Epilepsy

Study 005

Study 019

Study 029

1
21
Male
6
500
2x8
contact
SPS
TLE

2
31
Male
6
500
2x4
contact
SPS/CPS/GTC
ETE

3
19
Female
3
500
2x4
contact
CPS/GTC
ETE

TLE: temporal lobe epilepsy; ETE: extra temporal lobe epilepsy; SPS:
simple partial seizure; CPS: complex partial seizure; GTC: generalized
tonic-clonic seizure

Fig. 1(b) illustrates the framework of the proposed phaseconnectivity analysis among neuronal oscillators to extract the
frequency and locations of stimulation. This process involved
selecting IMF (bandwidth of interest), nodes (locations of
stimulation), and finally frequency of stimulation. It should be
noted that the aforementioned parameters were extracted to
match the maximum level of phase-synchronization observed
at seizure termination.
A. Patients and iEEG Dataset
In this study, multi-channel iEEG data recorded from depth
electrodes implanted in three de-identified epilepsy patients
were retrieved from the online International Epilepsy Electrophysiology (IEEG) portal [31]. Two patients were diagnosed
with extratemporal lobe epilepsy (ETE) with left temporal
onset, while the third patient had temporal lobe epilepsy
(TLE) with a right temporal seizure focus. All patients were
adults undergoing long-term iEEG monitoring in preparation
for the pre-surgical evaluation including seizure onset zone
(SOZ) localization of their medically refractory epilepsy.
Epileptic SOZs and timing of seizures, seizure onset and
termination, were clinically determined and annotated by the
treating physicians at Mayo Clinic via visual inspection of
clear ictal discharges. Further clinical information regarding
the analyzed patients as well as their access IDs in the IEEG
portal are provided in Table I. The iEEG data were recorded
from the patients using depth electrodes with 4 or 8 recording
sites, a 500 Hz sampling rate, and a 1-150 Hz bandpass
filtering. All epilepsy patients were implanted with two depth
electrodes in both amygdala and hippocampal regions of the
brain. A digital 60 Hz notch filter was used to eliminate line
noise.
B. Noise-Assisted Multivariate EMD (NA-MEMD)
EMD is an adaptive, data-driven method of decomposing
signals into a set of finite and nearly orthogonal oscillators,
called intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) [32]. The decomposed
IMFs together form the underlying oscillations within a time
series. That is, IMFs are truly determined from the dynamics
of original signals considering the nature of their underlying
components. Therefore, EMD is an appropriate method for the
time-frequency analysis of non-linear, non-stationary electrophysiological signals [33]. However, EMD of multi-channel

3

data can result in mode-aliasing and mode-misalignment [34].
An advanced version of the EMD method called NA-MEMD
was introduced to overcome the aforementioned problems
which is described in detail in [35]. The original signal is
described by the following equation at the end of the
decomposition.
N

x(t )   Di (t )  r (t )

(1)

i 1

where N is the number of the extracted IMFs and r(t) is the
residue. The residue corresponds to a signal whose projections
do not contain sufficient extrema to comprise a multi-variate
envelope. The lower-index IMFs correspond to fast oscillation
modes of the original signal while the extracted higher-index
IMFs denote the slower oscillation modes.
In this study, NA-MEMD was performed on iEEG data
segments to obtain its corresponding IMFs. The instantaneous
phases of IMFs were measured using the Hilbert transform.
The NA-MEMD on a 1-s ictal data-segment along with the
time-frequency representation of its extracted IMFs are shown
in Fig. 2. For simplicity, only the top six extracted IMFs are
illustrated in Fig. 2. The in-depth rationale for employing NAMEMD prior to the determination of the instantaneous phase
information are discussed in the next section.
C. Hilbert Analytic Signal Method
Hilbert analytic signal method has been widely utilized to
extract instantaneous phase and frequency information from
narrowband signals [36]. Details regarding using the Hilbert
transform to extract instantaneous phase points and frequency
information from a time series are described in [36].
In order to extract unambiguous phase information, the
phase space trace of an analytic signal should possess a single
center of rotation. Multi-component or wideband signals yield
trajectories in the complex plane with multiple centers of
rotation. Therefore, it is essential to individually extract the
underlying components of a time series, contributing to the
multiple centers of rotation, in order to reach an unambiguous
phase reading. NA-MEMD method, described in the previous
section, provides a proper instantaneous phase determination
by separating a wideband signal into its underlying oscillatory
components or IMFs. Each one of these IMFs results in a
complex plane with a single center of rotation. In this study,
NA-MEMD of iEEG signals were performed for each 1-s
segment of data prior to the use of the Hilbert transform to
measure the instantaneous phase points.
D. Mean-Phase Coherence Analysis
In order to determine the strength of phase relationship
among the extracted IMFs, the instantaneous phase points of
each IMF was represented as a row vector and stacked on top
of each other to form an N × M matrix, in which N is the total
number of IMFs decomposed from all channels within a 1-s
data segment and M denotes the total length of the time series.
Next, the bivariate mean-phase coherence matrix, RN×N, was
calculated using the following equation [37].
R kp 

1 M [i(km (t) pm (t))]
e
M m 1

(2)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006908; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

4

all the extracted neuronal oscillators. All the eigenvalues were
sorted in ascending order to construct an eigenvalue spectrum.
Each eigenvalue indicates how strongly oscillators are phasecorrelated in the direction of its associated eigenvector.
The eigenvalue decomposition was performed by solving
RN×Nνi = λiνi, where λi and νi are the obtained eigenvalues and
their corresponding eigenvectors, respectively. It is important
to note that all the N obtained eigenvalues were real with their
sum equal to the total number of the IMFs, as the RN×N matrix
was square symmetric. Therefore, any decrease in one of the
eigenvalues must be compensated by an increase in the other
eigenvalues in order to keep the sum constant. This is the main
idea underlying capturing the phase-synchrony between the
extracted oscillators. Due to the ascending order between the
eigenvalues, a small change in the value of a few higher-index
or larger eigenvalues causes a relatively large dynamic change
in the value of the majority of lower-index eigenvalues in
order to compensate it. Hence, the temporal changes of phasesynchrony are captured with higher sensitivity by focusing on
the high percentage of lower-index eigenvalues. The average
value of the first 60% lower-index eigenvalues, meanλ1:60%,
was computed for each 1-s segment of data to quantify the
temporal evolution of phase-synchrony levels.
Computational modeling was described in our previous
study to quantify and compare meanλ1:60% value among three
epileptic networks with different phase-synchrony level [27].
Simulation results demonstrated that as the phase-synchrony
level increases between neuronal oscillators from its minimum
to its maximum, the meanλ1:60% value decreases accordingly.
Furthermore, the normalized meanλ1:60% values were measured
to quantify phase-synchrony levels as seizures evolve in order
to magnify the small relative changes of the meanλ1:60% over
time. It should be noted that phase-synchrony was observed to
increase from mid-ictal towards seizure end and achieved its
maximum level at seizure termination in all of the analyzed
epilepsy patients [27].

Fig. 2. NA-MEMD process on an iEEG recording. (a) 1.5-min iEEG
signal along with a magnified view of its 1-s ictal period utilized for the
NA-MEMD process. (b) The top six IMFs decomposed from the 1-s,
ictal period along with their time-frequency representations.

in which i is equal to √-1, M is the total number of samples
within the data segment, and Ø(t) is the instantaneous phase of
the analytic signal pair indicated by the subscripts k and p.
Subscripts k and p iterate from 1 to N and all the values in the
RN×N are between zero and one.
E. Eigenvalue Decomposition and Synchrony Analysis
Eigenvalue decomposition of the square, bivariate meanphase coherence matrix was carried out in order to achieve a
multi-variate measure for capturing phase-synchrony among

F. IMF (Bandwidth) Selection for DBS
A 10-s window leading up to the seizure termination was
selected for phase-connectivity analysis in order to provide
adequate timing for evaluating changes in phase relationships.
The main purpose of the IMF selection process was to identify
which of the extracted IMFs mostly contributed to the hypersynchronization observed at seizure termination.
Fig. 3 illustrates how phase-connectivity of the extracted
IMFs were evaluated. This example displays the comparison
between two different IMFs in order to select the one that has
higher phase-synchronization within the termination window.
The same index IMFs from five iEEG channels were grouped
to model the phase-connectivity analysis. Fig. 3(a) illustrates
the fourth neuronal oscillators (IMF4) decomposed from five
different iEEG channels within a 10-s window leading up to
seizure termination. The bivariate phase-locking value, PLV,
was then calculated in each 1-s segment for every unique pairs
of channels. The PLV value was measured according to the
following equation [38].
PLVvw 

1 S [i(vs (t) ws (t))]
e
S s 1

(3)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006908; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

5

Fig. 3. Selection of IMF (bandwidth of interest) for DBS. (a) A set of the fourth neuronal oscillators (IMF4) decomposed from five different iEEG
channels within a 10-s window leading up to seizure termination. Bivariate PLV values were measured for every unique pairs of channels in each 1-s data
segment. The average PLV value across the whole network, M-PLV, was calculated for every 1-s and its temporal average across the 10-s window, TMPLV, was utilized as a metric to assess the network-level of phase-connectivity within each IMF. (b) A set of the fifth oscillators (IMF5) extracted from the
same five channels within the 10-s termination window. The IMF index with the largest TM-PLV value was selected as the one with the highest
contribution to the hyper-synchronization observed at seizure termination. For simplicity, only the PLV values of the connections forming the outer edge of
the diagram are displayed for the first and last 1-s segments.

in which i is equal to √-1, S is the total number of samples
within the data segment, and ϕ(t) is the instantaneous phase of
the IMF extracted from channels indicated by subscripts v and
w. PLV values can be between zero and one. Circles in Fig.
3(a) represents iEEG channels and PLV values indicate the
strength of phase-connection between a pair of channels. For
simplicity, only the PLV values of the connections forming the
outer edge of the diagram are displayed for the first and last 1s segments. The average PLV value among all connections, MPLV, was then calculated for each 1-s segment. Finally, the
average M-PLV values were measured for the entire 10-s
termination window, which is defined by TM-PLV value. Fig.
3(b) shows the aforementioned steps on the fifth IMFs (IMF5)
extracted from the same five iEEG channels within the 10-s
termination window.
As it is shown in Fig. 3, neuronal oscillators within IMF5
resulted in a higher TM-PLV value relative to the ones in
IMF4. Therefore, it contributes more into increasing the
phase-synchrony level at termination window. The IMF index
with the largest TM-PLV value was selected as the one with

the highest contribution to the hyper-synchronization observed
at seizure termination. It should be noted that the frequency
bandwidth of the selected IMF was considered as the tuning
range for the frequency of stimulation.
G. Node (Channel) Selection for DBS
Once the IMF of interest is identified, the next step is to
determine which iEEG channels would be the best candidates
for applying DBS. First, the PLV values were calculated in
each 1-s segment for every unique pairs of channels, within
the selected IMF, for the entire 10-s termination-window.
Next, the temporal average of PLV values was measured over
the 10-s termination-window for each unique pair. This step
results in a L × 1 array which L is defined as follows:
L

C(C  1)
2

(4)

in which C is the total number of nodes or iEEG channels.
Finally, nodes that mostly contributed to the hyper-synchrony
observed at seizure termination-window, within the selected
IMF, were determined by the following steps:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006908; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

6

Fig. 4. Phase-synchrony and phase-connectivity analysis for selecting DBS locations and frequency in Patient-1 with TLE. (a) Anatomical position of
depth electrodes. (b) 3-min, iEEG recording containing a seizure. The green dashed lines denote seizure onset and offset. (c) Temporal changes of the
normalized meanλ1:60% value, after smoothing with a 5-s moving average filter, for IMFs extracted from all channels. An increase/decrease in the value of
the normalized meanλ1:60% corresponds to a decrease/increase in the phase-synchrony level, respectively. (d) Phase-connectivity analysis for the selected
IMF, (IMF5). The brown lines drawn between pairs of channels indicate the ones with PLV value above the 75th percentile threshold. The red-filled circles
are the candidate nodes for DBS.

1. TM-PLV values for the selected IMFs ranged between
0.6 and 0.96 for all seizures among all epilepsy patients.
A threshold of the 75th percentile of the PLV values in
the L × 1 array was found to consistently result in pairs
of channels with PLV greater than 0.6 for all seizures. It
should be noted that pairs of channels with higher PLV
values contribute more to the high phase-synchronization
at the network level.
2. A list was formed with all pairs of channels with PLV
values exceeding the threshold.
3. The number of times a channel appears in the list (as part
of a pair) was defined as its degree of connection. The
degree of connection of a channel is indicative of its
effectiveness in controlling the network. That is, a node
with a high degree of connection would entrain a larger
portion of the network resulting in a significant increase
in the network phase-synchrony [39]-[41].
4. Channels that appear at least twice (degree of connection
greater than one) were considered candidate nodes for
DBS. A channel with degree of connections equal to 0 is
an isolated node and a channel with degree of connection
equal to 1 is an end node. Both of these cases possess
minimal potential for driving an epileptic network into a
hyper-synchronization.
5. Channels or nodes that were considered as candidates
and consistently appeared among all seizures of a patient
were selected as final locations of stimulation.
H. Frequency Selection for DBS
The phase of each IMF was measured using the Hilbert
transform for each 1-s segment for the entire 10-s termination
window. The frequency of each IMF was calculated by taking
the time derivative of its instantaneous phases over each 1-s
data segment. Finally, the average frequency over the 10-s
termination window for each selected node, in the previous

TABLE II
TM-PLV VALUES AT TERMINATION WINDOW IN DIFFERENT IMFS
AMONG ALL PATIENTS

TM-PLV

Subject
1
2
3

IMF 1
0.31
0.48
0.73

IMF 2
0.28
0.69
0.93

IMF 3
0.26
0.41
0.80

IMF 4
0.38
0.43
0.62

IMF 5
0.75
0.48
0.34

IMF 6
0. 35
0.45
0.53

section, was measured as the stimulation frequency for that
specific channel. The variation in frequency values across the
10-s termination window for any channel was less than 3%.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
All seizures from the three epilepsy patients were analyzed
using the proposed methodology. To deal with the edge effect
problem associated with the data segmentation during the NAMEMD process, 50 samples from neighboring segments were
incorporated to both ends of each 1-s segment. However, after
executing the NA-MEMD, only the IMFs corresponding to the
original data segment were retained. Furthermore, although all
IMFs were considered for the phase-synchrony analysis, only
IMFs with frequency above 4 Hz were included in the subsequent analysis to determine the stimulation parameters. The
IMFs with frequency below 4 Hz did not show any changes in
their phase-connectivity with respect to seizures.
A. Phase-Connectivity Analysis to Select DBS Parameters in
Patient-1
Network phase-synchrony and phase-connectivity analysis
were performed on seizures recorded in Patient-1 with TLE in
order to determine stimulation frequency and locations. Fig.
4(a) illustrates the anatomical position of depth electrodes in
Patient-1. Fig. 4(b) shows a 3-min iEEG signal, containing an
epileptic seizure, used for this analysis. The green dashed lines

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006908; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

7

Fig. 5. Phase-synchrony and phase-connectivity analysis for selecting DBS locations and frequency in Patient-2 with ETE. (a) Anatomical position of
depth electrodes. (b) A 4-min iEEG recording containing a seizure. The green dashed lines denote seizure onset and offset. (c) Temporal changes of the
normalized meanλ1:60% value, after smoothing with a 5-s moving average filter, for IMFs extracted from all channels. An increase/decrease in the value of
the normalized meanλ1:60% corresponds to a decrease/increase in the phase-synchrony level, respectively. (d) Phase-connectivity analysis for the selected
IMF, (IMF2). The brown lines drawn between pairs of channels indicate the ones with PLV value above the 75th percentile threshold. The red-filled circles
are the candidate nodes for DBS.

indicate seizure onset and termination that were clinically
determined by treating physicians. Temporal changes in the
normalized meanλ1:60% variable, which reflects the evolution
of network phase-synchrony, is illustrated in Fig. 4(c). The
normalized meanλ1:60% value started to increase from about
15-s preceding seizure onset up to almost 30-s after it, which
indicates a phase desynchronization among oscillators within
this period. However, the synchrony level started to gradually
increase toward seizure offset and reached its maximum level
at seizure termination. This result suggests that the epileptic
network is maximally synchronized at this point. Table II lists
the TM-PLV values for all IMFs above the cut-off frequency
of 4 Hz for all three patients. The IMF5 was selected as the
bandwidth of interest, because it possessed the highest TMPLV value. It should be noted that IMF5 consistently had the
maximum TM-PLV value among all seizures in this patient.
Fig. 4(d) displays the connections between unique pairs of
channels for the selected IMF, (IMF5). The circles denote the
recording sites on the depth electrodes implanted in Patient-1.
The brown lines drawn between pairs of channels indicate the
ones with PLV value above the 75th percentile threshold. The
red-filled circles are the candidate nodes for DBS. This
analysis was performed on all recorded seizures for Patient-1.
The final nodes, candidate nodes that appeared in all seizures
as described in methods section part G, for this patient were
LTD5, LTD7 and RTD7. It should be noted that the final
nodes for DBS correlated well with the channels possessing
the highest degree of connections. These channels appeared to
be hubs and thereby are well suited for synchronizing the
epileptic network. All of these channels were located in the
hippocampus and the measured frequency of them within the
termination window was approximately 15 Hz. The measured
frequency was the same among all seizures for this patient and
was chosen as the proposed stimulation frequency.

B. Phase-Connectivity Analysis to Select DBS Parameters in
Patient-2
The same analysis described in the previous section was
carried out for Patient-2. Fig. 5 displays the phase-synchrony
and phase-connectivity dynamics for an iEEG data containing
an epileptic seizure in Patient-2 with ETE. Fig. 5(a) shows the
anatomical position of the depth electrodes in the patient. A 4min iEEG signal utilized for the phase-synchrony and phaseconnectivity analysis, is shown in Fig. 5(b). Green dashed
lines indicate seizure onset and offset. Fig. 5(c) exhibits the
normalized meanλ1:60% obtained from the phase-synchrony
analysis. The phase-synchrony pattern was similar to the one
observed in Patient-1. The network achieved the maximum
phase-synchrony level at seizure termination. The bandwidth
of interest was measured to be the second IMF (IMF2) as it
had the highest TM-PLV value, which is reported in Table II.
The selected IMF was the same among all seizures analyzed in
this patient. Fig. 5(d) displays the candidate nodes for DBS for
a recorded seizure in Patient-2 using the same procedure
applied to Patient-1. The final nodes for DBS were identified
as LAD2 and LAD3. The final nodes for DBS overlapped well
with the obtained candidate nodes with the highest degree of
connections in the network. These sites appeared to be hubs in
the network and further supported selecting these channels as
simulation sites for DBS. Both of these channels were located
in the amygdala and the measured frequency of them within
the termination window was about 90 Hz. The calculated
frequency was the same among all seizures for this patient and
was selected as the proposed stimulation frequency.
C. Phase-Connectivity Analysis for the Selection of DBS
Parameters in Patient-3
Fig. 6 exhibits the phase-synchrony and phase-connectivity
dynamics for an iEEG signal containing a seizure in Patient-3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006908; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

8

Fig. 6. Phase-synchrony and phase-connectivity analysis for selecting DBS locations and frequency in Patient-3 with ETE. (a) Anatomical position of
depth electrodes. (b) A 4-min iEEG recording containing a seizure. The green dashed lines denote seizure onset and offset. (c) Temporal changes of the
normalized meanλ1:60% value, after smoothing with a 5-s moving average filter, for IMFs extracted from all channels. An increase/decrease in the value of
the normalized meanλ1:60% corresponds to a decrease/increase in the phase-synchrony level, respectively. (d) Phase-connectivity analysis for the selected
IMF, (IMF2). The brown lines drawn between pairs of channels indicate the ones with PLV value above the 75th percentile threshold. The red-filled circles
are the candidate nodes for DBS.

with ETE. Fig. 6(a) illustrates the anatomical position of the
depth electrodes in this patient. Fig. 6(b) shows a 4-min iEEG
signal utilized for this analysis. Green dashed lines denote
seizure onset and offset. The normalized meanλ1:60% variable
obtained from the phase-synchrony analysis is shown in Fig.
6(c). A phase desynchronization was observed from ictal onset
to mid-ictal. However, the synchrony level started to gradually
increase from mid-ictal towards ictal offset and achieved its
maximum level at seizure termination. As shown in Table II,
the second IMF (IMF2) was obtained as the bandwidth of
interest as it had the highest TM-PLV value among the other
extracted IMFs. Moreover, IMF2 was consistently obtained as
the IMF with the maximum TM-PLV value among all seizures
analyzed in this patient. Fig. 6(d) displays the candidate nodes
for DBS for one of the recorded seizures in Patient-3 using the
analysis reported in the method section. For Patient-3, the final
nodes for stimulation were identified as LAD3 and LPD2. The
final nodes for DBS overlapped well with the candidate nodes
with high degree of connections. Besides, these channels
appeared to be hubs in the network with respect to their degree
of connections. One of the channels was located in the
amygdala and the other was located in the hippocampus. The
frequency of these nodes within the termination window was
obtained to be approximately 90 Hz. This frequency was the
same among all seizures recorded in this patient, and thereby
was selected as the proposed stimulation frequency.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this study, an adaptive non-linear analytical methodology
was proposed that merges both phase-synchrony and phaseconnectivity analysis in order to extract stimulation frequency
and locations that match the endogenous brain dynamics of
patients as seizures naturally terminate. This method provides
an algorithm for tuning DBS parameters in order to develop a
DBS protocol that can be delivered upon detection of subsequent seizures in an effort to terminate them immediately.

Applying DBS using the proposed closed-loop approach could
potentially improve the clinical efficacy of the therapy as
shown in our previous study performed in a freely moving
chronic rat model of limbic epilepsy [22]. The analysis
proposed in this study are divided into two major components;
namely, (1) Phase-synchrony analysis in order to determine
how network synchrony changes as seizures evolve, and (2)
Phase-connectivity analysis in order to select IMF (bandwidth
of interest), channels (locations of stimulation), and finally
frequency of electrical stimulation. These parameters were
extracted to match the maximum level of phase-synchrony
observed at seizure termination in order to reproduce hypersynchrony.
The first step in the phase-synchrony analysis was the
decomposition of wideband electrophysiological signals into a
set of finite, narrow-band neuronal oscillators using NAMEMD. The instantaneous phases of the oscillators or IMFs
were then calculated using the Hilbert transform. Next, the
eigenvalue decomposition of the square, bivariate mean-phase
coherence matrix, RN×N, was performed to access the phasesynchrony dynamics between IMFs. The normalized mean
value of the first 60% lower-index eigenvalues, meanλ1:60%,
was measured and reported for each second to determine
changes in the network’s synchrony level as seizures evolve.
In all patients, a decrease in phase-synchrony was observed
from seizure onset to mid-ictal. This finding is consistent with
what has been reported by other researchers [42], [43]. The
phase-desynchronization period was followed by a gradual
increase in phase-synchronization level as seizure progressed
and reached its maximum level at seizure termination. The
hyper-synchrony at seizure termination provided the basis for
the phase-connectivity analysis, and is consistent with recent
studies using human and rat epileptic seizures [42], [44], [45].
The phase-connectivity analysis used bivariate phase-locking
value, PLV, to locate the neuronal oscillators that contribute
the most to the hyper-synchronization observed at seizure

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006908; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

offset. This was achieved by finding the neuronal oscillators
that were highly synchronized in the 10-s window leading up
to seizure termination.
Both the obtained frequency and locations of stimulation
representing the hyper-synchronization at termination window
varied among the patients analyzed in this study. It should be
noted that the extracted stimulation frequency and locations
were stable among all seizures in all patients. Patient-1 with
TLE had identified locations in the hippocampus while the
other two patients with ETE had at least one of their site
outside of the hippocampus. The frequency of stimulation
obtained in Patient-1 was lower than the other two patients.
Patient-1 had bilateral hippocampal sclerosis while the other
two patients possessed no lesions. These results suggest that
the underlying pathology may contribute to the variance in
frequency and locations of stimulation obtained in epilepsy
patients. Most DBS therapy using available FDA-approved
devices utilize pre-determined stimulation parameters such as
stimulation frequency and locations for a cohort of patients. In
clinical studies, patients showing more than 50% reduction in
seizure frequency in comparison to baseline are labelled as
responders and those that do not, are categorized as nonresponders. The therapeutic DBS protocol described in this
study could potentially increase the responder’s rate using
current DBS devices by accounting for patient’s specific brain
dynamics when determining stimulation parameters. A recent
study that investigated hippocampal stimulation in patients
with drug-resistant mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE)
found individual variation in the optimal DBS frequency [46].
Low frequency hippocampal stimulation was effective (more
than 50% reduction in seizure frequency) in MTLE patients
with hippocampal sclerosis, while it was ineffective (~20%
reduction in seizure frequency) in patients with no lesions in
the hippocampus. Switching stimulation frequency in a patient
with no lesion to a high frequency resulted in greater reduction
(up to 55%) in seizure frequency relative to the baseline level.
Furthermore, several studies have reported the efficacy of high
frequency DBS in reducing seizure frequency for epilepsy
patients [47]-[49]. On the other hand, many other studies have
suggested that low frequency stimulation is more efficacious
in reducing seizure frequency [50]-[52]. Computational results
of our analysis also supported the difference in stimulation
frequency and locations that matched the hyper-synchrony at
seizures termination among epilepsy patients.
In addition to providing stimulation parameters based on
patient’s brain dynamics, another important feature of closedloop stimulation is the ability to deliver electrical stimulation
in response to seizure detection. In all seizures recorded from
patients, there is a decrease in the network’s phase-synchrony
level a few seconds before seizure onset. This decrease in
phase-synchrony may be utilized as a potential trigger in
implantable neuromodulation devices for applying electrical
stimulation in order to terminate epileptic seizures.
The main aim of this study was to extract DBS stimulation
frequency and locations that drive the epileptic network into
hyper-synchrony at natural seizure termination. This DBS
protocol can be delivered upon seizure detection to artificially
revert the phase desynchronization dynamics observed around
seizure onset in order to terminate it immediately.

9

This analysis is adaptive and takes into consideration the
endogenous brain dynamics of patients that could potentially
leads to personalizing and optimizing DBS therapy for them.
Future studies will focus on applying the proposed method to
a higher number of epilepsy patients and exploring its clinical
efficacy through DBS using the patient-specific stimulation
parameters.
REFERENCES
[1] R. S. Fisher et al., “Epileptic seizures and epilepsy: Definitions proposed
by the international league against epilepsy (ILAE) and the international
bureau for epilepsy (IBE),” Epilepsia, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 470-472, Apr.
2005.
[2] D. J. Mogul and W. Van Drongelen, “Electrical control of epilepsy,”
Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 483-504, Jul. 2014.
[3] A. Singh and S. Trevick, “The epidemiology of global epilepsy,” Neurol.
Clin., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 837-847, Nov. 2016.
[4] S. Wiebe, W. T. Blume, J. P. Girvin, and M. Eliasziw, “Effectiveness and
efficiency of surgery for temporal lobe epilepsy study group. A
randomized, controlled trial of surgery for temporal-lobe epilepsy,” N.
Engl. J. Med., vol. 345, no. 5, pp. 311-318, Aug. 2011.
[5] J. Wellmer et al., “Risks and benefits of invasive epilepsy surgery workup
with implanted subdural and depth electrodes,” Epilepsia, vol. 53, no. 8,
pp. 1322-1332, Aug. 2012.
[6] C. A. Edwards, A. Kouzani, K. H. Lee, and E. K. Ross,
“Neurostimulation devices for the treatment of neurologic disorders,”
Mayo. Clin. Proc., vol. 92, no. 9, pp. 1427-1444, Sep. 2017.
[7] W. H. Theodore, and R. S. Fisher, “Brain stimulation for epilepsy,”
Lancet Neurol., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 111-118, Feb. 2004.
[8] I. Osorio et al., “Automated seizure abatement in humans using electrical
stimulation,” Ann. Neurol., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 258-268, Feb. 2005.
[9] C. C. McIntyre and P. J. Hahn, “Network perspectives on the mechanisms
of deep brain stimulation,” Neurobiol. Dis., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 329-337,
Jun. 2010.
[10] T. M. Herrington, J. J. Cheng, and E. N. Eskandar, “Mechanisms of deep
brain stimulation,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 115, no. 1, pp. 19-38, Jan.
2016.
[11] M. J. Conolly, S. E. Park, R. E. Gross, and B. Mahmoudi, “A machine
learning approach to characterizing the effect of asynchronous
distributed electrical stimulation on hippocampal neural dynamics in
vivo,” Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., pp. 2122-2125, Jul. 2017.
[12] M. Hodaie et al., “Chronic anterior thalamus stimulation for intractable
epilepsy,” Epilepsia, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 603–608, Jun. 2002.
[13] L. B. Good et al., “Control of synchronization of brain dynamics leads
to control of epileptic seizures in rodents,” Int. J. Neural Syst., vol. 19,
no. 7, pp. 173–196, 2009.
[14] S. Farahmand, M. H. Maghami, and A. M. Sodagar, “Wearable, batterypowered, wireless, programmable 8-channel neural stimulator,” Proc.
37th IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society Conference, pp.
6120-6123, Sept. 2012.
[15] S. Farahmand, H. Vahedian, M. Abedinkhan, and A. M. Sodagar,
“Programmable high-output-impedance, large-voltage compliance,
microstimulator for low voltage Biomedical applications,” Proc. 37th
IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society Conference, pp. 863866, Sept. 2012.
[16] J. J. Zhou, T. Chen, S. H. Farber, A. G. Shetter, and F. A. Ponce, “Openloop deep brain stimulation for the treatment of epilepsy: A systemic
review of clinical outcomes over the past decade (2008-present),”
Neurosurg. Focus., vol. 45, no. 2: e5, Aug. 2018.
[17] V. Salanova et al., “Long-term efficacy and safety of thalamic
stimulation for drug-resistant partial epilepsy,” Neurology, vol. 84, no.
10, pp. 1017-1025, Mar. 2015.
[18] H. Kassiri et al., “Closed-loop neurostimulators: A survey and a seizurepredicting design example for intractable epilepsy treatment,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 1026-1040, Oct. 2017.
[19] G. K. Bergey et al., “Long-term treatment with responsive brain
stimulation in adults with refractory partial seizures,” Neurology, vol.
84, no. 8, pp. 810-817, Feb. 2015.
[20] X. L. Zhong, J. T. Yu, Q. Zhang, N. D. Wang, and L. Tan, “Deep brain
stimulation for epilepsy in clinical practice and in animal models,” Brain
Res. Bull., vol. 85, no. 3-4, pp. 81-88, May 2011.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19006908; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

10

[21] C.H. Halpern, U. Samadani, B. Litt, J. L. Jaggi, and G. H. Baltuch,
“Deep brain stimulation for epilepsy,” Neurotherapeutics, vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 59-67, Jan. 2008.
[22] T. Sobayo and D. J. Mogul, “Should stimulation parameters be
individualized to stop seizures: Evidence in support of this approach,”
Epilepsia, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 131-140, Jan. 2016.
[23] C. P. Warren, S. Hu, M. Stead, B. H. Brinkmann, M. R. Bower, and G.
A. Worrell, “Synchrony in normal and focal epileptic brain: The seizure
onset zone is functionally disconnected,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 104, no.
6, pp. 3530–3539, Dec. 2010.
[24] W. Truccolo et al., “Neuronal ensemble synchrony during human focal
seizures,” J. Neurosci., vol. 34, no. 30, pp. 9927-9944, Jul. 2014.
[25] P. Jiruska, M. de Curtis, J. G. R. Jefferys, C. A. Schevon, S. J. Schiff,
and K. Schindler, “Synchronization and desynchronization in epilepsy:
Controversies and hypotheses,” J. Physiol., vol. 591, no. 4, pp. 787-797,
Feb. 2013.
[26] M. G. Rosenblum, A. S. Pikovsky, and J. Kurths, “Phase
synchronization of chaotic oscillators,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 76, pp.
1804-1807, Mar. 1996.
[27] S. Farahmand, T. Sobayo, and D. J. Mogul, “Noise-assisted multivariate
EMD-based mean-phase coherence analysis to evaluate phasesynchrony dynamics in epilepsy patients,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 2270–2279, Dec. 2018.
[28] K. Schindler, H. Leung, C. E. Elger, and K. Lehnertz, “Assessing
seizure dynamics by analysing the correlation structure of multichannel
intracranial EEG,” Brain, vol. 130, no. 1, pp. 65-77, Jan. 2007.
[29] E. Evangelista et al., “Does the thalamo-cortical synchrony play a role in
seizure termination,” Front. Neurol., vol. 6, pp. 192, Sep. 2015.
[30] K. Schindler, C. E. Elger, and K. Lehnertz, “Increasing synchronization
may promote seizure termination: Evidence from status epilepticus,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 118, no. 9, pp. 1955-1968, Sep. 2007.
[31] J. B. Wagenaar, G. A. Worrell, Z. Ives, M. Dümpelmann, B. Litt, and A.
Schulze-Bonhage, “Collaborating and sharing data in epilepsy research,”
J. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 235-239, Jun. 2015.
[32] N. E. Huang et al., “The empirical mode decomposition and the Hilbert
spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series analysis,” Proc.
Roy. Soc. London A, Math., Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 454, no. 1971, pp. 903995, Mar. 1998.
[33] S. Farahmand, T. Sobayo, and D. J. Mogul, “EMD-based, mean-phase
coherence analysis to assess instantaneous phase-synchrony dynamics in
epilepsy patients,” Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., pp. 24062409, Jul. 2018.
[34] S. Farahmand, T. Sobayo, and D. J. Mogul, “Using interictal HFOs to
improve the identification of epileptogenic zones in preparation for
epilepsy surgery,” Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., pp. 22642267, Jul. 2018.
[35] N. ur Rehman and D.P. Mandic, “Filter bank property of multivariate
empirical mode decomposition,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59,
no. 5, pp. 2421-2426, May 2011.
[36] D. Gabor, “Theory of communication,” J. Inst. Elect. Eng. London, vol.
93, no. 3, pp. 429-457, Nov. 1946.
[37] F. Mormann, K. Lehnertz, P. David, and C. E. Elger, “Mean phase
coherence as a measure for phase synchronization and its application to
the EEG of epilepsy patients,” Phys. D, Nonlinear Phenomena, vol. 144,
nos. 3-4, pp. 358-369, Oct. 2000.
[38] P. Celka, “Statistical analysis of the phase-locking value,” IEEE Signal
Process. Lett., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 577-580, Oct. 2007.
[39] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, “Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’
networks,” Nature, vol. 393, pp. 440-442, Jun. 1998.
[40] N. Masuda and A. Kazuyuki, “Global and local synchrony of coupled
neurons in small-world networks,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 302309, Apr. 2004.
[41] K. Lee, H. M. Khoo, J. M. Lina, F. Dubeau, J. Gotman, and C. Grova,
“Disruption, emergence and lateralization of brain network hubs in
mesial temporal lobe epilepsy,” Neuroimage Clin., vol. 20, pp. 71-84,
Jun. 2018.
[42] W. Truccolo et al., “Single-neuron dynamics in human focal epilepsy,”
Nature Neurosci., vol. 14, pp. 635-641, May 2011.
[43] T. I. Netoff and S. J. Schiff, “Decreased neuronal synchronization during
experimental seizures,” J. Neurosci., vol. 22, no. 16, pp. 7297-7307,
Aug. 2002.
[44] L. Topolnik, M. Steriade, and I. Timofeev, “Partial cortical deafferentation promotes development of paroxysmal activity,” Cerebral Cortex,
vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 883-893, Aug. 2003.

[45] M. A. Kramer, U. T. Eden, E. D. Kolaczyk, R. Zepeda, E. N. Eskandar,
and S. S. Cash, “Coalescence and fragmentation of cortical networks
during focal seizures,” J. Neurosci., vol. 30, no. 30, pp. 10076-10085,
Jul. 2010.
[46] S. N. Lee et al., “Low and high frequency hippocampal stimulation for
drug-resistant mesial temporal lobe epilepsy,” Neuromodulation, vol. 19,
no. 4, pp. 365-372, Jun. 2016.
[47] R. S. Fisher and A. L. Velasco, “Electrical brain stimulation for
epilepsy,” Nat. Rev. Neurol., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 261-270, Apr. 2014.
[48] F.A. Al-Otaibi, C. Hamani, and A. M. Loranzo, “Neuromodulation in
epilepsy,” Neurosurgery, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 957-979, Oct. 2011.
[49] C. Boex, S. Vulliemoz, L. Spinelli, C. Pollo, and M. Seeck, “High and
low frequency electrical stimulation in non-lesional temporal lobe
epilepsy,” Seziure, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 664-669, Dec. 2007.
[50] S. A. Chkhenkeli et al., “Electrophysiological effects and clinical results
of direct brain stimulation for intractable epilepsy,” Clin. Neurol.
Neurosurg., vol. 106, no. 4, pp. 318-329, Sep. 2004.
[51] L. M. Schrader et al., “Low frequency electrical stimulation through
subdural electrodes in a case of refractory status epilepticus,” Clin.
Neurophysiol., vol. 117, no. 4, pp. 781-788, Feb. 2006.
[52] J. Yamamoto et al., “Low-frequency electrical cortical stimulation has
an inhibitory effect on epileptic focus in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy,”
Epilepsia, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 491-495, May 2002.

