medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Running Title: Polygenic Contributions to ALS
Machine learning suggests polygenic contribution to cognitive dysfunction in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Katerina Placek1, Michael Benatar2, Joanne Wuu2, Evadnie Rampersaud3, Laura
Hennessy1, Vivianna M. Van Deerlin4, Murray Grossman1, David J. Irwin1, Lauren
Elman1, Leo McCluskey1, Colin Quinn1, Volkan Granit2, Jeffrey M. Statland5, Ted. M
Burns6, John Ravits7, Andrea Swenson8, Jon Katz9, Erik Pioro10, Carlayne Jackson11,
James Caress12, Yuen So13, Samuel Maiser14, David Walk14, Edward B. Lee4, John Q.
Trojanowski4, Philip Cook15, James Gee15, Rosa Rademakers16, The CReATe
Consortium17, Wenan Chen3, Gang Wu3, J. Paul Taylor3,18, & Corey T McMillan1*
1

Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA
2
Department of Neurology, University of Miami, Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami,
FL
3
Center for Applied Bioinformatics, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
4
Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
5
Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS
6
Department of Neurology, University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, VA
7
Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA
8
Department of Neurology, University of Iowa
9
Department of Neurology, Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri.
10
Department of Neurology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH
11
Department of Neurology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, San
Antonio, TX
12
Department of Neurology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC
13
Department of Neurology, Stanford University Medical Center, San Jose, CA
14
Department of Neurology, University of Minnesota Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN
15
Penn Image Computing Science Laboratory (PICSL), Department of Radiology, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
16
Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL
17
Rare Diseases Clinical Research Network, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
18
The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MS
±
*

Refer to Appendix for full CReATe Consortium author list.
Correspondence:
Penn Frontotemporal Degeneration Center, Department of Neurology
3700 Hamilton Walk, Suite 606B
Philadelphia, PA,19104
mcmillac@pennmedicine.upenn.edu; (215) 614 0987

Word/Figure Counts: Abstract=148 words (150 max); Body=3591 words (5000 max,
excluding Supplementary Methods); Body References=44 (65 total); Figures/Tables=6.

1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a multi-system disorder characterized by
progressive muscular weakness and, in addition, cognitive/behavioral dysfunction in
nearly 50% of patients. The mechanisms underlying risk for cognitive dysfunction,
however, remain elusive. Using sparse canonical correlation analysis (sCCA), an
unsupervised machine-learning technique, we observed that 26 single nucleotide
polymorphisms collectively associate with baseline cognitive performance in 330 ALS
patients from the multicenter Clinical Research in ALS and Related Disorders
for Therapeutic Development consortium. We demonstrate that a polygenic risk score
derived from sCCA relates to longitudinal cognitive decline in the same cohort, and also
to in vivo cortical thinning (N=80) and post mortem burden of TDP-43 pathology in the
middle frontal and motor cortices (N=55) in independent validation cohorts of patients
with sporadic ALS. Our findings suggest that common genetic polymorphisms contribute
to the manifestation of cognitive dysfunction and disease vulnerability in a polygenic
manner in ALS.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Introduction
Nearly half of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) manifest progressive
decline in cognition consistent with extra-motor frontal and temporal lobe
neurodegeneration, including 14% also diagnosed with frontotemporal dementia
(FTD).1,2 Comorbid cognitive dysfunction is a marker of poorer prognosis in this fatal
disease and confers risk for shorter survival, more rapid functional decline, and greater
caregiver burden.3-6 While linkage analysis and genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) have identified rare causal mutations7-9 and common risk loci10-14 linking the
incidence of ALS with FTD, whether and how identified variants relate to phenotypic
heterogeneity – including in cognition - has not yet been explored.

The genetic landscape of ALS is largely characterized by ‘apparent sporadic’ disease
occurring in 90% of patients with no known family disease history or pathogenic
mutation,15 but recent evidence suggests polygenic contribution to disease incidence
from common genetic variants.16,17 Population-based studies estimate that only 5-10%
of non-familial and 40-50% of familial ALS cases can be attributed to known pathogenic
mutations18 (e.g. C9ORF72,7,19 NEK1,20 SOD121), but GWAS have revealed many loci
of common genetic variation that confer risk for ALS and FTD. These include the largest
ALS GWAS to-date which identified the novel KIF5A gene,11 and genome-wide
conjunction and conditional false discovery rate (FDR) analyses demonstrating genetic
linkage between ALS and FTD via common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at
known and novel loci.14 In patients with apparent sporadic ALS, single SNPs associated
with risk of ALS and FTD demonstrate quantitative trait modification of cognitive decline,

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

in vivo cortical degeneration in the dorsolateral and ventromedial prefrontal cortices and
anterior and middle temporal lobes, and overall post mortem pathologic burden of
hyperphosphorylated transactive DNA response protein – 43 kiloDalton (TDP-43) in the
middle frontal, temporal, and motor cortices.22,23 Others have recently demonstrated
shared polygenic risk between ALS and other traits (e.g. smoking, education) and
diseases (e.g. schizophrenia)16,17,24, suggesting that a single variant is unlikely to fully
account for observed disease phenotype modification. However, we are unaware of any
investigations evaluating polygenic contribution to cognitive dysfunction in ALS.

Here, we employ an unsupervised machine-learning approach - sparse canonical
correlation analysis (sCCA) - to identify and evaluate polygenic contribution to cognitive
dysfunction in ALS. Traditional approaches to polygenic scores identify variants
associated with disease risk through GWAS in a univariate manner, and then compute
the sum of alleles at each identified variant weighted by their effect sizes. In this study,
we use data-driven sCCA to identify polygenic associations with a continuous
phenotype of cognitive performance in ALS. This method is ideally suited to evaluating
multivariate genotype-phenotype relationships, and employs sparsity to select
maximally contributing variants and assigns corresponding weights based on model
contribution with minimal a priori assumptions. We use sCCA to derive a polygenic risk
score for cognitive dysfunction in the largest to-date longitudinal cohort of cognitivelycharacterized patients with ALS from the multicenter Clinical Research in ALS and
Related Disorders for Therapeutic Development (CReATe) consortium. We then
evaluate independent neuroimaging and autopsy cohorts of patients with apparent

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

sporadic ALS25 to test whether polygenic risk for cognitive dysfunction also relates to in
vivo cortical neurodegeneration and ex vivo burden of underlying TDP-43 pathology.
We focus our investigation on SNPs achieving genome-wide significance in the largest
ALS GWAS to-date,11 and SNPs identified as shared risk loci for both ALS and FTD.14
We hypothesized that a sparse multivariate approach would reveal a subset of genetic
loci associated with cognitive dysfunction profiles in ALS in a polygenic manner, and
that follow-up analyses in independent neuroimaging and autopsy cohorts would
converge to characterize quantitative traits associated with polygenic risk from identified
loci.

Results
Heterogeneity of baseline cognitive and motor phenotype in ALS patients.
Smaller-scale studies have shown that ALS patients have impairments in executive,
verbal fluency, and language domains, but with relative sparing of memory and
visuospatial function.4 The Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioural ALS Screen (ECAS)
was developed to measure cognitive function minimally confounded by motor disability
and includes an ALS-Specific summary score that captures impairments in Language,
Executive, and Verbal Fluency domains that are frequently observed in ALS patients,
and an ALS-Non-specific summary score that captures less frequently observed
impairments in Memory and Visuospatial function, in addition to overall performance
(ECAS Total).26 To measure the extent of heterogeneity in cognitive dysfunction, we
evaluated performance of 330 patients with ALS or a related disorder (e.g., ALS-FTD,
primary lateral sclerosis (PLS), progressive muscular atrophy (PMA)) participating in the

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

CReATe consortium’s Phenotype-Genotype Biomarkers (PGB) study (Table 1). We
used linear mixed-effects (LME) to model variability between individuals in baseline
performance and rate of decline on the ECAS (Total Score, ALS-Specific Score, ALSNon-specific Score, and Scores for each individual cognitive domain), physical disability
on the ALS Functional Rating Scale – Revised (ALSFRS-R), and clinician ratings of
upper motor neuron (UMN) and lower motor neuron (LMN) symptom severity; each
model was adjusted for potential confounds in age, sex, education, disease duration,
and mutation status (present or absent pathogenic mutation in genes causally
associated with ALS or FTD). We confirm that cognitive and motor performance at
baseline is heterogeneous across individuals (Figure 1A), and correlation analyses
suggest that this is independent of disability in physical function or UMN/LMN symptom
severity (all R>0.2; Figure 1B). Together, this establishes the heterogeneity of baseline
and longitudinal cognitive and motor phenotypes within the PGB cohort, and validates
assessment of cognitive function in a motor-disabled population.

Multivariate analyses indicate polygenic contributions to baseline cognitive
performance.
To identify potential polygenic contributions to cognitive impairment in ALS we
employed sCCA.27 This unsupervised machine-learning approach enables identification
of multivariate relationships between a dataset of one modality (e.g., allele dosage of
SNPs) and another modality (e.g. measures of motor and cognitive function).
Traditional CCA identifies a linear combination of all variables that maximize the
correlation between datasets, resulting in an association of features from one dataset

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

(e.g., SNPs) and features from another dataset (e.g., clinical scores).27 The “sparse”
component of sCCA additionally incorporates an L1 penalty that shrinks the absolute
value of the magnitude of coefficients to yield sparse models (i.e. models with fewer
features) such that some coefficients are 0, and the features associated with them are
effectively eliminated from the model. As a result, features that contribute little variance
to the model are dropped and instead of a linear combination of all model features, we
are able to identify a data-driven subset of SNPs that relate to a subset of clinical
factors. Unstandardized regression coefficients resulting from sCCA serve as canonical
weights indicating the direction and strength of the relationships between features.

We evaluated an allele-dosage dataset comprised of 33 SNPs identified as shared risk
loci for both ALS and FTD,14 and 13 SNPs identified as risk loci for ALS from the largest
case-control GWAS to date,11 with the latter chosen to include loci associated with ALS
but not specifically with FTD. We excluded one SNP (rs12973192) since it was common
to both sources, three SNPs (rs3849943, rs118082508, and rs116900480) identified as
in high linkage disequilibrium (R2>.8) with other included SNPs, and one SNP
(rs10511816) due to high level of missingness across samples; this resulted in a total of
43 analyzed SNPs. We then related the allele-dosage dataset (see Supplementary
Methods) to a dataset comprised of adjusted baseline clinical performance on
functional, motor and cognitive measures extracted from LME models (see above).

After optimizing model sparsity parameters (i.e., the L1 penalty; see Supplementary
Figure 1), sCCA of 330 patients in the PGB Cohort of CReATe revealed that a subset of

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

26 genetic variants related to a single clinical feature – the ALS-Specific summary score
on the ECAS - achieving the maximal canonical correlation between the two datasets
(R=.34, p=.0018) (Figure 2; see Supplementary Table 2 for canonical weights). Among
the top five most highly weighted SNPs were rs1768208 (MOBP), rs538622 (ATXN3),
and rs538622 (ERGIC1), and rs4239633 (UNC13A) and rs7224296 (NSF).
Interestingly, 4 out of the 5 top SNPs and 20 of the 26 (77%) observed genetic variants
have been previously identified as shared risk loci for ALS and FTD.14 The association
of genetic variants with the ECAS ALS-Specific score suggests these variants may
contribute to impairment in domains of cognition frequently observed as impaired in
patients with ALS (i.e. Language, Verbal Fluency, and Executive Function) that are also
the most impaired domains of cognition observed in FTD. To evaluate model
robustness, we additionally repeated sCCA 10,000 times each employing a random
bootstrapped subsample of 70% of participants and observed similar results
(Supplementary Figure 3).

Polygenic score captures baseline cognition as well as longitudinal rate of cognitive
decline, but not motor decline.
Next, we investigated potential polygenic contributions to rate of decline in motor and
cognitive performance in the CReATe PGB cohort. Investigation of baseline
performance may only capture differences in cognitive impairment at a single
(somewhat arbitrary) point in time, but not differences in the trajectory of cognitive
decline over time.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

We first calculated a weighted polygenic score (wPGS) by computing a weighted sum of
allele dosage for each individual multiplied by the canonical weights (see
Supplementary Table 2) for each genetic variant resulting from the prior sCCA.
Spearman rank-order correlation between the wPGS and adjusted baseline estimates of
ECAS ALS-Specific performance resulted in correlation value similar to the canonical
correlation observed from sCCA (rs(329)=-.34, p=2.3x10-10) (Figure 3A), suggesting
construct validity.

We then conducted Spearman’s rank order correlations between the wPGS and
adjusted rate of decline on each measure of cognitive and motor performance using
FWE correction. To obtain adjusted rates of decline, we extracted individual slope
estimates from prior LME (see above) for individuals with 2 or more observations on the
ECAS, ALSFRS-R, and UMN and LMN assessments. We observed significant negative
relationships between the wPGS and rate of decline on the ECAS ALS-Specific score
(rs(277)=-.25, p=2.7x10-4) (Figure 3B) and each other ECAS score but not on the
ALSFRS-R or UMN and LMN scores (all p >.9) (Supplementary Figure 2). These
findings further suggest polygenic contribution to rates of cognitive – but not motor –
decline in patients with ALS, in addition to baseline cognitive impairment.

Polygenic score relates to cortical thinning.
Cognitive dysfunction in ALS, including performance on the ECAS, has previously been
attributed to sequential disease progression rostrally and caudally from the motor
cortex28-30 and advancing disease stage.4 To evaluate convergent anatomical evidence

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

for polygenic contributions to cognitive performance in patients with ALS, we related the
wPGS to voxel-wise in vivo measures of whole-brain cortical thickness (in mm3). Crosssectional measurements of cortical thickness were derived from T1-weighted magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) in an independent cohort of 80 patients with sporadic forms of
ALS (i.e. no known pathogenic mutation; see Supplementary Methods) recruited for
research from the University of Pennsylvania (UPenn) (Table 2). Nonparametric
modeling relative to 10,000 random permutations adjusted for potential confounds in
age, sex, disease duration, and scanning acquisition revealed a negative relationship
between the wPGS and diffuse cortical thickness; all reported clusters survived FWEcorrected threshold-free cluster-enhancement (TFCE) (p<0.05) (Figure 4A;
Supplementary Table 4). While relatively diffusely distributed, the neuroanatomic
distribution of cortical thickness associations include the anterior prefrontal cortex,
inferior frontal gyrus, and orbital frontal cortex which are known regions to support the
domains of cognitive dysfunction characterized by the ECAS ALS-Specific Score.
Cortical thickness associated with the wPGS also encompassed motor regions including
primary and supplementary motor cortex consistent with ALS disease distribution as
well as more posterior anatomic regions. These findings provide a potential
neuroanatomical basis for observed polygenic relationships between the wPGS and
baseline cognitive performance and rate of decline, and are consistent with prior
associations of cortical neurodegeneration with cognitive dysfunction in patients with
ALS.29

Polygenic score relates to frontal burden of TDP-43 neuropathology.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

To complement these in vivo neuroanatomical data, we also explored a potential
polygenic association with the neuropathological distribution of TDP-43 at autopsy.
Extracellular inclusions composed of hyperphosphorylated TDP-43 are the predominant
underlying neuropathology in 98% of patients with ALS and ~50% of patients with
FTD.31,32 We assessed the presence or absence of TDP-43 pathological inclusions in a
priori specified regions of interest in the motor cortex and middle frontal cortex in 55
patients with autopsy-confirmed ALS due to underlying TDP-43 pathology (Table 2),
and conducted nonparametric analyses to test whether post mortem burden of TDP-43
pathology was related to the wPGS. Wilcoxon rank-sum tests with continuity correction
revealed that wPGS was significantly higher in those with greater TDP-43 pathology for
both the motor cortex (W=212, p=0.041) and middle frontal cortex (W=195, p=0.04)
(Figure 4B). Additional analyses using ordinal measures of TDP-43 pathology (i.e.,
none, rare, mild, moderate, or severe neuropathologic burden) remained significant for
the middle frontal cortex (p<.01) and approached significance for the motor cortex
(p=.07). These findings add converging neuropathological evidence suggesting that
wPGS relates to the presence of pathology in the frontal cortex.

Discussion
In this study, we evaluated polygenic contribution to cognitive dysfunction in patients
with ALS by employing an unbiased machine-learning technique. We identified a
polygenic relationship between cognitive dysfunction and SNPs associated with
incidence of ALS and FTD, which we further investigated through quantitative-trait
evaluations of two independent sporadic ALS cohorts with in vivo neuroimaging and

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

post mortem neuropathology data. Our results indicate a polygenic contribution to the
presence and rate of decline of cognitive dysfunction in domains specifically impaired in
ALS. Converging evidence from independent cohorts further demonstrate the
generalizability of the collective polygenic contribution to biologically plausible
associations including reduced in vivo cortical thickness and TDP-43 pathologic burden
at autopsy in the middle frontal and motor cortices. To our knowledge, our study
provides novel evidence for a polygenic contribution to cognitive dysfunction in ALS,
quantitative anatomic characterization of identified polygenic burden in ALS spectrum
disease, and further phenotypic evidence for genetic linkage between ALS and FTD.

Our findings add to an increasing body of evidence for genetic contribution to
phenotypic variability in ALS, and specifically demonstrate that polygenic variation
accounts for variability in cognitive dysfunction and cortical disease burden in ALS.
While cognitive impairment has been more frequently linked to genetic mutations
causally associated with ALS, such as C9ORF72 repeat expansions,33 univariate
studies have implicated SNPs including those in UNC13A as risk factors for ALS and/or
FTD.22,24 However, mounting evidence suggests that there are polygenic, rather than
single allele, modifiers of disease risk and phenotype in ALS and related
neurodegenerative diseases.16,17,24 Our observation of 26 genetic variants collectively
associating with the ECAS ALS-Specific score – a combined measure of executive,
language, and verbal fluency domains most commonly affected in ALS - is consistent
with the idea of polygenic contribution to phenotypic variability in ALS. Notably, our
observed polygenic association in the CReATe PGB Cohort appears specific to

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

cognitive variability in ALS: we demonstrate relative independence of cognitive
performance and motor disease severity (i.e. UMN or LMN symptoms, functional
performance on the ALSFRS-R) and observe no evidence for polygenic association with
motor disease severity. This suggests that, in this study, polygenic risk for cognitive
dysfunction does not appear to by confounded by motor disease severity.

Of the 26 genetic variants collectively associated with the ECAS ALS-Specific score via
sCCA, the majority (77%) are shared risk loci for ALS and FTD.14 The genetic variants
with the strongest model contributions (i.e. with the highest canonical weights) include
SNPs in or nearest to MOBP, NSF, ATXN3, ERGIC1, and UNC13A. Two loci in MOBP
(rs9820623, rs1768208) and two loci in UNC13A (rs12608932, rs4239633) were
amongst the most heavily weighted. Our group recently demonstrated an additive doseeffect relationship between the minor allele of rs12608932 in UNC13A and in vivo
cortical thinning in the dorsal prefrontal cortex, greater burden of TDP-43 pathology in
the middle frontal and motor cortices at autopsy, and worse performance on a measure
of working memory associated with executive function.22 Our group has also shown that
SNPs mapped to MOBP, including rs1768208, relate to regional neurodegeneration in
patients with sporadic forms of FTD and shorter survival in FTD patients with underlying
tau or TDP-43 pathology.32,34 rs538622 near ERGIC1, originally identified through
conditional FDR as a shared risk locus for ALS and FTD, has also been previously
demonstrated to contribute to quantitative-trait modification in ALS by relating to
reduced expression of the protein BNIP1 in ALS patient motor neurons.14 Other topweighted variants near NSF and ATXN3 indicate potential biological plausibility.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

rs10143310 is found near ATXN3 which encodes a de-ubiquitinating enzyme, and
polyglutamine expansions in ATXN3 cause spinocerebellar axatia – type 3.35
rs7224296 near NSF tags the MAPT H1 haplotype36 and is associated with increased
risk for FTD syndromes including progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal
degeneration,37 as well as Alzheimer’s and Parikinson’s diseases.38

While the mechanism of polygenic contribution to cognitive dysfunction in ALS requires
further investigation, we speculate based on our findings that identified SNPs may
contribute to neuroanatomic disease burden. A weighted polygenic risk score derived
from the observed multivariate genotype-phenotype correlation in the CReATe PGB
cohort showed robust relationships in independent validation cohorts to both in vivo
cortical thinning and post mortem burden of TDP-43 pathology. Anatomically, these
findings were largely consistent with prior in vivo structural imaging studies of
neurodegeneration associated with cognitive dysfunction and with ex vivo investigations
of TDP-43 neuropathologic burden in ALS.28,29,39 Thus, in addition to indicating
polygenic contribution to cognitive dysfunction in ALS, our findings suggest a possible
mechanisms of observed findings via disease pathophysiology.

Beyond the potential biological mechanism of identifying polygenic contributions to ALS
disease heterogeneity, we additionally suggest that sCCA can provide a tool for defining
polygenic factors of disease risk. While sCCA has been widely applied to imaginggenetic studies,40 we are unaware of prior applications using sCCA to define and
polygenic score based on rich clinical phenotypic and biomarker data. Traditional

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

approaches to the generation of polygenic scores include using data from established,
typically case-control, GWAS but practical considerations involve the selection of how
many variants to include in a model and how to define the weights of an appropriate
statistical model.41 Critically, rather than an arbitrary selection of variants and their
weights, the sparsity parameter of sCCA facilitates an unsupervised, data-driven
manner to select the number of variants to include in the model and the canonical
correlation provides data-driven weights to define the statistical model. The positive or
negative direction of model-derived weights is potentially biologically informative, and
could reflect ‘risk’ (i.e. positive weight) or ‘protective’ benefit (i.e. a negative weight).
Further investigation is necessary to clarify the relationships between model-selected
SNPs and model-derived canonical weight from both biological (e.g., some SNPs and/or
genes may contribute more strongly to risk factors) and mathematical (e.g., weights
may be constrained by minor allele frequency) perspectives. Nonetheless, sCCA may
provide an optimal method for future studies of polygenic variation and direct research
efforts towards model-selected variants.

Several limitations should be considered in the present study. Here, we focus our
analysis on a set of SNPs selected a priori from previous large-scale GWAS based on
genome-wide association with ALS11 or shared risk between ALS and FTD.14 Other
genetic variants not included in the present study may also relate to cognitive
dysfunction in ALS spectrum disease, and future, more densely-genotyped studies are
necessary to elucidate discovery of novel genetic contributions to cognition that have
not been identified through prior case-control studies. We derived a wPGS from the

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

sCCA to further investigate polygenic associations with longitudinal clinical and
cognitive performance in the same cohort, and to investigate polygenic associations
with in vivo and post mortem disease neuroanatomy in independent sporadic ALS
cohorts. While we define our polygenic score from sCCA using a cross-sectional
snapshot of baseline cognitive and motor performance estimates, future work using
longitudinal data to define polygenic associations may further elucidate genetic risk for
cognitive dysfunction in ALS. However, our finding that the wPGS also relates to
longitudinal cognitive performance in the PGB cohort, and also relevant disease
anatomy in independent cohorts, suggests its relevance to longitudinal cognitive
phenotypes in ALS. Previous critique of polygenic scores suggest calculation based on
GWAS-defined odds ratios for univariate risk loci42 or undue influence by population
variance43 limit their use in clinical and prognostic settings. To avoid these potential
confounds, our computation of a weighted polygenic risk score is based on modelselected parameters derived from an analysis including all genetic variants in an effort
to account for multivariate genetic relationships. We also include the first two principal
components in our model from the whole-genome analyses of the PGB CReATe cohort
in an effort to account for differences in population heterogeneity. Our analyses focus
on the investigation of genetic contribution to cognitive dysfunction in ALS, yet it is well
established that behavioral impairment is also part of the ALS spectrum disease.44
Further research is necessary to investigate polygenic risk for behavioral dysfunction in
ALS, and whether loci included in our calculated wPGS confer risk for both cognitive
and behavioral dysfunction. While this study demonstrates converging, multimodal
evidence for polygenic risk in independent neuroimaging and autopsy cohorts,

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

replication in additional, large cohorts that allow for robust cross-validation is warranted;
however alternative datasets that contain detailed genetic and cognitive phenotyping for
ALS are lacking and PGB cohort represents the largest of its class. Future research
investigating additional, large-scale patient cohorts with genetic and phenotypic data are
necessary.

With these limitations in mind, our research demonstrates converging clinical,
neuroimaging, and pathologic evidence for polygenic contribution to cognitive
dysfunction and frontal cortical disease distribution in ALS. These findings should
stimulate further investigation into polygenic risk for cognitive disease vulnerability in
ALS, and suggest their importance in prognostic consideration and treatment trials.
More broadly, this work provides insight into genetic contribution to heterogeneous
phenotypes in neurodegenerative and neurological disease and supports evidence for
polygenic architecture in these conditions.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Supplementary Methods
Participants: CReATe Consortium
Participants consisted of 339 individuals clinically diagnosed by a board-certified
neurologist with a sporadic or familial form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS),
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with frontotemporal dementia (ALS-FTD), progressive
muscular atrophy (PMA), or primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) who were enrolled and
evaluated through the CReATe Consortium’s Phenotype-Genotype-Biomarker (PGB)
study. All participants provided written informed consent. The PGB study is registered
on clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02327845) and the University of Miami IRB (the central IRB for
the CreATe Consortium) approved the study. This study entails participant blood DNA
samples available for genetic screening and longitudinal evaluation at regularlyscheduled visits (ALS, ALS-FTD, and PMA: 0 (baseline), 3, 6, 12, and 18 months; PLS:
0 (baseline), 6, 12, 18, and 24 months). Participants were evaluated at each visit using
alternate versions of the ECAS,26 the ALSFRS-R,45 with UMN and LMN burden scores
calculated from a detailed elemental neuromuscular examination. Scores for UMN and
LMN symptoms were calculating by summing within and across each spinal region
resulting in a score ranging from 0 (none) to 10 (worst) reflective of burden of upper and
lower motor neuron pathology. We excluded nine individuals with missing or incomplete
longitudinal evaluation data that precluded subsequent analysis, resulting in a total of
330 participants.

Genotyping: CReATe Consortium

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cell DNA was extracted using the QIAamp DNA Blood
Mini Kit Qiagen #51106 and quantified using the Quant-iT dsDNA Assay Kit (Life
Technologies cat#Q33130). The DNA integrity was verified by agarose gel
electrophoresis (E-Gel, Life Technologies, cat#G8008-01). Unique samples were
barcoded and whole genome sequencing (WGS) was performed at the HudsonAlpha
Institute for Biotechnology Genomic Services Laboratory (Huntsville, Alabama) (HA)
using Illumina HiSeq X10 sequencers to generate approximately 360 million pairedends reads, each 150 base pairs (bp) in length. Peripheral DNA was extracted from
participant blood samples and screened for known pathogenic mutations associated
with ALS and related diseases.

Screening included sequencing for C9ORF72 repeat expansions and WGS which is
curated and validated via Sanger sequencing for pathogenic mutations associated with
ALS and/or FTD in ANG, CHCHD10, CHMP2B, FUS, GRN, hnRNPA1, hnRNPA2B1,
MAPT, MATR3, OPTN, PFN1, SETX, SOD1, SPG11, SQSTM1, TARDBP, TBK1,
TUBA4A, UBQLN2, VCP (see Table 1 for participant mutation status). The PGB study
also includes patients with HSP that were excluded in the current analysis, but we
additionally screened individuals for pathogenic mutations in 67 additional genes
associated with hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) and 7 genes associated with distal
hereditary motor neuropathy and all cases were negative for pathogenic mutations in
these genes.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

In terms of whole genome sequencing data, paired-end 150 bp reads were aligned to
the GRCh38 human reference using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA-ALN v0.7.12)46
and processed using the GATK best-practices workflow implemented in the Genome
Analysis Toolkit (GATK v3.4.0).47 Variants for individual samples were called with
HaplotypeCaller which produced intermediate gVCFs that we combined using a joint
genotyping step to produce a multi-sample VCF. Variant filtration was performed using
Variant Quality Score Recalibration (VQSR), which assigns a score (VQSOD) to each
variant and a PASS/FAIL label and evaluated this in the context of hard filtering
thresholds (Minimum Genotype Quality ≥ 20, minimum mean DP ≥ 10). Variant
annotation was performed using Variant Effect Predictor (VEP)48 and in-house pipelines
including non-coding variant allele frequencies from Genome Aggregation Database
(gnomAD).49 In-house scripts were used to identify false positives resulting from
paralogous mapping or/and gaps in the current human genome assembly. VCFs were
further decomposed prior to analyses using the Decompose function of Vt.50

To control for population variance, we additionally derived the first two principal
components scores for each in the CReATe PBG cohort using principal components
analysis as implemented in Eigenstrat software.51

From the WGS data we extracted 43 hypothesized variants from WGS that previously
achieved genome-wide significance for association with ALS11 or joint association with
ALS and FTD via GWAS52 Proxy loci were genotyped (linkage disequilibrium (LD) R2 >
0.80) when genetic data were not available for previously-published loci (see

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Supplementary Table 1 for a complete list); one locus (rs1051181652) as excluded from
analysis due to high level of missingness across samples; no LD proxy was identified.
We examined linkage disequilibrium (LD) between loci on the same chromosome and
pruned loci based on an R2 value greater than or equal to 0.80; this resulted in the
exclusion of rs3849943 (R2 = 1.0 with rs3849942), rs118082508 (R2 = 1.0 with
rs117027576), and rs116900480 (R2 = 0.929 with rs113247976). We then used Plink
software53 to recode participant genotypes according to additive genetic models (e.g. 0
= no minor allele copies, 1 = one minor allele copy, 2 = two minor allele copies), since
the dominant or recessive nature of the loci included in this study remains unknown.

Linear Mixed-Effects Modeling of the ECAS and clinical measures
We conducted linear mixed-effects modeling of longitudinal performance on the ECAS,
ALSFRS-R, and UMN and LMN scores using the nlme package in R. Each model was
fit using maximum likelihood. In addition to the ECAS Total Score, we analyzed
Executive Function, Language, Verbal Fluency, Memory, and Visuospatial subscores
and summary scores (ALS-Specific Score, ALS-Non-Specific Score) each as dependent
variables to analyze patient performance in separate cognitive domains and in clinicallygrouped cognitive domains. Fixed effects included age at baseline visit (in years), lag
between age of symptom onset and age at baseline visit (in years), sex, pathogenic
mutation status (carrier / noncarrier), college education (yes / no) and visit time-point (in
months), and we included individual by visit time-point as random effects. This allowed
us to obtain adjusted estimates of baseline performance (i.e. intercept) and rate of

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

decline (i.e. slope) per individual, having regressed out potential confounding variables
as fixed effects.

We conducted Spearman’s rank-order correlations between baseline performance and
rate of decline using family-wise error (FWE)-correction for multiple comparisons (see
Figure 1B), and used the car package in R to conduct Levene’s test for equality of
variance to evaluate whether variance in baseline performance and rate of decline
differed between measures.

Sparse Canonical Correlation Analysis
We next conducted sparse canonical correlation analysis (sCCA) to select a
parsimonious linear combination of variables that maximize the correlation between two
multivariate datasets using the PMA package in R.27 One dataset comprised scaled
intercepts from each clinical variable per participant (see Mixed-Effects Modeling of
Clinical Data), and the other comprised raw genotypes and, in an effort to account for
population differences in genetics, raw estimates for the first two principle components
per participant.

We assumed standard (e.g. unordered) organization of each dataset, and selected
regularization parameters using a grid search of 100 combinations of L1 values
between 0 (most sparse) and 1 (least sparse) in increments of 0.1. The combination of
L1 values yielding the highest canonical correlation of the first variate were then used in
the sCCA, as similarly reported.54 We calculated a p value by reporting the probability of

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

observing a canonical correlation greater than or equal to the model-fitted value relative
to 10,000 random permutations. To evaluate model robustness, we additionally
repeated sCCA 10,000 times each employing a random bootstrapped subsample of
70% of participants and observed similar results.

Polygenic Score
We calculated a weighted polygenic score (wPGS) by computing a weighted sum of
allele dosage for each individual using canonical weights for each genetic variant
resulting from prior sCCA. We then conducted Spearman’s rank-order correlations
between the wPGS and 1) adjusted estimates of baseline performance on clinical
measure(s) selected from sCCA and 2) adjusted rates of decline on all clinical
measures using FWE correction for multiple comparisons.

Participants: Neuroimaging cohort from UPenn
We retrospectively evaluated 80 patients with ALS recruited for research between 2006
and 2019 from the Penn Comprehensive ALS Clinic and Penn Frontotemporal
Degeneration Center at UPenn (Table 2). Inclusion criteria consisted of negative
screening for known pathogenic mutations associated with ALS and FTD, complete
genotyping at analyzed SNPs, white non-Latino racial and ethnic background
(population diversity is known to influence allele frequencies across individuals),
disease duration from symptom onset < 2.5 standard deviations from respective group
means (to avoid confounds associated with clear outliers), and T1-weighted MRI. All
patients (N= 80) were diagnosed with ALS by a board-certified neurologist (L.E., L.M.,

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

M.G., D.I) using revised El Escorial criteria55 and assessed for ALS frontotemporal
spectrum disorder using established criteria;56 those patients enrolled in research prior
to 2017 were retrospectively evaluated through chart review. All patients participated in
an informed consent procedure approved by an Institutional Review Board convened at
the University of Pennsylvania.

Participants: Autopsy cohort from UPenn
We evaluated brain tissue samples from 55 ALS autopsy cases identified from the
UPenn Integrated Neurodegenerative Disease Database57 who were diagnosed by a
board-certified neuropathologist (J.Q.T., E.B.L.) with ALS due to TDP-43 pathology
using immunohistochemistry31 and published criteria;58 this cohort included 11 patients
from the ALS neuroimaging cohort. Inclusion criteria consisted of negative screening for
known pathogenic mutations associated with ALS or FTD, complete genotyping at
analyzed SNPs, white non-Latino racial and ethnic background (population diversity is
known to influence allele frequencies across individuals), disease duration from
symptom onset < 2.5 standard deviations from respective group means (to avoid
confounds associated with clear outliers), and sufficient brain tissue samples from the
motor cortex and middle frontal cortex for pathological analysis.

Genetic Screening and SNP Genotyping: UPenn cohorts
DNA was extracted from peripheral blood or frozen brain tissue following the
manufacturer’s protocols (Flexigene (Qiagen) or QuickGene DNA whole blood kit
(Autogen) for blood, and QIAsymphony DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) for brain tissue). All

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

patients were screened for C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansions using a
modified repeat-primed polymerase-chain reaction (PCR) as previously described59 and
we excluded any patient with >=30 hexanucleotide repeats. Of the remaining
individuals, we evaluated family history using a three-generation pedigree history as
previously reported.60 For cases with a family history of the same disease we
sequenced 45 genes previously associated with neurodegenerative disease, including
genes known to be associated with ALS (e.g. SOD121, TBK19). Sequencing was
performed using a custom-targeted next-generation sequencing panel (MiND-Seq)25
and analyzed using Mutation Surveyor software (Soft Genetics, State College, PA). We
excluded any individuals identified as having a pathogenic mutation.
For our cross-validation analyses of PENN MRI and autopsy samples, we
genotyped peripheral or brain cerebellum DNA of each case using the Illumina Infinium
Global Screening Array through the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP) Center
for Applied Genomics Core according to manufacturer’s specifications. Plink was then
used to remove variants with <95% call rate, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) pvalue < 0.0001 and individuals with >5% missing genotypes. From the remaining
genotypes, if the tag SNP was not available, we used the LDlink tool 61 to select a proxy
SNP on the same chromosome <100kb in distance and a D’prime >0.85, with the
exception of one SNP in which the maximum D’prime available was 0.57 (see
Supplementary Table 3).

Neuroimaging Processing and Analyses

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

High-resolution T1-weighted MPRAGE structural scans were acquired for neuroimaging
participants using a 3T Siemens Tim Trio scanner with an 8-channel head coil, with
T=1620ms, T=3.09ms, flip angle=15°, 192x256 matrix, and 1mm3 voxels. T1-weighted
MRI images were then preprocessed using Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs)
software.62 Each individual dataset was deformed into a standard local template space
in a canonical stereotactic coordinate system. ANTs provide a highly accurate
registration routine using symmetric and topology-preserving diffeomorphic
deformations to minimize bias toward the reference space and to capture the
deformation necessary to aggregate images in a common space. Then, we used N4
bias correction to minimize heterogeneity63 and the ANTs Atropos tool to segment
images into six tissue classes (cortex, white matter, CSF, subcortical grey structures,
brainstem, and cerebellum) using template-based priors and to generate probability
maps of each tissue. Voxel-wise cortical thickness was measured in millimeters (mm3)
from the pial surface and then transformed into Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI)
space, smoothed using a 3 sigma full-width half-maximum Gaussian kernel, and
downsampled to 2mm isotropic voxels.

We used randomise software from FSL to perform nonparametric, permutation-based
statistical analyses of cortical thickness images from our neuroimaging cohort.
Permutation-based statistical testing is robust to concerns regarding multiple
comparisons since, rather than a traditional assessment of two sample distributions, this
method assesses a true assignment of factors (e.g. wPGS) to cortical thickness relative
to many (e.g., 10,000) random assignments.64

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

We evaluated whether wPGS relates to magnitude of reduced cortical thickness,
covarying for age, sex, disease duration, and scanner acquisition in an effort to control
for factors associated with reduced cortical thickness but not specifically associated with
polygenic risk. We constrained analysis using an explicit mask restricted to high
probability cortex (>.4). We report clusters that survive p<.05 threshold-free cluster
enhancement (TFCE)65 corrected for family-wise error (FWE) relative to 10,000 random
permutations.

Neuropathology Processing and Analyses
The presence of phosphorylated TDP-43 intraneuronal inclusions (dots, wisps, skeins)
for sampled regions from the middle frontal and motor cortices were assessed on a
semi-quantitative ordinal scale: 0=none/rare, 1=mild, 2=moderate, 3=severe/numerous.
All neuropathological ratings were performed by an expert neuropathologist (J.Q.T.,
E.B.L.) blinded to patient genotype. For each region, we divided the autopsy cohort into
two groups based on ordinal score of TDP-43 pathology: None/Rare=pathology score of
0, Mild to Severe=pathology score of 1 or greater. We did this to maximize statistical
power, as analyses considering ordinal scales were statistically under-powered. We
conducted Wilcoxon rank-sum tests using base R to determine whether wPGS differed
between cases with absent or present TDP-43 pathology in each region.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Acknowledgements
The CReATe consortium (U54NS092091) is part of the Rare Diseases Clinical
Research Network (RDCRN), an initiative of the Office of Rare Diseases Research
(ORDR), NCATS. CReATe is funded through a collaboration between NCATS, and the
NINDS. Additional research support was provided by the National Institutes of Health
(NS106754, AG017586, NS092091). The genomics sequencing was funded by St. Jude
Children’s Research Hospital American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities (ALSAC)
and the ALS Association (grants 17-LGCA-331 and 16-TACL-242).

Author Contributions
Study concept/design: K.P., M.B., C.T.M.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: K.P., M. B., J. W., E. R., L. H., V. V. D.,
D. J. I., L. E., L. M., C. Q., V. G., J. S., T. B., J. R., A. S., J. K., E. P., C. J. J. C., Y. S.,
S. M., D. W., E. B. L., J. Q. T., P. C., J. G., R. R., G. W., J. P. T., and C. T. M.
Drafting/revising manuscript: K.P., M. B., C.T.M., M.G., E.B.L., D.W., V.G., E. R., G. W.,
W.C., J.S., T.B.

Competing Interests statement
The following authors declare the following competing interests:
C. M. receives financial support from Biogen and has provided consulting for Axon
Advisors. M.B. reports grants from National Institutes of Health, the ALS Association,
the Muscular Dystrophy Association, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
the Department of Defense, and Target ALS during the conduct of the study; personal

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

fees from Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, AveXis, and Genentech, outside the submitted
work. In addition, M.B. has a provisional patent entitled ‘Determining Onset of
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis,’ and serves as a site investigator on clinical trials funded
by Biogen and Orphazyme. All other authors declare no competing interests.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

References
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.

7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.
18.

Montuschi, A. et al. Cognitive correlates in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a
population-based study in Italy. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry
86, 168–173 (2015).
Beeldman, E. et al. The cognitive profile of ALS: a systematic review and metaanalysis update. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry 87, 611–619
(2016).
Elamin, M. et al. Cognitive changes predict functional decline in ALS: A
population-based longitudinal study. Neurology 80, 1590–1597 (2013).
Crockford, C. et al. ALS-specific cognitive and behavior changes associated with
advancing disease stage in ALS. Neurology 91, e1370–e1380 (2018).
Hu, W. T. et al. Behavior Matters—Cognitive Predictors of Survival in Amyotrophic
Lateral Sclerosis. PLoS ONE 8, e57584 (2013).
Caga, J., Hsieh, S., Lillo, P., Dudley, K. & Mioshi, E. The Impact of Cognitive and
Behavioral Symptoms on ALS Patients and Their Caregivers. Front Neurol 10,
942 (2019).
DeJesus-Hernandez, M. et al. Expanded GGGGCC Hexanucleotide Repeat in
Noncoding Region of C9ORF72 Causes Chromosome 9p-Linked FTD and ALS.
Neuron 72, 245–256 (2011).
Van Deerlin, V. M. et al. TARDBP mutations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with
TDP-43 neuropathology: a genetic and histopathological analysis. The Lancet
Neurology 7, 409–416 (2008).
Freischmidt, A. et al. Haploinsufficiency of TBK1 causes familial ALS and frontotemporal dementia. Nat Neurosci 18, 631–636 (2015).
van Rheenen, W. et al. Genome-wide association analyses identify new risk
variants and the genetic architecture of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Genet
48, 1043–1048 (2016).
Nicolas, A. et al. Genome-wide Analyses Identify KIF5A as a Novel ALS Gene.
Neuron 97, 1268–1282.e6 (2018).
van Es, M. A. et al. Genome-wide association study identifies 19p13.3 (UNC13A)
and 9p21.2 as susceptibility loci for sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat
Genet 41, 1083–1087 (2009).
Diekstra, F. P. et al. C9orf72 and UNC13A are shared risk loci for amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia: A genomewide metaanalysis.
Ann Neurol. 76, 120–133 (2014).
Karch, C. M. et al. Selective Genetic Overlap Between Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis and Diseases of the Frontotemporal Dementia Spectrum. JAMA Neurol
75, 860–16 (2018).
Turner, M. R. et al. Genetic screening in sporadic ALS and FTD. Journal of
Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry 88, 1042–1044 (2017).
McLaughlin, R. L. et al. Genetic correlation between amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
and schizophrenia. Nat Commun 8, 14774 (2017).
Ciga, S. B. et al. Shared polygenic risk and causal inferences in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol. 85, 470–481 (2019).
Umoh, M. E. et al. Comparative analysis of C9orf72 and sporadic disease in an

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

34.
35.

36.

Placek et al.

ALS clinic population. Neurology 87, 1024–1030 (2016).
Renton, A. E. et al. A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the cause
of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD. Neuron 72, 257–268 (2011).
Kenna, K. P. et al. NEK1 variants confer susceptibility to amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. Nat Genet 48, 1037–1042 (2016).
Rosen, D. R. et al. Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated
with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature 362, 59–62 (1993).
Placek, K. et al. UNC13A polymorphism contributes to frontotemporal disease in
sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurobiology of Aging 73, 190–199
(2019).
Vass, R. et al. Risk genotypes at TMEM106B are associated with cognitive
impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Acta Neuropathologica 121, 373–380
(2011).
Hagenaars, S. P. et al. Genetic risk for neurodegenerative disorders, and its
overlap with cognitive ability and physical function. PLoS ONE 13, e0198187
(2018).
Toledo, J. B. et al. A platform for discovery: The University of Pennsylvania
Integrated Neurodegenerative Disease Biobank. Alzheimer's & Dementia 10,
477–484.e1 (2014).
Abrahams, S., Newton, J., Niven, E., Foley, J. & Bak, T. H. Screening for
cognition and behaviour changes in ALS. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and
Frontotemporal Degeneration 15, 9–14 (2014).
Witten, D. M., Tibshirani, R. & Hastie, T. A penalized matrix decomposition, with
applications to sparse principal components and canonical correlation analysis.
Biostatistics 10, 515–534 (2009).
Lulé, D. et al. Cognitive phenotypes of sequential staging in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. CORTEX 101, 163–171 (2018).
Agosta, F. et al. Structural brain correlates of cognitive and behavioral impairment
in MND. Hum Brain Mapp 37, 1614–1626 (2016).
Müller, H.-P. & Kassubek, J. MRI-Based Mapping of Cerebral Propagation in
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Front Neurosci 12, 655 (2018).
Neumann, M. et al. Ubiquitinated TDP-43 in Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration
and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Science 314, 130–133 (2006).
Irwin, D. J. et al. Myelin oligodendrocyte basic protein and prognosis in
behavioral-variant frontotemporal dementia. Neurology 83, 502–509 (2014).
Byrne, S. et al. Cognitive and clinical characteristics of patients with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis carrying a C9orf72 repeat expansion: a population-based cohort
study. The Lancet Neurology 11, 232–240 (2012).
McMillan, C. T. et al. Genetic and neuroanatomic associations in sporadic
frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Neurobiology of Aging 35, 1473–1482 (2014).
Burnett, B., Li, F. & Pittman, R. N. The polyglutamine neurodegenerative protein
ataxin-3 binds polyubiquitylated proteins and has ubiquitin protease activity.
Human Molecular Genetics 12, 3195–3205 (2003).
Yokoyama, J. S. et al. Shared genetic risk between corticobasal degeneration,
progressive supranuclear palsy, and frontotemporal dementia. Acta Neuropathol
133, 825–837 (2017).

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS
37.

38.
39.
40.

41.
42.
43.

44.

45.

46.
47.
48.
49.

50.
51.
52.

53.

54.

Placek et al.

Ferrari, R. et al. Genetic architecture of sporadic frontotemporal dementia and
overlap with Alzheimer‘s and Parkinson’s diseases. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery & Psychiatry 88, 152–164 (2017).
Desikan, R. S. et al. Genetic overlap between Alzheimer‘s disease and
Parkinson’s disease at the MAPT locus. Mol. Psychiatry 20, 1588–1595 (2015).
Prudlo, J. et al. TDP-43 pathology and cognition in ALS: A prospective
clinicopathologic correlation study. Neurology 87, 1019–1023 (2016).
Parkhomenko, E., Tritchler, D. & Beyene, J. Sparse canonical correlation analysis
with application to genomic data integration. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol 8, Article 1–
34 (2009).
Sugrue, L. P. & Desikan, R. S. What Are Polygenic Scores and Why Are They
Important? JAMA 321, 1820–1821 (2019).
Wald, N. J. & Old, R. The illusion of polygenic disease risk prediction. Genetics in
Medicine 2019 319, 1 (2019).
Mostafavi, H., Harpak, A., Conley, D., Pritchard, J. K. & Przeworski, M. Variable
prediction accuracy of polygenic scores within an ancestry group. bioRxiv 51,
629949 (2019).
Lillo, P., Mioshi, E., Zoing, M. C., Kiernan, M. C. & Hodges, J. R. How common
are behavioural changes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis? Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis 12, 45–51 (2010).
Cedarbaum, J. M. et al. The ALSFRS-R: a revised ALS functional rating scale that
incorporates assessments of respiratory function. Journal of the Neurological
Sciences 169, 13–21 (1999).
Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler
transform. Bioinformatics 26, 589–595 (2010).
McKenna, A. et al. The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for
analyzing next-generation DNA sequencing data. Genome Res. 20, 1297–1303
(2010).
Hunt, S. E. et al. Ensembl variation resources. Database (Oxford) 2018, 1193
(2018).
Karczewski, K. J. et al. Variation across 141,456 human exomes and genomes
reveals the spectrum of loss-of-function intolerance across human protein-coding
genes. bioRxiv 49, 531210 (2019).
Tan, A., Abecasis, G. R. & Kang, H. M. Unified representation of genetic variants.
Bioinformatics 31, 2202–2204 (2015).
Price, A. L. et al. Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in
genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet 38, 904–909 (2006).
Karch, C. M. et al. Selective Genetic Overlap Between Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis and Diseases of the Frontotemporal Dementia Spectrum. JAMA Neurol
(2018). doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.0372
Purcell, S. et al. PLINK: A Tool Set for Whole-Genome Association and
Population-Based Linkage Analyses. The American Journal of Human Genetics
81, 559–575 (2007).
Xia, C. H. et al. Linked dimensions of psychopathology and connectivity in
functional brain networks. Nat Commun 1–14 (2018). doi:10.1038/s41467-01805317-y

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS
55.

56.

57.

58.
59.

60.
61.

62.
63.
64.
65.

Placek et al.

Brooks, B. R., Miller, R. G., Swash, M., Munsat, T. L.World Federation of
Neurology Research Group on Motor Neuron Diseases. El Escorial revisited:
revised criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. in 1, 293–299
(2000).
Strong, M. J. et al. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - frontotemporal spectrum
disorder (ALS-FTSD): Revised diagnostic criteria. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
and Frontotemporal Degeneration 1–22 (2017).
doi:10.1080/21678421.2016.1267768
Toledo, J. B. et al. A platform for discovery: The University of Pennsylvania
Integrated Neurodegenerative Disease Biobank. Alzheimers Dement 10, 477–
84.e1 (2014).
Mackenzie, I. R. A. et al. A harmonized classification system for FTLD-TDP
pathology. Acta Neuropathol 122, 111–113 (2011).
Suh, E. et al. Semi-automated quantification of C9orf72 expansion size reveals
inverse correlation between hexanucleotide repeat number and disease duration
in frontotemporal degeneration. Acta Neuropathologica 130, 363–372 (2015).
Wood, E. M. et al. Development and Validation of Pedigree Classification Criteria
for Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration. JAMA Neurol 70, 1411–1417 (2013).
Machiela, M. J. & Chanock, S. J. LDassoc: an online tool for interactively
exploring genome-wide association study results and prioritizing variants for
functional investigation. Bioinformatics 34, 887–889 (2018).
Tustison, N. J. et al. Large-scale evaluation of ANTs and FreeSurfer cortical
thickness measurements. NeuroImage 99, 166–179 (2014).
Tustison, N. J. et al. N4ITK: Improved N3 Bias Correction. IEEE Trans Med
Imaging 29, 1310–1320 (2010).
Winkler, A. M., Ridgway, G. R., Webster, M. A., Smith, S. M. & Nichols, T. E.
Permutation inference for the general linear model. NeuroImage 92, 381–397
(2014).
Smith, S. M. & Nichols, T. E. Threshold-free cluster enhancement: addressing
problems of smoothing, threshold dependence and localisation in cluster
inference. NeuroImage 44, 83–98 (2009).

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Figure Legends.
1. Clinical and genetic heterogeneity in ALS. A) Differences in baseline performance
and rate of decline on each measure of cognitive performance and motor symptom
severity for each individual in the CReATe PGB cohort included in this analysis; the
heatmap indicates each individual’s standard deviation from the mean, with warmer
colors denoting positive values (i.e. baseline or rate of decline that is greater than the
mean) and cooler colors denoting negative standard deviation values (i.e. baseline or
rate of decline that is lesser than the mean). B) Correlation between baseline
performance and rate of decline for all cognitive and motor measures across the
CReATe PGB cohort; the heatmap indicates Spearman correlation coefficient, with
warmer colors indicative of positive correlations and cooler colors indicative of negative
correlations. C) Variation in SNP genotype for each individual in the CReATe PGB
cohort; the color key indicates the number of minor alleles at each SNP for each
individual: Blue = 0 minor alleles, Yellow = 1 minor allele, Red = 2 minor alleles.
2. Sparse, polygenic relationship between clinical and genetic variation in ALS.
sCCA selected the Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioral ALS Screen (ECAS) ALSSpecific score and 26 SNPs which resulted in the maximal correlation between clinical
and genetic variates in the CReATe PGB cohort. The color key denotes which variates
were selected for inclusion in the model: Green = selected, Gray = not selected. The
heatmap denotes the canonical weight strength associated with each relationship
between each selected SNP and the ECAS ALS-Specific Score, with warmer colors
indicative of positive weights and cooler colors indicative of negative weights.
3. Polygenic risk score correlates with cognitive performance on the ECAS. A)
Weighted polygenic risk score (wPGS) correlates with A) adjusted baseline and B) rate
of decline on the Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioral ALS Screen (ECAS) ALS-Specific
score in the CReATe PGB cohort.
4. Reduced cortical thickness and greater burden of pTDP-43 pathology relates to
higher polygenic risk score in independent validation cohorts. A) Sporadic ALS
(N=80) from an independent validation cohort at UPenn with higher weighted polygenic
risk score (wPGS) exhibited greater reduction of cortical thickness in diffuse neocortical
regions. The heatmap indicates the associated T-statistic for each voxel, with yellow
representing the highest value. B) Beeswarm boxplots of wPGS in sporadic ALS at
autopsy (N=55) from an independent validation cohort at UPenn show that presence of
pTDP-43 pathology in the motor cortex and middle frontal cortex are associated with
higher wPGS.

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Supplementary Figure Legends.
1. Gridsearch for sparse canonical correlation analysis (sCCA) L1 parameters.
Each column indicates 1 of 100 unique combinations of L1 parameters (ranging 0.1 to
1) applied to clinical and genetic datasets, and each row lists a feature entered into the
sCCA. The heatmap denotes the canonical weight strength between clinical features
and SNPs within each column; warmer colors indicate positive weights and cooler
colors indicate negative weights.
2. Polygenic risk score correlates with rate of decline in cognitive performance on
the ECAS. Scatterplots demonstrating relationships between weighted polygenic risk
score (wPGS) and rate of decline on each Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioral ALS
Screen (ECAS) score and upper motor neuron (UMN), lower motor neuron (LMN), and
ALS Functional Rating Scale – Revised (ALSFRS-R) scores in the CReATe PGB
cohort.
3. Evaluation of sparse canonical correlation analysis (sCCA) model robustness
in bootstrapped subsamples. Each column indicates 1 of 10,000 random
bootstrapped subsamples of 70% of participants in the CReATe PGB cohort, and each
row lists a feature entered into the sCCA. The heatmap denotes the canonical weight
strength between clinical features and SNPs within each column; warmer colors indicate
positive weights and cooler colors indicate negative weights.

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Tables
Table 1: Demographic Characteristics of the CReATe PGB cohort.
N
Sex
Number of Visits
Age at Symptom Onset
Symptom Onset to Baseline
(years)
Site of Symptom Onset
Bulbar
Bulbar & Limb
Bulbar & Other
Limb
Limb & Other
Other
College Education or greater
Mutation Carrier
C9ORF72
C9ORF72 and UBQLN2
SOD1
SQSTM1
TARDBP
TBK1
Baseline ALSFRS-R (0-48)
UMN Score (0-10)
LMN Score (0-10)
ECAS
ALS Specific (0-100)
Language (0-28)
Verbal Fluency (0- 24)
Executive (0-48)
ALS Non-Specific (0-36)
Memory (0-24)
Visuospatial (0- 12)
ECAS Total (0-136)

Male (%)
Mean (SD)
Mean (SD)

ALS
280
163 (58%)
3.08 (1.35)
56.34 (12.54)

ALS-FTD
15
12 (80%)
2.87 (1.13)
62.27 (10.18)

PLS
22
11 (50%)
2.82 (1.26)
49.68 (7.39)

PMA
13
8 (625)
3.31 (1.38)
48.08 (15.31)

Mean (SD)

3.59 (4.97)

3.53 (2.47)

8.45 (6.12)

7.77 (7.17)

46 (16.4)
7 (2.5)
7 (2.5)
175 (62.5)
22 (7.6)
7 (2.5)
197 (70.4)
34 (12.1)
22 (7.9)
1 (0.4)
8 (2.9)
1 (0.4)
1 (0.4)
1 (0.4)
35.02 (7.09)
2.71 (1.68)
2.53 (1.49)

4 (26.7)
1 (6.7)
4 (26.7)
5 (33.3)
9 (60.0)
3 (20.0)
3 (20.0)
34.53 (6.42)
2.65 (1.85)
2.49 (1.74)

5 (22.7)
3 (13.6)
13 (59.1)
1 (4.5)
20 (90.9)
0 (0.0)
36.50 (5.95)
4.4 (1.33)
0.59 (0.96)

11 (84.6)
1 (7.7)
1 (7.7)
10 (76.9)
0 (0.0)
33.62 (7.83)
0.87 (0.73)
4.84 (1.93)

80.89 (10.85)
25.84 (2.66)
16.62 (5.10)
38.43 (5.97)

51.73 (13.22)
20.60 (4.12)
7.29 (5.41)
24.33 (10.59)

87.95 (7.47)
26.82 (1.97)
19.50 (3.38)
41.64 (3.29)

81.62 (11.61)
26.62 (1.26)
16.77 (4.36)
38.23 (7.50)

28.01 (3.81)
16.44 (3.54)
11.57 (0.88)

17.93 (8.56)
8.27 (7.00)
10.36 (2.17)

29.73 (2.76)
17.95 (2.84)
11.77 (0.43)

27.62 (6.31)
15.69 (6.20)
11.92 (0.28)

108.90 (13.05)

69.67 (20.62)

117.68 (9.12)

109.23 (16.47)

N (%)

N (%)

N (%)

Mean (SD)
Mean (SD)
Mean (SD)

Mean (SD)

PGB = Phenotype-Genotype-Biomarker; CReATe = Clinical Research in ALS and Related
Disorders for Therapeutic Development ; ALS = Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, ALS-FTD = ALSFrontotemporal dementia; PLS = Primary lateral sclerosis, PMA = Progressive muscular atrophy;
ALSFRS-R = Revised ALS Functional Rating Scale; UMN = upper motor neuron; LMN = lower
motor neuron; ECAS = Edinburgh Cognitive and Behavioral ALS Screen; SD = standard deviation

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Table 2. Demographics for neuroimaging (A) and autopsy (B) validation amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) cohorts from UPenn.
A. Neuroimaging Cohort
N (Male)

80 (49)

Age at MRI in Years, M (SD)
Education in Years, M (SD)
Disease Duration in Years, M (SD)
Site of Symptom Onset, N (%)
Bulbar
Limb
Cognitive
Unknown
ALSFRS-R, M (SD)

59.76 (11.45)
15.10 (3.03)
2.90 (2.33)
18 (22.50)
49 (61.25)
8 (10.00)
5 (6.25)
34.51 (7.26)

B. Autopsy Cohort
N (Male)

55 (30)

Age at Death Years, M (SD)
Education in Years, M (SD)
Disease Duration at Death in Years, M (SD)
Site of Symptom Onset, N (%)
Bulbar
Limb
Cognitive
Respiratory
Unknown
ALSFRS-R, M (SD)

65.31 (10.36)
15.54 (3.49)
4.11 (2.92)
8
30
1
1
15
18.09 (6.10)

Abbreviations: ALSFRS-R = ALS Functional Rating Scale – Revised, M = Mean, SD =
standard deviation

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Supplementary Tables
Supplementary Table 1: List of genetic variants analyzed in the PGB Study. Variants in
red were excluded due to linkage disequilibrium (R2 > 0.80).
Marker
Name

Nearest
Gene

Chr

1000
Genome
GMAF

GRCh38
Position

Proxy Marker

Proxy HG19
Position

rs2068667

NFASC

1

0.208

chr1:204948552

rs11240317

chr1:204920322

rs11185393

AMY1A

1

0.368

chr1:104209379

rs67205957

chr1:104752258

rs515342

ASB1

2

0.214

chr2:238458655

rs508986

chr2:239337691

rs9820623

MOBP

3

0.406

chr3:39452367

rs6765697

chr3:39493239

rs13079368

MOBP

3

0.275

chr3:39471060

rs1464047

chr3:39526874

rs1768208

MOBP

3

0.323

chr3:39481512

rs616147

chr3:39534481

rs10463311

TNIP1

5

0.431

chr5:151031274

-

-

rs3828599

GPX3

5

0.417

chr5:151022235

rs4958872

chr5:150402334

rs538622

ERGIC1

5

0.32

chr5:172920676

rs2446192

chr5:172352369

rs17111695

NAF1

5

0.183

chr5:151052885

rs12518386

chr5:150438085

rs757651

REEP2

5

0.016

chr5:138455779

rs149312547

chr5:137792021

rs10488631

TNPO3

7

0.059

chr7:128954129

rs12539741

chr7:128596805

rs17070492

LOC101927815

8

0.208

chr8:2563763

-

-

rs7813314

BC045738

8

0.2

chr8:2558274

rs6996532

chr8:2417678

rs10869188

C9ORF72

9

0.49

chr9:72614090

rs7032232

chr9:75229116

rs870901

AK097706

9

0.133

chr9:107086201

rs60743641

chr9:109854824

rs3849942

C9ORF72

9

0.183

chr9:27543283

rs3849943

chr9:27543382

rs13302855

C9ORF72

9

0.086

chr9:27595997

rs34460171

chr9:27594491

rs732389

AK294518

10

0.205

chr10:78584745

rs7071538

chr10:80338173

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

rs7118388

CAT

11

0.454

chr11:34432600

rs1962369

chr11:34456941

rs12803540

CAT

11

0.138

chr11:34471200

rs17881488

chr11:34492443

rs117027576

KIF5A

12

0.00913

chr12:56922819

-

-

rs113247976

KIF5A

12

0.007

chr12:57581917

-

-

rs142321490

KIF5A

12

0.006

chr12:58282349

-

-

rs74654358

TBK1

12

0.012

chr12:64488187

-

-

rs1578303

HTR2A

13

0.204

chr13:47389011

rs144877054

chr13:47962781

rs10492593

PCDH9

13

0.121

chr13:66919985

rs73208976

chr13:67486924

rs17446243

TTL/TEL

13

0.116

chr13:40174794

rs78375967

chr13:40751567

rs10139154

SCFD1

14

0.428

chr14:30678292

-

-

rs10143310

ATXN3

14

0.339

chr14:92074037

-

-

rs12886280

NUBPL

14

0.412

chr14:31829453

rs35875023

chr14:32298974

rs6603044

BTBD1

15

0.332

chr15:83015059

rs12904695

chr15:83700365

rs9901522

PMP22

17

0.18

chr17:14770617

-

-

rs739439

KIAA0524

17

0.105

chr17:28396803

rs35714695

chr17:26719788

rs2240601

MSI2

17

0.192

chr17:57673751

rs16942143

chr17:55748611

rs2285642

GGNBP2

17

0.407

chr17:36556904

rs10707226

chr17:34916453

rs7224296

NSF

17

0.472

chr17:46722680

rs9912530

chr17:44836302

rs12973192

UNC13A

19

0.278

chr19:17642430

-

-

rs12608932

UNC13A

19

0.43

chr19:17641880

rs12973192

chr19:17753239

rs4239633

UNC13A

19

0.28

chr19:17631660

rs71162163

chr19:17744075

rs2425220

DLGAP4

20

0.241

chr20:36371037

rs2425223

chr20:35001520

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

rs75087725

C21orf72

21

0.003

chr21:44333234

-

-

rs3849943

C9ORF72

9

0.183

chr9:27543384

-

-

rs118082508

KIF5A

12

0.005

chr12:5692503

-

-

rs116900480

KIF5A

12

0.006

chr12:58262322

-

-

Abbreviations: GMAF = global minor allele frequency; Chr = chromosome; GRCh38 =
Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 38; HG19 = Human Genome Project 19

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Supplementary Table 2: Features and canonical weights selected from sparse
canonical correlation analysis (sCCA).
Feature

Canonical Weight

ECAS ALS-Specific Score

-1

rs1768208 (MOBP)

-0.393

rs10143310 (ATXN3)

-0.338

rs538622 (ERGIC1)

-0.269

rs11185393 (AMY1A)

-0.196

rs9901522 (PMP22)

-0.186

rs12886280 (NUBPL)

-0.174

rs10488631 (TNPO3)

-0.11

rs739439 (KIAA0524)

-0.107

rs757651 (REEP2)

-0.047

rs2240601 (MSI2)

-0.046

rs113247976 (KIF5A)

-0.023

rs75087725 (C21orf72)

-0.019

rs10492593 (PCDH9)

0.002

rs7813314 (BC045738)

0.007

rs7118388 (CAT)

0.049

rs17111695 (NAF1)

0.05

rs10463311 (TNIP1)

0.075

rs10869188 (C9ORF72)

0.092

rs10139154 (SCFD1)

0.099

rs3828599 (GPX3)

0.167

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

rs12608932 (UNC13A)

0.17

rs9820623 (MOBP)

0.179

rs2068667 (NFASC)

0.185

rs6603044 (BTBD1)

0.202

rs4239633 (UNC13A)

0.21

rs7224296 (NSF)

0.538

42

Placek et al.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Supplementary Table 3: List of genetic variants and proxies analyzed in the Penn MRI
and neuropathology samples.
Marker
Name

Nearest
Gene

Chr

GRCh37
Position

Proxy Marker

Proxy
GRCh37
Position

D’

rs10139154

SCFD1

14

31147498

rs230340

31125745

1.00

rs10143310

ATXN3

14

92540381

rs12588287

92536959

1.00

rs10463311

TNIP1

5

150410835

rs3924

150410135

1.00

rs10488631

TNPO3

7

128594183

rs10488631

N/A

N/A

rs10492593

PCDH9

13

67494117

rs1924311

67546580

1.00

rs10869188

C9ORF72

9

75229006

rs10217204

75231217

0.85

rs11185393

AMY1A

1

104752001

rs11185392

104751861

1.00

rs113247976

KIF5A

12

57975700

rs113247976

N/A

N/A

rs12608932

UNC13A

19

17752689

rs12608932

N/A

N/A

rs12886280

NUBPL

14

32298659

rs1953273

32368934

0.85

rs17111695

NAF1

5

150432446

rs60646696

150432657

1.00

rs1768208

MOBP

3

39523003

rs1768208

N/A

N/A

rs2068667

NFASC

1

204917680

rs12737855

204912843

1.00

rs2240601

MSI2

17

55751112

rs1005631

55733373

0.98

rs3828599

GPX3

5

150401796

rs2233287

150440097

0.91

rs4239633

UNC13A

19

17742469

rs34474857

17653298

0.57

rs538622

ERGIC1

5

172347679

rs514627

172355039

1.00

rs6603044

BTBD1

15

83683811

rs7172665

83717146

1.00

rs7118388

CAT

11

34454147

rs7118388

N/A

N/A

rs7224296

NSF

17

44800046

rs183211

44788310

0.99

rs739439

KIAA0524

17

26723822

rs117288663

26749941

0.85

rs75087725

C21orf72

21

45753117

rs8133730

45727242

1.00

rs757651

REEP2

5

137791468

rs255997

137889505

0.96

rs7813314

BCO45738

8

2415366

rs7005619

2421058

0.91

rs9820623

MOBP

3

39493858

N/A

N/A

N/A

rs9901522

PMP22

17

14673934

N/A

N/A

N/A

43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polygenic Contributions to Cognition in ALS

Placek et al.

Supplementary Table 4: Peak voxel coordinates for regions of reduced cortical
thickness associated with increased weighted polygenic score (wPGS) in patients with
sporadic ALS from the independent validation cohort from UPenn.

Primary Sensory Cortex (1)

L

MNI Coordinates
x
y
z
-54
-16
52

Premotor Cortex (6)

R

38

-16

68

4.39

0.007

9847

Subgenual Cingulate (25)

R

6

14

-8

4.21

0.018

805

Anterior Frontal Cortex (8)

L

-8

34

54

4.37

0.018

661

Posterior Cingulate Cortex (23)

R

2

-52

24

4.19

0.02

543

Anterior Prefrontal Cortex (10)

L

-36

60

-6

3.56

0.032

257

Visual Association Cortex (18)

L

-14

-46

-2

3.9

0.032

101

Inferior Frontal Gyrus (45)

R

30

24

10

2.94

0.042

57

Neuroanatomic region (BA)

L/R

T
statistic
4.7

p value
(FWE corrected)
0.008

Voxels
11921

Extrastriate Cortex (19)

R

46

-76

10

3.24

0.045

35

Orbital Frontal Cortex (47)

R

30

26

-10

2.64

0.05

26

Visual Association Cortex (18)

R

38

-84

-6

3.16

0.05

22

Abbreviations: BA = Brodmann area, L/R = Left/Right, MNI = Montreal Neurological
Institute

44

A

standard
deviation

B

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Spearman rho

C

# minor
alleles

Key

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.23.19014407; this version posted December 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

T-statistic
0.0

B

4.7

