medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Patterns of Autism Symptoms:
Hidden Structure in the ADOS and ADI-R
instruments
Jérémy Lefort-Besnard1,4, Kai Vogeley2, Leonhard Schilbach3, Gaël
Varoquaux5, Bertrand Thirion5, Guillaume Dumas6,7,8, Danilo Bzdok1,4,5,*
1

Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy, and Psychosomatics, RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany
2
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Cologne, Germany
3
Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany
4
Jülich Aachen Research Alliance (JARA) — Translational Brain Medicine, Aachen,
Germany
5
Parietal Team, INRIA, CEA, University Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
6
Human Genetics and Cognitive Functions University Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Paris, France
7
CNRS UMR3571 Genes, Synapses and Cognition, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
8
Human Genetics and Cognitive Functions Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
*Corresponding author: Prof. Danilo Bzdok (danilo.bzdok@rwth-aachen.de)

Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

ABSTRACT
We simultaneously revisited the ADI-R and ADOS with a comprehensive data-analytics
strategy. Here, the combination of pattern analysis algorithms and an extensive data resources
(n=266 patients aged 7 to 49 years) allowed identifying coherent clinical constellations in and
across ADI-R and ADOS assessments widespread in clinical practice. The collective results
of the clustering and sparse regression approaches suggest that identifying autism subtypes
and severity for a given individual may be most manifested in the social and communication
domains of the ADI-R. Additionally, our quantitative investigation revealed that diseasespecific patterns of ADI-R and ADOS scores can be uncovered when studying sex, age or
level of FIQ in patients.

Keywords: Autism subtypes | sparse modeling | machine learning | autism severity

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

INTRODUCTION
Autism spectrum disorder is clinically defined by different types of symptoms: deficits
in communication and social interaction as well as restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior,
interests, or activities. It is a spectrum disorder because a patient's symptoms can present as a
wide variety of combinations, from mild to severe. It is yet not clear how specific subgroups
may map onto symptom presentations (Frith & Happé, 2005).
The clinical assessment of autism symptoms is still a lengthy and time-consuming
process. This evaluation involves a team of well-trained professionals and combines
information about the patient from different sources. The assessment of such patient includes
an interview with the caregivers as well as an observation of each individual both in the living
environment and as part of a psychiatric evaluation in the assessment center. Two clinical
tools have become established in this assessment procedure and are considered to be the ‘gold
standard’ in symptom evaluation for autism, particularly when combined with clinical
judgment: i) the ADI-R (Lord, Rutter, & Le Couteur, 1994), a semi-structured interview
conducted with parents which focuses on current presentation and lifelong developmental
history, and ii) the ADOS (Lord et al., 2000), a standardized semi-structured diagnosis
assessment conducted through one-to-one personal interaction and direct observation of an
individual suspected to have autism using a range of activities and delivered by a trained
examiner. A combination of ADI-R and ADOS assessments coupled with experienced clinical
judgments has previously been shown to improve diagnostic validity (Kim & Lord, 2012). In
everyday clinical practice, however, often only one of the instruments is used due to time,
cost or expertise constraints. The choice of preferred instrument used for the evaluation of
autism symptoms remains quite variable from one center to another.
The inconsistency in the choice of symptom assessment tool used might have
contributed to discrepancies in results and conclusions of several studies (Grantham et al.,
2014; Lemler, 2012). Only a handful of studies have directly compared the ADI-R and ADOS
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

and the outcomes are not always directly clinically applicable. For instance, De Bildt and
colleagues (2004) found that the level of agreement between the ADI-R and ADOS was
slightly higher than the chance level to classify individuals as patients with autism, patients
with pervasive developmental disorder or healthy. In addition, Mazefsky and Oslwald (2006)
found a good agreement between team diagnoses and the instruments. As such, the
commonalities and divergences between the widespread ADI-R and the ADOS are yet to be
fully understood.
The use of these two symptom assessment tools required long training and each of
them is rather time-consuming. These circumstances can lead to massive delays in diagnosis
and unequal coverage of the population in need of medical attention (Goin-Kochel,
Mackintosh, & Myers, 2006). As a consequence, delays in the delivery of therapies occur
frequently, which contributes to parental distress (Goddard, Lehr, & Lapadat, 2000; Quine &
Pahl, 1987) and may also affect the long-term outcomes of early interventions (Goin &
Myers, 2004). For these reasons, it is an emerging agenda to improve these procedures to
diminish the time between symptom appearance and formal diagnosis. Indeed, streamlining
the process to detect autism severity in a rapid, efficient, and accurate fashion could lead to
significant benefits. Such gains would include saving patients time and potentially allowing
for fast early intervention, reduction of clinician work hours and alleviating economic costs to
name a few.
In view of potential benefits from refining the diagnostic process and the need of a
more direct comparison of each instrument, we simultaneously revisited the ADI-R and
ADOS with a comprehensive data-analytics strategy. Variability in symptoms and severity
within the autism population suggests the possibility of dimensional profiles of autism
symptoms. Therefore, we extracted distinct homogeneous patient symptom profiles from the
ADI-R and ADOS giving further insights on how symptoms presentation might outline
different patient subgroups. Additionally, we used data-guided evaluation for the
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

parsimonious subsets of the ADI-R and ADOS which could enable improvements of clinical
workflows. Finally, we quantitatively characterized the relation between the two instruments
in the context of different patients' age, sex and fluid IQ (FIQ).

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

METHODS
Data resources
We systematically charted the relationship between the ADI-R and the ADOS based
on behavioral data from a publicly available dataset: ABIDE (Autism Brain Imaging Data
Exchange; http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/abide/). All data analyses were carried out
on this data repository which is described in detail in Di Martino and colleagues (2014). The
ABIDE data provides subject information, including age, sex, measures of intellectual
functioning, and measures of symptom severity as assessed by the Autism Diagnostic
Observation Schedule (ADOS) as well as the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R).
The behavioral assessments were collected from a total of 266 patients with an autism
spectrum disorder diagnosis, aged 7/49 years, including 233 male and 33 female subjects (see
Supplementary Table 1 for details). The autism diagnoses were provided by board-certified
psychiatrists. The distribution of the responses in ADI-R and the ADOS assessment in our
sample was homogeneous (SFig. 1). Homogeneous distribution of the ADI-R and ADOS
scores was also found across patients' age (SFig. 2) The original studies included in ABIDE
received approval from each site’s Institutional Review Board.

Identifying hidden group structure: k-means clustering
To explore distinct subgroups among patients with autism, we applied a k-means
clustering algorithm to automatically partition patient symptom profiles into homogeneous
groups. K-means is a method identifying many-to-one mapping (Forgy, 1965): each patient is
a member of exactly one group. We used "NbClust" (Charrad, Ghazzali, Boiteau, Niknafs, &
Charrad, 2014) as an established R package to simultaneously apply 30 cluster validity
metrics. This approach provided complementary ways to reach indications of the number of
groups most supported by the patient data. Among all metrics of cluster usefulness and
according to the majority rule, the best number of clusters was three (see the supplementary
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

table 2 for the output of the NbClust package in R). That is, the most robust number of patient
symptom clusters consisted of three groups, to the extend supported by our data. Therefore,
three patient groups of distinct symptom profiles were automatically extracted as it provided a
useful fit to our clinical sample.

Identifying predictive relevance of

domains of the ADI-R and ADOS: Sparse logistic

regression
The goal behind k-means was to partition the patients into non-overlapping
homogeneous groups (Bzdok & Meyer-Lindenberg, 2017) as measured by the ADI-R and
ADOS domains. This approach allowed to explore the relationship among autism spectrum
disorder patients. Complementing these insights in a next step, we applied a modeling
technique that emphasizes prediction performance with an optimal tradeoff against the
number of most relevant domains.
To extract the most informative subsets of domains for predicting autism severity, we
capitalized on the pattern analysis algorithm sparse logistic regression (Hastie, Tibshirani, &
Wainwright, 2015). The sparsity constraint was imposed in form of an l 1 regularization
penalty added to the objective of the generalized linear modelling problem. Such a constraint
in the optimization objective automatically detects relevant features “on-the-fly” during
model estimation. Thel 1 penalty term, calibrated by the hyper-parameter λ, exerts control over
the parsimony criterion and its shrinkage regularization on the learned model weights. The
penalized negative log-likelihood of the sparse logistic regression objective is given by:
N

−1
−y f x ; β , β)
) + λ‖ β‖1 ,
log ( 1+ e (
∑
N i=1
i

i

0

where x i represents a given patient’s ADI-R and ADOS domain scores, y i is his or her autism
severity group defined as the median-split of the ADI-R and ADOS total score (i.e., 0 as mild,
1 as severe) representing a categorical summary of the constituent continuous scores, β 0 is the
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

intercept, and β is the weight attached to each instrument domain, the right term corresponds
to the l 1 penalty term controlled by the hyper-parameter λ. The domain selection behavior is
calibrated by the choice of this tuning parameter. The hyper-parameter selection was based on
an independent split of our data in a principled fashion using nested cross-validation (X data
splits in each fold). In a common grid of candidate tuning parameter choices, the value of λ
was varied logarithmically from 3.5 to 1.0 in log-space with 16 steps. The member in the
model family that yielded highest prediction accuracy (i.e., generalization performance) for
each candidate of λ was selected. In other words, the goal here was not to select the best
hyper-parameter. Rather, we charted a space of candidate λ to explicitly investigate the
parsimony tradeoff from imposing high to low sparsity. In this way, the quantitative
investigation detected subsets of domains that were most informative about the autism
severity.

Assessing domain importance in predicting autism severity
The k-means method (cf. above) extracted latent structure dormant in the data
regardless of symptom severity measures. Sparse logistic regression (cf. above) in turn
selected the most predictive variables. Here, we wanted to make sure that the sparse logistic
regression was more appropriate to our research setting than a model looking for higher-order
effects. We thus compared the prediction performance of the sparse logistic regression to the
accuracy reached by a commonly used non-linear predictive model: the random-forest
algorithm.

Predicting age, sex, and FIQ based on the ADI-R and ADOS domains.
We analyzed the relative importance of each ADI-R and ADOS domain for predicting
sex, age and FIQ using a logistic regression (without sparsity constraint). Note that we
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

refrained from computing more sophisticated regressions with non-linear interaction terms
because these model extensions would require more than twice the sample size to obtain
model fits of equal quality. Subgroups representative of each category were extracted. We
then looked for the weight of each instrument domain to predict the outcome of interest. The
age and FIQ outcomes were defined as categorical summaries of the constituent continuous
scores. That is, the patients' age was defined as superior or inferior to 18 years, while the
patients' level of FIQ was defined as higher or lower than the median-split of the FIQ scores
(105.35). Note that the FIQ was used as measure of interest given the high number of missing
entries in the other IQ measurements provided in the ABIDE dataset.
In a first set of analyses, the sample was subdivided based on FIQ and sex. That is,
four subgroups were extracted depicting males with high FIQ, males with low FIQ, females
with high FIQ and females with low FIQ. A logistic regression was applied to predict the age
based on the domain scores of the ADI-R and ADOS of each specific subgroup.
For the second set of analyses, the sample was subdivided based on FIQ and age.
Thus, we ended up with four subgroups including respectively adults with high FIQ, adults
with low FIQ, teenagers with high FIQ and teenagers with low FIQ. A logistic regression was
applied to predict the sex based on the scores of the ADI-R and ADOS domains of each
specific subgroup.
For the third set of analyses, the patient sample was subdivided based on sex and age.
This subdivision led to four subgroups including respectively adult males, adult females,
teenager males and teenager females. A logistic regression was applied to predict the FIQ
based on the scores of the ADI-R and ADOS domains of each specific subgroup.
For each of these analyses, in each subgroup, the logistic regression was applied only
if more than 10 observations were available. Furthermore, class imbalance, if present, was
handled using up-sampling if the majority class was inferior or equal to a third of the minority
class or using down-sampling otherwise. Once the weights of the logistic regression for a
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

subgroup computed, the 90% bootstrapped confidence intervals were calculated by fitting the
logistic regression to 100 bootstrapped samples made from the specific subgroup. In a similar
fashion as described above, bootstrapping was used here to provide a principled estimate of
the statistical quality of the domain relevances for estimating age, sex and FIQ. Finally, we
computed the confusion matrix for each classification algorithm to allow visualization of its
performance.

Code availability
All analysis scripts of the present study are readily accessible to the reader online
(https://github.com/JLefortBesnard/ADIR_ADOS2019). See Supplementary Methods
for more details.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

RESULTS
Properties of patient groups hidden in the ADI-R and ADOS assessments
To explore distinct subgroups related to the ADI-R and ADOS assessment patterns
among patients with autism, we assigned each patient to one dominant symptom constellation
based on the two instruments. This data-driven exploration revealed three distinct symptom
constellations that grouped the patients in our sample (Fig. 1): i) A severe group that included
patients scoring high on every domain of the ADI-R and ADOS. Specifically, these patients
had on average particularly high scores on the domains of the ADOS. ii) A mild group that
included patients who scored low in every domain of the ADI-R and ADOS. By contrast, this
coherent subgroup of patients with similar profiles exhibited particularly low scores on the
social and communication domains of the ADI-R. iii) An ADOS-negative group that included
patients who scored high in every domain of the ADI-R and low in every domain of the
ADOS. In sum, the divergence between the social and communication domains as assessed by
the ADI-R and the ADOS were the most informative markers. In contrast, the least instructive
marker was the repetitive behavior domain of the two instruments (SFig. 3). The three
subgroups were homogeneous in terms of sex, age and FIQ (STable 3).
As an exploratory pattern-discovery approach, k-means yields clusters as descriptive
summary of our data, without primary concern for predictive validity (Bzdok, 2017; ShalevShwartz & Ben-David, 2014). A natural next step of the present study therefore consisted in
estimating the predictability of autism from ADI-R and ADOS instruments domains.

Isolating the most predictive domains in the ADI-R and ADOS instruments
A sparse logistic regression was used to automatically identify domain subsets in the
ADI-R and ADOS instruments that are most informative about telling mild versus severe
autism apart in future patients. With systematically varying parsimony constraint, a series of

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

algorithms estimations was carried out to predict autism severity (defined as the median-split
of the ADI-R and ADOS total score) based on the symptom scales (Fig. 2 A and 2 C).
Our analysis strategy extracted two of the overall six domains as the most predictive
subset and achieved quite effective prediction of autism severity (88.81% accuracy). This
essential subset included the social and communication domains of the ADI-R.
As we calibrated the parsimony constraint step-by-step, four other solutions were
automatically identified that isolated further subsets of instrument domains predictive of
autism severity (Fig. 2 B). The second solution included the social domain of the ADOS in
addition to the social and communication domains of the ADI-R and reached a prediction
accuracy of 89.7%. The three remaining automatically identified solutions successively
incorporated to the previous subset the repetitive behavior domain of the ADI-R, the
communication domain of the ADOS and finally included the repetitive behavior of the
ADOS. These three final domain inclusions allowed for a prediction accuracy of 91.18%,
93.96%, and 96.81% in new patients, respectively. In other words, rich descriptions of the
patterns in the ADI-R and the ADOS were extracted and two domains of the ADI-R were
identified as being highly predictive of autism severity. In sum, though the combination of
both ADI-R and ADOS instruments are required for a more rigorous diagnostic procedure,
our data-guided analysis gave support to the existence of a subset including two ADI-R
domains highly predictive of autism severity.

Testing for non-linearity in the ADI-R and ADOS instruments
To complement the sparse logistic regression insights, we combined exploration of
more sophisticated domain-domain relationships with the evaluation of prediction
performance using random-forest algorithm. Random-forest reached a maximum prediction
accuracy of 92.78%, while the accuracy obtained with the sparse logistic regression using
every domain of the ADI-R and ADOS reached 96.81% (SFig. 4). Interestingly, both the
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

random-forest algorithm and the sparse logistic regression found the social and
communication domains of the ADI-R to exhibit patterns of interest in the estimation of
autism severity.

Exploring the instrument domains relation to patients' age, sex and FIQ
In a first set of analyses, to quantify the relation of the ADI-R and the ADOS domains
with their relation to age, we explored the contribution of each instrument domain in deriving
age of patients in our sample. Age (i.e., target variable) was predicted based on the ADI-R and
ADOS domains (i.e., input variables) after segregating the patient pool into subgroups
according to sex and FIQ (Fig. 3, SFig. 5). For this analysis and the following ones, only the
domains with important weight per estimation and exhibiting mostly one-sided confidence
interval were interpreted (STable 4). In this first analysis, the communication domain of the
ADOS contributed to detecting an adult, while the ADI-R repetitive behavior domain
contributed to detecting a teenager in each subgroup. In other words, a patient scoring high in
the ADOS communication domain would tip the balance of the output toward being an adult,
while scoring high in the ADI-R repetition behavior domain would tip it toward being a
teenager. In females with high FIQ, the ADI-R communication domain was highly weighted
contributing to being a teenager. In males with high FIQ, the social domain of the ADI-R
contributed to detecting an adult, while in males with low FIQ, the social domain of the
ADOS contributed to detecting a teenager. Finally, the repetitive behavior domain of the
ADOS was contributing to being an adult in males and females with high FIQ, while this
ADOS domain was contributing to being a teenager in males with low FIQ.
In a second set of analyses, to quantify the relation of the ADI-R and the ADOS
domains with their relation to sex, we explored the contribution of each instrument domain in
deriving sex of patients in our sample. Sex (i.e., target variable) was predicted based on the
ADI-R and ADOS domains (i.e., input variables) after segregating the patient pool into
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

subgroups according to age and FIQ (Fig. 4, SFig. 6). The ADI-R was not contributing for
differentiating sex. The ADOS social domain was highly weighted contributing to identifying
females among both adult with high FIQ and teenager with low FIQ. The ADOS
communication contributed to detecting a male in adult with high FIQ and to being a female
in teenagers with high FIQ. The ADOS repetitive behavior domain was highly weighted in
teenagers with high FIQ contributing to being a male.
In a final set of analyses, to quantify the relation of the ADI-R and the ADOS domains
with their relation to FIQ, we explored the contribution of each instrument domain in deriving
the level of FIQ of patients in our sample. FIQ (i.e., target variable) was predicted based on
the ADI-R and ADOS domains (i.e., input variables) after segregating the patient pool into
subgroups according to age and sex (Fig. 5, SFig. 7). In teenager males, the repetitive
behavior domain of the ADI-R as well as the social and repetitive behavior domains of the
ADOS were contributing to having a low FIQ, while the ADOS communication domain
contributed to detecting a high FIQ. In adult females, the communication domain of the ADIR as well as the social domain of the ADOS contributed to detecting a low FIQ, while the
repetitive behavior domain of the ADI-R contributed to detecting a high FIQ. In teenager
females, the communication and repetitive behavior domains of the ADI-R as well as the
communication domain of the ADOS were highly weighted contributing to having a high
FIQ.
Across analyses, our results show that the communication domain of the ADOS was
the most salient overall domain in distinguishing sex, age and FIQ (7 contributions) and the
ADOS domains were the most informative about the patient's sex.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

DISCUSSION
Our study emphasizes the relatively bigger importance of certain parts of two widely
administered clinical instruments for autism. The social and communication domains of the
ADI-R were found particularly informative for predicting autism severity when looking for
additive effects as well as non-linear interactions confirming the informative value of these
domains in our sample. Further, 3 dimensional partitions of discrete autism profiles were
uncovered and these 3 subgroups exhibited the highest discrepancy on the social and
communication domains of the two instruments. Additionally, we provide a comprehensive
characterization of how information each instrument domain carries about the patients’ age,
sex, and FIQ. Collectively, our results provide quantitative insights on the relation between
ADI-R and ADOS by using a set of modern data-analysis tools.

Extracting the most predictive domain subsets in the ADI-R and ADOS
As a primary focus of the present investigation, we algorithmically identified the most
predictive ADI-R and ADOS domains of autism severity. Using all domains from the ADI-R
and ADOS, the sparse logistic regression predicted autism severity with an accuracy of 97%.
In particular, the first solution that gave non-zero coefficient was a subselection of 2 domains
which predicted autism severity with an accuracy of about 89% thus only 8% below the
accuracy obtained using all domains. The specific subset included the social and
communication domains of the ADI-R. This core subset of instrument domains was highly
predictive of autism severity.
More generally, the ADI-R and ADOS assessments are often mentioned to be well
designed and comprehensive, but not to be particularly efficient to administer in clinical
practice. The cost-effectiveness has rarely been carefully evaluated. In fact, ~45 minutes are
required for the ADOS assessment, while approximately ~1.5 hours are required for the ADIR assessment. Furthermore, extensive training is needed to use each instrument, which makes
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

the combined assessment very heavy and time-expensive. Berument and colleagues (1999)
found that the diagnostic accuracy of the ADI and a 40-item scale was pretty much the same
suggesting that much shorter and highly effective screening instrument can be established. In
a similar spirit, our results show that assessing only 2 domains from the ADI-R assessment
may be sufficient for making reliable statements about the rough overall severity of the
psychopathology of patients with autism. In sum, although the combination of ADI-R and
ADOS assessments has been shown to improve autism diagnostic validity, we found support
for a subset highly predictive of autism severity in a data-guided fashion nevertheless. In other
words, using a shorter version of the ADI-R in addition to clinical expertise might be an
appropriate tradeoff to alleviate the time constraint.
Mazefski and colleagues (2013) highlighted a discrepancy in the ability of the ADOS
to capture autism symptoms catalogued in the DSM-5. These authors found that the ADI-R
was more relevant than the ADOS for tapping on the breadth of autism symptoms as defined
by the DSM-5. Similarly, Wiggins and Robins (2008) reported that using only the social and
communication domains of the ADI-R resulted in improved sensitivity and specificity of the
instrument. Our results lend support to these previous findings in showing that the social and
communication domains of the ADI-R were more predictive of autism severity than any other
domains from the ADOS and therefore potentially more relevant for a fast and effective
screening of autism severity.
In sum, our results lend support to the predictive value of the derived instrument
subset, comprising the social and communication domains of the ADI-R. From a clinical
perspective, being able to find evidence for repetitive behavior has often been considered as
being indicative of an autism diagnosis, while only finding interaction and communication
difficulties is considered less convincing (Szatmari et al., 2006). This stands in contrast to our
empirical findings that emphasizes the predicting value of the interaction and communication
domains. This observation adds further arguments in favor of assisting medical decision
16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

making in psychiatry by predictive machine learning algorithm towards a future of precision
medicine.

Extracting patient subgroups from the ADI-R and ADOS
Given that autism is widely acknowledged to be a spectrum disorder, we aimed at
providing windows into useful intermediate phenotypes. Using a clustering algorithm, three
distinct types of clinically meaningful symptom sets emerged: a severe profile with high
expression in each domain of the ADI-R and ADOS, ii) a mild profile with low scores on both
instruments with particularly low associations with the social and communication domains of
the ADI-R and iii) an ADOS-negative profile with high scores only in the domains of the
ADI-R. In each subgroup, the social and communication domains of both instruments were
the most informative markers while the repetitive behavior domain of both instruments was
not as informative. Our results provide data-driven evidence that a major difference between
autism patients is the extent of the social and communication domain symptoms as provided
by the ADI-R and the ADOS. Our analysis also revealed a group of patients scoring high only
in the ADI-R. This subgroup indicates that for certain patients, symptoms might remain
hidden when only the ADOS is used for the symptom severity assessment. These patients are
sometimes classified as ADOS-negative (Philip et al., 2010). This ADOS-negative subgroup
suggests that the ADI-R might be a more appropriate tool to accurately capture autism
severity when assessing symptoms using both instruments is not achievable. Finally, our
results provide hints for the possible clinical effectiveness of the subtypes.
A few existing studies also applied a clustering method to extract meaningful
information but only from either the ADOS or the ADI-R. For instance, using K-means
clustering, Cholemkery and colleagues (2016) found 3 clusters in a sample of patients
assessed with the ADI-R. Their results indicated a different pattern of social interaction and
communication problems versus stereotype behaviors across the identified subgroups. The
17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

characteristics of the extracted clusters fit with the assumption of a severity gradient across
the 3 subgroups they found. Similarly, a severity gradient was the main difference between
the subgroups that emerged in our sample. Spiker and colleagues (2002) also used K-means
clustering in a sample of siblings with autism and found subgroups that could be characterized
along a single and continuous severity dimension. Children with the lowest nonverbal IQ
scores exhibited higher scores in each domain of the ADI-R. Those with higher nonverbal IQs
had ADI-R scores indicative of less severe impairment. Interestingly, these authors found that
repetitive behavior scores were negatively correlated with this severity gradient in their
sample which corroborate our results in two ways. First, we also found a severity gradient
across the three clusters mostly related to the social and communication domains of the two
instruments. Given the ADOS-negative subgroup, the ADI-R social and communication
domains might therefore be a good tradeoff to capture symptoms severity if the time
constraint discourages the use of the two instruments. Second, in the three subgroups that
emerged from our sample, the repetitive behavior domain of the ADI-R and ADOS expressed
in the three scenarios an opposite pattern of the severity gradient. In the subgroup exhibiting
the highest scores in each domain of the ADI-R and ADOS, the repetitive behavior domain
had the lowest weight compared to the remaining domains of the same instrument. In the
subgroup exhibiting the lowest scores in each domain, the repetitive behavior domain of the
ADI-R and ADOS had the highest one compared to the two others of the same scale.
In sum, our results corroborate previous findings on potential autism subtypes.
Furthermore, our results have repeatedly emphasized relevance of the social and
communication domains of the ADI-R, which were found to be highly informative of autism
severity in our previous analyses.

Relation of instrument domains to patients’ age, sex, and FIQ.
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

We explored the contribution of each instrument domain in deriving age, sex and level
of FIQ of patients in our sample. Our results suggest that i) the ADI-R and ADOS are
differently useful to uncover relevant information of patients with autism, and that ii) sex
differences might be more contrasting through the ADOS rather than through the ADI-R
domains.
Some studies identified differences between girls and boys in social symptoms on the
ADI-R (Beggiato et al., 2017; Carter et al., 2007). However, no sex effects were found when
the authors controlled for IQ differences (Banach et al., 2009). Our results complemented
these previous findings by suggesting that the ADI-R was not informative about the sex. A
few authors have reported greater socio-communication difficulties as captured by the ADOS
in females (Carter et al., 2007; Frazier, Georgiades, Bishop, & Hardan, 2014; Hartley &
Sikora, 2009). Corroborating these results, we found the social and communication domains
of the ADOS to be often informative about the patient's sex. Scoring high in the social domain
of the ADOS was indicative of a female in teenagers and adults which contrasts with the
"adolescent emergence hypothesis". This theory states that the social deficits in females
appear later in time (Bargiela, Steward, & Mandy, 2016; Mandy, Pellicano, St Pourcain,
Skuse, & Heron, 2018). Sex differences should hence appear to be lower as patients grow up
which was not the case in our sample. Given that in subsets of adult patients, social and
communication domains were as informative about sex differences as in subsets of teenagers,
our results are also in contrast with the "female compensation hypothesis". According to this
theory, females learn over time to compensate for their social difficulties (i.e. social
camouflage) more effectively than males (Dworzynski, Ronald, Bolton, & Happé, 2012; Lai
et al., 2017; Lehnhardt et al., 2016; Mandy et al., 2018) which would lead to a higher sex
difference later in time. Interestingly, scoring high in the communication and social domains
of the ADOS was indicating of a female in subsets of patients that were teenagers. Thus, our

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

results suggest that social and communication symptom deficits are less visible in teenager
male patients which, again, is in contrast with the two previous hypotheses.
Our results shed light on many sex differences in the ADOS scoring. Surprisingly, the
ADI-R was little relevant to differentiate patients' sex in our sample. However, the two
instruments were informative about patients' level of FIQ and age. Indeed, interesting patterns
emerged regarding the level of FIQ and age of patients. For example, we found the repetitive
behavior domain of the ADI-R to be very useful to distinguish the age and the FIQ level of
the patients. A patient scoring high on the repetitive behavior domain of the ADI-R was more
likely to be identified as a teenager rather than an adult in every subset of patients. This
pattern potentially indicates that these symptoms attenuate with age which was also found in
previous studies (Esbensen, Seltzer, Lam, & Bodfish, 2009; Leekam, Prior, & Uljarevic,
2011; Seltzer et al., 2003). Conversely, we found that patients who scored high in the
communication domain of the ADOS were more likely to be adults rather than teenagers.
These results suggest that communication problems are harder to disguise as patients grow up.
In contrast, previous findings from Seltzer and colleagues (2003) found no difference between
teenager and adult in the communication symptoms severity.
In sum, our last set of analyses corroborates previous findings showing that the ADI-R
and the ADOS are both differently informative about the patients' age and level of FIQ. Our
results also emphasize the higher relevance of the ADOS than the ADI-R to estimate patients'
sex. Finally, our results show that disease-specific patterns of ADI-R and ADOS scores
related to patients' characteristics can be uncovered when studying subset of similar patients'
sex, age or level of FIQ.

Conclusion
Improving the process of detecting and monitoring autism is an emerging agenda to
improve early intervention and reduced cost. On the one hand, our quantitative investigations
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

expose a subset of the ADI-R domains to be sufficient for making reliable statements about
the overall severity of autism and uncovered three types of distinct, clinically meaningful
patient categories. On the other hand, the discovered subgroup effects showed that patterns of
ADI-R and ADOS scores discriminate patients' sex, age and level of FIQ. A combination of
ADI-R and ADOS assessments improve diagnostic validity but worsen the already heavy
process to detect autism severity. In today’s medical practice, clinical centers often use only
one instrument but the choice of preferred instrument remains quite variable. Our data-driven
research identified some principles that can help guide the choice of a most suitable
instrument when the time constraint prompts the medical team to use only one. Furthermore,
our study paves the way to reconciling and integrating the ADI-R and ADOS. Our repository
is a large sample but this participant sample may be limited to its demographic characteristics.
Future studies could provide further insights into underlying patterns of the ADI-R and ADOS
specific to individuals with autism with lower intellectual ability or younger. It is also
important to note that our results on female patients are only preliminary and need to be
confirmed by future research. Nevertheless, analysis approaches based on subgroup of
patients with similar characteristics may be critical to disentangle the "female compensation"
and "adolescent emergence" hypotheses that have been proposed to underlie autism (Bargiela
et al., 2016; Beggiato et al., 2017; Dworzynski et al., 2012; Lai et al., 2017; Mandy et al.,
2018). Given the heterogeneity among patients, studying subset of patients with similar
characteristics can provide advantages on future intervention and research in autism.
Increasingly available "big data" resources will allow for such fine-grained explorations.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Banach, R., Thompson, A., Szatmari, P., Goldberg, J., Tuff, L.,
Zwaigenbaum, L., & Mahoney, W. (2009). Brief report: Relationship
between non-verbal IQ and gender in autism. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 39(1), 188.
Bargiela, S., Steward, R., & Mandy, W. (2016). The experiences of latediagnosed women with autism spectrum conditions: An
investigation of the female autism phenotype. Journal of autism and
developmental disorders, 46(10), 3281-3294.
Beggiato, A., Peyre, H., Maruani, A., Scheid, I., Rastam, M., Amsellem, F.,
. . . Gillberg, C. (2017). Gender differences in autism spectrum
disorders: divergence among specific core symptoms. Autism
Research, 10(4), 680-689.
Berument, S. K., Rutter, M., Lord, C., Pickles, A., & Bailey, A. (1999).
Autism screening questionnaire: diagnostic validity. The British
Journal of Psychiatry, 175(5), 444-451.
Bzdok, D. (2017). Classical statistics and statistical learning in imaging
neuroscience. Frontiers in neuroscience, 11, 543.
Bzdok, D., & Meyer-Lindenberg, A. (2017). Machine learning for precision
psychiatry: Opportunites and challenges. Biological Psychiatry:
Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging.
Carter, A. S., Black, D. O., Tewani, S., Connolly, C. E., Kadlec, M. B., &
Tager-Flusberg, H. (2007). Sex differences in toddlers with autism
spectrum disorders. Journal of autism and developmental disorders,
37(1), 86-97.
Charrad, M., Ghazzali, N., Boiteau, V., Niknafs, A., & Charrad, M. M.
(2014). Package ‘NbClust’. Journal of Statistical Software, 61, 1-36.
Cholemkery, H., Medda, J., Lempp, T., & Freitag, C. M. (2016).
Classifying autism spectrum disorders by ADI-R: subtypes or
severity gradient? Journal of autism and developmental disorders,
46(7), 2327-2339.
De Bildt, A., Sytema, S., Ketelaars, C., Kraijer, D., Mulder, E., Volkmar,
F., & Minderaa, R. (2004). Interrelationship between autism
diagnostic observation schedule-generic (ADOS-G), autism
diagnostic interview-revised (ADI-R), and the diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-IV-TR) classification in
children and adolescents with mental retardation. Journal of autism
and developmental disorders, 34(2), 129-137.
Di Martino, A., Yan, C.-G., Li, Q., Denio, E., Castellanos, F. X., Alaerts,
K., . . . Dapretto, M. (2014). The autism brain imaging data
exchange: towards a large-scale evaluation of the intrinsic brain
architecture in autism. Molecular psychiatry, 19(6), 659.
Dworzynski, K., Ronald, A., Bolton, P., & Happé, F. (2012). How different
are girls and boys above and below the diagnostic threshold for
autism spectrum disorders? Journal of the American Academy of
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 51(8), 788-797.
Esbensen, A. J., Seltzer, M. M., Lam, K. S., & Bodfish, J. W. (2009). Agerelated differences in restricted repetitive behaviors in autism
spectrum disorders. Journal of autism and developmental disorders,
39(1), 57-66.
22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Forgy, E. W. (1965). Cluster analysis of multivariate data: efficiency
versus interpretability of classifications. biometrics, 21, 768-769.
Frazier, T. W., Georgiades, S., Bishop, S. L., & Hardan, A. Y. (2014).
Behavioral and cognitive characteristics of females and males with
autism in the Simons Simplex Collection. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 53(3), 329-340. e323.
Frith, U., & Happé, F. (2005). Autism spectrum disorder. Current biology,
15(19), R786-R790.
Goddard, J. A., Lehr, R., & Lapadat, J. C. (2000). Parents of children with
disabilities: Telling a different story. Canadian Journal of
Counselling and Psychotherapy/Revue canadienne de counseling et
de psychothérapie, 34(4).
Goin, R. P., & Myers, B. J. (2004). Characteristics of infantile autism:
Moving toward earlier detection. Focus on Autism and Other
Developmental Disabilities, 19(1), 5-12.
Goin-Kochel, R. P., Mackintosh, V. H., & Myers, B. J. (2006). How many
doctors does it take to make an autism spectrum diagnosis? Autism,
10(5), 439-451.
Grantham, C., Gower, M., McCalla, M., Harris, A., O’Kelley, S., & Guest,
K. (2014). Diagnosis of autism utilizing the ADOS and ADI-R: are
there factors to account for discrepancies. Paper presented at the
International Meeting for Autism Research. San Diego, California
Available: https://imfar. confex.
com/imfar/2011/webprogram/Paper7956. html. Accessed.
Hartley, S. L., & Sikora, D. M. (2009). Sex differences in autism spectrum
disorder: an examination of developmental functioning, autistic
symptoms, and coexisting behavior problems in toddlers. Journal of
autism and developmental disorders, 39(12), 1715.
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., & Wainwright, M. (2015). Statistical learning
with sparsity: the lasso and generalizations: CRC press.
Kim, S. H., & Lord, C. (2012). Combining information from multiple
sources for the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders for toddlers
and young preschoolers from 12 to 47 months of age. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 53(2), 143-151.
Lai, M.-C., Lombardo, M. V., Ruigrok, A. N., Chakrabarti, B., Auyeung, B.,
Szatmari, P., . . . Consortium, M. A. (2017). Quantifying and
exploring camouflaging in men and women with autism. Autism,
21(6), 690-702.
Leekam, S. R., Prior, M. R., & Uljarevic, M. (2011). Restricted and
repetitive behaviors in autism spectrum disorders: a review of
research in the last decade. Psychological Bulletin, 137(4), 562.
Lehnhardt, F.-G., Falter, C. M., Gawronski, A., Pfeiffer, K., Tepest, R.,
Franklin, J., & Vogeley, K. (2016). Sex-related cognitive profile in
autism spectrum disorders diagnosed late in life: implications for
the female autistic phenotype. Journal of autism and developmental
disorders, 46(1), 139-154.
Lemler, M. (2012). Discrepancy between parent report and clinician
observation of symptoms in children with autism spectrum
disorders. Discussions, 8(2).
Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., Cook, E. H., Leventhal, B. L., DiLavore,
P. C., . . . Rutter, M. (2000). The Autism Diagnostic Observation
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Schedule—Generic: A standard measure of social and
communication deficits associated with the spectrum of autism.
Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 30(3), 205-223.
Lord, C., Rutter, M., & Le Couteur, A. (1994). Autism Diagnostic
Interview-Revised: a revised version of a diagnostic interview for
caregivers of individuals with possible pervasive developmental
disorders. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 24(5),
659-685.
Mandy, W., Pellicano, L., St Pourcain, B., Skuse, D., & Heron, J. (2018).
The development of autistic social traits across childhood and
adolescence in males and females. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry.
Mazefsky, C., McPartland, J., Gastgeb, H., & Minshew, N. (2013). Brief
report: Comparability of DSM-IV and DSM-5 ASD research samples.
Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 43(5), 1236-1242.
Mazefsky, C. A., & Oswald, D. P. (2006). The discriminative ability and
diagnostic utility of the ADOS-G, ADI-R, and GARS for children in a
clinical setting. Autism, 10(6), 533-549.
Philip, R., Whalley, H., Stanfield, A., Sprengelmeyer, R., Santos, I., Young,
A., . . . Lawrie, S. (2010). Deficits in facial, body movement and
vocal emotional processing in autism spectrum disorders.
Psychological medicine, 40(11), 1919-1929.
Quine, L., & Pahl, J. (1987). First diagnosis of severe handicap: a study of
parental reactions. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology,
29(2), 232-242.
Seltzer, M. M., Krauss, M. W., Shattuck, P. T., Orsmond, G., Swe, A., &
Lord, C. (2003). The symptoms of autism spectrum disorders in
adolescence and adulthood. Journal of autism and developmental
disorders, 33(6), 565-581.
Shalev-Shwartz, S., & Ben-David, S. (2014). Understanding machine
learning: From theory to algorithms: Cambridge university press.
Spiker, D., Lotspeich, L. J., Dimiceli, S., Myers, R. M., & Risch, N. (2002).
Behavioral phenotypic variation in autism multiplex families:
evidence for a continuous severity gradient. American Journal of
Medical Genetics, 114(2), 129-136.
Szatmari, P., Georgiades, S., Bryson, S., Zwaigenbaum, L., Roberts, W.,
Mahoney, W., . . . Tuff, L. (2006). Investigating the structure of the
restricted, repetitive behaviours and interests domain of autism.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47(6), 582-590.
Wiggins, L. D., & Robins, D. L. (2008). Brief report: Excluding the ADI-R
behavioral domain improves diagnostic agreement in toddlers.
Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 38(5), 972-976.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1. Uncovering three patient groups with distinct symptom
profiles
Automatic clustering based on the domains of the ADI-R and ADOS
questionnaires

exposed three distinct

symptom constellations

that

grouped the patients. Each row represents one data-derived symptom
group constellation hidden in the patient assessments. The weights ( y
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

axis) of each domain (x axis) indicated the relative importance of the
domains for a particular group in the k-means model. The red bars are
the domain scores of the ADI-R in the respective cluster and the blue
ones are the domain scores of the ADOS. Three different autism subtypes
emerged: i) a severe profile including patients scoring high on every
domain of the ADI-R and ADOS with particularly high scores on the
domains of the ADOS (group 1), ii) a mild profile including patients
scoring low in every domain of the ADI-R and ADOS with particularly low
scores on the social and communication domains of the ADI-R (g roup 2),
and iii) an ADOS-negative profile including patients scoring high in every
domain of the ADI-R and scoring low in every domain of the ADOS (g roup

3). These findings from automatic clustering provide additional evidence
that the ADI-R and ADOS questionnaires capture some distinct clinical
aspects of patients with autism. Furthermore, our results suggest that the
symptoms severity of the ADOS-negative group might be more accurately
measured by the ADI-R.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2. Predictive decomposition of autism symptoms
A parsimony-inducing pattern analysis algorithm was used to search
through the array of questionnaire domains and extract the most
informative subsets of domains for predicting symptom severity in
patients with autism.

A) Domain groups
Trajectories of the classifier weights of the ADI-R and ADOS domains are
plotted on the y axis while the parsimony constraint of the statistical
models decreasing from left to right (here represented as the increasing
number of domains automatically selected) is plotted on the x axis. The
curves indicate changes in the subset of selected domains (i.e., the
weight set not equal to zero), typically an inclusion. The color of each line
shows in which model solution a specific questionnaire domain is
included as relevant. For example, ADI-R social and communication
27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

domains were found as part of the first (most parsimonious) predictive
model and are plotted in red.

B) Prediction accuracy
The middle panel retraces how prediction performance increases step-bystep as the identified domain subsets are added to the model . Each
colored point represents a predictive model including a specific number
of selected domains. Two domains were sufficient for decent prediction
performance at the single-subject level. These two domains predicted
autism severity with 88.81% accuracy, while the model including every
domains of the ADI-R and ADOS predicted autism severity with 96.81%
accuracy.

C) Relative domain importance
Domain importance in the active weights is indicated as the parsimony
constraint becomes more lenient (left to right). This panel thus represents
the relative importance of each domain ( y axis) as more variables are
included in the model (x axis, from left to right).
In sum, the results emphasize that using every domains of the ADI-R and
ADOS, autism severity was predicted with 97% accuracy, while using only
the social and communication domains of the ADI-R, autism severity was
predicted with an accuracy as high as 89% indicating a very high
predictive power for these two elements.

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. Domain importance in age prediction segregated by sex
and FIQ
Adult versus teenager was distinguished based on domains quantified in
the ADI-R and ADOS. Each plot shows identical analyses on a stratified
subset of the patient pool. From upper left to lower right, we selected the
male patients with high or low FIQ, and the female patients with high
FIQ. We had insufficient female patients with low FIQ to perform the
analysis. The purple circles show the estimated contribution ( y-axis) of
each particular questionnaire domain (x-axis) to distinguishing adult
29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

versus teenager participants using logistic regression in each specific
subgroup. Each green bar indicates the bootstrapped 90% uncertainty
interval at the population level. The communication domain of the ADOS
contributed to detecting an adult in our sample, while a patient scoring
high in the repetitive behavior of the ADI-R was more likely to be a
teenager. In other words, a patient scoring high in the communication
domain of the ADOS would tip the balance of the output toward being an
adult, while scoring high in the repetitive behavior domain of the ADI-R
would tip it toward being a teenager. In females with high FIQ, the
communication domain of the ADI-R was most associated with being a
teenager. In males with high FIQ, the social domain of the ADOS
contributed to detecting a teenager, while in males with low FIQ the
communication domain of the ADI-R contributed to detecting an adult.
Finally, the repetitive behavior domain of the ADOS was contributing to
detecting male and female adults with high FIQ, while this ADOS domain
was contributing to detecting a teenager in males with low FIQ.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

F
igure 4. Domain importance in sex prediction segregated by age
and FIQ
Male versus female patients were distinguished based on domains
quantified in the ADI-R and ADOS. Each plot shows identical analyses on
stratified subset of patient pool. From upper left to lower right, we
selected the adult patients with high FIQ, and the teenager patients with
high or low FIQ. We had insufficient adult patients with low FIQ to
compute the analysis. The purple circles show the estimated contribution
(y-axis) of each particular questionnaire domain ( x-axis) to distinguishing
31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

male versus female participants using logistic regression in each specific
subgroup. Each green bar indicates the bootstrapped 90% uncertainty
interval at the population level. The ADI-R domains hardly contributed to
differentiating sex. The social domain of the ADOS was highly associated
with detecting a female in both adult with high FIQ and teenager with
low FIQ. The communication domain of the ADOS enabled detecting a
male in adults with high FIQ and a female in teenagers with high FIQ.
The repetitive behavior domain of the ADOS was highly weighted in
teenagers with high FIQ contributing to detecting males.

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Fi
gure 5. Domain importance in FIQ prediction segregated by sex
and age
High versus low FIQ was distinguished based on domains quantified in
the ADI-R and ADOS. Each plot shows identical analyses on a stratified
subset of the patient pool. From upper left to lower right, we selected the
adult or teenager male patients and the adult or teenager female
patients. The purple circles show the estimated contribution ( y-axis) of
each

particular

questionnaire

domain

(x-axis)

to

distinguishing

participants with high versus low FIQ using logistic regression in each

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19007419; this version posted September 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

specific subgroup. Each green bar indicates the bootstrapped 90%
confidence interval at the population level. In teenager males, the
repetitive behavior of the ADI-R, the social and repetitive behavior
domains of the ADOS were contributing to having a low FIQ, while the
communication domain of the ADOS helped detecting high FIQ. In adult
females, the communication domain of the ADI-R and the social domain of
the ADOS contributed to detecting a low FIQ, while the repetitive
behavior domain of the ADI-R contributed to detecting a high FIQ. In
teenager females, the communication and repetitive behavior domains of
the ADI-R as well as the communication domain of the ADOS were highly
associated with detecting high FIQ. Interestingly, the domains of the ADIR and ADOS were not informative of the patients' level of FIQ in adult
males.

34

