medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

1

Original article
Show solidarity with the Congolese people in the 10th Ebola outbreak declared a
health emergency of international concern: understand a qualitative study of
variables of hospital activities on infection control practices in Kinshasa city
Guyguy Kabundi Tshima 1,2,*, Kaleb Tshimungu Kalala 3,4

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

2
1

Department of Tropical Medicine, Infectious and Parasitic Diseases, Faculty of

Medicine, University of Kinshasa, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo
2

Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health,

University of Montreal, Quebec, Canada
3

Non-Governmental Organization in health “Work Guyguy asbl” (non-profit

organization) volunteer in the partnership of Health with the National Council of
Non-Governmental Organisations in Health (CNOS), Kinshasa, Democratic
Republic of the Congo
4

School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Kinshasa, Kinshasa,

Democratic Republic of the Congo
* Corresponding author
Email: guyguytshimakabundi@gmail.com
Availability of data and materials
The dataset is available in the manuscript in tables. Add information on the
ongoing Ebola outbreak is available from the update message of Press Team of the
Ministry of Health Democratic Republic of the Congo on reasonable request.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

3

Abstract
Health workers play an important role during epidemics, but there is limited
research on hospital activities on infection control practices in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and how health workers can cope during a probable health
epidemic in Kinshasa city. The determinants of the current Ebola Virus Disease in
the geographical distribution remain poorly understood. The World Health
Organization's Health Regulation Committee decided on Wednesday July 17th,
2019 to declare the Ebola haemorrhagic fever epidemic in the provinces of North
Kivu and Ituri as a health emergency of international concern. The country
struggles to control it against a backdrop of a health system that is already
overburdened. To test the influence of the challenges of a contamination in the
context of an Ebola outbreak that may face health workers and their coping
strategies in thirteen hospitals of reference in Kinshasa, we conducted a survey
hoping to educate or remember good practices for health workers in Kinshasa that
is also available for health workers in the East Area of the country in which the
ongoing Ebola outbreak progress is spreading (North Kivu and Ituri). For the
ongoing outbreak, we obtained data from the Ministère de la Santé Publique of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo where cases are classified as suspected,
probable, or confirmed using national case definitions. We found that the ongoing
Ebola virus outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has similar

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

4

epidemiological features to previous Ebola virus disease outbreak in Sierra Leone
that was well described. For the qualitative study about the biosecurity in thirteen
hospitals of reference in Kinshasa, we found that the Bondeko-Ngaliema Monkole
group has occupied the first rank, while the group Kintambo-King BaudouinNdjili-Makala occupied the other end of the scale; the other health facilities
occupied an intermediate position. Among the 7 hospitals which were placed at the
top of this classification of biosecurity, 5 were massively subsidized by
international NGO, which explains to a great extent their performances in one
hand, another hand finding its explanation in the quality of their management. It is
the case of Bondeko, Monkole, Kalembe-Lembe, St Joseph and Kingasani 2.
Keywords: Health workforce, Biosecurity, Epidemic, Democratic Republic of the
Congo

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

5

Author summary
The determinants of the transmission are poorly understood, but a growing body of
evidence supports an important role of the lack of prevention in the dissemination
of Ebola virus. The results of our study conducted in 13 hospitals of reference in
Kinshasa suggest that the biosecurity measures—which were introduced in
Kinshasa hospitals policies through prevention since Ebola outbreaks—have been
respected by 75% and had 25% of parameters to be improved. Biosecurity is an
important concept; it seems to be a vector for the prevention of Ebola Virus
Disease. In addition, the lack of biosecurity observation may have a role in the
contamination of Ebola Virus Disease in local populations found in invaded areas.
This study provides knowledge into the preventive measures influencing Ebola
Virus Disease populations, thereby determining in perspective a study on meat
consumption of animals found dead in forests that will be a risk for human
infection as the Democratic Republic of the Congo has many forests.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

6

Introduction
Background
There are five identified subtypes of Ebola virus. The subtypes have been named
after the location where they have been first detected. Three of the five subtypes
have been associated with large Ebola haemorrhagic fever (EHF) outbreaks in
Africa. Ebola–Zaire, Ebola–Sudan and Ebola–Bundibugyo. EHF is a febrile
haemorrhagic illness which causes death in 25–90% of all cases [1].
The Zaire strain is the most fatal, with an overall case fatality ratio ranging from
69% to 88% [1].
Ebola virus disease is transmitted primarily through contact with the body fluids of
symptomatic patients, most commonly in adults aged 17–44 years, with relative
sparing of children younger than 16 years [1,2].
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has had nine recorded Ebola virus disease
outbreaks since 1976. The remoteness of most affected communities and the
involvement of 2 deaths in Uganda, a neighboring country connected to the risk
zone make this outbreak the most complex and high risk ever experienced by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo [3].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

7

The ongoing outbreak
The ongoing outbreak occurred in January, 2019, in the North-Kivu Province, in
the East of the country, causing a total of 1,449 deaths with 1,355 confirmed. Most
of the previous outbreaks have been confined to remote rural areas, with the
exception of an outbreak in Kikwit, a town with a population of nearly 400000
that resulted in 315 cases and 250 deaths [4].
The ongoing response to the current outbreak in North-Kivu Province includes use
of traditional measures such as early identification, isolation and care of cases,
contact tracing, safe and dignified burials, and culturally appropriate community
mobilisation (including risk communication, community engagement, and social
mobilisation). These traditional measures are being supplemented by use of the
recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus–Zaire Ebola virus (rVSV-ZEBOV) vaccine,
with vaccination of first-line and second-line contacts [5].
Specific objectives
This deep survey was conducted to inquire into what is concretely done regarding
BS in the reference hospitals of the city of Kinshasa.
Prespecified hypotheses

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

8

1.Transmission can be stopped by early diagnosis, patient isolation and care,
infection control, safe and dignified burial of people who had died from Ebola virus
disease, rigorous tracing of contacts, and, more recently, promising evidence on the
use of targeted vaccination [2].
2. Being an ongoing-conflict country, the health system in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo can be described as fragile and sub-optimal in the face of a disease
outbreak as shown by its poor health outcomes [1].
3. In hospital settings, the primary level of infectious risk concerns the family
members [6]. These naturally maintain diverse or intimate relationships with other
members of their families thus exposing them to the secondary infectious risk.
These in turn may transmit the infection to others in their neighborhood (tertiary
infectious risk), and so on [7]. It brings the concept of biosecurity (BS).
The concept of biosecurity (BS)
It brings together knowledge, attitudes and individual or collective practices in the
rational management of biological, infectious or toxic risk. BS touches on many
fields of activity, including the agro-food industries, animal production, air
conditioning, drinking water supply, medical activities (care and vaccination),
biomedical research, military... [8].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

9

The common point is the risk of contamination by pathogenic microorganisms or
biological products harmful to exposed individuals. The emergence of new
pathogens as Ebola virus and the prodigious development of exchanges between
countries and continents because of air transport raise the issue of BS in
apocalyptic terms [9].
Depth survey
In deep, BS concept incorporates a dozen variables, namely: (1) the respect of the
standards of hygiene, (2) the posted written instructions, (3) the measures of
individual protections (mask, glasses, gloves), (4) the cleanliness of hygienic
facilities, (5) respect for the principles of teamwork, (6) asepsis, (7) sanitation, (8)
basic education, (9) training, and (10) ease of access to care [10].
Methods
This study was conducted between September and December 2003 and the last
three months of March 2004 as a preliminary study. It used qualitative research
methods - in depth interviews (IDI) with health workers and key informant
interviews (KII) [2] – to explore workers experiences during their normal working
days that is from 2004 to June 2019 [2]. Qualitative interviews facilitate generation
of in-depth and contextual information about an individual’s experience, beliefs

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

10

and perceptions as well as exploration of reasons behind their answers through
probing questions [2].
The study was conducted in thirteen health facilities in Kinshasa. The selected
study health facilities were selected for being the reference hospitals health, as they
represent different health centers of Kinshasa. This survey targeted the emergency
departments and laboratories of the 13 reference institutions in the city of Kinshasa.
In depth interviews with health workers
Contextual information about the ongoing health situation in the country is checked
using the press team service of communication of the Ministry of Health of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo [1] as well as exploration of other media
sources reasons through probing updates [2]. In the preliminary study, the
investigators' job was to record the results of their observations, as well as the
answers to the questions provided by the health workers found at the targeted
places (laboratories, emergency rooms) following a pre-established questionnaire.
Our database contained 20 variables (Table 2).
Key informant interviews
Doctors themselves were often surprised when asked if their blood pressure
monitors and stethoscopes were disinfected after each patient consulted or if they
washed their hands with soap or bleach before moving on to another patient.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

11

Data sources measurements
The interviews were conducted in French, in a private room in the health facility,
office or in corridor where the participant felt most comfortable. Separate topic
guides were used for the in-depth interviews with health workers and key informant
interviews.
The data were synthesized in the form of principal components (PC) from which a
projection map of the various hospitals following their BS performance was
constructed. Each health facility was represented by one point. The proximity of
the points on the map signified their resemblance, while their distance emphasized
their dissimilarity. Hospitals were then grouped into a small number of categories
given their similarity. This grouping was done using the hierarchical ascending
classification technique described by Ward where the results appear as a
dendrogram. The analyzes were performed using SPSS software version 10.0.7.
Efforts to address potential sources of bias
The data presented are subject to change after extensive investigation and after
redistribution of cases and deaths in their respective health areas.
Ethics
Ethical approval was obtained from the University of Kinshasa Scientific and
Ethics Committee and the Tropical Medicine Department Research Ethics

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

12

Committee. Rigorous informed consent process was followed: all participants were
given verbal and detailed written information about the nature and purpose of the
research before taking part; participants were made aware of their right to decline
to answer questions, and were assured that measures are in place to anonymize
responses. All participants gave their consent.
Quantitative variables
All data were anonymized to protect patient privacy. Regarding accessing patient
data and the indication whether all human subjects were adult or whether a parent
or guardian of any child participant provided informed consent on their behalf, this
statement was not applicable as we work with data that were available from the
Ministère de la Santé to inform people on the ongoing outbreak.
Results
Descriptive data
The epidemiological situation of the Ebola Virus Disease dated 16 July 2019: Since
the beginning of the epidemic, the cumulative number of cases is 2,522: 2,428
confirmed and 94 probable. In total, there were 1,698 deaths (1,604 confirmed and
94 probable) and 717 people cured. 374 suspected cases under investigation; 10
new confirmed cases, including 6 in Beni, 2 in Mabalako, 1 in Katwa and 1 in
Mangurujipa; 10 new confirmed cases deaths: 5 community deaths, including 3 in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

13

Beni, 1 in Mabalako and 1 in Mangurujipa; 5 deaths at Ebola Treatment Centers
including 4 in Beni and 1 in Katwa; 7 people cured out of Mabalako Ebola
Treatment Center. The cumulative number of confirmed / probable cases among
health workers is 136 (5% of all confirmed / probable cases), including 41 deaths.
The objective of this paper was to educate health workers by revisiting or
reminding the evaluation of the level of biosecurity (BS) in the emergency rooms
and laboratories of 13 hospitals of reference of the city of Kinshasa.
In this problem, health facilities have a very special dimension. Indeed, they
constitute real bio-reactors that concentrate, cross and multiply, by a factor of
several orders of magnitude, the dangerousness of many germs brought by the
patients or that circulate there.
Thus, any stay, even for a very short period, in these eminently dangerous places,
can be of great consequence for an imprudent visitor, that directly or indirectly. In
addition, gaseous or liquid effluents, as well as solid wastes emanating from these
places pose a serious threat to the populations living in its immediate surroundings
Details of hospital participants
Of the 13 health facilities surveyed, 6 had no instructions on BS, 9 had bleach in
the laboratory and only 3 had bleach in the emergency room. In 7 hospitals, we saw

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

14

active laboratory technicians wearing gloves; 10 had automatic pipettes. According
to the answers of the health workers, the laboratory equipment was disinfected the
same day in 12 health facilities. Ten regularly emptied their baskets. Seven had an
incinerator. Room ventilation was satisfactory in 9 cases and enough lighting in 12
cases (Table 2).
In emergency rooms, examination equipment (sphygmomanometer, stethoscope
and thermometer) was not regularly disinfected after use in only 2 facilities. The
change of sheets after examination of each patient was only observed in 4
establishments. In 2 cases, the examiners wore gloves. The toilet was well kept in 5
cases (Table 2).
Overall, for each parameter studied, the achievement performance for all health
facilities was classified into 4 categories: excellent, if performed by more than 75%
of hospitals; average, if carried out by 50 to 75% of hospitals; low, if carried out by
25 to 50% of hospitals; bad, if done by less than 25% of hospitals.
Thus, the following 6 parameters had obtained the excellent score: disposable
sampling equipment; disinfection of equipment and the bench; good lighting of
premises; waiting room unencumbered; adequate preservation of biological
specimens; regular emptying of baskets.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

15

In the extreme, the following 2 parameters were rated bad: gloves worn by
examiners; disinfection of examination instruments.
The other parameters had a rating from low to medium.

Hospitals profile
The 1st principal component (PC) represented the direction of the increase of the
BS performance at the top of which the Bondeko-Ngaliema-Monkole group was
standing, as opposed to the other hospitals surveyed, notably the Makala-NdjiliKing Baudouin group. Kintambo in extreme position. The Kinshasa General
Hospital was in a position close to the middle.
The 2nd PC represented the direction of the increased contrast between labs and
emergency rooms in terms of BS.
Following this axis, Monkole, Kintambo, Bondeko, King Baudouin and Ngaliema
were opposed to other hospitals.
Considering the groupings provided by the dendrogram, it was noted that for a
relative distance of 15 units, health facilities formed the following three aggregates:

 Group 1: Makala, King Baudouin, Ndjili and Kintambo
 Group 2: Ngaliema, Bondeko

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

16

 Group 3: General Hospital, Monkole, Kingasani, Kinoise, CUK, Kalembe-lembe,
St Joseph
Group 1 was away from the other two groups by 19 units of distance. Thus, a
relative distance of 10 units corresponded to the following 6 aggregates:

 Group 1: Makala
 Group 2: King Baudouin, Ndjili, Kintambo
 Group 3: Ngaliema, Bondeko
 Group 4: Kinshasa General Hospital
 Group 5: Monkole, Kingasani, Kinoise
 Group 6: CUK, Kalembe-lembe, St Joseph
Following this second grouping, it was noted that Makala stood out from the group
it formed with King Baudouin and Kintambo.
Former group 3 was broken into three pieces (groups 4, 5 and 6).
The General Hospital of Kinshasa was isolated from the others.
The group Monkole-Kingasani-Kinoise (group 5) was away from the group CUKKalembe-lembe-St Joseph (group 6) by 11 units of distance.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

17

Considered according to the performance achieved, the group Bondeko-Ngaliema

(group 2 in the first ranking) had the best score with 15 parameters of excellent
level, 4 of average level and none of mediocre level.
In second place came Group 3 with 10 excellent level parameters and 3 parameters
at each of the lower levels.
In third place was group 1, which had 5, 3, 4 and 7 parameters, respectively
excellent, medium, low and mediocre.
The difference in the distribution of performance frequencies between groups was
highly significant (chi-squared = 12.5, 2 degrees of freedom, p = 0.002).
Discussion
Key results
This deep survey was conducted to inquire into what is concretely done regarding
BS in the reference hospitals of the city of Kinshasa [11]. It showed that health
facilities in Kinshasa have a very variable level of BS ranging from excellent to
poor [13].
The Bondeko-Ngaliema-Monkole group undoubtedly occupied the first rank, while
the Kintambo-Roi Baudouin-Ndjili-Makala group occupied the other end of the
scale; the other hospitals were in an intermediate position.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

18

It is important to note that the University Hospital of Kinshasa is placed 8th in this
classification, between the Kingasani Hospital and the General Hospital. It is far
from the time when this hospital was presented as "the top of medicine" in the
DRC. The consequences of such a fall are incalculable when one thinks that this
hospital more than another is eminently involved in the process of training doctors
in our country.
Its deliquescence is only the logical reflection of the difficulties known to all that
our country is currently going through. Of the seven hospitals that placed before the
University hospital in this classification of BS, five are heavily subsidized by
international NGOs, which largely explains their performance, another party
finding its explanation in the quality of their management. They are: Bondeko,
Monkole, Kalembe-Lembe, St Joseph and Kingasani 2.
Limitations of the study, taking into account sources of potential bias or
imprecision. Discuss both direction and magnitude of any potential bias
To be contaminated, there is no need to transgress all the elements of this chain of
security: the transgression of only one of them is enough to lead to a catastrophe.
The wearing of gloves in the laboratory was highly rated with a rate of 83.8% for
all health facilities. It is a manifestation of an awareness translated positively act
against the risk of infection. This good practice has been adopted by the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

19

maintenance staff to the point of perverting it. Indeed, we even saw a cleaner, with
gloved hands, move from one room to another opening doors after doors, without
anyone having to call him.
The state of the toilets, often disastrous in many of the hospitals, is betrayed by the
pestilential odors that emerge, and the presence of the bins not regularly emptied,
besides the presence of the cockroaches, makes the stay in the hospital more that
formidable.
Key informant interviews
Doctors themselves were often surprised when asked if their blood pressure
monitors and stethoscopes were disinfected after each patient consulted or if they
washed their hands with soap or bleach before moving on to another patient.
Data collection and analysis
The interviews, were conducted in French, in a private room in the health facility,
office or in corridor where the participant felt most comfortable. Separate topic
guides were used for the in-depth interviews with health workers and key informant
interviews. The topic guides for the in-depth interviews covered health workers’
perceptions and experiences of working during their normal working day, any
constraints that they faced, challenges in the health systems, their coping
mechanisms, and options to increase the resilience of workers and the health

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

20

system in the future. The topic guides for the key informants included the following
areas: perceptions and experiences of the risk contamination, of Ebola outbreak; its
impact on health workers; constraints, challenges and opportunities in relation to
leadership and governance, health workforce and service delivery during the
normal working day; and options to increase the resilience of workers and the
health system in the fear of an Ebola epidemic phase.
A cautious overall interpretation of results considering objectives, limitations,
multiplicity of analyses, results from similar studies, and other relevant evidence
The interviews were manually recorded after gaining permission from the
participants. The recordings of the interviews were transcribed verbatim and
analysed using the framework approach which facilitates rigorous and transparent
analysis. The coding framework was developed using themes emerging from the
data, the topic guides and study objectives. The authors applied the coding
framework to the transcripts, Ministry of Health DRC Press team update
information was used to support the analysis.
The generalisability (external validity) of the study results
In the great majority of laboratories, according to workers answers, disinfection of
the bench would be done regularly, practically every day with alcohol. The
disinfection of the instruments, the bench is not a simple question. It must be

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

21

subject to a rigorous protocol specific to each case. The products used are chosen
according to their effectiveness against microorganisms, their safety and their nonreactivity with the equipment. This aspect of the issue has not been addressed in
this study.
The use of disposable sheets is also not a widespread practice in our hospitals, to
the point where we have seen the patients' parents spontaneously use their
loincloths to have their sick child examined.
Other considerations include the cockroaches that are legion in hospitals: These
undesirable companions of man deserve a whole study. In fact, these intrepid
insects impose their law in the buildings they occupy, passing sewers at any place
where they are not expected, making a real problem face to all BS measures taken
in hospitals [14].
The promiscuity that reigns in our emergency rooms adds an extra dimension to the
drama that is playing out. The patients, not isolated from each other, are seated on
benches, for those who can, where most of the time they are on the floor, joined
together, pell-mell, according to the chance of the arrivals. In some hospitals, an
effort has been made to ensure that each patient has an individual plastic chair that
is easy to clean and disinfect.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

22

Those who did not have were simply examined by the leatherette or what was left
of it. The risk of transmission of the pathogenic germs of a patient is, so to speak,
amplified dramatically. We even surprised a head of Department to give
instructions, during the visit of an authority of the place, so that the beds of the
patients are covered with sheets clean and new leaves to remove them immediately
after the visit.
Authentic! Some of our young doctors have never seen a clean sheet throughout
their training. What do they know about BS if no one has ever talked to them about
it, as this is not part of their curriculum? They will reproduce, where they will be,
what they have been taught unfortunately carelessness. The responsibility of
trainers and public authorities is total.
The lack of an incinerator is another observed aberration whose consequence on the
environment is immeasurable. Who can understand that a hospital may lack an
incinerator? And yet, it is unfortunately the case. This question is part of the
problem of waste management at the health facility level. Liquid waste is
discharged through public sewers; solids are either buried or simply thrown into
dumps in the immediate vicinity.
In fact, no regulation seems to compel health facilities to manage orthodox waste.
As if that were not enough, it is also necessary to add to this tragedy the almost

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

23

chronic water supply disruption that strikes severely all the institutions that do not
have enough water reserves. On this point, the excellence rating goes to the
Monkole Hospital Center, which has an artesian well that protects it from untimely
and prolonged breaks in water supply through the network to which it is connected.
It seemed to us that compliance with BS's instructions was, so to speak, left to
everyone's discretion. We did not feel the existence of a constraint forcing the
different actors to pay more attention. For example, while almost all facilities have
internal or external refectories, in some hospitals it was quite amazing to see
caregivers or health workers take their meals on the job site itself.
What can be the life expectancy of health workers in such conditions? The absence
of instructions posted does not contribute to the promotion of the BS. Having
instructions posted is one thing, respecting them is another.
This is a deep survey, however, highlighted serious failure to meet BS standards in
most referral hospitals. This necessitates the taking of urgent decisions at all levels
of responsibility so that eventually a BS audit is instituted within each hospital. The
latter will be planning a more in-depth exploration of impacts of hospital activities
on infection control practices [12-23].
There are serious deficiencies in contamination risk communication and infection
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For example, the meaning of "Draconian

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

24

precautions should be taken in the health facilities to protect all people called to
evolve participate in the concept of biosecurity (BS)" is unknown maybe it is an
expression appropriate for a scientific report. Overall, it is interest to publish such
paper with the appreciation of the relevance of the biosecurity findings to the Ebola
outbreak [24,25].
Meeting of the Emergency Committee of the International Health
Regulations
The meeting of the Emergency Committee for International Health Regulations,
convened by the Director-General of WHO, was held on Wednesday, July 16,
2019. The Emergency Committee concluded that the Ebola outbreak in the
provinces of North Kivu and Ituri constitute a public health emergency of
international concern At the meeting of the committee, the Director General of
WHO, Tedros Adhanom, asked the international community to show solidarity
with the Congolese people. He also asked not to impose "punitive and
counterproductive restrictions that will only serve to isolate the DRC at the
international level". "These restrictions on travel and trade will be useless. There
have already been more than 75 million people controlled at the border posts," he
said at a press conference, sanctioning the meeting [26].
The Ministry of Health accepts the evaluation of the expert committee. The
ministry hopes that this decision is not the result of the many pressures from

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

25

different stakeholder groups who wanted to use this statement as an opportunity to
raise funds for humanitarian actors despite the potentially harmful and unforeseen
consequences for the affected communities that depend on them greatly from crossborder trade for their survival [26].
Furthermore, we regret that after spending almost a year in this epidemic, certain
groups of people in the community continue to adopt irresponsible behavior that
causes the geographical spread of the virus. It is important to remember that in the
cases of Goma and Uganda, the patients knew that they were at risk but refused to
respect the health recommendations and deliberately traveled to another area. The
Government will consider what steps need to be taken to prevent these high-risk
groups from continuing to spread the epidemic in the region [26].
Follow-up of the situation of the pastor's contacts who traveled to Goma
Vaccination around the confirmed Goma case continues at the Afia Himbi Health
Center in the Goma Health Zone. All contacts in the city were found in less than 72
hours, including the motorcycle taxi driver that the pastor had used to get to the
health center. The response teams from Beni and Butembo continue the
investigations to trace the pastor's journey and identify his contacts in these two
cities [26].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

26

The Committee noted that epidemiological trends are evolving positively in the
Butembo and Katwa epicentres. However, the response is beginning to face
challenges related to community acceptance and security in areas such as Mabalako
where the epidemic has resumed recently. On the other hand, the response
continues to be limited by the lack of adequate funding and limited human
resources [27].
The Committee commended the communication and collaboration between the
DRC and Uganda that rapidly contained Ebola cases that crossed the border.
Uganda's rapid response proves the importance of preparing border countries for
DRC [26].
After lengthy discussions, the Committee considered that the criteria for declaring a
public health emergency of international concern were not fulfilled. The Committee
considered that all public health measures and recommendations needed to end the
epidemic were already being implemented by WHO and the affected countries
[26].
Conclusions
We address an important topic: contamination in the context of an Ebola outbreak.
We offer a survey of infection control practices and suggest more in-depth
exploration of the impacts of hospital activities on infection control. There are

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

27

serious deficiencies in contamination risk communication and infection in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Overall, there is interest in publishing a such
paper with the appreciation of the relevance of the biosecurity findings to the Ebola
outbreak. Our investigation did not address or deepen all aspects of BS. We did not
investigate all hospital sectors (delivery rooms, internal medicine, pediatrics,
surgery, etc.).
Perspective
The Social responsibility in the control of an infection risk
While the Government continues to openly share with partners and donors the way
in which it uses the funds received, we hope that there will be greater transparency
and accountability of humanitarian actors in their use of funds to respond to this
Ebola outbreak
The Ebola epidemic is above all a public health crisis that requires a response by
actors with real technical expertise. However, the main difficulty is that this
epidemic occurs in an environment characterized by problems of development and
shortcomings of the health system.
Communication on risks contamination in meat consumption of dead animals
We hope to conduct a KAP (Knowledge, Attitude and Practices) survey of health
workers, including students, on biosecurity issues, particularly communication on

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

28

risks contamination in meat consumption of animals found dead in forests, and
issues related to the transmission of Ebola Virus disease and food insecurity.
The overall aim for this perspective will to develop the foundation of an education
campaign on prevention of risks and the methodology for a comprehensive study of
the communication risks and the evaluation of community behaviour change in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo about eating meat from animals found dead in
the forest because the Democratic Republic of the Congo has many forests. We will
analyse that rising incidence and large-scale outbreaks are largely due to foods
insecurity, inadequate living conditions, naïve populations, meat trade and
population mobility, climate change making the hunters, the principal vectors of
contaminated meat of dead animals.
Thinking on meat risk contamination was evidenced by the past Ebola Virus
Disease outbreaks. We will highlight the first goal of sustainable development: no
poverty because based on poverty, the interdiction of eating meats of dead animals
(in forest which may be identified responsible for transmitting Ebola Virus
Disease) cannot work as these circulating contaminated meats are difficult to
control without means and efficiently transmit diseases.
Acknowledgements

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

29

We thank Drs: Zinszer Kate, Mvumbi Lelo Georges, Mafuta Eric, Ahuka-Mundeke
Steve, Justus Nsio, Kalala Lunganza Richard, Odio Wobin Taddhée, Bobanga
Lengu Thierry, Situakibanza Nani-Tuma Hippolyte, Lutumba Pascal, Kayembe
Ntumba JM, Mulumba Madishala Paul, Kisasa Kafutshi Robert, Sylvie-Mireille
Bambi, Onyamboko Akatshi Marie, Lebwaze Massamba Bienvenu, Kamangu
Ntambwe Erick, Wumba Roger, Mitashi Patrick, Kayembe Kalambay Patrick and
Mr Mukinay Tumb’ Tumb’ Nestor.

Role of the funding source
There was no funding source for this study. The corresponding author had full
access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to
submit for publication. No funder played a role in the design of the study and
in collection, analysis, and interpretation of data and in writing the manuscript.
Availability of data and materials
The dataset is available in the manuscript in 2 tables. Add information on the
ongoing Ebola outbreak is available from the update message of Press Team of the
Ministry of Health Democratic Republic of the Congo on reasonable request.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

30

Abbreviations
EVD

Ebola Virus Disease

CTE

Centre Traitement Ebola

HW

Health worker

IDI

In-depth interview

PC

Principal Component

KI

Key informant

KII

Key informant interview

BS

Biosecurity

Authors’ contributions
GTK contributed to the design of the study, coordinated the data collection,
supported the analysis and interpretation of the data and drafted the manuscript.
KTK contributed to the design of the study, the analysis and interpretation of the
data, and reviewed update drafts of the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
Notes
Consent for publication

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

31

Not applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Contributor Information
Guyguy Kabundi Tshima, Email: guyguy.kabundi.tshima@umontreal.ca
(institutional); guyguytshimakabundi@gmail.com (private)
Kaleb Tshimungu Kalala, Email: kalalakaleb@googlemail.com
References
1. Raven J, Wurie H, Witter S. Health workers' experiences of coping with the
Ebola epidemic in Sierra Leone's health system: a qualitative study. BMC
Health Serv Res. 2018;18(1):251. 2018. doi:10.1186/s12913-018-3072-3
2. WHO. Ebola virus disease—the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
http://www.who.int/csr/don/13-may-2017-ebola-drc/en/ (accessed June 20,
2019); The Ebola outbreak Epidemiology Team. Outbreak of the Ebola virus
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, April-May 2018: an
epidemiological

study.

Lancet.

June

29,

2018.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31387-4
3. WHO. Health worker Ebola infections in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Preliminary report. May, 2015.
4. Khan AS, Tshioko FK, Heymann DL, et al. The reemergence of Ebola
hemorrhagic fever, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1995. J Infect Dis
1999; 179: S76–86.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

32

5. De Roo A, Ado B, Rose B, Guimard Y, Fonck K. Survey among survivors of
the 1995 Ebola epidemic in Kikwit, Democratic Republic of Congo: their
feelings and experiences. Trop Med Int Health. 1998;3:883–885. doi:
10.1046/j.1365-3156.1998.00322.x.
6. Kruk ME, Myers M, Varpilah ST, Dahn BT. What is a resilient health
system?

Lessons

from

Ebola. Lancet. 2015;385:1910–1912.

doi:

10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60755-3.
7. Kieny M, Evans DB, Kadandale S. Health-system resilience: reflections on
the Ebola crisis in western

Africa.

Bull World

Health Organ.

2014;92:149278.
8. World Health Organization. Health worker Ebola infections in Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone - a preliminary report. Geneva: WHO; 2015.
9. Kucharski AJ, Camacho A, Flasche S, Glover RE, Edmunds WJ, Funk S.
Measuring the impact of Ebola control measures in Sierra Leone. Proc Natl
Acad Sci. 2015;112:201508814. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1508814112.
10. Koh Y, Hegney DG, Drury V. Comprehensive systematic review of
healthcare workers’ perceptions of risk and use of coping strategies towards
emerging

respiratory

infectious

diseases. Int

J

Evid

Based

Healthc. 2011;9:403–419. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-1609.2011.00242.x.
11. Hewlett BL, Hewlett BS. Providing care and facing death: nursing during
Ebola outbreaks in Central Africa. J Transcult Nurs. 2005;16:289–297. doi:
10.1177/1043659605278935.
12. Kinsman J. “A time of fear”: local, national, and international responses to a
large Ebola outbreak in Uganda. Glob Health. 2012;527:1–12.
13. McMahon SA, Ho LS, Brown H, Miller L, Ansumana R, Kennedy CE.
Healthcare providers on the frontlines: a qualitative investigation of the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

33

social and emotional impact of delivering health services during Sierra
Leone’s Ebola epidemic. Health Policy Plan. 2016;31:1–8.
14. Wurie HR, Samai M, Witter S. Retention of health workers in rural Sierra
Leone : findings from life histories. Hum Resour Health. 2016;14:1–15.
15. Snape D, Spencer L. The foundations of qualitative research. In: Ritchie J,
Lewis J, editors. Qualitative research practice. A guide for social science
students and researchers. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications; 2003. pp. 1–
23.
16. Legard R, Keegan J, Ward K. In-depth interviews. In: Ritchie J, Lewis J,
editors. Qualitative research practice. A guide for social science students and
researchers. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications; 2003. pp. 138–169.
17. Ritchie J, Spencer L, O’Connor W. Carrying out qualitative analysis. In:
Ritchie J, Lewis J, editors. Qualitative research practice. A guide for social
science students and researchers. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications; 2003.
pp. 219–262.
18. Witter S, Wurie H, Chandiwana P Namakula J, So S, Alonso-Garbayo A, et
al. How do health workers experience and cope with shocks? Learning from
four fragile and conflict-affected states on resilience in the health workforce.
Health Policy Plan. 2017;32(suppl 3):iii3.
19. Cancedda C, Farmer PE, Kerry V, Nuthulaganti T, Scott KW, Goosby E, et
al. Maximizing the impact of training initiatives for health professionals in
low-income countries: frameworks, challenges, and best practices. PLoS
Med. 2015;12:e1001840. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001840.
20. Krech R, Kieny M. The 2014 Ebola outbreak: ethical use of unregistered
interventions. Bull

World

10.2471/BLT.14.145789.

Health

Organ. 2014;92:622.

doi:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

34

21. Cancedda C, Davis SM, Dierberg KL, Lascher J, Kelly JD, Barrie MB, et al.
Strengthening health systems while responding to a health crisis : lessons
learned by a nongovernmental organization during the Ebola virus disease
epidemic in Sierra Leone. J Infectious Dis. 2016;214(Suppl 3):153–163. doi:
10.1093/infdis/jiw345.
22. The Statistics Portal. Ebola cases and deaths among health care workers due
to the outbreaks in West African countries as of November 4,
2015. https://www.statista.com/statistics/325347/west-africa-ebola-casesand-deaths-among-health-care-workers/. Accessed 14 June 2019.
23. Van Bortel T, Basnayake A, Wurie F, Jambai M, Koromo A, Muana A, et al.
Psychosocial effects of an Ebola outbreak at individual, community and
international levels. Bull World Health Organ. 2016;94(3):210–214. doi:
10.2471/BLT.15.158543.
24. WHO Ebola Response Team. West African Ebola epidemic after one year—
slowing but not yet under control. N Engl J Med 2015; 372: 584–87.
25. Shears P, O’Dempsey T. Ebola virus disease in Africa: epidemiology and
nosocomial transmission. J HospInf 2015; 90: 1–9.
26. Team Press. Ministère de la Santé Publique. Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Every day update on the ongoing of Ebola virus disease and
Nosocomial transmission of Ebola virus disease on health workers in: NorthKivu and Ituri, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 2019 (mailing messages).
27. Kentikelenis A, King L, McKee M, Stuckler D. The International Monetary
Fund and the Ebola outbreak. Lancet Glob Health. 2015;3:e69–e70. doi:
10.1016/S2214-109X(14)70377-8.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/19000539; this version posted July 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

35

Table 1. The epidemiological situation of the Ebola Virus Disease dated July 16,
2019
Table 2. Exploration of variables of hospital activities on infection control practices
S1 Checklist: STROBE Checklist

