bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.03.433767; this version posted March 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

SPOT: a web-tool enabling Swift Profiling Of Transcriptomes
Elias Farr1,#, Julia M. Sattler1,2 and Friedrich Frischknecht1,2#
1

Integrative Parasitology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg University Medical School, Im

Neuenheimer Feld 344, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
2

German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), partner site Heidelberg, Germany.

# to whom correspondence should be addressed:
eliasfarr@gmail.com; freddy.frischknecht@med.uni-heidelberg.de
phone: +49-6221-566537

fax: +49-6221-564643

Abstract
The increasing number of single cell and bulk RNAseq data sets describing complex gene expression
profiles in different organisms, organs or cell types calls for an intuitive tool allowing rapid comparative
analysis. Here we present Swift Profiling Of Transcriptomes (SPOT) as a web tool that allows not only
differential expression analysis but also fast ranking of genes fitting transcription profiles of interest.
Based on a heuristic approach the spot algorithm ranks the genes according to their proximity to the userdefined gene expression profile of interest. The best hits are visualized as a table, bar chart or dot plot and
can be exported as an Excel file. While the tool is generally applicable, we tested it on RNAseq data from
malaria parasites that undergo multiple stage transformations during their complex life cycle as well as on
data from multiple human organs during development and cell lines infected by the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
SPOT should enable non-bioinformaticians to easily analyse their own and any available dataset.
1 Introduction
To understand cell and organ-specific functionality, gene expression patterns are often determined as a
first step before specific genes are investigated in more detail. Many researchers are interested to identify
genes that are specifically expressed in certain entities such as cell types, developmental stages, tissues or
species where their encoded proteins can play diverse or similar roles. Different tools exist to visualize
profiles of known genes or to perform differential expression analysis (DEA) (Ge et al. 2018;
Papatheodorou et al. 2020; Reyes et al. 2019).
However, there is no intuitive tool to extract and visualize gene expression patterns matching user-defined
gene expression profiles of interest, POI (Figure 1A). SPOT addresses this need (Figure 1B, C): sliders on
the application’s control panel allow users to enter their own POI across the desired entities of a data set.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.03.433767; this version posted March 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

This slider-entity connection is the basis for a ranking process that is based on the proximity to the userdefined gene expression POI, which is updated every time a slider is moved. The results of the spot
pot
ranking algorithm are visualized in the main panel as table, bar chart or dot blot (Figure 1C).
For the proof-of-concept we pre-installed data in SPOT from studies on organ development of Homo
mo
sapiens (bulkRNAseq) (Cardoso-Moreira et al. 2019) and developmental stages of the rodent infecting
ing
malaria parasite Plasmodium berghei (scRNAseq) (Howick et al. 2019) as well as SARS-CoV-2 infected
ted
human cell lines (Wyler et al. 2021). The general workflow and the interface design can be seen in
Figure 1, while example predictions and comparison with state-of-the-art methods are available in the
supplemental material

.
Figure 1: (A) Logic and (B) workflow of SPOT. (C) Cartoon version of the SPOT web interface
ce
highlighting specific functions
2 Methods and features
SPOT is a web-based R shiny app, which mainly consists of a visualization and a control panel. While the
user can make selections in widgets such as tables, sliders, drop-down menus or buttons in the control
rol
panel, the visualization panel depicts the results of the given input. For each analysis variant, the app hass a
section with its own functionalities in the lower panel and visualization methods in the upper panel.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.03.433767; this version posted March 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

2.1 SPOT Expression Profile
In this proof-of-concept version of SPOT expression profiles from the three implemented sets of data can
be extracted. To this end, the POI of each entity (e.g. cell type, stage of development, organ, infected vs
non-infected cell) can be defined via a slider with values from 0 to 2. spot ranks the genes according to the
match of their expression to the POI as reflected by the slider constellation. The top ranked genes can be
displayed as table, bar chart or dot plot. In case of a single cell dataset, the dot plot visualizes the average
of cells in which gene expression is detected as dot circumference – and the average expression as dot
colour. For bulk RNAseq data, gene expression is visualized as circumference of a dot. For further
analysis, the results can be downloaded as Excel file. Also links to the database entries of the individual
genes are provided. A detailed definition of the spot algorithm is available in the supplementary
information.
2.2 DEA
For users interested in a more precise but less interactive candidate search, we have also implemented a
differential expression analysis (DEA) tool based on Seurat, MAST and DESeq2 (Stuart et al., 2019;
Finak et al. 2015; Anders and Huber, 2010). Similar to SPOT, the user can select the POI of entities in the
lower panel. Due to its simplicity a Wilcoxon rank sum test between the selected and unselected entities is
performed as default. As more time-consuming methods MAST (for single cells) and DESeq2 are
available for ranking (Figure S1). For visualization the same charts are available as for the SPOT section.
2.3 Comparing profiles
Gene expression values of three pre-installed data sets are listed as a HTML table in the lower panel
enabling the selection of single genes for visualization. The table can be searched with a term, filtered by
multiple attributes (e.g. name, expression values) or subdivided by expression value ranges. Each selected
gene is displayed as an interactive box plot in the visualization panel, which allows quick profile
comparisons e.g. of already known genes with the results of the performed analysis.
2.4 Analysis of additional datasets
To allow users to examine their own records or published datasets, data files (.csv/.xlsx) can be readily
uploaded. Input data sets should list entities in the first row and gene names in the first column. The shiny
app then creates a slider for each column name (entity) in the first row. For single cell datasets the cell
identities should be listed in the second row. Uploaded datasets are visualized in the same way as
described under 2.1 - 2.3.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.03.433767; this version posted March 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

3 Conclusion
SPOT provides an easy-to-use web tool for ranking genes with an expression profile that matches userdefined characteristics. Moreover, it allows swift visual comparison of multiple genes as well as
differential expression analysis of datasets.

Financial support: The work was supported through a grant from the German Centre for Infection
Research, TTU Malaria, project number TTU 03.813.
References
Anders, S. and Huber, W. (2010). Differential expression analysis for sequence count data. Genome Biol
11, R106.
Cardoso-Moreira M. et al. (2019). Gene expression across mammalian organ development. Nature 571,
505-509.
Finak, G. et al. (2015). MAST: a flexible statistical framework for assessing transcriptional changes and
characterizing heterogeneity in single-cell RNA sequencing data. Genome Biol 16, 278.
Ge, S.X. et al. (2018). iDEP: an integrated web application for differential expression and pathway
analysis of RNA-Seq data. BMC Bioinformatics 19, 534.
Howick, V.M. et al. (2019). The Malaria Cell Atlas: Single parasite transcriptomes across the complete
Plasmodium life cycle. Science 365, 56.
Papatheodorou, I. et al. (2020). Expression Atlas update: from tissues to single cells. Nucleic Acids Res
48, D77-D83.
Reyes, A.L.P. et al. (2019). GENAVi: a shiny web application for gene expression normalization, analysis
and visualization. BMC Genomics 20, 745.
Stuart, T., et al. (2019). Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data. Cell 177, 1888-1902.e21.
Wyler, E., et al. (2021). Transcriptomic profiling of SARS-CoV-2 infected human cell lines identifies
HSP90 as target for COVID-19 therapy. iScience 24, 102151.

