bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Integrated intra- and intercellular signaling knowledge
for multicellular omics analysis

Dénes Türei​1​, Alberto Valdeolivas​1​, Lejla Gul​4​, Nicolàs Palacio-Escat​1,2,3​, Olga Ivanova​1​, Attila
Gábor​1​, Dezső Módos​4,5​, Tamás Korcsmáros​4,5​, Julio Saez-Rodriguez​1,2,​*

1 ​

Heidelberg University, Faculty of Medicine and Heidelberg University Hospital, Institute of

Computational Biomedicine, Bioquant, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
2

RWTH Aachen University, Faculty of Medicine, Joint Research Centre for Computational

Biomedicine (JRC-COMBINE), 52074 Aachen, Germany
3​

Heidelberg University, Faculty of Biosciences, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

4​

Earlham Institute, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7UZ, UK

5​

Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7UQ, UK

* Corresponding author: ​julio.saez@uni-heidelberg.de

Keywords​: signaling network, pathways, intercellular signaling, database, web service, omics
integration

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Molecular knowledge of biological processes is a cornerstone in the analysis of omics data.
Applied to single-cell data, such analyses can provide mechanistic insights into individual cells
and their interactions. However, knowledge of intercellular communication is scarce, scattered
across different resources, and not linked to intracellular processes. To address this gap, we
combined over 100 resources in a single database. It covers the interactions and roles of proteins
in inter- and intracellular signal transduction, as well as transcriptional and post-transcriptional
regulation. We also provide a comprehensive collection of protein complexes and rich
annotations on the properties of proteins, including function, localization, and role in diseases.
The resource is available for human, and via homology translation for mouse and rat. The data is
accessible via ​OmniPath’​ s web service, a Cytoscape plugin, and packages in R/Bioconductor and
Python, providing convenient access options for both computational and experimental scientists.
Our resource provides a single access point to knowledge spanning intra- and intercellular
processes for data analysis, as we demonstrate in applications to study SARS-CoV-2 infection
and ulcerative colitis.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Cells process information by physical interactions of molecules. These interactions are organized
into an ensemble of signaling pathways that are often represented as a network. This network
determines the response of the cell under different physiological and disease conditions. In
multicellular organisms, the behaviour of each cell is regulated by higher levels of organization:
the tissue and, ultimately, the organism. In tissues, multiple cells communicate to coordinate
their behavior to maintain homeostasis. For example, cells may produce and sense extracellular
matrix (ECM), and release enzymes acting on the ECM as well as ligands. These ligands are
detected by receptors in the same or different cells, that in turn trigger intracellular pathways
that control other processes, including the production of ligands and the physical binding to
other cells. The totality of these processes mediates the intercellular communication in tissues.
Thus, to understand physiological and pathological processes at the tissue level, we need to
consider both the signaling pathways within each cell type as well as the communication
between them.
Since the end of the nineties, databases have been collecting information about signaling
pathways​1​. These databases provide a unified source of information in formats that users can
browse, retrieve and process. Signaling databases have become essential tools in systems biology
and to analyze omics data. A few resources provide ligand-receptor interactions​2–6​. However,
their coverage is limited, they do not include key players of intercellular communication such as
matrix proteins or extracellular enzymes, and they are not integrated with intracellular
processes. This is increasingly important as new techniques allow us to measure data from single
cells, enabling the analysis of inter- and intracellular signaling. For example, the recent
CellPhoneDB​6​ and ​ICELLNET7​ ​ tools provide computational methods to prioritize the most likely
intercellular connections from single cell transcriptomics data, and ​NicheNet8​ ​ expands this to
intracellular gene regulation. A comprehensive resource of inter- and intracellular signaling
knowledge would enhance and expedite these analyses.
To effectively study multicellular communication, a resource should: (a) classify proteins by
their roles in intercellular communication, (b) connect them by interactions from the widest
possible range of resources and (c) integrate all this information in a transparent and
customizable way, where the users can select the resources to evaluate their quality and features,
and adapt them to their context and analyses. Prompted by the lack of comprehensive efforts
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

addressing principle (a), we built a database on top of ​OmniPath9​ ,​ a resource which has already
shown the benefits of principles (b) and (c). This new resource focuses on intercellular
communication and its integration with intracellular signaling, providing prior knowledge for
modeling and analysis methods. It combines 103 resources to build on an integrated database of
molecular interactions, enzyme-PTM ​(post-translational modification)​ relationships, protein
complexes and annotations about intercellular communication and other functional attributes of
proteins.
We demonstrate with two case studies that we provide a versatile resource for the analysis of
single-cell and bulk omics data. First, we studied the potential influence of ligands secreted in
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ​(SARS-CoV-2)​ infection on the inflammatory
response through autocrine signaling. We identified signaling mechanisms that may lead to the
dysregulated inflammatory and immune response shown in severe cases. Second, we examined
the rewiring of cellular communication in ​ulcerative colitis​ (UC) based on single cell data from
the colon. By analyzing downstream signalling from the intercellular interactions, we found
pathways associated with the regulatory T cells targeted by myofibroblasts in UC.

Results
We used four major types of resources: (1) molecular ​interactions,​ (2) ​enzyme-PTM

relationships, (3) protein ​complexes​ and (4) molecule ​annotations​ about function, localization

and other attributes (Figure 1a). The ​pypath​ Python package combined the resources from those
four types to build four corresponding integrated databases. Using the ​annotations,​ ​pypath

compiled a fifth database about the roles in intercellular communication (​intercell​; Figure 1b).
The ensemble of these five databases is what we call ​OmniPath​, combining data from 103
resources (Figure 1a and Supplementary Table S1).

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 1: The composition and workflow of OmniPath.
(a)​ Database contents with the respective number of resources in parentheses. ​(b)​ Workflow and
design: OmniPath is based on four major types of resources, and the pypath Python package combines
the resources to build five databases. The databases are available by pypath, the web resource at
omnipathdb.org​, the R package OmnipathR, the Cytoscape plug-in and can be exported to formats such
as Biological Expression Language (BEL).

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

A focus on intercellular signaling
To create a database of intercellular communication, we defined the roles that proteins play in
this process. Ligands and receptors are main players of intercellular communication. Many other
kinds of molecules have a great impact on the behavior of the cells, such as matrix proteins and
transporters. We defined eight major (Figure 2) and 17 minor generic functional categories of
intercellular signaling roles (Supplementary Table S6 and S10). We also defined ten locational
categories (e.g. p
​ lasma membrane peripheral)​ , using in addition structural resources and
prediction methods to annotate the transmembrane, secreted and peripheral membrane
proteins. Furthermore, we provide 994 specific categories (e.g. ​neurotrophin receptors)​ . Each

generic category can be accessed by resource (e.g. ​ligands from HGNC​) or as the combination of
all contributing resources (Supplementary Figure S5). To provide highly curated annotations, we
checked every entry in each category manually against UniProt datasheets to exclude wrong
annotations. Overall we defined 1,170 categories and provided 54,330 functional annotations
about intercellular communication roles of 5,781 proteins.
We collected the proteins for each intercellular communication functional category using data
from 27 resources (Supplementary Table S6). Combining them with molecular interaction
networks from 48 resources (Supplementary Table S2) we created a corpus of putative
intercellular communication pathways (Figure 2c). To have a high coverage on the intercellular
molecular interactions, we also included ten resources focusing on ligand-receptor interactions
(Figure 3, Supplementary Figure S1).
Many of the proteins in intercellular communication work as parts of complexes. We therefore
built a comprehensive database of protein complexes and inferred their intercellular
communication roles: a complex belongs to a category if and only if all members of the complex
belong to it. We obtained 14,348 unique, directed transmitter-receiver (e.g. ligand-receptor)
connections, around seven times more than the largest of the resources providing such kind of
data (Figure 2d). This large coverage is achieved by not only integrating ten ligand-receptor
resources, but also complementing these with data from annotation and interaction resources.
An essential feature of this novel resource is that it combines knowledge about intercellular and
intracellular signaling. Thus, using ​OmniPath​ one can, for example, easily analyze the

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

intracellular pathways triggered by a given ligand or check the transcription factors (TFs) and
microRNAs (miRNAs) regulating the expression of such ligands.

Figure 2: The composition and representation of the intercellular signaling network.
We assigned intercellular communication roles to proteins based on evidence from multiple resources.
In all panels: ​T​ - transmitter; ​R​ - receiver.​ (a) S
​ chematic illustration of the intercellular communication
roles and their possible connections. Cells are physically connected by proteins forming tight junctions
(1), gap junctions (2) and other adhesion proteins (3); they release vesicles which can be taken up by

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

other cells (4); some receptors form complexes (5) to detect secreted ligands (6); transporters might also
be affected by factors released by other cells (8); enzymes released into the extracellular space act on
ligands and the extracellular matrix (7, 9); cells release the components of the extracellular matrix and
bind to the matrix by adhesion proteins (10). ​(b) T
​ he main intercellular communication roles (x axis)
and the major contributing resources (y axis). Size of the dots represents the number of proteins
annotated to have a certain role in a given resource. The darker areas represent the overlaps (proteins
annotated in more than one resource for the same role) while the lighter color denotes those unique to
that resource.​ (c) ​The intercellular communication network. The circle segments represent the eight
main intercellular communication roles. The edges are proportional to the number of interactions in the
OmniPath PPI network connecting proteins of one role to the other. (​ d) N
​ umber of unique, directed
transmitter-receiver (e.g. ligand-receptor) connections by resources.

OmniPath:​ an ensemble of five databases

The abovementioned intercellular database exists in ​OmniPath​ together with four further
databases (Figure 1b), supporting an integrated analysis of inter- and intracellular signaling.
The network of molecular interactions
The ​network​ database part covers four major domains of molecular signaling: (i) protein-protein
interactions (PPI), (ii) transcriptional regulation of protein-coding genes, (iii) miRNA-mRNA
interactions and (iv) transcriptional regulation of miRNA genes (TF-miRNA). We further
differentiated the PPI data into four subsets based on the interaction mechanisms and the types
of supporting evidence: 1) literature curated activity flow (directed and signed; corresponds to
the original release of ​OmniPath9​ ​), 2) activity-flow with no literature references, 3) enzyme-PTM
and 4) ligand-receptor interactions (Figure 3a-c). In total, the​ r​ esource contained 103,396 PPI

interactions between 12,469 proteins from 38 original resources (Supplementary Table S2). The
large number of unique interactions added by each resource underscores the importance of their
integration (Supplementary Figures S2-4). The interactions with effect signs, essential for
mechanistic modeling, are provided by the activity flow resources (Figure 3b). The combined PPI
network covered 53% of the human proteome (SwissProt), with an enrichment of kinases and
cancer driver genes (Figure 3c). The transcriptional regulation data in ​OmniPath​ was obtained

from D
​ oRothEA10
​ ,​ a comprehensive resource of TF regulons integrating data from 18 sources. In
addition, six literature curated resources were directly integrated into ​OmniPath
(Supplementary Table S8). The miRNA-mRNA and TF-miRNA interactions were integrated
from five and two literature curated resources, with 6,213 and 1,803 interactions, respectively.
Overall, we included 61 network resources in ​OmniPath​ (Supplementary Table S2).

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Furthermore, ​pypath​ provides access to additional resources, including the Human Reference
Interactome​11​, ConsensusPathDB​12​, Reactome​13​, ACSN​14​ and WikiPathways​15​.

Figure 3: Quantitative description of the network, complex and enzyme-PTM databases.
(a-c)​ Networks by interaction types and the network datasets within the PPI network. (​ a)​ Number of
nodes and interactions. The light dots represent the shared nodes and edges (in more than one resource),
while the dark ones show their total numbers. (​ b)​ Causality: number of connections by direction and
effect sign. (​ c)​ Coverage of the networks on various groups of proteins. Dots show the percentage of
proteins covered by network resources for the following groups: cancer driver genes from COSMIC and
IntOGen, kinases from kinase.com, phosphatases from Phosphatome.net, receptors from the Human
Plasma Membrane Receptome (HPMR) and transcription factors from the TF census. Gray bars show
the number of proteins in the networks. The information for individual resources is in Supplementary
Figures S1-3.​ (d-g) O
​ n each panel the bottom rows represent the combined complex and enzyme-PTM
databases contained in OmniPath​ (d-e).​ Number of complexes (​ d) a
​ nd enzyme-PTM​ (e) ​interactions by
resource. (​ f) ​Enzyme-PTM relationships by PTM type. (​ g) E
​ nzyme-PTM interactions by their target.
Light, medium and dark dots represent the number of enzyme-PTM relationships targeting the enzyme
itself, another protein within the same molecular complex or an independent protein, respectively.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Enzyme-PTM relationships
In enzyme-PTM relationships, enzymes (e.g. kinases) alter specific residues of their substrates,
producing so-called post-translational modifications (PTM). We combined 11 resources of
enzyme-PTM relationships mostly covering phosphorylation (94% of all) and
dephosphorylations (3%) (Figure 3f). Overall, we included 39,201 enzyme-PTM relationships,
1,821 enzymes targeting 16,467 PTM sites (Figure 3e-g). Besides phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation, only proteolytic cleavage and acetylation account for more than one hundred
interactions. Most of the databases curated only phosphorylation, and ​DEPOD16
​ ​ exclusively
dephosphorylation. Only ​SIGNOR17
​ ​ and ​HPRD​18​ contained a large number of other

modifications (Figure 3f). 60% of the interactions were described by only one resource, and 92%
of them by only one literature reference (Figure 3e). Self-modifications, e.g.
autophosphorylation and modifications between members of the same complex comprised 4%
and 18% of the interactions, respectively (Figure 3g).
Protein complexes
The ​complexes​ database of ​OmniPath​ included 22,005 protein complexes described by 12
resources from 4,077 articles (Figure 3d). A complex is defined by its unique combination of
members. 14% of them were homomultimers, 54% had four or less unique components while
20% of them had 18 or more. 71% of the complexes had stoichiometry information.
Annotations: function, structure and localization
Annotations provide information about the function, structure, localization, classification and
other properties of molecules. We compiled the ​annotations​ database from 49 resources. The
format of the records from each of these resources is different. The simplest ones only define a
category of proteins, like ​Cell Surface Protein Atlas​19​ (CSPA)​ that collects the proteins localized
on the cell surface. More complex annotation records express a combination of multiple
attributes. For example, each of the annotations from the ​Cancer Pathway Association

Database​20​ (CPAD)​ contain seven attributes to describe a relationship between a protein or
miRNA, a pathway and their effect on a specific cancer type (Supplementary Figure S4). The
pathway and gene sets are also part of the annotation database, as these are useful for functional
characterization of omics data and enrichment analysis.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Overall, the ​annotations​ database included 5,475,532 records about 20,365 proteins, virtually
the whole protein-coding genome, 19,566 complexes and 182 miRNAs. The majority of the
annotations for complexes were the result of our ​in silico​ inference: if all members of a complex
share a certain annotation we assign this annotation to the complex itself.
The ​annotations​ database can be used in different ways: selecting one resource, its data can be
reconstituted into a conventional data frame with attributes as columns and annotations as
rows. Alternatively, specific sets of proteins can be queried e.g. "the members of the ​Notch
pathway​ according to ​SIGNOR"​ ​17​ or "the ​hypoxia upregulated​ genes according to ​MSigDB​"​21​.
Homology translation to rodents
OmniPath​ comprises human resources. We translated the network and the enzyme-PTM

relationships to mouse and rat by protein homology using ​NCBI HomoloGene,​ covering 81% and
31% of the interactions for mouse and rat, respectively (Supplementary Table S9). In addition,
pypath​ is able to translate to other organisms.

Case Studies
OmniPath​ provides a single-access point to resources covering diverse types of knowledge. Thus,
it can be used as an input to many analysis tools, and is particularly useful for tools that span
over molecular processes typically considered separately (Figure 4a). To illustrate this, we used
two examples where we extracted from ​OmniPath​ different types of intra- and intercellular
knowledge for computational analysis of bulk and single-cell RNA-Seq data.
Analysis of intra- and intercellular processes in SARS-CoV-2 infected lung epithelial cancer
cells
NicheNet​ is a recently developed method to prioritize ligand-target relationships between
interacting cells by combining their expression data with prior knowledge on interaction
networks​8​. For this purpose, ​NicheNet​ explores the most consistent inter- and intracellular
protein interactions in accordance with a given gene expression dataset. In the ​NicheNet
publication, the authors collected different types of interactions from more than 20 databases to
build a ligand-receptor network, a signaling network and a gene regulatory network. Here, we
built a network for analysis with ​NicheNet​ using exclusively ​OmniPath.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

We used this network to investigate the mechanistic processes leading to the excessive
inflammatory innate response and dysregulated adaptive host immune defense that may occur
in severe ​COVID-19​ cases​22​. We studied the autocrine regulatory effect of ligands secreted in

SARS-CoV-2​ infection of epithelial lung cancer cells ​(Calu3)​ on the expression of inflammatory
response genes (Methods and Supplementary Note 1, data from​23​). Out of a total of 117 ligands

over-expressed in ​SARS-CoV-2​ infection according to ​NicheNet,​ we selected the 12 top-ranked
ones for subsequent analysis (Supplementary Figure 6). Among them, we found various
cytokines: interleukins (​IL23A​ and ​IL1A)​ , tumor necrosis factors (​TNF​ and ​TNFSF13B)​ and

chemokines (​CXCL5​, ​CXCL9​ and ​CXCL10​), known to be involved in the inflammatory response.
The top predicted target genes for these 12 ligands were enriched for inflammatory response
gene sets (average p-value=3.25e-08 from Fisher’s exact tests after 10 cross-validation rounds).
Then, we explored the signaling events linking these ligands to their target genes (Figure 4b,
Methods and Supplementary Note 1). We identified several key proteins of the ​JAK-STAT
pathway,​ a main regulator of the inflammatory response, that has been suggested as a potential
target to treat ​COVID-19​24.​ We also found ligands that potentially trigger the ​MAPK pathway
that has also been reported to be promoted by ​SARS-CoV-2​ infection​25,26​. We found further
support for these results in the literature (Supplementary Note 1).
Alteration of intercellular communication in ulcerative colitis
As a second case study, we used single-cell RNA-Seq data 27​
​ from ​ulcerative colitis (UC)​ to

investigate paracrine signaling using ​OmniPath.​ We explored the intercellular interactions
comparing the healthy state and non-inflamed UC. We selected five interacting cell types:
dendritic cell, macrophage, regulatory T cell (Treg), myofibroblast and Goblet cell. Combining
the expression data with ​OmniPath,​ we built a network of communication between these five cell
types and quantified the disease specific changes. Then, we added the components from the
OmniPath​ PPI network two steps downstream of the cell type specifically expressed receptors.
Finally, we performed a pathway enrichment analysis using ​Reactome​13;​ Methods).

We found that in healthy condition dendritic cells (DC) were tightly connected to the four other
cell types. In contrast, in UC the connections shifted towards the Treg cells instead of DC, in
agreement with previous findings​27​ (Figure 4c). We found a 30% increase in the amount of
ligand-receptor and ligand-adhesion interactions between myofibroblasts and Treg in UC versus
healthy, even though the number of connections is similar in both conditions. In an analysis of
downstream signaling in Treg cells we found pathways known to downregulate the
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

pro-inflammatory function of Treg cells to be active in healthy state, including the ​MAPK28
​ ,​

TLR229
​ ​ and ​TLR7​30​ ​pathways​ (Supplementary Table S11). In contrast, the pro-inflammatory

TLR431
​ ​ and ​TLR3 pathways​32​ were upregulated in UC. These results suggest a pro-inflammatory
response in UC, where the anti-inflammatory role of regulatory T cells is deteriorated by
myofibroblasts.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 4: Illustrations of the integrated analysis of inter- and intracellular signaling.
(a)​ Examples of tools for integrated analysis of tissue level signaling from cell type specific
transcriptomics data that can be applied with the prior knowledge available in OmniPath. ​(b) I​ nter and
intracellular signaling interactions linking the top predicted ligands over-expressed after SARS-CoV-2
infection to their potential immune response targets in the Calu3 cell line. Top-ranked ligands (orange)
connect to their potential receptors (turquoise) that trigger an intracellular cascade until reaching TFs
(light grey), that in turn regulate the expression of the target genes (blue). Signaling intermediates (dark
grey) connect receptors to TFs across their shortest path.​ (c) ​Intercellular connections and their
downstream effect in UC compared to healthy control. Top: communication network of five cell types
reconstructed from scRNA-Seq; the thickness of the edges is proportional to the number of intercellular
connections. Bottom: condition specific ligand-receptor connections between myofibroblasts and
regulatory T cells trigger a immunosuppressive versus an inflammatory signaling in T cells, in healthy
and UC, respectively.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Discussion
A single access point to annotated causal knowledge
Here, we present a single-access point to over 100 resources containing prior knowledge of
intra- and intercellular processes, building on the ​OmniPath​ framework. To achieve this, we
developed versatile annotations of intercellular communication roles, combined with a network
covering intra- and intercellular signaling as well as gene regulation.
We focused on resources that follow the ​activity flow​ representation where nodes are linked
with signed and directed edges representing a certain influence. The alternative ​process
description​ representation describes the underlying processes as biochemical reactions​33​.

Integrative resources such as ​STRING34
​ ,​ ​PathwayCommons​35,​ ​ConsensusPathDB​12​, ​PathMe​ and

ComPath36
​ ​ use mostly the major process description resources (e.g. ​Reactome13
​ ​ and ​ACSN​14)​ and
​
resources with undirected interactions (e.g. ​IntAct37
​ ​ and ​BioGRID​38),
and only few activity flow

resources.
However, for many applications, ​process description​ representation must undergo a conversion

to ​activity flow​ representation​35​. This conversion is technically challenging, leads to information
loss​35,39,40​, alters the network topology, and affects downstream applications. On the other

extreme, undirected interactions lack information about directionality and stimulatory and
inhibitory effects, which are essential for many analytical methods, in particular those that aim
to capture causal relationships. The activity flow representation is between both: interactions are
presented as signed and directed edges, regardless of the underlying biochemistry. Due to this
abstraction, activity flow has limitations and the stimulatory and inhibitory nature of the
interactions can be ambiguous​41​. Despite these limitations, activity flow databases are widely
used because their level of abstraction provides a convenient input for multiple analysis
techniques​42​.
Comprehensive knowledge for multicellular omics analysis
As we demonstrated here, ​OmniPath​ is able to provide the input knowledge for different data
analysis tools, such as ​CellPhoneDB6​ ​, NicheNet​8​ and ​CARNIVAL43
​ ​ to infer communication

between and within cell types. ​OmniPath​ is not limited to literature curated interactions and it
includes activity flow, kinase-substrate and ligand-receptor interactions without references as
separate datasets, so that the users can decide which ones to use according to their purposes.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

The rich annotations allow users to dive into specific knowledge and extract information across
resources. Information obtained via text-mining approaches​44,45​ can be used to complement the
curated knowledge captured within ​OmniPath​.
As our case studies illustrate, O
​ mniPath​ can replace the tedious collection of information from
many different databases. In the first case study, we modelled with ​NicheNet​ the autocrine
signaling after ​SARS-CoV-2​ infection. Our results suggest potential signaling mechanisms

leading to the dysregulated inflammatory and immune response characteristic of severe ​COVID
cases. In the second study, we illustrated how conveniently ​OmniPath​ supports a combined
analysis of inter- and intracellular signaling from single-cell transcriptomics data.
In summary, we provide a new integrated resource of biological knowledge particularly valuable
for network analysis and modeling of bulk and single-cell omics data. Furthermore, with the
emergence of spatially resolved omics data​46​, we anticipate that this prior knowledge of interand intracellular communication will be valuable to study tissue architecture.

Methods
Terminology
In the manuscript we use consistently the following three definitions to describe the structure of
OmniPath​:
●

database: ​collection of similar records in a uniform format integrated from multiple
resources (network, enzyme-PTM, complexes, annotations, intercell)

●

dataset: ​a subset or variant of a database, e.g. the transcriptional interaction network is
a dataset of the network database

●

resource: ​any data source we use for building the databases

Database build
To build ​OmniPath​ we developed a free software, the ​pypath​ Python module
(​https://github.com/saezlab/pypath​, version 0.11.20). We built each segment of the database by
the corresponding submodules and classes in ​pypath.​ In addition to the database building
process, all modules rely on common utility modules from ​pypath​ such as the identifier

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

translator or the downloading and caching service. ​Pypath​ downloads all data from the original
sources. Many resources integrate data from other resources, we call these secondary resources
and their relationships are listed in Supplementary Table S7.
Network
For the ​OmniPath​ network, we converted the identifiers of the different molecules and merged
their pairwise connections, preserving the literature references, the information about the
direction and effect sign (activation or inhibition).
In ​OmniPath​, we included nine network datasets built from 61 resources (Supplementary Table

S2). The first four datasets provide PPI (​‘post_translational’​ in the web service) while the others
transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation. At each point below we highlight the label of
the dataset in the web service.
1. We compiled the “​omnipath” ​network as described in Türei et al​9​. Briefly, we combined all
resources we could get access to, that are literature curated and are either activity flow,
enzyme-PTM or undirected interaction resources. We also added network databases with
high-throughput data. Then we added further directions and effect signs from resources
without literature references.
2. The ​"kinaseextra"​ network contains additional kinase-substrate interactions without
literature references. The direction of these interactions points from the enzyme to the
substrate.
3. In the ​"pathwayextra" ​network, we combined further activity flow resources without
literature references. However, they are manually curated and many have effect signs.
4. In the ​"ligrecextra" ​network, we provide additional ligand-receptor interactions from
large, comprehensive collections.
5. The ​"dorothea"​ network comes from DoRothEA database, a comprehensive resource of
transcription factor-gene promoter interactions from literature curated databases,
high-throughput experiments, binding motif and gene expression-based ​in silico​ inference,
overall 18 resources​10​. We included the interactions from DoRothEA subclassified by

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

confidence levels from A to D, excluding the lowest confidence level E. In ​OmniPath​ users
are able to filter the TF-target interactions by confidence level.
6. Transcriptional regulation (​“tf_target”​) directly from 6 literature curated resources. We
show the size of the TF-target network at different settings in Supplementary Table S8.
7. In the ​"post_transcriptional" ​network, we combined 5 literature curated miRNA-mRNA
interactions.
8. Transcriptional regulation of miRNA (​“tf_mirna”​) from 2 literature curated resources.
9. lncRNA-mRNA interactions from 3 literature curated resources (​“lncrna_mrna”​).
Enzyme-PTM interactions
After translating the identifiers, we merged enzyme-PTM interactions from 11 databases
(Supplementary Table S3) based on the identity of the enzyme, the substrate and the modified
residue and its position. In addition, we discarded the records where the residue could not be
found in any of the isoform sequences from UniProt​47​. For each enzyme-PTM interaction, we
included the original sources and the literature references. We also kept the records without
literature support, e.g. from high-throughput screenings or in silico prediction.
Complexes
We combined 12 databases to build a comprehensive set of protein complexes (Supplementary
Table S4). Seven of these databases provide information about the stoichiometry of the
complexes while three contain only the lists of components. We translated the names of the
components to UniProtKB accession numbers. We merged the complexes based on their
identical sets of components and preserved the stoichiometry if available. We represent each
complex by the UniProt IDs of their components sorted alphabetically, separated by dashes and
prefixed with `COMPLEX:`. From the original sources, we kept the literature references, the
human readable names (synonyms) and the PDB structure identifiers if available.
Annotations
Annotation resources provide diverse information about the localization, function or other
characteristics of the molecules. We obtained annotations from 49 databases (Supplementary
Table S5). For these databases, we translated IDs and extracted the fields with relevant

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

information. Due to the heterogeneous nature of the data, in the annotation database, the
content of the resources is not merged, but rather all entries are provided independently.
Each annotation record assigns one or more attributes to a molecule. One protein might have
more than one annotation record from the same database. For example, Vesiclepedia provides
two attributes: the vesicle type and the tissue where the protein has been detected. We combined
the annotation resources into a uniform table where one column is the name of the attribute and
the other is the value. As one record might have multiple attributes the records are identified by
unique numbers (Supplementary Figure S4). Providing the data in this format in our web
service, it can be easily reconstituted to conventional tables with standard tools like tidyr
(​https://tidyr.tidyverse.org​) in R or pandas (​https://pandas.pydata.or​g) in Python.
Complex annotations
Only four resources curate annotations of protein complexes, from these we processed the
complex annotations as we did for proteins. Furthermore, we inferred annotations for complexes
based on the annotations of their components. We assigned the annotations to the complex if all
components agreed in all attributes that we considered relevant e.g. if all members of a complex
belong to the WNT pathway then the complex is also annotated as a member of the WNT
pathway.
Intercellular signaling roles
From the resources used in ​annotations,​ we selected 26 with function, location or structure
information relevant in intercellular signaling. The relevant attributes we processed and
combined to account for main roles in intercellular communication (e.g. ligand, receptor, ECM
proteins) as well as the locational and topological properties (e.g. secreted, transmembrane). In
addition, we built Boolean expressions from Gene Ontology terms to define the same categories.
Overall we created 25 functional and 10 locational categories (Supplementary Table S6). Each
category carries the attributes described in Supplementary Table S10 (Supplementary Figure
S5). We manually checked the members of all the annotation groups, relying on literature
knowledge and UniProt datasheets​47​, discarding the wrong annotations. We provide the
classification of proteins and complexes by these categories in the ​intercell​ query of the web
service.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Identifier translation
For each type of molecule, we chose a reference database: for proteins the UniProtKB ACs while
for miRNAs the miRBase mature ACs. From these databases we obtained a reference set of
identifiers for each type of molecular entity and organism. We then used translation tables
provided by them to map other kinds of identifiers to the reference set. For UniProt, we
corrected for deprecated or secondary ACs by translating to primary gene symbol and then to
primary UniProt AC. We applied corrections to handle non-standard notations (e.g. extra
dashes, greek letters). We also accounted for the ambiguity in the mapping, i.e. if one foreign
identifier may correspond to multiple reference identifiers we keep all target identifiers in
OmniPath​.
Translation by homology to rodent species
The homology translation in ​pypath​ uses the NCBI HomoloGene database​48​. Because
HomoloGene uses RefSeq IDs, the translation takes three steps: from UniProt to RefSeq, then to
the homologous RefSeq and finally from RefSeq to UniProt. The success rate of this translation
is around 80% for mouse and roughly 30% for rat (Supplementary Table S9). We translated the
network data and the enzyme-PTM interactions from human to mouse and rat, the two most
popular mammalian model organisms. In addition, we looked up PTMs in PhosphoSite​49​ which
provides homology data for PTM sites. Then we checked the residues in the UniProt sequences​47​,
and discarded the ones that did not match. The homology-translated data is included also in the
OmniPath​ web service.
Data download and caching
At the database build we download all input data directly from the original sources
(Supplementary Table S1). Certain databases either temporarily or ultimately went offline; we
deposited their data in the ​OmniPath Rescued Data Repository
(http://rescued.omnipathdb.org/). ​Pypath​ contains the URLs for all resources used including
the identifier translation tables. It automatically downloads, extracts and preprocesses the data
for each operation. Then it stores the downloaded data in a local cache directory which belongs
to the user account on the computer. Once cache is created, ​pypath​ reads from it and performs
the download only if requested by the user.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Joint analysis of intra- and intercellular processes in ​SARS-CoV-2​ infection
The NicheNet method​8​ was built, trained and applied to a case study using interactions and

annotations from ​OmniPath​ resources. This information was downloaded via our R package,
OmnipathR​.

Network construction
NicheNet generates a model based on prior knowledge to describe potential regulatory effects of
ligands on target genes. To reproduce their procedure, we first built three networks accounting
for protein interactions of different categories retrieved from ​OmniPath​:
1. Ligand-receptor network​: we downloaded the ​"ligrecextra" ​network which specifically
contains known interactions between ligands and receptors. In addition, we selected proteins
annotated as ​ligands​ or r​ eceptors ​as their main “​intercellular signaling role”​. Then we
extended this network with PPI whose source is a ligand and its target a receptor.
2. Signaling network:​ we retrieved PPI from the original ​OmniPath​ network​9​, the
"kinaseextra"​ network and the ​"pathwayextra" ​network.
3. Gene regulatory network:​ we selected TF-target interactions with confidence level A, B
and C from the DoRothEA dataset of the ​"transcriptional"​ network of ​OmniPath.​
Then, we computed ligand–target regulatory potential scores based on the topology of our
aforementioned networks, following the protocols described in the NicheNet original study and
using its associated ​nichenetr​ package​8​. Briefly, Personalized PageRank was applied on the
union of the ligand-receptor and signaling networks considering every individual ligand as
starting node. To estimate the impact of every ligand in the expression of target genes, a matrix
containing the PageRank scores is multiplied by the weighted adjacency matrix of the gene
regulatory network.
Analysis of altered ligands and pathways
We applied our OmniPath-based version of NicheNet analyses on RNA-seq data of a human lung
cell line, Calu3 (GSE147507)​23​. In this study, differential expression analysis at the gene level
between controls and SARS-CoV-2 infected cells was carried out using the ​DESeq2​ package​50​.
We selected over-expressed ligands (adjusted p-value < 0.1 and Log2 fold-change > 1) after

SARS-CoV-2 infection for further analysis. ​Then, we executed Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

(GSEA) taking the Wald statistic and the hallmark gene sets from MsigDB as inputs using the
fgsea​ package​51​. Inflammatory response appeared as one of the top enriched sets. We therefore
selected the leading edge genes of inflammatory response, i.e. genes contributing the most to
the enrichment of this particular set, as potential targets of the over-expressed ligands.
Ligand activity analysis on the aforementioned samples was conducted using the ​nichenetr
package​8​. We then selected the shortest paths between receptors (the ones interacting with the
top predicted ligands) and transcription factors (the ones regulating the expression of the
inflammatory target genes). These paths were exported to Cytoscape​52​ to generate Figure 4b.

Intercellular communication in ulcerative colitis
Intercellular interactions from OmniPath
We downloaded intercellular interactions using the ‘​import_intercell_network()​’ method in
OmnipathR​ and filtered for direct cell-cell connections: we discarded extracellular matrix

proteins, extracellular matrix regulators, ligand regulators, receptor regulators and matrix
adhesion regulators and kept only membrane-bound (transmembrane or peripheral site of the
membrane) proteins. This resulted in connections involving ligands, receptors, junction,
adhesion, ion channel, transporter and cell surface or secreted enzyme proteins.
Single cell RNA-Seq data processing
We downloaded the raw scRNAseq data and processed it according to Smillie et al​27​. 51 cell types
have been characterized by average gene expressions in healthy (n=12) state and non-inflamed
UC (n=18). A gene was considered expressed if its log2 expression value was above the mean
minus 2 standard deviations of the expressed genes within the cell type.
Specific interactions between cell types
We examined all possible connections among the selected 5 cell types. We considered
interactions condition specific if they appeared either only in healthy or in UC, i.e. at least one
member expressed only in the given condition. We counted the unique PPIs between each cell
pair in the two conditions separately (Figure 4c).

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Cell type specific network of regulatory T cell and downstream pathway analysis
To highlight the downstream effect connections from myofibroblasts to regulatory T cells, we
created a cell specific signalling network and we carried out a pathway enrichment analysis. We
used the ​OmniPath​ Cytoscape application​53​ to combine the gene expression data with the
OmniPath​ network. We limited the network to genes expressed in regulatory T cells. We

selected the receptors targeted by condition-specific ligand-receptor connections in regulatory T
cells. Finally, we pruned the network to the two steps neighborhood of the T cell specific
receptors. We performed a pathway enrichment analysis on the network described above, using
the online interface of the Reactome database with its default settings (hypergeometric test,
Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction, the human genome as the universe).

Software and data availability
OmniPath​ is available via the Python package ​pypath​ (​https://github.com/saezlab/pypath​)​,​ the
web resource (​https://omnipathdb.org​), the R/Bioconductor package ​OmnipathR
(​https://saezlab.github.io/OmnipathR​) and the ​OmniPath​ Cytoscape plug-in​53​. In addition,
pypath​ is able to export the network and the enzyme-PTM databases in BEL (Biological

Expression Language) format​54​, as well as to generate input files for CellPhoneDB. The BEL
format databases are available in BEL Commons​55​. Code is licensed open source (GPLv3).
Pypath​ builds the ​OmniPath​ databases directly from the original resources, hence it gives the
highest flexibility for customization and the richest API for queries and manipulation among all
access options. Furthermore, it is possible to convert each database to a plain data frame and
export in a tabular format. ​Pypath​ also generates the web resource’s contents which is accessible
for any HTTP client at ​https://omnipathdb.org​. Information about the resources is available at
https://omnipathdb.org/info​. ​OmnipathR​ and the ​OmniPath Cytoscape​ plug-in work from the
web resource data with convenient post-processing features. All data in ​OmniPath​ carry the

licenses of the original resources (Supplementary Table S12), for profit users can easily limit
their queries to fit the legal requirements. A comprehensive guide for ​pypath​ is available at
https://pypath.omnipathdb.org/notebooks/pypath_guide.html​.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Apart from the figures presented in this paper, further regularly updated statistics and
visualizations are available at ​https://insights.omnipathdb.org​.
A Python and R package for producing the figures and tables of this paper is available at
https://github.com/saezlab/omnipath_analysis​. The code to build and train the NicheNet
method​8​ exclusively using ​OmniPath​ resources as well as to reproduce the ​SARS-CoV-2​ case
study is freely available at ​https://github.com/saezlab/NicheNet_Omnipath​. The code for
building the cell type specific inter- and intracellular networks is available at
https://github.com/korcsmarosgroup/uc_intercell​.

Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the JRC-COMBINE, partially funded by Bayer, the
European Union Innovative Medicines Initiative TransQST (agreement No. 11603), the Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF, Computational Life Sciences grant no. 031L0181B),
the DFG (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft / German Research Council; Funding code: SA
3554/1-2, to J.S.R.). T.K. and D.M. were supported by the Earlham Institute (Norwich, UK) in
partnership with the Quadram Institute (Norwich, UK) and strategically supported by the UKRI
Biotechnological and Biosciences Research Council (BBSRC) UK grants (BB/J004529/1,
BB/P016774/1, and BB/CSP17270/1) and by a BBSRC ISP grant for Gut Microbes and Health
BB/R012490/1 and its constituent projects, BBS/E/F/000PR10353 and BBS/E/F/000PR10355.
L.G was supported by w the BBSRC Norwich Research Park Biosciences Doctoral Training
Partnership grant number BB/M011216/1. Thanks to Mirjana Efremova, Daniel
Domingo-Fernandez, Charles Tapley Hoyt, Lu Li and Paul D Thomas for their helpful feedback
and discussions.

Authors contributions
D.T. designed and developed ​pypath​ and ​OmniPath​ and created the descriptive figures and

tables. A.V., D.T. and A.G. developed the ​OmnipathR​ package. A.V. designed and carried out the
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

case study on ​SARS-CoV-2​ infection data. L.G. and D.M. designed and carried out the case study
on ulcerative colitis. N.P. and O.I. and L.G. contributed to the development of ​pypath​ and

visualization of the database contents. J.S.R. supervised the project, with support from T.K. All
authors contributed to the writing of the manuscript.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

References
1.

Xenarios, I. ​et al.​ DIP: the database of interacting proteins. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​28​, 289–291
(2000).

2.

Ramilowski, J. A. ​et al.​ A draft network of ligand-receptor-mediated multicellular signalling
in human. ​Nat. Commun.​ ​6​, 7866 (2015).

3.

Kirouac, D. C. ​et al.​ Dynamic interaction networks in a hierarchically organized tissue. ​Mol.
Syst. Biol.​ ​6​, 417 (2010).

4.

Armstrong, J. F. ​et al.​ The IUPHAR/BPS Guide to PHARMACOLOGY in 2020: extending
immunopharmacology content and introducing the IUPHAR/MMV Guide to MALARIA
PHARMACOLOGY. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ (2019) doi:​10.1093/nar/gkz951​.

5.

Fazekas, D. ​et al.​ SignaLink 2 - a signaling pathway resource with multi-layered regulatory
networks. ​BMC Syst. Biol.​ ​7​, 7 (2013).

6.

Efremova, M., Vento-Tormo, M., Teichmann, S. A. & Vento-Tormo, R. CellPhoneDB:
inferring cell-cell communication from combined expression of multi-subunit

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

ligand-receptor complexes. ​Nat. Protoc.​ (2020) doi:​10.1038/s41596-020-0292-x​.
7.

Noël, F. ​et al.​ ICELLNET: a transcriptome-based framework to dissect intercellular
communication. ​Systems Biology​ 87 (2020).

8.

Browaeys, R., Saelens, W. & Saeys, Y. NicheNet: modeling intercellular communication by
linking ligands to target genes. ​Nature Methods​ (2019) doi:​10.1038/s41592-019-0667-5​.

9.

Türei, D., Korcsmáros, T. & Saez-Rodriguez, J. OmniPath: guidelines and gateway for
literature-curated signaling pathway resources. ​Nat. Methods​ ​13​, 966–967 (2016).

10. Garcia-Alonso, L., Holland, C. H., Ibrahim, M. M., Turei, D. & Saez-Rodriguez, J.
Benchmark and integration of resources for the estimation of human transcription factor
activities. ​Genome Res.​ ​29​, 1363–1375 (2019).
11. Luck, K. ​et al.​ A reference map of the human binary protein interactome. ​Nature​ ​580​,
402–408 (2020).
12. Kamburov, A., Stelzl, U., Lehrach, H. & Herwig, R. The ConsensusPathDB interaction
database: 2013 update. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​41​, D793–800 (2013).
13. Jassal, B. ​et al.​ The reactome pathway knowledgebase. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​48,​ D498–D503
(2020).
14. Kuperstein, I. ​et al.​ Atlas of Cancer Signalling Network: a systems biology resource for
integrative analysis of cancer data with Google Maps. ​Oncogenesis​ ​4​, e160 (2015).
15. Slenter, D. N. ​et al.​ WikiPathways: a multifaceted pathway database bridging metabolomics
to other omics research. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​46​, D661–D667 (2018).
16. Damle, N. P. & Köhn, M. The human DEPhOsphorylation Database DEPOD: 2019 update.
Database ​ ​2019​, (2019).
17. Licata, L. ​et al.​ SIGNOR 2.0, the SIGnaling Network Open Resource 2.0: 2019 update.
Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​48​, D504–D510 (2020).

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

18. Keshava Prasad, T. S. ​et al.​ Human Protein Reference Database--2009 update. ​Nucleic
Acids Res.​ ​37​, D767–72 (2009).
19. Bausch-Fluck, D. ​et al.​ A mass spectrometric-derived cell surface protein atlas. ​PLoS One
10​, e0121314 (2015).
20. Li, F. ​et al.​ A comprehensive overview of oncogenic pathways in human cancer. ​Brief.
Bioinform.​ ​21​, 957–969 (2020).
21. Subramanian, A. ​et al.​ Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for
interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. ​Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.​ ​102​,
15545–15550 (2005).
22. Catanzaro, M. ​et al.​ Immune response in COVID-19: addressing a pharmacological
challenge by targeting pathways triggered by SARS-CoV-2. ​Signal Transduction and
Targeted Therapy​ ​5​, 1–10 (2020).
23. Blanco-Melo, D. ​et al.​ SARS-CoV-2 launches a unique transcriptional signature from in
vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo systems. ​Microbiology​ 265 (2020).
24. Goker Bagca, B. & Biray Avci, C. Overview of the COVID-19 and JAK/STAT Pathway
Inhibition: Ruxolitinib Perspective. ​Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.​ (2020)
doi:​10.1016/j.cytogfr.2020.06.013​.
25. Bouhaddou, M. ​et al.​ The Global Phosphorylation Landscape of SARS-CoV-2 Infection. ​Cell
(2020) doi:​10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.034​.
26. Treveil, A. e​ t al.​ ViralLink: An integrated workflow to investigate the effect of SARS-CoV-2
on intracellular signalling and regulatory pathways. ​bioRxiv​ 2020.06.23.167254 (2020)
doi:​10.1101/2020.06.23.167254​.
27. Smillie, C. S. ​et al.​ Intra- and Inter-cellular Rewiring of the Human Colon during Ulcerative
Colitis. ​Cell​ ​178​, 714–730.e22 (2019).

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

28. He, T. ​et al.​ The p38 MAPK Inhibitor SB203580 Abrogates Tumor Necrosis Factor-Induced
Proliferative Expansion of Mouse CD4Foxp3 Regulatory T Cells. ​Front. Immunol.​ ​9​, 1556
(2018).
29. Nyirenda, M. H. ​et al.​ TLR2 stimulation regulates the balance between regulatory T cell and
Th17 function: a novel mechanism of reduced regulatory T cell function in multiple
sclerosis. ​J. Immunol.​ ​194​, 5761–5774 (2015).
30. Forward, N. A., Furlong, S. J., Yang, Y., Lin, T.-J. & Hoskin, D. W. Signaling through TLR7
enhances the immunosuppressive activity of murine CD4 CD25 T regulatory cells. ​Journal
of Leukocyte Biology​ vol. 87 117–125 (2010).
31. Cao, A. T. ​et al.​ TLR4 regulates IFN-γ and IL-17 production by both thymic and induced
Foxp3+ Tregs during intestinal inflammation. ​J. Leukoc. Biol.​ ​96​, 895–905 (2014).
32. Xiao, X. ​et al.​ Inflammatory regulation by TLR3 in acute hepatitis. ​J. Immunol.​ ​183​,
3712–3719 (2009).
33. Le Novère, N. ​et al.​ The Systems Biology Graphical Notation. ​Nat. Biotechnol.​ ​27​, 735–741
(2009).
34. Szklarczyk, D. ​et al.​ STRING v11: protein--protein association networks with increased
coverage, supporting functional discovery in genome-wide experimental datasets. ​Nucleic
Acids Res.​ ​47​, D607–D613 (2019).
35. Cerami, E. G. ​et al.​ Pathway Commons, a web resource for biological pathway data. ​Nucleic
Acids Res.​ ​39​, D685–90 (2011).
36. Domingo-Fernández, D., Mubeen, S., Marín-Llaó, J., Hoyt, C. T. & Hofmann-Apitius, M.
PathMe: merging and exploring mechanistic pathway knowledge. ​BMC Bioinformatics​ ​20​,
243 (2019).
37. Orchard, S. ​et al.​ The MIntAct project--IntAct as a common curation platform for 11

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

molecular interaction databases. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​42​, D358–63 (2014).
38. Oughtred, R. ​et al.​ The BioGRID interaction database: 2019 update. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​47​,
D529–D541 (2019).
39. Tang, H., Zhong, F., Liu, W., He, F. & Xie, H. PathPPI: an integrated dataset of human
pathways and protein-protein interactions. ​Sci. China Life Sci.​ ​58,​ 579–589 (2015).
40. Demir, E. ​et al.​ Using biological pathway data with paxtools. ​PLoS Comput. Biol.​ ​9​,
e1003194 (2013).
41. Touré, V. ​et al.​ The Minimum Information about a Molecular Interaction Causal Statement
(MI2CAST). ​Bioinformatics​ (2020) doi:​10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa622​.
42. Touré, V., Flobak, Å., Niarakis, A., Vercruysse, S. & Kuiper, M. The Status of Causality in
Biological Databases for Logical Modeling: Data Resources and Data Retrieval Possibilities.
Preprints​ (2020) doi:​10.20944/preprints202007.0123.v1​.
43. Liu, A. ​et al.​ From expression footprints to causal pathways: contextualizing large signaling
networks with CARNIVAL. ​NPJ Syst Biol Appl​ ​5​, 40 (2019).
44. Kveler, K. ​et al.​ Immune-centric network of cytokines and cells in disease context identified
by computational mining of PubMed. ​Nat. Biotechnol.​ ​36​, 651–659 (2018).
45. Gyori, B. M. ​et al.​ From word models to executable models of signaling networks using
automated assembly. ​Mol. Syst. Biol.​ ​13​, 954 (2017).
46. Asp, M., Bergenstråhle, J. & Lundeberg, J. Spatially Resolved Transcriptomes—Next
Generation Tools for Tissue Exploration. ​Bioessays​ 1900221 (2020).
47. UniProt Consortium. UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge. ​Nucleic Acids Res.
47​, D506–D515 (2019).
48. NCBI Resource Coordinators. Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnology
Information. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​46​, D8–D13 (2018).

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

49. Hornbeck, P. V. ​et al.​ PhosphoSitePlus, 2014: mutations, PTMs and recalibrations. ​Nucleic
Acids Res.​ ​43​, D512–20 (2015).
50. Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for
RNA-seq data with DESeq2. ​Genome Biol.​ ​15​, 550 (2014).
51. Korotkevich, G., Sukhov, V. & Sergushichev, A. Fast gene set enrichment analysis. ​bioRxiv
060012 (2019) doi:​10.1101/060012​.
52. Shannon, P. ​et al.​ Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular
interaction networks. ​Genome Res.​ ​13​, 2498–2504 (2003).
53. Ceccarelli, F., Turei, D., Gabor, A. & Saez-Rodriguez, J. Bringing data from curated pathway
resources to Cytoscape with OmniPath. ​Bioinformatics​ (2019)
doi:​10.1093/bioinformatics/btz968​.
54. Hoyt, C. T., Konotopez, A., Ebeling, C. & Wren, J. PyBEL: a computational framework for
Biological Expression Language. ​Bioinformatics​ ​34​, 703–704 (2018).
55. Hoyt, C. T., Domingo-Fernández, D. & Hofmann-Apitius, M. BEL Commons: an
environment for exploration and analysis of networks encoded in Biological Expression
Language. ​Database ​ ​2018​, (2018).

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Materials

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure S1: Quantitative description of the PPI network by resource.
(a)​ Number of nodes and interactions. The light dots represent the shared nodes and edges (in more
than one resource), while the dark ones show their total numbers. ​(b) ​Causality: number of connections
by direction and effect sign. (​ c)​ Coverage of the networks on various groups of proteins. Dots show the
percentage of proteins covered by network resources for the following groups: cancer driver genes from
COSMIC and IntOGen, kinases from kinase.com, phosphatases from Phosphatome.net, receptors from
the Human Plasma Membrane Receptome (HPMR) and transcription factors from the TF census. Gray
bars show the number of proteins in the networks.

Supplementary Figure S2: Quantitative description of the transcriptional network by
resource.
Panels and notations are the same as on Supplementary Figure S1.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure S3: Quantitative description of the post-transcriptional network
by resource.
Panels and notations are the same as on Supplementary Figure S1.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure S4: Example of the annotations query in the OmniPath web
service.
For the protein mTOR a large variety of information is available from different databases. The
‘record_id’ binds together the fields of the record from the original resource. Each field has a ‘label’ and
a ‘value’.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure S5: Example of the intercell query in the OmniPath web service.
Each category has a parent category and a database of origin. The scope of a category is either ‘generic’
(e.g. ligand) or ‘specific’ (e.g. interleukin). The aspect is either ‘locational’ or ‘functional’. Further
attributes show whether the protein is a signal transmitter or a receiver, and whether it is secreted, or a
transmembrane or peripheral protein of the plasma membrane.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure S6: OmniPath-based NicheNet analysis to predict overexpressed
ligands in SARS-CoV-2 infection potentially affecting the expression of inflammatory
response related genes in Calu3 cells.
(a)​ Most significantly enriched gene sets after SARS-CoV-2 infection on the Calu3 cell line.
Inflammatory response is highlighted in red. ​(b)​ Results of NicheNet’s ligand activity analysis: Number
of overexpressed ligands after SARS-CoV-2 infection and their potential to predict the inflammatory
response gene set based on the Pearson correlation coefficient. The top 12 ranked ligands, out of a total
of 117 overexpressed ligands, were selected. (​ c)​ Regulatory potential of the top ranked ligands and
target genes from the inflammatory response program based on NicheNet’s prior knowledge model. (​ d)
Ligand-receptor interaction potential based on NicheNet’s prior knowledge model between the top
ranked ligands and the receptors expressed in the Calu3 cell line.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Table S1: List of resources in OmniPath and pypath.
Besides the name, webpage and publication of the resources we list which ones of the five major
OmniPath databases (network, enzyme-PTM, complexes, annotations, intercell) each resource
contributes to, and which datasets within the network database. Certain resources are not redistributed
by the OmniPath web service or not used for any of the databases, but available only by pypath or used
for different purposes such as identifier translation, curation facilitation, etc.

Supplementary Table S2: Quantitative description of the OmniPath network database.
Number of shared (overlap with any other resource) and unique molecular entities in total and by entity
type, number of interactions in total, and by direction and effect sign, number of references and curation
effort (unique reference-interaction pairs). Total rows are shown for each dataset and interaction type
(PPI, transcriptional, post-transcriptional, TF-miRNA). In the total rows the components are counted as
shared if they can be found in more than one resource.

Supplementary Table S3: Quantitative description of the OmniPath enzyme-PTM
database.
Number of shared (overlap with any other resource) and unique enzyme-PTM relationships, references
and curation effort (reference-record pairs), list of available modification types.

Supplementary Table S4: Quantitative description of the OmniPath complexes database.
Number of protein complexes, homomers and heteromers, shared (overlap with any other resource) and
unique records, availability of stoichiometry information, number of references and curation effort
(reference-record pairs).

Supplementary Table S5: Quantitative description of the OmniPath annotations
database.
Each record carries the attributes listed in the ‛fields‛ column. At resources where no attributes are listed
here, the annotation can be considered a set, i.e. a molecular entity either belongs to this set or not. One
molecular entity might have more than one annotation records from the same resource.

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Table S6: Quantitative description of the OmniPath intercell database.
Size and contents of the generic functional and locational categories in the intercellular communication
roles (intercell) database. Functional categories are either transmitters, receivers or both; locational
don’t have these attributes. ‛OmniPath’ in the resources column appears if certain subclasses of the
category are defined directly by OmniPath not by an integrated resource. The specific categories are not
shown in this table.

Supplementary Table S7: Secondary resources in OmniPath.
Some resources integrate data from other resources. In OmniPath the records carry information both
about the primary (directly integrated into OmniPath) and the secondary resources.

Supplementary Table S8: Size of the transcriptional regulatory network.
Number of nodes, interactions, transcription factors and target genes are shown for networks of
interactions with or without literature references, using DoRothEA confidence levels A-D vs. A-E. All
networks include, apart from DoRothEA, other resources integrated directly into OmniPath: ABS,
ENCODE, HTRI, ORegAnnO, PAZAR, SIGNOR.

Supplementary Table S9: Success rate of homology translation.
Here we show the success rate of homology translation of the OmniPath human PPI signaling network
to mouse and rat using the NCBI HomoloGene database. Number and percentage of nodes (genes) and
interactions successfully translated.

Supplementary Table S10: Terminology in the intercellular communication roles
(intercell) database.
The attributes category name, parent category, source, aspect and scope are carried by each category in
the intercell database. Below we define the possible values of these attributes. We also define here those
major categories (e.g. secreted, receptor, etc) which are pivotal for an unambiguous definition of the
intercellular communication roles.

Supplementary Table S11: Dominant pathways in healthy and ulcerative colitis networks.
The networks have been created from condition specific receptors and proteins within two steps from the
receptors. Using the Reactome database, we highlighted the top ten pathways.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Table S12: Licensing terms of the resources in OmniPath.
The license field is highlighted in green if the resource is freely available for commercial (for-profit) use,
in yellow if only for academic or non-profit use, and in grey if we are awaiting clarification from the
copyright holders. In the OmniPath interfaces (pypath, web service, OmnipathR) users are able to set
their license preferences to ensure their data usage meets the legal requirements.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Note 1: Joint analysis of intra- and intercellular processes in
SARS-CoV-2​ infected lung epithelial cancer (Calu3) cells
In this note, we provide further details and supporting literature for the results obtained in the
SARS-CoV-2​ case study and presented in Figure 4b and Supplementary Figure S6. In this case
study, we aim to explore the potential autocrine regulatory effect of ligands overexpressed in
SARS-CoV-2​ infection of epithelial lung cancer cells ​(Calu3)​ on the expression of inflammatory
response genes. We used expression data from a recent publication​1​.

We first performed a differential expression analysis of ​SARS-CoV-2​ infected cells versus mock
treated controls. This allowed us to carry out a gene set enrichment analysis revealing
inflammatory response as one of the most enriched sets (Supplementary Figure S6a). We
subsequently selected the most relevant genes involved in inflammatory response (Methods). In
addition, we selected over-expressed ligands after infection that are likely to be secreted to the
extracellular milieu (Methods). We then applied our ​OmniPath​-based version of ​NicheNet​ to
rank the overexpressed ligands secreted by infected ​Calu3​ cells that are most likely to be

involved in the regulation of inflammatory response related genes (Methods). Out of a total of
117 overexpressed ligands, we selected the 12 top-ranked ones for subsequent analysis according
to the distribution of correlation values (Supplementary Figure S6b) and ​nichenetr​ guidelines​2​.
Among them, we found different types of cytokines: interleukins (​IL23A​ and ​IL1A​), tumor

necrosis factors (​TNF​ and ​TNFSF13B​) and chemokines (​CXCL5​, ​CXCL9​ and ​CXCL10​). These
proteins are known to be involved in the immune and inflammatory response, hence supporting
our ​OmniPath​-based approach. Indeed, we evaluated to which extent our top 12 prioritized
ligands can together predict whether the top predicted targets belong to our previously defined
inflammatory response gene set or not (average p-value=3.25e-08 from Fisher’s exact tests after
10 cross-validation rounds). We can therefore assume that the overexpressed ligands secreted
after ​SARS-CoV-2​ infection can explain, at least to some extent, the expression of inflammatory
response related genes in the ​Calu3​ cells.

NicheNet ​ranks the ligands based on their potential effect to regulate the whole set of

inflammatory response genes​2​. In order to get more detailed functional and mechanistic
insights, we next investigated the inter- and intracellular signaling events that can lead to the
activation of a particular ligand-target link. First, we explored the ​NicheNet​ regulatory potential
scores between our top-scored ligands and the top inflammatory response target genes

S1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

according to our ​OmniPath​-based prior knowledge network (Supplementary Figure S6c). Then,
we selected the receptors expressed in ​Calu3​ cells after infection that can potentially bind our
top ranked ligands, i.e. a known interaction is described between them in our ligand-receptor
network (methods). The most likely ligand-receptor pairs according to their ​NicheNet​ prior
interaction potential score are displayed in Supplementary Figure S6d. We finally inferred the
most likely paths connecting some of our top ranked ligands to their inflammatory response
target genes (Figure 4b and methods).
Among the top predicted ligands, we found three C-X-C motif chemokines (​CXCL5​, ​CXCL9​ and

CXCL10​). ​CXCL9​ and ​CXCL10​ are well known pro-inflammatory chemokines that participate in
the inflammatory response by recruiting immune cells to infected areas​3​. According to our

results, these ligands may potentially bind to C-X-C chemokine​ receptor​s (​CXCR1​ and ​CXCR2​)
and to the ​CCR3 ​receptor (Figure 4b). Then, ​CXCR1 ​and​ CCR3 ​can both activate ​MAPK14​, a
serine/threonine kinase which plays a key role in the signalling responses to extracellular
stimuli such as proinflammatory cytokines or physical stress leading to direct activation of
transcription factors​4​. In addition, ​CXCR1, CXCR2 ​and​ CCR3 ​directly interact with ​JAK2​,

activating the STAT transcription factors. In particular, ​JAK2​ mediates the cytokine-driven
activation of the ​FOS​ transcription factor, which is a key component in the regulation of

proinflammatory genes​5​. Consequently, the use of ruxolitinib, a ​JAK1​ and ​JAK2​ inhibitor, has
been suggested as a potential way to prevent the harmful effects of the excessive secretion of
proinflammatory proteins, the so-called ​cytokine storm,​ in severe cases of ​COVID-196​​ .
We also identified two interleukins (​IL23A​ and ​IL1A)​ among the top predicted ligands. ​IL23A
forms a heterodimeric cytokine by associating with IL12B, the IL-23 interleukin. IL-23 binds to
the ​IL12RB1​-​IL23R​ receptor complex and activates the JAK-STAT signaling cascade promoting
the production of proinflammatory cytokines. Furthermore, IL-23 induces autoimmune
inflammation and its inhibition is the main treatment for ​psoriasis,​ an autoimmune disease​7​. In
our results (Figure 4b), we identified the interaction between ​IL23A​ and ​IL12RB1​, and how

IL12RB1​ directly activates some of the STAT transcription factors (​STAT1, STAT3 ​and​ STAT4)​ .

IL1A​ is known to play key roles in the regulation of the immune and the inflammatory response.
It binds to the interleukin-1 receptor, interaction that was partially recovered in our signaling
network (​IL1R2,​ Figure 4b). Then, I​ L1R2​ activates ​CASP3​, whose role in the modulation of

S2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

cytokine expression and inflammation has been proposed​8​, although is not as straightforward as
in the previous discussed examples.
Finally, we also retrieved some tumor necrosis factors (​TNF​ and ​TNFSF13B​) as top ligands
potentially regulating the expression of inflammatory response related genes. The main
functions of ​TNF​ are the regulation of immune cells and the systemic inflammatory response.

Once ​TNF​ comes to contact with their potential receptors, the ​TRADD​ protein can also bind to
the receptor resulting in the potential initiation of three different pathways: activation of the
NFKB pathway, activation of the MAPK pathway or induction of death signaling​9​. Our results
capture the interaction between ​TNF​ and ​TRADD​ to their potential receptor, T
​ NFRSF21​, which
in turn activates R
​ ELA​ (Figure 4b). The activation of ​RELA​ suggests an activation of the ​NF-kB

pathway, known to be active in ​SARS-CoV-2​ infection​10​. The ​TNFSF13B​ gene encodes the B-cell
activating factor (​BAFF​) protein, which can bind to the ​TNFRSF13C​ receptor as identified in
our results. The interaction between ​BAFF​ and its receptors triggers the activation of the
classical and non-canonical ​NF-kB ​signaling pathway​11​. In our results, we identified the

activation of ​MAP3K14​, which indeed appears to be involved in the activation of the ​NF-kB
complex and its transcriptional activity​12​.

In summary, we studied how the ligands secreted after SARS-CoV-2 infection could influence
the inflammatory response of neighboring cells. We were able to capture known biological
processes supported by the literature. These processes and signaling cascades may lead to the
exacerbated inflammatory response observed in COVID-19 most severe cases.

Supplementary Note References

1.

Blanco-Melo, D. ​et al.​ SARS-CoV-2 launches a unique transcriptional signature from in
vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo systems. ​Microbiology​ 265 (2020).

2.

Browaeys, R., Saelens, W. & Saeys, Y. NicheNet: modeling intercellular communication by
linking ligands to target genes. ​Nature Methods​ (2019) doi:​10.1038/s41592-019-0667-5​.

3.

Qin, S. ​et al.​ Epigallocatechin-3-gallate reduces airway inflammation in mice through

S3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.221242; this version posted August 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

binding to proinflammatory chemokines and inhibiting inflammatory cell recruitment. ​J.
Immunol.​ ​186​, 3693–3700 (2011).
4.

Lee, J. C. ​et al.​ A protein kinase involved in the regulation of inflammatory cytokine
biosynthesis. N
​ ature​ ​372​, 739–746 (1994).

5.

Lee, Y.-N. ​et al.​ c-Fos as a regulator of degranulation and cytokine production in
FcepsilonRI-activated mast cells. ​J. Immunol.​ ​173​, 2571–2577 (2004).

6.

Goker Bagca, B. & Biray Avci, C. Overview of the COVID-19 and JAK/STAT Pathway
Inhibition: Ruxolitinib Perspective. ​Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.​ (2020)
doi:​10.1016/j.cytogfr.2020.06.013​.

7.

Fotiadou, C., Lazaridou, E., Sotiriou, E. & Ioannides, D. Targeting IL-23 in psoriasis:
current perspectives. ​Psoriasis (Auckl)​ ​8​, 1–5 (2018).

8.

Martinon, F. & Tschopp, J. Inflammatory Caspases: Linking an Intracellular Innate
Immune System to Autoinflammatory Diseases. ​Cell​ ​117​, 561–574 (2004).

9.

Wajant, H., Pfizenmaier, K. & Scheurich, P. Tumor necrosis factor signaling. ​Cell Death
Differ.​ ​10​, 45–65 (2003).

10. Mahase, E. Covid-19: what treatments are being investigated? ​BMJ​ ​368​, (2020).
11. Gardam, S. & Brink, R. Non-Canonical NF-κB Signaling Initiated by BAFF Influences B Cell
Biology at Multiple Junctures. ​Front. Immunol.​ ​4​, 509 (2014).
12. Liao, G., Zhang, M., Harhaj, E. W. & Sun, S.-C. Regulation of the NF-kappaB-inducing
kinase by tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 3-induced degradation. ​J. Biol.
Chem.​ ​279​, 26243–26250 (2004).

S4

