bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.077461; this version posted January 19, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Delta-range coupling between prefrontal cortex and
hippocampus supported by respiratory rhythmic input
from the olfactory bulb
Rola Mofleh and Bernat Kocsis
Dept Psychiatry at BIDMC, Harvard Medical School
Correspondence: bkocsis@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
Respiratory rhythm (RR) during sniffing is known to
couple with hippocampal theta rhythm. However, outside
of the short sniffing bouts, a more stable ~2Hz RR was
recently shown to rhythmically modulate non-olfactory
cognitive processes, as well. The underlying RR coupling
with wide-spread forebrain activity was confirmed using
advanced techniques, including current source density and
phase modulation of local gamma activity, creating solid
premise for investigating how higher networks use this
mechanism in their communication. Here we show
essential differences in the way prefrontal cortex (PFC)
and hippocampus (HC) processes the RR signal from the
olfactory bulb (OB) allowing dynamic PFC-HC coupling
utilizing this input. We found stable OB-PFC coherence in
waking contrasting low but highly variable OB-HC
coherence. PFC-HC coupling however primarily
correlated with the latter, indicating that HC access to the
PFC output readily segmented and shaped by RR in the
delta range is dynamically regulated by the responsiveness
of HC to the common rhythmic drive.

1. Introduction
More than half a century after the first observations1, an
explosion of recent findings firmly demonstrates that brain
activity and cognitive function in rodents and humans are
modulated synchronously with nasal respiration (rev.2).
Respiratory related oscillations (RRO) were detected in
numerous brain structures, including higher order cognitive
centers in the prefrontal cortex (PFC)3, 4 and hippocampus
(HC)5-7. Respiratory rhythm primarily derived from rhythmic
nasal airflow by the olfactory bulb (OB) 6 dynamically couples
with intrinsic network oscillations in these structures either by
coherence, when the frequency of RRO matches that of local
field potentials (LFP), e.g. in the delta and theta ranges in
rodents3, 5-9, or by phase-amplitude modulation when the
frequencies diverge, e.g. gamma in rodents3, 4, 6, 8 and most
components of the human EEG, relevant for cognitive function
(delta, theta, alfa, gamma)10.
New evidence rapidly accumulating in the past decade
extended research on the mechanisms of OB-cortical RRO
coupling well studied in sniffing episodes to those associated
with continuous on-going respiration raising questions of how
RRO may be involved in non-olfactory cognitive processing11,
12
. Respiratory modulation of a wide range of cognitive
functions was reported both in rodents and human, from sensory

processing and motor coordination to a variety of memory
functions (rev.12), not directly related to olfaction or the primary
respiratory function of gas exchange. Rhythmic coupling is a
powerful ubiquitous mechanism of functional coordination of
neural ensembles and RRO appears to provide a potential carrier
for such synchronization with a wide, perhaps even global2, 9,
access to various networks, cortical as well as subcortical. For
functional networks, this access has to be dynamically regulated
in a state and task dependent manner to include specific circuits
involved in certain tasks when it is necessary and uncouple
when it is not. The anatomical substrate of carrying the RRO
signal to different networks may be suitable for such control.
RRO from different sources13, of which OB is dominant, is
transmitted by diverse multi-synaptic pathways whereas
different networks may synchronize with this input in different
ways, determined by their unique circuit characteristics and
connectivity. For example, key intrinsic oscillations in PFC
(delta, 2-5 Hz14-16) are in the range of on-going RRO whereas in
HC they are faster (theta, 5-10 Hz17), overlapping in rodents
with sniffing RRO frequency. These two forebrain structures are
the focus of the current study investigating how the RRO signal
generated in the OB may potentially contribute to PFC-HC
communication by synchronizing their activities at the
respiratory rate.
Effective PFC-HC communication is important for normal
cognition and impaired PFC-HC coupling was implicated in
cognitive deficits in psychiatric diseases18-21. We have shown
recently by studying forebrain oscillations induced by the
ascending arousal input from brainstem in urethane anesthetized
rats that rhythmic coupling between PFC and HC can be
established in both delta and theta ranges, even simultaneously,
and proposed that they may serve as parallel channels of
communication in opposite directions between the two
structures22. RRO and theta was also shown to co-exist in
chronic experiments during theta states with an asymmetric
regional distribution of RRO dominant in the frontal and theta
in more caudal cortical areas9. Based on these data we
hypothesized that RRO might enhance the communication
between distant PFC and HC networks primarily in the PFC-toHC direction. Correlation between RRO coherences through the
OB, i.e. maintained with diaphragmal (dia) EMG on one hand
and forebrain LFPs on the other, revealed a strong faithful RRO
transmission to PFC whereas OB-HC coherence was lower and
did not necessarily follow the RRO input to OB. Although weak
on average, OB-HC coherence was highly variable, however,
and showed strong correlation with PFC-HC RRO coherence
indicating that HC access to the PFC output readily segmented
and shaped by the RRO in the delta range is dynamically
regulated by the responsiveness of HC to the common RRO

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.077461; this version posted January 19, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

drive. The details of this regulation remain unknown as our
recordings were performed in undisturbed conditions, limited to
spontaneous behaviors and different sleep-wake states. We
found however that this pattern was only present in waking,
both theta and non-theta states, whereas PFC-HC
communication appeared protected from RRO synchronization
in sleep states.

2. Methods
Eighteen adult, male rats (360–560g, Charles River
Laboratories) were used in this study. Experiments were
performed on 10 rats under urethane anesthesia, whereas the
remaining 8 rats were subjected to survival surgery followed by
chronic recordings in free behaviors. All procedures were
performed in accordance with the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.
2.1. Anesthetized rats Urethane (i/p; 1.2-1.5 g/kg of 6580% solution) was given in two doses, an hour apart with
ketamine supplemented (3.5 to 5 mg/kg) if necessary by
monitoring reaction to tail pinch. The body temperature was
maintained by isothermal pad. First, a 10 mm cut was made on
the right side of the abdomen through which the diaphragm was
palpated with the edge of the forceps to find the right position
for implantation of the electrodes. Two multi-threaded electrode
wires were implanted and fixed with surgical glue for recording
of the EMG. The incision was closed by 5-6 sutures. The dia
electrodes were tunneled under the skin up to the skull.
The second part of the surgery was performed in a
stereotaxic frame, where the recording electrodes were
implanted according to the Atlas of Paxinos23. Stainless steel
screw above the parietal cortex (AP: -3.5 mm, Lat: 2.5 mm from
bregma) was inserted on the left side to record the cortical EEG,
two screws were inserted in the nasal bone (~5.0 mm anterior to
bregma) and above the cerebellum to act as reference and
ground electrodes. Two single electrodes (stainless steel wires)
were implanted on each side (AP: +3.2 mm, Lat: ±0.5 mm, DV:
-5.1 mm) to record the electrical activity in the PFC, a single
electrode on the left side for the OB (AP: +8.5 mm, Lat: 1.5
mm, DV: -1.6 mm), and a pair of twisted wires with 1 mm
between their tips in the HC on the right side (AB: -3.7, Lat: 2.2
mm, DV: -3.5 mm) (Fig. S1). All the electrode wires and screws
were fixed to the skull with dental acrylic. The electrodes were
connected to an amplifier (A-M systems) for data recording,
filtered between 0.3 and 100 Hz, whereas the dia EMG filters
had both low- and high-pass filters set at 100 Hz to diminish
unwanted noise including respiratory movement artifacts and
electrical noise from the heart (Fig. S2). The local field
potentials (LFP) were recorded and saved in DASYLab 7.0
Acquisition System. When a sufficient amount of data was
collected, approximately around one hour, the rats were
euthanized by injection of Ketamine, 1 ml.
2.2. Chronic experiments Survival surgeries were
conducted on 8 rats under sterile conditions. Deep anesthesia
was maintained by Ketamine-Xylazine mixture (i/p; 30-40
mg/kg ketamine and 5 mg/kg Xylazine) with supplementary
injections of Ketamine (10 % of the initial dose) if necessary.
The electrodes were implanted as described above. In addition,
two multi-threaded electrodes in soft insulation were implanted
in the neck muscles on each side to evaluate general motor
activity and tone to identify states, such as sleep and
exploration. Antibiotic gel was applied before suturing the
incisions. Meloxicam analgesics, 1 mg/kg of 5 mg/ml daily, was

given subcutaneously two days in a row to relieve pain. The rats
were observed until they fully woke up. They recovered for a
week in their home cages before the first 24 hours-recording.
These recordings included different behaviors and sleep-wake
states while the rat was freely moving in the cage, undisturbed.
The rats were euthanized by 1 ml of Ketamine injections 3
weeks later and the brains were extracted for verification of the
electrode position (Fig. S1).
2.3. Data and statistical analysis In two 24 hr recordings,
acquired a couple of days apart in each rat, sleep-wake states
were identified using standard criteria based on cortical EEG,
HC LFP, and neck muscle EMG recordings. In waking,
characterized by high and variable muscle activity, active
waking (AW) and quiet waking (QW) were separated by the
presence or absence, respectively, of HC theta rhythm and low
amplitude fast cortical EEG. Sleep periods, characterized by
continuously low muscle tone were also divided by the presence
of HC theta accompanied by low-amplitude cortical EEG (REM
sleep) or large amplitude slow activity dominating cortical and
HC recordings (slow wave sleep, SWS). For analysis, multiple
segments were selected from discontinuous episodes of each
state dispersed over the 2 days of recordings, in which
respiration appeared relatively stable without fluctuations (Table
S1). Respiratory rate varied in different states in a relatively
narrow band (between 1-3 Hz, Table S1) with an occasional
faster component (4-6 Hz) in AW which did not overlap with
theta frequency, specifically verified in each segment submitted
for analysis.
EEG and EMG recordings were acquired as a ~.DDF-files
in DASYLab 7.0 and then imported to Spike2 (Cambridge
Electronic Devices) for signal analysis. Dia EMG recordings
were processed using built-in procedures of Spike2 to remove
ECG contamination and to convert high-frequency EMG
components in order to retrieve pure respiratory rhythm (see
details in Supplement, Fig. S2).
To quantify neuronal synchronization we used coherence
analysis. Coherence function is calculated for pairs of different
signals of interest (e.g., LFP recorded from two spatially distinct
areas) and provides a useful measure of synchrony between two
signals at each frequency of the spectrum, thus revealing
characteristic frequencies of synchronization. Pairwise
coherences were calculated using a program (COHER.S2S)
from the Spike2 library between 5 signal pairs, representing the
potential transfer of the RRO signal to higher-order structures
through the OB (i.e. dia with OB and OB with PFC and HC) and
between these higher order structures (i.e. PFC with HC). Power
spectra for dia EMG and HC were also calculated to identify the
frequencies of spectral peaks of RRO and theta rhythm.
Coherence values at RRO and theta frequencies were calculated
in segments selected for theta and non-theta states in urethane
anesthetized rats and in SWS, REM, QW and AW in chronic
experiments, recorded on two different days (Table S1). Daily
averages of these values were then used in statistical analysis,
including group averages (Tables 1 and S2) and comparisons of
peak coherences. Differences between coherences in different
states were tested using Student’s t-test after Fisher r to z
transformation to obtain z-scored values with normal
distribution. Correlation between pair-wise coherences were
statistically tested using Excel’s T-DIST procedure using the
formula p=TDIST(R*SQRT((N-2)/(1-R2)),N,1) where R is
coherence and N is number of experiments, included.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.077461; this version posted January 19, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

3.Results
3.1. Respiratory rhythm in diaphragmic EMG
correlates with LFP oscillations in OB
Respiratory rate varies extensively, covering in rodents the
entire range of characteristic frequencies of low frequency
oscillations (delta, theta, even alfa) intrinsically generated by
neural circuits in the cortex and hippocampus2. To focus on ongoing regular RROs (Fig. 1), in the present study the analysis
was limited to lasting stationary segments however, excluding
e.g. short segments with fast RRO potentially associated with
sniffing (Fig. S3). Thus, RRO frequency was in the delta range
in all states; it was below 2Hz in sleep and under urethane
anesthesia and slightly faster in waking but still below theta
(Table S1). Except for AW, RRO was stable in all states,
manifested by a single sharp peak in the autospectra of the dia
EMG signal in each recording session (Fig 2A, left and Fig. S4).
RRO frequency in these states shifted from experiment to
experiment in a narrow range, producing ~1 Hz-wide peaks in
average dia autospectra (Fig. 2B). LFP in the OB correlated
with this signal in a state-dependent manner (see below) giving
rise to RRO peaks in the dia-OB coherence spectra, which in
sleep and under urethane anesthesia were also restricted to this
narrow frequency range (Fig 2C, left).

Figure 1. Sample of respiratory rhythm (black) derived from diaphragmal EMG
(grey) along with LFPs in OB, PFC, and HC and neck muscle EMG in QW state.

In AW, RRO peaks in dia autospectra were somewhat
wider in each experiment (indicating short-time scale variations
within recording sessions) and its peak shifted in a wider range
between experiments (1-3 Hz; Fig. 2A, right). In four out of 10
recordings (in 3 rats), there was a second dia power peak at 4-6
Hz, which however always appeared together with clearly
distinguishable components in the 2-3 Hz range (Fig. S3C).
Accordingly, group averages of dia power spectra in AW were
relatively wide, with blurred maxima in the 1-3 and 5-7 Hz
ranges (Fig. 2B, right). Dia-OB coherences were also not
strictly constrained to low RRO frequencies in AW; in addition
to the 1-3 Hz RRO peak there was a wide component of
elevated coherences above 4 Hz in most recordings (Fig. 2E and
Table S1). Therefore, in the foregoing analysis of pairwise
coherences between dia, OB, PFC, and HC signals calculated at
RRO peaks in individual experiments in all states was extended
in AW also to coherences at the maxima in the 4.2-5.6 Hz range.
This latter was verified in each recording not to coincide with
HC theta frequency (Figs. 2D and S3C).
3.2. OB unevenly conveys RRO to higher order
networks in PFC and HC
To assess RRO synchronization across regions, RRO peaks
of pairwise coherences representing RRO transfer from
rhythmic nasal airflow to the OB and then from OB to PFC

Figure 2. RRO oscillations in diac
EMG, correlated with OB LFP. A.
Autospectra of dia EMG in individual
experiments. Note single sharp RRO
peaks varying in a narrow frequency
range in SWS (left), similar to all other
states (see Fig. S3), except AW (right)
which showed large variations and
peaks at higher frequencies in a few
recordings. B. Group averages of dia
autospectra in different states. Note
narrow RRO peaks in all recordings,
except AW. AW*: group averages after
eliminating 4 recordings with high
frequency RRO. Power is shown in
arbitrary units after normalization of
autospectra in individual recordings
setting maxima equal to 1. C. Group
averages
of
dia-OB
coherence
spectra, in different states. Note
coherence peaks constrained to RRO
frequencies (dia spectral peaks) in
sleep and under urethane anesthesia
(left) and in a wider range, up to 6 Hz
in QW and higher in AW (right). In AW,
dia-OB coherence does not have a
clear RRO peak on the group average
due to interindividual variability of the
respiratory rates (see in E). D. Group
averages of dia and HC autospectra in
AW. Note overlap of 1-3 Hz RRO in
the two signals and no overlap
between fast RRO in dia and theta in HC. E. dia-OB coherences in individual
recordings.

Figure 3. Peak coherence at
RRO frequency between rhythmic
dia activity and LFP in the OB
and between OB and cortical
(PFC) and hippocampal (HC)
networks during different sleepwake states (A: QW, AW, SWS,
and REM sleep) in freely
behaving rats and under urethane
anesthesia (B: theta and nontheta states). Note strong state
dependence and nearly identical
dia-OB and OB-PFC coherences
in all recordings and considerably lower OB-HC coherence both in chronic (QW,
AW, REM) and anesthetized rats. Squares: group averages, dots: individual
experiments; same colors identify individual rats within the chronic (n=7) and the
anesthetized (n=6) groups. RRO peak coherences were found in each
experiment and then averaged over the group; these averages are higher than
RRO peak values of averaged coherence spectra in Figs. 4 and S5 due to slight
individual variability of RRO frequency.

and HC were compared in different behavioral states. In chronic
recordings, dia-OB coherences showed strong state dependence
(Fig. 2C and 3A, Table 1A) and while RRO coherence between
OB and PFC followed this pattern, those between OB and HC
were relatively low in all states (Figs. 4, S5). Thus, OB-PFC
coherences at RRO frequency were higher during wake than
sleep states; differences between AW and QW vs. SWS and
REMs were all statistically significant (p<0.01), whereas within
waking and within sleep no significant differences were
detected (p>0.1). On the other hand, group averages of OB-HC
coherence fell in a narrow range; they did not change between
QW, AW, and SWS and were somewhat lower in REM sleep
(p<0.1). In all states, OB-PFC coherences were similar to diaOB coherence (i.e. statistically equal, p>0.1), in major contrast
to the pathway conveying RRO to HC; where OB-HC and dia-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.077461; this version posted January 19, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

OB coherences were significantly different in all states
(p<0.01), except SWS. In AW, OB-PFC coherences were also
higher (p=0.09) than OB-HC coherences in the 4.2-5.6 Hz
range, as well (Fig. S6A; Table 1D).
Under urethane anesthesia (Fig. 3B, S5 and Table 1E),
RRO coherences in signal-pairs of dia-OB and OB-PFC in theta
state appeared closer to those in QW (although higher; p<0.05)
than in the natural theta-dominated states of AW and REM
sleep. In non-theta state they were higher than in SWS (p=0.01
and p=0.03), the presumed unanesthetized analog of this state,
and were instead in the range of chronic wake states (p>0.17 in
all comparisons). Between OB and HC, RRO coherence under
urethane was higher in theta state (0.60±0.08) than in any state
of chronic experiments and low in non-theta states, in the range
of chronic recordings (Table 1E).

Figure 4. RRO coherence between
OB and higher order networks of
PFC and HC during waking (QW
and AW). A-B. OB-PFC (A) and
OB-HC (B) coherence spectra in
individual experiments (grey) and
averaged over the group (red and
blue).

Examination of pairwise coherences in individual
experiments further supported the pattern revealed by group
averages; OB-HC coherence was lower than dia-OB and OBPFC in all experiments in all states, without exception (see
colors of dots, representing different experiments in Fig. 3) even
though the increase in RRO coherences during wake states
compared to sleep, showed natural variation between
experiments. Furthermore, the variability of coherence values
revealed a feature, unique for the OB-HC relationship, further
separating it from dia-OB and OB-PFC. In QW and AW, as well
as in theta state under urethane, the coefficient of variation (CV;
Fig. 5A) indicated widely dispersed values of OB-HC
coherences, compared with the other signal-pairs (CV exceeded
the other two by 100-200 %; Fig. 5B).
Figure
5.
Variability
of
coherence values in individual
experiments in different states,
in freely moving (SWS, REM
sleep,
QW,
AW)
and
anesthetized rats (n-th: nontheta, th: theta state). A.
Coefficient of variation; B. CV
ratio of coherences in the OBHC vs. the other two signal-pairs (dia-OB and OB-PFC). Note high variation of
OB-HC in waking (AW and QW), REM sleep, and urethane-theta state, 2-3
times exceeding CV of the other pairs.

To study the origin of this variability, dia-OB coherences
quantifying RRO input to the OB were correlated with RRO
coherences in the pathways connecting OB to the PFC and to
the HC, bearing in mind that strong correlation would indicate
that the more RRO is derived by OB from rhythmic nasal
airflow, the more it is transferred further, to downstream targets
of the OB. For the PFC this was indeed the case; we found that
dia-OB and OB-PFC coherences were positively correlated (Fig
6A) in all sleep-wake states (R>0, p<0.1; Table S2), except
SWS where the correlation was negative. In contrast, no such
faithful, obligatory transmission of RRO through OB was found

toward the HC. In chronic recordings, no significant correlation
between dia-OB and OB-HC coherences was detected in waking
(see grey lines in Fig. 6B), and the correlation was negative in
sleep states. Thus, the consistent increase of RRO conveyed by
the OB to the PFC was closely associated with RRO variation in
the OB network derived from respiration (Fig. 6A), whereas
RRO transmission from OB to HC, varying in a wide range
from one experiment to the next (Fig. 5), did not follow the
variations of dia-OB coherence in wake (AW and QW) and it
was in fact showing an opposite tendency in sleep states (Fig.
6B). Similar tendency was observed in the relationship between
the input and output sides of OB, i.e. positive correlation
between dia-OB and OB-PFC and negative between dia-OB and
OB-HC at high-frequency RRO (Fig. S6C) although the
correlations were not significant (Table S2) in the low sample
(n=4).
Under urethane anesthesia, both OB-PFC and OB-HC
coherences showed strong correlations (R>0, p<0.05) with diaOB coherence in both theta and non-theta states (Fig. S7, Table
S2), again violating the correspondence, commonly expected on
the basis of EEG signals, between urethane-theta and AW-REM
on one hand and between urethane non-theta and QW-SWS on
the other.

Figure 6. The relationship between peak RRO coherences connecting dia to OB
C(Dia-OB) and those connecting OB to neural networks of PFC (A) and HC (B)
in different states in chronic recordings. Trend-lines with non-significant
correlations (p>0.1) are shown in grey,solid lines show theta, dashed line show
non-theta states. Note significant positive correlation of C(dia-OB) with C(OBPFC) but no positive correlation with C(OB-HC) in chronic experiments. C(X-Y):
coherence between X and Y.

3.3. Role of OB-mediated RRO in coupling between
higher order networks in PFC and HC
Oscillatory coupling between PFC and HC was reported in
different states in freely moving rats and under Urethane
anesthesia both in delta and theta frequency bands16, 21, 22
maintained by various mono- and polysynaptic connections
between the two structures. Theta peaks were dominant in PFCHC coherence spectra during theta states (AW, REM sleep,
urethane-theta) in this study, as well. Adding simultaneous dia
EMG and OB recordings in this study, however, we could also
identify RRO coherence peaks indicative of PFC-HC coupling
at RRO frequency in the delta range. They appeared in waking
animals and under urethane anesthesia, either alone (QW) or in
addition to theta (AW, Urethane-theta; Fig. S8).
Average RRO coherence between PFC and HC fell in
between OB-PFC and OB-HC coherence values in all states
(Table 1C), although the differences were only significant in
QW (p=0.02) with sufficient gap between OB-PFC and OB-HC
coherences. PFC-HC coherence was significantly higher in
waking (above 0.42) than sleep (below 0.22) and did not change

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.077461; this version posted January 19, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Figure
7.
Coupling of
PFC
and
HC
networks
at
the
RRO
and
theta
requencies.
A. PFC-HC
coherences
in different
states at RRO in awake (QW, AW) and sleep states (SWS, REM) at slow (1-3
Hz) and in AW at fast RRO (>4 HZ). B. PFC-HC coherences at theta frequency
in theta states (AW, REM). C. PFC-HC coherences under urethane anesthesia at
RRO in non-theta and theta states and at θ in theta states. Squares: group
averages, dots: individual experiments; same colors were used for individual rats
in the chronic (n=7) and the anesthetized (n=6) groups (same colors as in Figs. 3
and S6).

significantly within these states (i.e. p>0.1 for AW vs. QW and
REM vs. SWS comparisons) (Fig. 7A). Significant differences
were also found in urethane anesthetized rats, PFC-HC RRO
coherence in theta was the highest (0.7) in all states and lower in
non-theta states (0.3) within the range of peak coherences in
wake and sleep states (Fig. 7C; Table 1E). The relationship of
OB-HC < PFC-HC < OB-PFC coherences was robust, it was
also valid in most individual experiments (60 and 71% of
recordings in AW and QW, 50% in urethane-theta). In theta
states, coherences of the two oscillations, RRO and theta, were
statistically similar in AW and urethane-theta (p>0.1), but not in
REM sleep (p=0.001) (Fig. 7B,C).
Unlike theta rhythm, primarily generated in HC and
conveyed to PFC21, producing strong HC-PFC coherence, the
origin of the RRO coherence between these structures is less
certain. RRO is generated outside of these structures, and from
the OB it is faithfully transmitted to the PFC but much less
reliably to the HC (Figs. 3, 6). These differences
notwithstanding, state-dependent variations in the average HCPFC RRO coherences significantly correlated with OB-PFC
(R2=0.87, p=0.0003) as well as OB-HC (R2=0.88, p=0.0001)
coherences (Fig. 8).
Figure 8. Relationship between average
HC-PFC RRO coherence and RRO
coherences connecting OB to PFC (red)
and HC (blue) in different states in chronic
recordings (AW, QW, SWS, REM; filled
symbols) and under urethane anesthesia
(theta and non-theta states; open symbols).
Dashed lines show correlations calculated
for chronic experiments only, i.e. ignoring
the only high OB-HC RRO coherence in
urethane anesthetized rats (OB-PFC:
R2=0.84, p=0.0007; OB-HC: R2=0.84,
p=0.0002).

RRO coherence in the PFC-HC signal-pair may be due to
RRO received by PFC from OB and transmitted further to HC
or may be the effect of common input from OB to PFC and
HC. The first appears consistent with relatively strong, state
dependent RRO in OB-PFC and HC-PFC coherences
(compare Figs. 3 and 7), and the latter with the outstanding
variability of RRO transmission to HC (Fig. 5) in specific
states, i.e. relatively high in some experiments and lower in
others in wake states and in urethane theta state (Fig. 3). To
distinguish between these possible mechanisms, we next
compared correlations between RRO coherences in individual
experiments in each state and condition in which RRO
coherences were present (Fig. 9). We investigated in particular
whether stronger RRO synchrony between HC and PFC
signals was associated with stronger OB-PFC or with stronger
OB-HC coherences. As shown in Table 1B and Fig. 9, HC-

PFC RRO coherence significantly correlated only with RRO
coherences linking OB with HC but not with PFC. This
relationship was found in all states showing RRO in chronic
and anesthetized rats. Thus, R2 correlation coefficient revealed
similarity between the variations of HC-PFC and OB-HC
coherences from one experiment to the next in QW (R2=0.69,
p=0.003), in AW at both RRO peaks (R2=0.79, p=0.01 for
slow and R2=0.68, p=0.026 for fast RRO; Table 1B and 1D),
and in urethane-theta state (R2=0.72, p=0.02; Table 1E).

Figure 9. Correlation between peak RRO coherences C(HC-PFC) connecting
PFC and HC vs. RRO coherences connecting OB to dia, PFC, and HC signals
(C(dia-OB), C(OB-PFC), C(OB-HC), respectively) in AW and QW in chronic
recordings at low (A) and high frequency RRO (B) and in theta state under
urethane anesthesia (C). Significant correlations are shown in the color of the
corresponding dots, trendlines of non-significant correlations are shown in grey.

In contrast, HC-PFC coherence did not correlate with OBPFC coherence in any state (Table 1B, 1D, and 1E). Positive
trends were observed in QW (R2=0.33) and urethane-theta
(R2=0.30) states but were not significant (p=0.06 and p=0.16,
respectively; see grey lines in Fig. 9). Variations of HC-PFC
coherence in individual experiments was not affected by
variations of dia-OB coherence in waking states and by any
coherence connecting dia, OB, PFC, HC signals during sleep
(Fig. S9).
Table 1. Relationship between coherences through OB and their effect on
RRO synchronization between PFC and HC. Yellow background highlights
relatively high coherences, above 0.4 and significant correlations (p < 0.05),
R2, between pairwise coherences. C(X-Y): coherence between X and Y.
A. Coherences connecting OB to dia and LFP signals of PFC and HC, at RRO
frequency
Peak Coherence
C(Dia-OB)
C(OB-PFC)
C(OB-HC)

SWS
0.29±0.04
0.25±0.04
0.18±0.05

REM
0.33±0.04
0.32±0.04
0.09±0.03

QW
0.66±0.05
0.67±0.05
0.29±0.07

AW
0.40±0.07
0.55±0.07
0.24±0.10

B. Correlations between C(HC-PFC) and coherences connecting OB to other
signals
R2 between C(PFCHC) and…
… C(Dia-OB)

SWS

REM

QW

AW

0.08

0.01

0.00

0.00

… C(OB-PFC)
… C(OB-HC)

0.04
0.27

0.07
0.00

0.33
0.69

0.12
0.79

C. Coherences connecting LFP signals of PFC and HC, at RRO frequency
peak coherence
C(PFC-HC)

SWS
0.22±0.04

REM
0.19±0.07

QW
0.45±0.08

AW
0.42±0.09

D. At high frequency RRO in AW
Coherence

AW

C(Dia-OB)
C(OB-PFC)
C(OB-HC)
C(PFC-HC

0.34±0.05
0.46±0.06
0.26±0.07
0.32±0.10

R2 between C(PFCHC) and…
… C(Dia-OB)
… C(OB-PFC)
… C(OB-HC)

AW
0.04
0.01
0.68

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.077461; this version posted January 19, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
E. Under urethane anesthesia
Coherence

Urethane
Non-theta
Theta

C(Dia-OB)

0.53±0.11

0.87±0.06

C(OB-PFC)

0.47±0.13

0.82±0.09

C(OB-HC)
C(PFC-HC)

0.20±0.05
0.30±0.08

0.60±0.08
0.70±0.05

R2 between
C(PFC-HC)
and…
… C(DiaOB)
… C(OBPFC)
… C(OB-HC)

Urethane
Non-theta
Theta
0.87

0.63

0.92

0.30

0.88

0.72

4. Discussion
This study used inter-regional coherences and their
correlations to trace the RRO signal from OB, where it is
derived from rhythmic nasal airflow, to higher order brain
networks of PFC and HC where it may potentially contribute to
communication between these structures by synchronizing their
activities at the respiratory rate. We focused in particular on ongoing, i.e. “background”, RRO unaffected by behaviors
requiring its short-term fluctuations, e.g. sniffing. We found that
this rhythmicity depends on sleep-wake states; it is significantly
larger in waking than in sleep whereas within these arousal
states remains unchanged when the animal is engaged in
behaviors or conditions associated with theta or non-theta HC
activity, i.e. in exploration, locomotion (AW), and REM sleep
vs. consummatory behaviors (QW) and SWS. In agreement with
previous reports3, 4, 9, 24, RRO was more prominent in PFC with
an obligatory transmission of RRO from OB to PFC, indicated
by parallel variations in dia-OB and OB-PFC coherences in
individual experiments, verified by significant correlation
between these parameters over the group. In contrast, RRO was
relatively low in HC and the variations of OB-HC coherence did
not necessarily follow those between dia and OB. RRO input to
HC5-7 however lead to strong variations in individual recordings
not explained by the grossly defined states of AW and QW.
Importantly, this factor, quantified with OB-HC coherence, was
essential for establishing PFC-HC synchrony at the respiratory
rate, whereas variations of RRO in OB and PFC had no
significant effect. Furthermore, we found that RRO under
urethane had no resemblance with sleep; the two states
identified in urethane-anesthetized rats were more similar to
wake states in freely behaving rats.
4.1. RRO in waking. Communication and collaboration
between HC and PFC and its impairment in psychiatric diseases
has been the primary focus of extensive research to date 18-21. HC
theta driven PFC synchronization and its role in spatial working
memory is relatively well-studied25-30. On the other hand, PFC is
theorized to be the master regulator of working memory and
higher-order executive function31-36, yet the mechanisms by
which PFC exerts “top-down” influences remain less clear.
Functional coupling of PFC with downstream circuits, including
HC, amygdala, ventral tegmental area, by means of delta-range
oscillations (2-5 Hz) was recently shown in PFC-specific
tasks14-16 and it was proposed that theta and delta oscillations
may serve as parallel channels of communication in opposite
directions between the HC and the PFC22. The results of the
present study indicate that the balance and interaction between
theta and RRO may also provide a potential mechanism for
bidirectional HC-PFC coupling. When RRO is within the delta
range, it can contribute to or even drive the PFC 2-5 Hz
rhythm37, 38. PFC receives this input whenever OB detects RRO
and may broadcast it widely. In contrast, the connection of HC
to this global2 rhythm appears more dynamic; in episodes when
HC becomes receptive to RRO input this could open a PFC-to-

HC channel in the delta range distinct from the channel
established by HC-theta in the opposite direction.
The most striking observation of this study was the marked
contrast between the strength and reliability of RRO input, i.e.
stronger in PFC than in HC (Table 1A), and its effect on PFCHC coherence, i.e. HC stronger than PFC (Table 1B), raising
questions regarding the mechanisms and the functional
consequences. Differences in cytoarchitecture, connectivity, and
other characteristics of PFC and HC networks give rise to
different intrinsic oscillations in the two structures allowing
them to resonate with rhythmic input at specific frequencies. We
propose that due to these differences, baseline slow RRO
recorded in this study may be involved in PFC-HC
communication primarily in the of PFC-to-HC direction.
Task-related intrinsic oscillations in PFC appear at
frequencies in the delta range14-16. Notably, these oscillations in
waking are markedly different from the wide-band thalamocortical delta rhythm of SWS; their spectra are narrow-band,
they are hierarchically nested with gamma oscillations39, 40, and
are normally generated in cortico-cortical circuits, associated
with various cognitive functions40-43. Outgoing PFC messages
aligned with these oscillations may use the fluctuations in
sensitivity of downstream structures tuned to global RRO, when
the two are synchronized. This may include HC, when RRO is
present outside of sniffing5-7 making it sensitive to messages
arriving assembled in bouts at delta-range frequencies.
On the other hand, background RRO is slower than HC
theta rhythm and thus, in order to synchronize with the signature
HC oscillation during active states of sniffing, respiratory rate is
accelerated and brought within the higher and narrower theta
frequency band. The two oscillations, RRO and theta, show
distinct characteristics in HC, such as different laminar profiles
and theta-modulated gamma bands, and differentially entrained
HC neurons5-7 even when their frequencies overlap. However,
during these episodes, olfactory-related activity patterns in OB,
such as cell firing and gamma bursts, appear phase locked to the
RRO-theta rhythm44. The exact mechanisms are not completely
understood, but rhythmic synchronization of sensory sampling
in OB on one hand and excitability of neurons involved in
central processing in HC and piriform cortex on the other is
considered a “paradigmatic example” of active sensing11, 45
optimizing odor perception coordinated with multiple sensory
channels, in turn associated with rhythmic nasal, whisker, and
head movements.
Although lacking strong direct projections from the OB 6, 46,
47
, both structures receive RRO via multisynaptic pathways
which includes common connections, e.g. through piriform
cortex, as well as uneven projections, e.g. through amygdala
(PFC) or entorhinal cortex (HC)3, 6, and thus PFC-HC coherence
may emerge from common OB input. Alternatively, or in
addition, strong RRO may be directed primarily to PFC and then
transmitted further to HC. Nodes in centripetal OB projections
and in pathways connecting PFC and HC (see e.g.22, 48) may set
the balance of RRO between the two structures.
When and how HC couples with slow baseline RRO will
require further investigations using specific tasks beyond gross
sleep-wake states pursued in this study. Data demonstrating the
potential role of RRO in non-olfactory processing started to
accumulate in recent years not only from rodent but human
studies as well10, 49, 50. A specific challenge for translating the
results between species is due to important differences between
human and rodents. Brain oscillations, their function, dynamics,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.077461; this version posted January 19, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

and key features including their characteristic frequencies, are
evolutionarily well-preserved51, but respiratory rate varies
widely between species. In human, where respiratory rate (~0.2
Hz) is below the frequencies of the key components of the EEG
oscillatory hierarchy, RRO is manifested by phase-amplitude
modulation of oscillations rather than coherence in different
frequency bands, including slow (delta, theta) as well as fast
(beta, gamma) oscillations, involved in cognitive processes10.
This is a different form of coupling which unlike coherence
does not require matching the frequencies of rhythms generated
by different mechanisms.
4.2. RRO in sleep. In contrast to wake states, RRO during
sleep appears reduced already at the level of OB indicated by
relatively low dia-OB coherence (Fig. 3) thus restricting OBmediated RRO in higher brain structures (PFC, HC) from
coupling with oscillations dominant in these networks during
sleep. Viczko et al.52 demonstrated for example that slow
oscillations (SO), an archetypical EEG pattern in SWS, emerges
separate from respiration even when they overlap in frequency
and argued that it “fit with an SO mechanism as intrinsic
emergent property of a deafferented neural network”. Our data
is in-line with this concept, suggesting that intrinsic brain
oscillations, relevant in sleep-dependent memory consolidation
both in SWS (SO52 and delta53) and REM sleep (theta54), are
protected from RRO. It is interesting to note that in human,
where very few studies analyzed RRO during sleep with
statistical scrutiny55, 56, subtle changes in EEG linked to
respiratory cycles were enhanced in SWS and REM sleep in
children with sleep disordered breathing in multiple frequency
bands, including delta55, theta55, 56, alpha, and sigma56.
Adenotonsillectomy, the most common surgical procedure for
sleep apnea which among other benefits improves cognitive
function, reduced i.e. normalized these RRO alterations.
It is important to note however that our conclusions only
concern rhythmic RRO mediated by the OB. It has been
reported that, besides RRO, respiration may also pace nonrhythmic events, linking their occurrence to specific phases of
respiration (see e.g.13, 49). In sleep, this may include sharp
wave/ripples and dentate spikes, i.e. intrinsic HC patterns during
SWS synchronized with UP-DOWN transitions in cortical
networks that are involved in functional PFC-HC interactions
serving memory consolidation57, 58. In a recent study, Karalis
and Sirota59 found that the post-inspiratory bias of these patterns
along with firing of a large number of PFC and HC neurons
remained after deafferentation of OB sensory neurons,
indicating that mechanisms bypassing the OB play a primary
role in their synchronization. They hypothesized the
contribution of a “so-far undescribed ascending respiratory
corollary discharge signal, likely propagating from the
brainstem respiratory rhythm generators” which could pace
limbic networks using a disinhibition-mediated mechanism,
consistent with lack of prominent LFPs in the absence of input
from the OB59. The causal model remains to be elucidated,
however. Besides ascending projections from the preBötzinger
complex60 or the locus coeruleus61, a number of other signals
from internal organs due to respiratory movements and
chemosensitive signals from the cardiovascular system may be
involved13, 62, 63.
4.3. RRO under urethane anesthesia. We found major
differences between RRO in sleep and under urethane
anesthesia which raise important questions about the traditional
use of the latter for modeling oscillatory networks in sleep 7, 52, 64.

It is known that different types of brain oscillations better
survive urethane anesthesia65-68, compared with many other
anesthetics. It is especially compelling that HC theta rhythm
appears spontaneously in this preparation, alternating with nontheta states, and can also be elicited by brainstem stimulation
thus offering a viable model for mechanistic investigations of
generating this rhythm and related neuropharmacology69-71. The
major strength of the model is that behavioral confounds of
waking (e.g. locomotion, cognition) on one hand and
fragmentation of sleep patterns (e.g. REM sleep never lasts
longer than a few minutes in rodents) on the other are
effectively eliminated. But this comes with the price of
uncertainties in the interpretation of alternating theta and nontheta states as changes between QW and AW or between SWS
and REM sleep brain-states. RRO mechanisms were also
explored under urethane anesthesia6, 7, 52 interpreting the results
mostly in terms of modeling active and passive sleep states.
Indeed, stable respiratory rate, along with several other
parameters (e.g. genioglossus muscle atonia72) in theta state
resembles REM sleep more than AW. The results of this study
however suggest a cautious approach when interpreting the
results of RRO under urethane anesthesia. RRO coherences in
urethane anesthetized rats were higher than in SWS and REM
sleep and in urethane theta state were even higher than in AW
and QW. Under urethane anesthesia RRO transmission through
OB showed marked differences between active and passive
states, unlike in chronic AW vs. QW comparisons. The pattern
of pairwise RRO coherences connecting OB with the three other
signals detected in waking was similar to that in urethane nontheta and the pattern of their correlation with PFC-HC
coherence in theta states. These differences should be carefully
considered in mechanistic studies of RRO mechanisms in the
urethane model, in the future.

Supplemental Information
Perfusion and Histology. Perfusion was conducted by inserting a
hypodermic needle connected to a pump into the ascending aorta
through the left ventricle of the heart. The right ventricle was cut open
and phosphate buffered saline (PBS) was pumped into the circulation
system for 5 minutes, until all blood had been drained and replaced with
PBS. Then 10% buffered formalin solution was pumped for about 15-20

Figure S1. Placement of electrodes for local field potential (LFP) recordings.
Schematic drawing (top) and histology of stained coronal sections (bottom) to
identify electrode coordinates in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), hippocampus (HC),
and olfactory bulb (OB).

minutes, until the rat was stiff. After perfusion, the rats’ brain was
carefully extracted and placed in a vial filled with 20 mL of formalin for
further fixation for at least one hour, while stored at 4ºC. Before
cryosectioning (Microm, HM 450), the brains were stored in 20% sucrose
solution overnight at 4 °C until sank to the bottom of the vial. 45 µm
slices were stored in PBS with Azide and then mounted on slides and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.077461; this version posted January 19, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

stained with Cresyl Violet, coverslipped and evaluated to locate the
marks of damage due to inserted recording electrodes (Fig. S1).
Measurements of respiration. There are various methods for recording
respiration in rodents. The most well-known and commonly used are
whole-body plethysmography and measuring nasal airflow using
thermocouples or thermistors. Plethysmograph is an apparatus designed
for reliably measuring the variations of the body volume during
ventilation. This method however requires confining the animal to a small
chamber which represents serious limitations for behavior, and thus was
unacceptable for our paradigm of recording EEG during normal
undisturbed behaviors in freely moving rats 73. Thermocouples and
thermistors are small devices that contain sensors to measure the
changes in the temperature of the airflow, in the nose or the mouth.
During inspiration, the airflow has the same temperature as air in the
room whereas, during expiration, the temperature would follow the body
temperature74. These are simple devices which are relatively easy to use
but have to be implanted through invasive procedures, which may
contribute to changes in the natural behavior of the animal73. Additionally,
previous studies showed that thermocouple recording of respiration is
unreliable during sleep and specifically during REM sleep. This can be
explained by the reduced volume of the airflow during sleep, which may
provide inaccurate data.
In this project we developed an alternative method for the
monitoring respiration by measuring the muscle activity of the
diaphragm. According to our experience, this allows reliable monitoring
of breathing in different states, including REM-sleep, without the
difficulties and errors of the other measurements mentioned above. It’s
an invasive and quick surgical method, taking around 30 minutes,
performed at the time of surgical implantation of the EEG electrodes;
there were no signs of changing the normal behavior of the rats. A wellperformed surgery developed in this project is also suitable for different
experiments including behaviors in cognitive tasks e.g. during freezing or
tasks using a T-maze. The electrodes are chronic and could be left
inside the animals until the time of euthanasia. This method showed
good results in almost all rats in this project for up to 3 weeks after the
surgery. None of the rats showed any signs of infections or rejections of
the implant.
Diaphragmal EMG recordings were processed using built-in
procedures of Spike2 to remove ECG contamination and convert highfrequency EMG components to retrieve pure respiratory rhythm (Fig.
S2). First, the recording was high-pass filtered above 350-400 Hz which
gave the signal an “EMG shape” by eliminating slow fluctuations. Next,
the half-wave rectified signal was passed to a Spike2 algorithm to
generate a new “virtual channel” to cut off all EKG-related noises above
a certain voltage level identified individually in different experiments. The
final respiratory signal was then generated using Spike2 “RMS
amplitude” and “smooth” procedures.

Figure S2. Processing
of dia EMG. Ten second
sample raw signal with
high ECG contamination
(A), high-pass filtered
above 350 - 400 Hz (B),
rectified
(C),
and
smoothed
to
derive
RMS-amplitude

Figure S3. Unstable RRO in AW. Example of segments with RRO matching theta
frequency, presumably associated with sniffing and excluded from analysis in this
study (A-B) and segments with slow and faster RRO not synchronized with theta
frequency (C). A. Rapidly alternating episodes of slow and fast respiration,
presumably associated with sniffing. Respiration and time-frequency plots of LFP
signals are shown in the 0-10 Hz range. Note matching frequencies of different
signals in slow RRO and theta segments. B. Example of theta segment with RRO
at theta frequency. C. Top: Two spectral peaks in dia autospectra, one at 2-3 Hz,
the other at 4-6 Hz, in 4 out of 10 AW recordings. Bottom: Dia (solid lines) and HC
(dashed lines) autospectra showing that high RRO did not overlap with HC theta.

Figure S4.
Autospectra of
diaphragmal
EMG in
individual
experiments in
QW and REM
sleep.

Figure S5. RRO coherence between
OB and higher order networks of PFC
and HC in sleep (SWS, REM) and
under urethane anesthesia (theta and
non-theta states). A-B. OB-PFC (A)
and OB-HC (B) coherence spectra in
individual experiments (grey) and
averaged over the group (red).

Figure S6. Coherences between dia, OB, PFC,
and HC in AW at the high-frequency component
of RRO (4.2-5.6 Hz). A. Peak coherences in
individual experiments (dots) and group averages
(squares). B. Coefficient of Variation (CV) of
C(dia-OB), C(OB-PFC) and, and C(OB-HC)
coherences. C. No significant correlation between
coherences representing respiratory input to OB,
i.e. C(dia-OB), and RRO at the OB output (C(OBPFC): R=0.24, p=0.25, n=10; C(OB-HC): R=0.29, p=0.31, n=6). (CF A, B, and C with Figs. 3,
5, and 6, respectively)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.077461; this version posted January 19, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

References

Figure S7. The relationship between peak RRO coherences connecting dia to
OB and those connecting OB to PFC (A) and HC networks (B) under urethane
anesthesia. Note significant positive correlation of C(dia-OB) with C(OB-PFC)
and C(OB-HC) under anesthesia (theta and non-theta). C(X-Y): coherence
between X and Y.
Figure S8. Oscillatory coupling
between higher order networks of
PFC and HC. PFC-HC coherences
during different states in chronic
recordings (A) and under urethane
anesthesia (B). Note peaks at RRO
(~2 Hz in chronic and 1-2 Hz under
urethane) and at theta frequencies
(6-8 Hz in chronic and 3-5 Hz under Urethane), in specific states.

Figure S9. Correlation between peak RRO coherences between PFC and HC,
and RRO coherences connecting OB to PFC (A), and HC signals (B) in different
conditions and states with weak or non-existent RRO (REM sleep, SWS,
urethane non-theta state). Significant correlations are shown in the color of the
corresponding dots, trendlines of non-significant correlations are shown in grey.
Table S1: length of segments and average RRO and theta frequency in
different states

in each rat
(2 days):
# of segments
Ave length (s)
Total length (s)
# of rats
(recordings)
with identified
RRO in LFP
RRO peak
frequency (Hz)
and range (Hz)

SWS

REM

QW

AW

Urethane
Theta

Urethan
e
Nontheta

9±0.8
127±11
1237
±219

9±0.9
109±12
1031
±186

7±0.4
112±18
821
±147

7±0.5
95±14
670
±98

6±0.8
135±40
825
±276

5±0.7
96±20
471
±95

7(14)

7(14)

7(12)

5(5)

6(6)

1.65
±0.05
1.2-2.0

1.65
±0.05
1.2-2.0

2.01
±0.08
1.5-2.4

6(9)
Fast
RRO:
6(10)
2.23
±0.11
1.0-2.9
4.86
±0.18
4.2-5.6
6.84
±0.13
6.6-7.1

1.80
±0.14
1.2-2.2

1.73
±0.14
1.2-2.0

Theta freq. (Hz)
and range (Hz)

7.08±0.09
6.8-7.3

3.95
±0.26
3.2-4.9

Table S2: Correlation between dia-OB coherences and OB-PFC and OB-HC
(significant positive correlation is marked with colored background, yellow:
p<0.05, orange: 0.05<p<0.1). C(X-Y): coherence between X and Y.
R2 between
C(dia-OB)
and…
… C(OB-PFC)

SWS

REM

QW

AW

Urethane
Theta

Urethane
Non-theta

0.31 (-)

0.17

0.33

0.87

0.80

… C(OB-HC)

0.35 (-)

0.41 (-)

0.08

0.21
0.06
0.12
0.08

0.99

0.78

1. Adrian, E.D. Olfactory reactions in the brain of the
hedgehog. J Physiol 100, 459-473 (1942).
2. Tort, A.B.L., Brankack, J. & Draguhn, A. RespirationEntrained Brain Rhythms Are Global but Often Overlooked.
Trends Neurosci 41, 186-197 (2018).
3. Biskamp, J., Bartos, M. & Sauer, J.F. Organization of
prefrontal network activity by respiration-related oscillations.
Sci Rep 7, 45508 (2017).
4. Zhong, W., et al. Selective entrainment of gamma
subbands by different slow network oscillations. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 114, 4519-4524 (2017).
5. Nguyen Chi, V., et al. Hippocampal RespirationDriven Rhythm Distinct from Theta Oscillations in Awake
Mice. J Neurosci 36, 162-177 (2016).
6. Yanovsky, Y., Ciatipis, M., Draguhn, A., Tort, A.B. &
Brankack, J. Slow oscillations in the mouse hippocampus
entrained by nasal respiration. J Neurosci 34, 5949-5964 (2014).
7. Lockmann, A.L., Laplagne, D.A., Leao, R.N. & Tort,
A.B. A Respiration-Coupled Rhythm in the Rat Hippocampus
Independent of Theta and Slow Oscillations. J Neurosci 36,
5338-5352 (2016).
8. Ito, J., et al. Whisker barrel cortex delta oscillations
and gamma power in the awake mouse are linked to respiration.
Nat Commun 5, 3572 (2014).
9. Tort, A.B.L., et al. Parallel detection of theta and
respiration-coupled oscillations throughout the mouse brain. Sci
Rep 8, 6432 (2018).
10. Zelano, C., et al. Nasal Respiration Entrains Human
Limbic Oscillations and Modulates Cognitive Function. J
Neurosci 36, 12448-12467 (2016).
11. Corcoran, A.W., Pezzulo, G. & Hohwy, J.
Commentary: Respiration-Entrained Brain Rhythms Are Global
but Often Overlooked. Front Syst Neurosci 12, 25 (2018).
12. Heck, D.H., Kozma, R. & Kay, L.M. The rhythm of
memory: how breathing shapes memory function. J
Neurophysiol 122, 563-571 (2019).
13. Heck, D.H., et al. Breathing as a Fundamental Rhythm
of Brain Function. Front Neural Circuits 10, 115 (2016).
14. Dejean, C., et al. Prefrontal neuronal assemblies
temporally control fear behaviour. Nature 535, 420-424 (2016).
15. Karalis, N., et al. 4-Hz oscillations synchronize
prefrontal-amygdala circuits during fear behavior. Nat Neurosci
19, 605-612 (2016).
16. Fujisawa, S. & Buzsaki, G. A 4 Hz oscillation
adaptively synchronizes prefrontal, VTA, and hippocampal
activities. Neuron 72, 153-165 (2011).
17. Buzsaki, G. Theta oscillations in the hippocampus.
Neuron 33, 325-340 (2002).
18. Sigurdsson, T., Stark, K.L., Karayiorgou, M., Gogos,
J.A. & Gordon, J.A. Impaired hippocampal-prefrontal
synchrony in a genetic mouse model of schizophrenia. Nature
464, 763-767 (2010).
19. Lee, H., et al. Early cognitive experience prevents
adult deficits in a neurodevelopmental schizophrenia model.
Neuron 75, 714-724 (2012).
20. Dickerson, D.D., Wolff, A.R. & Bilkey, D.K.
Abnormal long-range neural synchrony in a maternal immune
activation animal model of schizophrenia. J Neurosci 30,
12424-12431 (2010).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.077461; this version posted January 19, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

21. Nandi, B., Swiatek, P., Kocsis, B. & Ding, M. Inferring
the direction of rhythmic neural transmission via inter-regional
phase-amplitude coupling (ir-PAC). Sci Rep 9, 6933 (2019).
22. Roy, A., Svensson, F.P., Mazeh, A. & Kocsis, B.
Prefrontal-hippocampal coupling by theta rhythm and by 2-5 Hz
oscillation in the delta band: The role of the nucleus reuniens of
the thalamus. Brain Struct Funct 222, 2819-2830 (2017).
23. Paxinos, G. & Watson, C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic
Coordinates. (Academic Press, Sydney, 1986).
24. Heck, D.H., et al. Cortical rhythms are modulated by
respiration. BioRxiv, 049007 (2016).
25. Sarnthein, J., Petsche, H., Rappelsberger, P., Shaw,
G.L. & von Stein, A. Synchronization between prefrontal and
posterior association cortex during human working memory.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95, 7092-7096 (1998).
26. Igarashi, K.M. Plasticity in oscillatory coupling
between hippocampus and cortex. Curr Opin Neurobiol 35,
163-168 (2015).
27. Zhang, X., et al. Impaired theta-gamma coupling in
APP-deficient mice. Sci Rep 6, 21948 (2016).
28. Kaplan, R., et al. Medial Prefrontal-Medial Temporal
Theta Phase Coupling in Dynamic Spatial Imagery. J Cogn
Neurosci 29, 507-519 (2017).
29. Tamura, M., Spellman, T.J., Rosen, A.M., Gogos, J.A.
& Gordon, J.A. Hippocampal-prefrontal theta-gamma coupling
during performance of a spatial working memory task. Nat
Commun 8, 2182 (2017).
30. Barr, M.S., et al. Impaired theta-gamma coupling
during working memory performance in schizophrenia.
Schizophr Res 189, 104-110 (2017).
31. Teffer, K. & Semendeferi, K. Human prefrontal cortex:
evolution, development, and pathology. Prog Brain Res 195,
191-218 (2012).
32. Fletcher, P.C., Shallice, T., Frith, C.D., Frackowiak,
R.S. & Dolan, R.J. The functional roles of prefrontal cortex in
episodic memory. II. Retrieval. Brain 121 ( Pt 7), 1249-1256
(1998).
33. Fletcher, P.C., Shallice, T. & Dolan, R.J. The
functional roles of prefrontal cortex in episodic memory. I.
Encoding. Brain 121 ( Pt 7), 1239-1248 (1998).
34. Buckner, R.L. & Wheeler, M.E. The cognitive
neuroscience of remembering. Nat Rev Neurosci 2, 624-634
(2001).
35. Miller, E.K. & Cohen, J.D. An integrative theory of
prefrontal cortex function. Annu Rev Neurosci 24, 167-202
(2001).
36. Benchenane, K., Tiesinga, P.H. & Battaglia, F.P.
Oscillations in the prefrontal cortex: a gateway to memory and
attention. Curr Opin Neurobiol 21, 475-485 (2011).
37. Kocsis, B., Pittman-Polletta, B.R. & Roy, A.
Respiration-coupled rhythms in prefrontal cortex: beyond if, to
when, how, and why. Brain Struct Funct 223, 11-16 (2018).
38. Lockmann, A.L.V. & Tort, A.B.L. Nasal respiration
entrains delta-frequency oscillations in the prefrontal cortex and
hippocampus of rodents. Brain Struct Funct 223, 1-3 (2018).
39. Pittman-Polletta, B., Hu, K. & Kocsis, B. Subunitspecific NMDAR antagonism dissociates schizophrenia
subtype-relevant oscillopathies associated with frontal
hypofunction and hippocampal hyperfunction. Sci Rep 8, 11588
(2018).

40. Hunt, M.J., Kopell, N.J., Traub, R.D. & Whittington,
M.A. Aberrant Network Activity in Schizophrenia. Trends
Neurosci 40, 371-382 (2017).
41. Hall, T.M., de Carvalho, F. & Jackson, A. A common
structure underlies low-frequency cortical dynamics in
movement, sleep, and sedation. Neuron 83, 1185-1199 (2014).
42. Nacher, V., Ledberg, A., Deco, G. & Romo, R.
Coherent delta-band oscillations between cortical areas correlate
with decision making. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110, 1508515090 (2013).
43. Riecke, L., Sack, A.T. & Schroeder, C.E. Endogenous
Delta/Theta Sound-Brain Phase Entrainment Accelerates the
Buildup of Auditory Streaming. Curr Biol 25, 3196-3201
(2015).
44. Kay, L.M., et al. Olfactory oscillations: the what, how
and what for. Trends Neurosci 32, 207-214 (2009).
45. Wachowiak, M. All in a sniff: olfaction as a model for
active sensing. Neuron 71, 962-973 (2011).
46. Hoover, W.B. & Vertes, R.P. Anatomical analysis of
afferent projections to the medial prefrontal cortex in the rat.
Brain Struct Funct 212, 149-179 (2007).
47. Moberly, A.H., et al. Olfactory inputs modulate
respiration-related rhythmic activity in the prefrontal cortex and
freezing behavior. Nat Commun 9, 1528 (2018).
48. Bagur, S. & Benchenane, K. Taming the oscillatory
zoo in the hippocampus and neo-cortex: a review of the
commentary of Lockmann and Tort on Roy et al. Brain Struct
Funct 223, 5-9 (2018).
49. Perl, O., et al. Human non-olfactory cognition phaselocked with inhalation. Nat Hum Behav 3, 501-512 (2019).
50. Arshamian, A., Iravani, B., Majid, A. & Lundstrom,
J.N. Respiration Modulates Olfactory Memory Consolidation in
Humans. J Neurosci 38, 10286-10294 (2018).
51. Buzsaki, G. & Draguhn, A. Neuronal oscillations in
cortical networks. Science 304, 1926-1929 (2004).
52. Viczko, J., Sharma, A.V., Pagliardini, S., Wolansky, T.
& Dickson, C.T. Lack of respiratory coupling with neocortical
and hippocampal slow oscillations. J Neurosci 34, 3937-3946
(2014).
53. Kim, J., Gulati, T. & Ganguly, K. Competing Roles of
Slow Oscillations and Delta Waves in Memory Consolidation
versus Forgetting. Cell 179, 514-526 e513 (2019).
54. Boyce, R., Glasgow, S.D., Williams, S. &
Adamantidis, A. Causal evidence for the role of REM sleep
theta rhythm in contextual memory consolidation. Science 352,
812-816 (2016).
55. Chervin, R.D., et al. Correlates of respiratory cyclerelated EEG changes in children with sleep-disordered
breathing. Sleep 27, 116-121 (2004).
56. Immanuel, S.A., et al. Respiratory cycle-related
electroencephalographic changes during sleep in healthy
children and in children with sleep disordered breathing. Sleep
37, 1353-1361 (2014).
57. Sirota, A. & Buzsaki, G. Interaction between
neocortical and hippocampal networks via slow oscillations.
Thalamus Relat Syst 3, 245-259 (2005).
58. Sirota, A., Csicsvari, J., Buhl, D. & Buzsaki, G.
Communication between neocortex and hippocampus during
sleep in rodents. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100, 2065-2069
(2003).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.04.077461; this version posted January 19, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

59. Karalis, N. & Sirota, A.M. Breathing coordinates
limbic network dynamics underlying memory consolidation.
BioRxiv (2018).
60. Yang, C.F. & Feldman, J.L. Efferent projections of
excitatory and inhibitory preBotzinger Complex neurons. J
Comp Neurol 526, 1389-1402 (2018).
61. Yackle, K., et al. Breathing control center neurons that
promote arousal in mice. Science 355, 1411-1415 (2017).
62. Kocsis, B. Basis for differential coupling between
rhythmic discharges of sympathetic efferent nerves. Am J
Physiol 267, R1008-1019 (1994).
63. Kocsis, B., Karlsson, T. & Wallin, B.G. Cardiac- and
noncardiac-related coherence between sympathetic drives to
muscles of different human limbs. Am J Physiol 276, R16081616 (1999).
64. Hauer, B.E., Pagliardini, S. & Dickson, C.T. The
Reuniens Nucleus of the Thalamus Has an Essential Role in
Coordinating Slow-Wave Activity between Neocortex and
Hippocampus. eNeuro 6 (2019).
65. Totah, N.K., Neves, R.M., Panzeri, S., Logothetis,
N.K. & Eschenko, O. The Locus Coeruleus Is a Complex and
Differentiated Neuromodulatory System. Neuron 99, 1055-1068
e1056 (2018).
66. Szkudlarek, H.J., Orlowska, P. & Lewandowski, M.H.
Light-induced responses of slow oscillatory neurons of the rat
olivary pretectal nucleus. PLoS One 7, e33083 (2012).
67. Granata, A.R. & Cohen, M.I. Different types of
barosensory synaptic inputs to rostral ventrolateral medulla
neurons of the rat. Brain Res 998, 36-47 (2004).
68. Kocsis, B. & Gyimesi-Pelczer, K. Spinal segments
communicating resting sympathetic activity to postganglionic
nerves of the stellate ganglion. Am J Physiol 275, R400-409
(1998).
69. Vertes, R.P., Colom, L.V., Fortin, W.J. & Bland, B.H.
Brainstem sites for the carbachol elicitation of the hippocampal
theta rhythm in the rat. Exp Brain Res 96, 419-429 (1993).
70. Sorman, E., Wang, D., Hajos, M. & Kocsis, B. Control
of hippocampal theta rhythm by serotonin: role of 5-HT2c
receptors. Neuropharmacology 61, 489-494 (2011).
71. Ly, S., Pishdari, B., Lok, L.L., Hajos, M. & Kocsis, B.
Activation of 5-HT6 receptors modulates sleep-wake activity
and hippocampal theta oscillation. ACS Chem Neurosci 4, 191199 (2013).
72. Pagliardini, S., Greer, J.J., Funk, G.D. & Dickson, C.T.
State-dependent modulation of breathing in urethaneanesthetized rats. J Neurosci 32, 11259-11270 (2012).
73. Jessberger, J., Zhong, W., Brankack, J. & Draguhn, A.
Olfactory Bulb Field Potentials and Respiration in Sleep-Wake
States of Mice. Neural Plast 2016, 4570831 (2016).
74. Farre, R., Montserrat, J.M. & Navajas, D. Noninvasive
monitoring of respiratory mechanics during sleep. Eur Respir J
24, 1052-1060 (2004).
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the
National Institute of Mental Health grant R01 MH100820 to BK
and a Swedish Government stipend to RM.
Author contributions. RM and BK contributed to the
experiments, analysis, interpreting the results, and writing the
report.

Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing
interests.

