bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Rapid host response to an infection with Coronavirus.
Study of transcriptional responses with Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea Virus
1

1

2

2*

Wei Hou , Fei Liu , Wim H.M. van der Poel , Marcel M. Hulst
1

College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China
2

Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Lelystad, the Netherlands.
* corresponding author; marcel.hulst@wur.nl

Abstract
The transcriptional response in Vero cells (ATCC® CCL-81) infected with the
coronavirus Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea Virus (PEDV) was measured by RNAseq
analysis 4 and 6 hours after infection. Differential expressed genes (DEGs) in PEDV
infected cells were compared to DEGs responding in Vero cells infected with
Mammalian Orthoreovirus (MRV). Functional analysis of MRV and PEDV DEGs showed
that MRV increased the expression level of several cytokines and chemokines (e.g.
IL6, CXCL10, IL1A, CXCL8 [alias IL8]) and antiviral genes (e.g. IFI44, IFIT1, MX1,
OASL), whereas for PEDV no enhanced expression was observed for these “hallmark”
antiviral and immune effector genes. Pathway and Gene Ontology “enrichment
analysis” revealed that PEDV infection did not stimulate expression of genes able to
activate an acquired immune response, whereas MRV did so within 6h. Instead,
PEDV down-regulated the expression of a set of zinc finger proteins with putative
antiviral activity and enhanced the expression of the transmembrane serine protease
gene TMPRSS13 (alias MSPL) to support its own infection by virus-cell membrane
fusion (Shi et al, 2017, Viruses, 9(5):114). PEDV also down-regulated expression of
Ectodysplasin A, a cytokine of the TNF-family able to activate the canonical NFKBpathway responsible for transcription of inflammatory genes like IL1B, TNF, CXCL8
and PTGS2. The only 2 cytokine genes found up-regulated by PEDV were
Cardiotrophin-1, an IL6-type cytokine with pleiotropic functions on different tissues
and types of cells, and Endothelin 2, a neuroactive peptide with vasoconstrictive
properties. Furthermore, by comprehensive datamining in biological and chemical
databases and consulting related literature we identified sets of PEDV-response
genes with potential to influence i) the metabolism of biogenic amines (e.g.
histamine), ii) the formation of cilia and “synaptic clefts” between cells, iii) epithelial
mucus production, iv) platelets activation, and v) physiological processes in the body
regulated by androgenic hormones (like blood pressure, salt/water balance and
energy homeostasis). The information in this study describing a “very early”
response of epithelial cells to an infection with a coronavirus may provide
pharmacologists, immunological and medical specialists additional insights in the
underlying mechanisms of coronavirus associated severe clinical symptoms including
those induced by SARS-CoV-2. This may help them to fine-tune therapeutic
treatments and apply specific approved drugs to treat COVID-19 patients.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction.
The lack of knowledge for treating hospitalized SARS-CoV-2 infected patients is one
of the pressing problems of the current COVID-19 pandemic. The SARS-CoV-2 virus
shows a close genetic similarity to the in April 2003 identified SARS virus (SARSCoV-1) and to other SARS-related coronaviruses isolated from humans and bats.
SARS-CoV-2 induces clinical respiratory symptoms familiar to the 2003 virus, mostly
in persons with underlying diseases like COPD, heart failure, diabetes and obesity (1:
Wu et al. 2020). Despite the 2003 SARS-CoV-1 virus has been extensively studied in
the last two decades, there are no vaccines available yet, neither there are effective
prophylactic and therapeutic treatment regimens with drugs that work equally well
for each individual patient with SARS-induced respiratory problems. Such treatments
might prevent development of severe disease patterns like “acute respiratory
distress syndrome” (ARDS) and other, often fatal complications, and may decrease
the case-fatality rate of SARS-CoV-2 infections.
In our lab we study the alpha-coronavirus PEDV. PEDV was first detected in pig herds
in 1977 in Europe (2: Pensaert and de Bouck 1978). However, this virus reemerged
in the spring of 2013 in North America causing a massive outbreak among pig herds,
resulting in the death of about 30% of the suckling piglets due to severe diarrhea
and dehydration (3: Huang et al. 2013, 4: Jung K. and Saif LJ. 2015). In the
following years, PEDV was detected in many countries around the world. Intensified
surveillance programs for PEDV frequently detected Mammalian Orthoreovirus
serotype 3 (MRV3) in the fecal samples of diarrheic piglets tested positive for PEDV.
Firstly in the USA during the PEDV epidemic in 2013 (5: Nayaranappa et al. 2015),
and in the following years also in fecal samples of PEDV infected piglets in Europe (6:
Lelli et al. 2016, 7: Hulst et al. 2017). MRV is able to infect many types of mammals
and is widely distributed around the world, with bats as the main animal reservoir.
Infections of MRV have been reported in humans and can cause mild (often
asymptotic) to severe respiratory symptoms, gastroenteritis, or encephalitis in young
children (8: Steyer et al. 2013, 9: Tyler 1998, 10: Chua et al. 2008). Although
several studies concluded that these clinical symptoms were caused by MRV itself, in
concordance with the co-existence of MRV3 in PEDV infected piglets, also other MRV
serotypes were isolated from hospitalized patients with airway problems diagnosed
positive for SARS-CoV-1 (11: Cheng et al. 2009, 12: Duan et al. 2003, 13: Zuo et al.
2003). Recently, a cross-family recombinant coronavirus was isolated in China from
bat faeces in which an RNA sequence originating from the S1 segment of MRV was
inserted in the coronavirus genome between the N and Ns7a genes, indicating that
both viruses were replicating simultaneously in a single cell in bats (14: Huang et al.
2016). A prevalence study showed that this cross-family recombinant coronavirus
circulated in an isolated bat colony in a cave in China (15: Obameso et al. 2017).
This cooccurrence of MRV with coronaviruses raised the questions whether a
synergistic effect between both viruses exists and if such coexistence plays a role in
viral pathogenesis. Therefore we studied the host response in cultured cells early (4
and 6 hours) after PEDV and MRV infection using RNAseq. Our original goal was to
identify early factors and processes induced by PEDV or MRV that could stimulate or
influence the replication and pathogenesis of the other virus.
The host, tissue and cell tropism of PEDV differs from SARS-CoV-1 and -2. However,
the genomic organization, replication strategy and function of a part of the viral nonstructural proteins share common features among all coronaviruses (16: Brian and
Baric 2005). This applies particularly for interactions in infected cells of nonstructural coronavirus proteins with specific host proteins. Host proteins that are
recruited or silenced to support virus replication, assembly and release. In our
experiment we used Vero cells (Cercopithecus aethiops epithelial kidney cell line;
ATCC® CCL-81) because these cells support efficient infection and replication of both
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

MRV and PEDV. Vero cells are susceptible for many coronaviruses, including SARSCoV-1 and -2 (17: Chu et al. 2020). They originate from epithelial tissue, in part
resembling nasal and bronchial epithelium cells, the prime target cells infected by
SARS-CoV-2 in the airways of humans. Recent research showed that SARS-CoV-2 is
also able to replicate in epithelial cells of human small intestinal organoids (18:
Lamers et al. 2020). A disadvantage of Vero cells is a deletion in the type I interferon
(IFN) gene cluster on chromosome 12 (19: Osada et al. 2014). Therefore, these cells
lack expression of type I IFNs important for activation of antiviral defense
mechanisms. However, research has shown that Vero cells by-pass this IFNactivation route and could mount an antiviral response mediated by interferon
regulatory factor 3 (20: Chew et al. 2009).
Single infections with PEDV or MRV3 alone and simultaneous (double) infections of
Vero cells with both viruses were performed using a maximum multiplicity of
infection (MOI) to achieve a synchronized infection of all cells. By RNAseq measured
expression levels of mRNA transcripts/genes in infected cells were compared to
RNAseq profiles measured from similar treated mock-infected cells harvested at the
same time point after infection. The detected sets of differential expressed genes
(DEGs) for PEDV and MRV were analyzed by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
using functional bioinformatic programs to retrieve biological processes (pathways
and Gene Ontology terms [GO-term]) and associations with chemical compounds,
including drugs. In addition, we searched the literature for functional information of
the PEDV-DEGs to find possible associations with SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. Because
of the COVID-2 pandemic we gave priority to publish the results of this functional
bioinformatical analysis and datamining for the single infected Vero cells with PEDV
separate from the results of the double infections with MRV3. In this report we
focused on the “very early” host response of epithelial cells to an infection with the
coronavirus PEDV and pay less attention to the role of specific viral proteins in this
host response to PEDV. In part our results were in agreement with results of a
previous RNAseq study comparing SARS-CoV-2 and Influenza host responses by
RNAseq (21: Blanco-Melo et al. 2020). But we also found associations with biological
processes, and pivotal genes/proteins acting in these processes, that had not been
recognized before. This information may contribute to the search for novel or
alternative preventive or therapeutic drugs and treatment protocols for this
devastating COVID-19 disease.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results
RNA transcription profiling
A time-dependent infection experiment was performed with cultured Vero cells.
Details are described in supplementary file 1 (material and methods) and visually
displayed in this file. Briefly, overnight cultured Vero cells grown in 2 cm2 wells were
mock-infected, infected with MRV3 strain WBVR (7: Hulst et al. 2017) or PEDV strain
CV777 (2: Pensaert and de Bouck 1978, 22: Rasmussen et al. 2018]) with a
multiplicity of infection of ≥1 for 30 min at 4°C. For PEDV and corresponding mockinfected cells, 10 µg/ml of trypsin in serum-free medium was used to facilitate
infection of Vero cells during the whole experiment. All virus and mock-infected
timepoints were performed in quadruplicate. After incubation for 30 min at 4°C, virus
was discarded and cells were washed twice and supplied with fresh culture medium.
Cells were incubated for 0, 2, 4, 6, and 16h at 37°C and 5% CO2. After incubation for
the indicated times, cells were placed on ice before total RNA was isolated from three
of the quadruplicate wells. The replication of both viruses in Vero cells was monitored
using virus-specific RT-qPCR tests (Fig.1: methods and primers used for PCR are
provided in supplementary file 1). In addition, cells in one of the quadruplicate wells
incubated for 16h were fixated and stained with antibodies directed against the S2
spike protein of PEDV and the S1 attachment protein (α1) of MRV3. A decrease in
CT-values for PEDV was not observed before 6 h post inoculation (6 h.p.i), indicating
that replication in PEDV infected cells started later than was observed for MRV (at 4
h.p.i). Staining of the cells after 16h indicated that nearly all Vero cells were infected
with MRV3 and more than 50% with PEDV. Also more than 50% of the cells in 16hwells appeared as fused cells (syncytia), confirming that more than 50% of the cells
were infected with PEDV. Quality control of the total RNA isolated from infected cells
using an Agilent Bioanalyzer showed that RNAs isolated from PEDV infected wells at
16 h.p.i. were partially degraded (RIN values below 9), making them unsuitable for
RNAseq analysis. Therefore, only 0, 4 and 6h timepoints were analyzed using
RNAseq.

Fig. 1. (A) Detection of PEDV and MRV replication in Vero cells at 0, 2, 4, 6 and 16h post infection by RTqPCR. CT values are provided in the table beneath the graphs. (B) Immuno-Peroxidase Monolayer Assay (IPMA)
of virus infected cells and mock infected cells (control) 16h after infection. PEDV and mock infected cells were
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

stained with a monoclonal antibody directed against the S2 spike protein. MRV and mock infected cells were
stained with a polyclonal rabbit serum raised against a peptide sequence of the S1-attachment protein of MRV
serotype 3. Nuclei were stained blue with the Hoechst, 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dye.

Equal amounts of total RNA isolated from triplicate wells were pooled and subjected
to RNAseq analysis by GenomeScan B.V.(Leiden, The Netherlands) using Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) (see supplementary file 2a for details). Mapping of
NGS reads to the Cercopithecus aethiops reference genome and preparation of
datafiles with calculated Fold Change (FC) of expression levels of mapped mRNAs,
were performed for each comparison at 0, 4, and 6h by GenomeScan (see
supplementary file 2b). From these datafiles we extracted lists of DEGs with a FC>2
and p-value of <0.05. After accessing the NCBI, Panther or KEGG databases for
human orthologs, not annotated Cercopithecus aethiops DEGs were annotated with
an HUGO official gene symbols (http://www.genenames.org). In supplementary file
3 sheet “PEDV-MRV DEGs FC>2”, lists of all annotated PEDV and MRV DEGs are
presented with their FC. In a separate sheet “PEDV-DEGs functional info” all 266
individual DEGs regulated by PEDV at 4 and 6 h.p.i. are presented with their FC,
information about their function and the types of human cells in which expression of
the gene is relatively high compared to other human cells (retrieved from the
“Primary Cell Atlas” dataset of BioGPS: http://biogps.org/). Note that all tables in
these Excel sheets of supplementary file 3 are sortable using the headers. In all
results paragraphs beneath information about the biological function of DEGs was
retrieved by consulting the “GeneCards” (Weizmann Institute of Science:
https://www.genecards.org/) and NCBI Gene reports (Entrez Gene:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/), and literature linked to these reports (for
references about these biological functions of genes/proteins we refer to publications
cited in these reports: “GeneCards” weblinks are provided in supplementary file 3).
Sets of PEDV and MRV DEGs were analyzed using the GSEA program GeneAnalytics
(LifeMap Sciences, Inc.) and pathways (for MRV and PEDV), GO-terms (not for MRV),
and associations with compounds/drugs (not for MRV) with a high or medium score
(p-value <0.05) were retrieved and listed in 3 separate sheets in supplementary file
3 (sheets “MRV-PEDV pathways”, “PEDV G0-terms” and “PEDV Compounds”). Similar
and related pathways retrieved for both PEDV and MRV, and remarkable PEDV
pathways, GO-terms and compound associations are summarized in Table 1. For
PEDV all DEGs within these pathways are provided with their regulation, up (green)
or down (red). For MRV only DEGs in common with PEDV-DEGs were listed in Table 1
(see sheet “MRV-PEDV pathways” in supplementary file 3 for all MRV-DEGs acting in
these pathways). Subsets of PEDV-DEGs were selected matching the terms
“chemokines-cytokines”, “antiviral” , and terms related to the pathogenesis of
COVID-2 (explained below) using the genotyping program VarElect (LifeMap
Sciences, Inc.) and displayed in supplementary file 3 in separate sheets:
“chemokines-cytokines”, “(anti)-viral”, etc. Based on these selections we prepared a
set of PEDV KEY-DEGs consisting of genes regulated with a FC of >10 (up) or <-10
(down) or playing an important role in biological processes induced by PEDV and
related to COVID-19 pathology. In beneath results sections we tried to give as much
as possible meaningful information about the function of KEY-DEGs for which we
found an association with SARS-CoV-2 infections. We emphasize that further
dedicated experimental and in-silico research is necessary to confirm the
involvement of the proteins encoded by these genes for pathogenesis of this viral
disease.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table 1. Enriched pathways, GO-terms and compound associations of PEDV-DEGs.
(A) PEDV and related
*PEDV and similar or related MRV enriched Pathways
MRV pathways (h.p.i.)
PEDV-4h/MRV -4 and
Transcription_Role of VDR in Regulation of Genes Involved in Osteoporosis (Vitamin-D metabolism)
6h
Tacrolimus/Cyclosporine Pathway (drug-induced regulation of NFAT transcription factor activity in TPEDV-4h/MRV-6h
cells by immunophilin [PPIA]; down-regulation of inflammatory cytokine expression)
Signaling By Rho GTPases (ARHGAP42 and its paralog OPHN1; inhibition of RhoA activity in
PEDV-6h/MRV-4h
regulating vascular tone and blood pressure and down-regulated expression of autoantigens)

Matched Genes (Symbols) $
CYP24A1, COL1A1 (MRV-4h 5 genes, MRV-6h 6 genes, no common genes to
PEDV)
PPIA, NRL (MRV-6h 8 genes; no common genes to PEDV)
HIST2H2BE, H2AFZ, ARHGAP42, HIST4H4, NOX3, SFN, OPHN1 (MRV-4h 14
genes; OPHN1 in common)
EIF4E3, AHSG, HLA-H, HSP90B1, HIST1H3A, AOC1, GAB2, EDARADD, ATP8B4,
MAOA, BLNK, PPIA, SPRED3, RORC, CD53, RASA4, PI3, CXCR1, RASGEF1A,
MUC5AC, EDA (MRV-6h 69 genes; RORC, RASA4 in common with PEDV)
LCE3B, HIST2H2BE, COL9A3, KRT25, H2AFZ, EPHA10, HSPA8, HIST4H4, SHC3,
MEF2B, PIK3CB, RND1, SCN4B (MRV-6h 42 genes; PIK3CB in common with
EIF4E3, HLA-H, HSP90B1, HIST1H3A , GAB2, EDARADD, MAOA, BLNK, SPRED3,
RORC, RASA4, RASGEF1A, EDA (MRV-4h 21 genes, MRV-6h 41 genes; RORC,
RASA4, HIST1H3A in common with PEDV)

PEDV-4h/MRV-6h

Innate Immune System (transcription of genes for vescicle formation)

PEDV-6h/MRV-6h

Developmental Biology (transcription of genes involved in forming "cornified cell envelopes";
mediated by ephrin ligands)

PEDV-4h/MRV-4 and
6h

Cytokine Signaling in Immune System (PEDV-RORC up-regulation/MRV-RORC down-regulation)
(PEDV up-reglation of Endothelin 2 [EDN2] at 4h and Cardiotrophin 1 [CTF1] at 6h)

PEDV-4h/MRV-4 and
6h

NF-kappa B Signaling Pathway (down-regulated EDA-EDARADD signaling: reduced NF-kappaB
induced IL1B, IL8,TNF,PTGS2,NFKBIA,TNFAIP3 transcription)

EDARADD, BLNK, EDA (MRV-6h 22 genes; no common genes to PEDV)

PI3K / Akt Signaling (ERAS activates the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signal transduction pathway)

BORCS6, ERAS, PIK3CB (MRV-6h 28 genes; PIK3CB in common with PEDV)

PEDV-6h/MRV-6h
PEDV-4h/MRV-4 and
6h
PEDV-4h

TNFs Bind Their Physiological Receptors (down-regulated EDA-EDARADD signaling: reduced
EDARADD, EDA (MRV-6h 14 genes; no common genes to PEDV)
activation of NF-kappaB induced IL1B, IL8,TNF,PTGS2,NFKBIA,TNFAIP3 transcription)
Cell Adhesion_ECM Remodeling (CXCR1; high affinity receptor for CXCL8=IL8, involved in neutrophil
COL1A1, COL3A2, CXCR1
activation)

PEDV-4h

Diseases of Glycosylation (down-regulation of forming of an epitehlial mucus layer)

SEMA5A, MUC5AC, SSPO

PEDV-4h

Histidine Metabolism (biogenic amine metabolism; histamine-[derivates])

AOC1, MAOA

PEDV-4h

Inflammatory Response Pathway (COL1A1 and COL3A1; inflammation fibriotic response)

COL1A1, COL3A1

PEDV-4h

Influenza Viral RNA Transcription and Replication (RPS genes; ribosomal proteins involved in
translation)

RPS2, RPL36, RPL35A, RPS15

PEDV-4h

Phenylalanine Metabolism (biogenic amine metabolism)

AOC1, MAOA, IL4I1

Tryptophan Metabolism (biogenic amine metabolism)

AOC1, MAOA, IL4I1

PEDV-4h
PEDV-6h
PEDV-6h
PEDV-6h
PEDV-6h
PEDV-6h

C-MYB Transcription Factor Network (PPIA forms acomplex with H2AZF in response to DNA
dammage)
Eicosanoid Synthesis (conversion of prostaglandin endoperoxide H2 [PGH2] to prostaglandin E2
[PGE2]; involved in pathogenesis of collagen-induced arthritis and acute pain during inflammatory
Histidine Metabolism (biogenic amine metabolism; histamine-[derivates])

CSF1R, H2AFZ, HSPA8
GGT1, PTGES
AMDHD1, HNMT

Histidine, Lysine, Phenylalanine, Tyrosine, Proline and Tryptophan Catabolism (biogenic amine
AMDHD1, HNMT, PRODH
metabolism)
Cell Surface Interactions at The Vascular Wall (PPIA forms a complex with H2AZF in response to DNA
JCHAIN, PPIA, PIK3CB, PSG7, SLC7A9
dammage)

(B) PEDV h.p.i.

*PEDV-GO-terms

Matched Genes (Symbols)

4

Translational Initiation (EIF4E3; Binds the 7-methylguanosine-mRNA cap in early step of translation
and may act as an inhibitor of EIF4E1 activity).
Viral Transcription (RPS genes; ribosomal proteins involved in translation)

4

Platelet Activation (F2RL2 down-regulation; reduced throbocitic and/or inflammatory response)

COL1A1, COL3A1, F2RL2, GNG2

4

Primary Amine Oxidase Activity (biogenic amine metabolism; histamine-[derivates])

AOC1, MAOA

4

Platelet-derived Growth Factor Binding (COL1A1 and COL3A1; inflammation fibriotic response)

COL1A1, COL3A1

FEZ1, CSF1R, EPHA10, FLRT2, SHC3, PIK3CB, OPHN1

6

Non-motile Cilium (ANO2 down-regulation; reduction olfactory sensory amplification of odorant
receptors present on non-motile cilia of dendritic knobs).
Axon Guidance (FEZ1; Fasciculation and/or normal axonal bundling and elongation within axon
bundles)
Cilium (CDK20 and MAK, inhibitors of cilia formation)

6

Axoneme (MAK; regulates intraflagellar transport (IFT) speed and negatively regulates cilia length)

DNAH10, CCDC114, MAK

6

Histidine Catabolic Process (biogenic amine metabolism; histamine-[derivates])

AMDHD1, HNMT

6

Secretory Granule Lumen (ATPase activity of HSPA8 contributes to disassembly of clathrin-coated
vesicles in the cell)

EEF1A1, GHDC, HSPA8, PPIA

4

4
6

(C) PEDV h.p.i.
4

MCHR1, ANO2, (added DEG; OR2A14)

GPR19, DNAH10, CCDC114, CDK20, MAK, TULP2

Matched Genes (Symbols)

4

Bepridil (calcium-blocking drug/calmodulin antagonist with antihypertensive and selective antiarrhythmia activities)
Hydrogen Peroxide (AOC1, MAOA, IL4I1, enzymatic by-product)

4

Indoleacetaldehyde (enzymatic product catalysis by AOC1, MAOA)

4

RPS2, RPL36, RPL35A, RPS15

*PEDV compound assiociation
Ammonia (GCSH, AOC1, MAOA, IL4I1, enzymatic by-product)

KCNQ4, CACNA1H
AOC1, MAOA, IL4I1
AOC1, MAOA

4
4

Tele-methylhistamine (histamine methyltransferase antagonist)

AOC1, MAOA

6

4-methylumbelliferone (choleretic drug; promoting bile secretion by the liver)

CES1, UGT1A9

6

Dabigatran Etexilate (Thrombin inhibitor drug, blocking thrombogenic activity)

CES1, UGT1A9

6

Dihydroartemisinin (malaria drug)

EEF1A1, HSPA8, PPIA, UGT1A9, NPM1

6

Excitatory Amino Acid Antagonists (synaptic transmission)

ERAS, SFN

6

Tacrine (Anticholinesterase drug)

HNMT, CES1

4

$

GCSH, AOC1, MAOA, IL4I1

NPPA (prohormone natriuretic Peptide A (ANP); inhibition cardiac hypertrophy in heart failure as
well as fibrosis).
NPPB (cardiac hormone; regulates natriuresis, diuresis, vasorelaxation, and has a key role in
cardiovascular homeostasis).
Phenylacetaldehyde (enzymatic product catalysis by AOC1, MAOA)

4

$

EIF4E3, RPS2, RPL36, RPL35A, RPS15

COL1A1, COL3A1
COL1A1, COL3A1
AOC1, MAOA

*PEDV enriched pathways (A), GO-terms (B), and associations with compounds and drugs (C) with
a high and medium score and with at least 2 matching genes were retrieved from GeneAnalytics.
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Common pathways for MRV were included in Table 1A. A full list of pathways with DEGs, retrieved
for MRV at 4 and 6h, is provided in supplementary file 3 (sheet MRV-PEDV pathways). A possible
function or process related to specific DEGs, pathways, GO-term, or compounds/drugs is provided
in blue text between brackets.
$Official Gene-symbols (HUGO abbreviations) are listed for DEGs. Down-regulated DEGs were
colored red and up-regulated DEGs were colored green. In section A the number of DEGs regulated
by MRV in a pathway and the common DEGs are provided between brackets. DEGs regulated by
both PEDV and MRV are underlined.

Regulation of immune and antiviral genes.
Compared to MRV, only a few genes involved in “cytokine/chemokine signaling” were
regulated at 4 and 6h by PEDV. In Fig. 2A the regulation of cytokines/chemokines in
PEDV and MRV infected Vero cells are displayed. This indicated that MRV increased
the transcription of a broad set of cytokines/chemokines, including interferonmediated cytokines like CXCL10 and CXCL8 (alias IL8), already at 4 h.p.i., whereas
PEDV did not, even not when replication of PEDV RNA was detected by RT-qPCR at 6
h.p.i.. For MRV, this cytokine/chemokine response at 4 h.p.i. was followed by high
up-regulation of “hallmark” antiviral genes at 6 h.p.i. (see Fig. 2B: e.g. interferoninduced genes [IFI] and OASL) and chemokines that attract T cells, monocytes,
granulocytes, including basophils (e.g. CXCL8, CXCL11 and CCL2). PEDV infection
up-regulated only a few genes coding for proteins with cytokine activity (CTF1 and
EDN2), and also did not elevated gene expression of these “hallmark” antiviral
genes. In contrast, PEDV down-regulated expression of 6 genes (out of 9 in total)
coding for Zinc Finger Proteins (out of 9 in total), all 6 with an antiviral activity
towards Herpes simplex virus 1 (Fig 2C) and of the gene coding for Heat Shock
Protein Family A (Hsp70) Member 8 (HSPA8; 12-fold at 6h). Binding of HSPA8 to the
measles virus nucleocapsid protein (N) negatively affected virus replication. An
indication that PEDV provoked a transcriptional response in Vero cells was the
elevated expression of the “Transmembrane Serine Protease 13” gene (TMPRSS13,
alias MSPL). It was recently reported that expression of this protease was stimulated
in response to PEDV infection (23: Shi et al. 2017). TMPRSS13 cleaves the PEDV
spike protein resulting in virus-cell membrane fusion and subsequent entry of virus
particles into cells. A similar mechanism of virus entry into cells is used by SARS
coronaviruses and influenza A viruses (24: Zmora et al. 2014, 25: Matsuyama et al.
2010). The only 2 genes with cytokine activity found up-regulated were Endothelin 2
(EDN2, a neuroactive secreted peptide with vasoconstrictive properties) and
Cardiotrophin 1 (CTF1). The latter codes for a protein that binds to the IL6-signal
transducer (IL6ST, alias GP130) receptor and leukemia inhibitory factor receptor
(LIFR). Both these receptors initiate phosphorylation of STAT3, a transcriptional
activator of interferon (IFN) genes and IL6. In a recent study EDN2 gene expression
was also up-regulated in alveolar basal epithelial cell line A549 in response to SARSCoV-2 infection (21: Blanco-Melo et al. 2020, see also below). CTF1 induces
pleiotropic physiological effects in the body, among them, induction of cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy, regulation of energy metabolism, reduction of lipid accumulation and
insulin sensitivity in skeletal myocytes, and regulation of inflammation (see also
below). PEDV down-regulated the expression of the cytokine Ectodysplasin A (EDA),
a cytokine of the TNF-family, and of the receptor to which EDA binds (EDAR
Associated Death Domain: EDARADD). EDA- EDARADD signaling activates canonicalNFKB transcription of inflammatory genes like IL1B, TNF, CXCL8 and ProstaglandinEndoperoxide Synthase 2. PTGS2 is responsible for synthesis of prostaglandin H2, a
chemical immune modulator.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 2. Fold Change (FC) of cytokine and chemokine gene expression (A), antiviral gene
expression (B) and zinc finger genes with a putative antiviral activity (C; only shown for PEDV)
measured in MRV and PEDV infected Vero cells at 4 and 6 h.p.i. The regulation of TMPRSS13 gene
expression by MRV and PEDV was included in graph B. Note that negative values represent the FC
of down-regulated genes.
Pathway analysis indicated that MRV enhanced the expression of a broad set of
genes in Vero cells, within 6h after infection, involved in activation of acquired
immune responses by T- cells. In contrary, only a few genes related to T-cell
activation were regulated by PEDV after 6h (see sheet “MRV-PEDV pathways” in
supplementary file 3). Therefore, we searched for PEDV-DEGs which regulation could
contribute to dysregulation of T-cell responses. PEDV-DEGs with potential to do so
are the receptors SLAMF8, CXCR1, and F2RL2 (thrombin receptor-like 2, alias PAR3),
all down-regulated 5 to 10-fold at 4 h.p.i., and the upregulated genes Colony
Stimulating Factor 1 Receptor (CSF1R; 7-fold at 6h), B cell Linker (BLNK; upregulated 10-fold at 4h) and nuclear receptor/transcription factor RORC (upregulated 10-fold at 4h). Transcription factor RORC was down-regulated by MRV at
6h. RORC mediates the expression of IL17 in helper Th17 cells (Th17). However, it
was reported that specific isoforms of RORC exist that can suppress expression of
IL17, IL2, and FASLG in T cells (26: Rauen et al. 2012). Binding of measles virus
hemagglutinin to SLAMF surface receptors inhibits IL12 expression by dendritic cells
(DCs). The S1 spike glycoprotein of specific PEDV strains and the majority of betacoronaviruses (SARS-CoV-2 included) also induce hemagglutination of human
erythrocytes (27: de Groot et al. 2006). CXCR1 is a high-affinity receptor for CXCL8
(IL8) on the surface of mast and T cells. Binding of thrombin to F2RL2 reduces
inflammation, activates platelets and increases vasodilation and permeability of the
vascular wall (see also below in the section “platelets activation”). CSF1R is a
receptor for the cytokine colony stimulating factor 1, a cytokine that regulates
differentiation and function of macrophages, and in the CNS, the density and
distribution of microglia cells. The BLNK gene codes for a cytosolic protein that
passes on B-cell receptor signals in the signaling cascade that activates B-cell
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

development and function. Gene expression of genes coding for essential
components of this B-cell signaling, like “spleen associated tyrosine kinase” (SYK)
and “LYN proto-oncogene”(LYN) were not regulated by PEDV, nor by MRV.
Genes involved in amino acid, protein translation and metabolism of immuno-active
compounds.
PEDV induced a 2-fold up-regulation of the gene coding for Eukaryotic Translation
Initiation Factor 4E Family Member 3 (EIF4E3) at 4 h.p.i. and strong down-regulation
of Eukaryotic Translation Elongation Factor 1 Alpha 1 (EEF1A1, 20-fold) at 6 h.p.i..
EIF4E3 interacts with 5-prime cap structures of mRNA’s and recruits these capped
RNA’s to the ribosomes. Coronavirus genomic and sub-genomic RNA’s are also
capped at the 5-prime ends and methylated by the non-structural viral protein
nsp14, which possesses guanine-N7-methyltransferase (N7-Mtase) activity (28:
Chen et al. 2009). It was shown that additional 2’-O methylation of viral caps by the
coronavirus nsp16/nsp10 2’-O-Mtase counteracts the innate antiviral response of
IFIT family members (Interferon Induced Protein With Tetratricopeptide Repeats) in
host cells (29: Daffis et al. 2010). EEF1A1 directs aminoacyl-tRNA’s to the ribosomes
during translation and is also a part of transcription factor-complex in T-helper 1
cells (Th1) that binds to the promotor of the IFNγ gene.
DEGs coding for enzymes involved in the metabolism of the non-essential amino
acids histidine, phenylalanine, tryptophan and proline were found enriched in the
PEDV dataset (see supplementary file 3, sheet PEDV-compounds). Remarkable were
the DEGs coding for amine oxidases involved in the catabolism of the biogenic
amines histamine, tryptamine and phenylethylamine, their derivates and related
substrates/products of these enzymes (Fig. 3, AOC1, MAOA, IL4I1). None of these
amino oxidase genes were regulated by MRV. Using the genotyping program
VarElect, PEDV-DEGs with an association with these biogenic amines were retrieved
(supplementary file 3, sheet “Biogenic amines”). Three enzymes clustered in the
“Histidine metabolism” pathway (https://www.kegg.jp/keggbin/show_pathway?hsa00340+4128) with histamine and reaction products
generated from this biogenic amine (Fig. 3). Also most association of PEDV-DEGs
were found by VarElect for histamine. The gene coding for the amine oxidase
“Interleukin 4 Induced 1” (IL4I1) was strongly down-regulated (30-fold) 4h after
infection with PEDV. Besides catalysis of L-Phenylaniline into Phenylpyruvate (Fig.3),
IL4I1 also fulfills an important role in signaling in “synaptic clefts” formed between
antigen presenting cells (APC) and T cells (so-called “immune cleft”: see also
below)(30: Boulland et al. 2007, 31: Molinier-Frenkel et al. 2019).

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 3. Regulation of genes involved in the metabolism of biogenic amines. Snapshots taken from
the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway schemes “Histidine metabolism” (A) and
“Phenylalanine metabolism” (B). Regulated genes are shown in red lined boxes. Up-regulation is
indicated by a green arrows (↑) and down-regulation by red arrows (↓). (C) Substrates and
reaction products of the reversible enzyme IL4I1.

Expression of the Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide Synthase 2 (PTGS2) gene was upregulated by MRV at 6h p.i. PTGS2 synthesizes prostaglandin endoperoxide H2
(PGH2), an compound with a short half-life and the precursor of many biological
active prostaglandins: e.g. Thromboxane-A2 (mediates activation of platelets), PGI2
and PGE2. In contrast, PEDV increased the expression of the gene coding for
Prostaglandin E Synthase (PTGES) which converts PGH2 into PGE2. PGE2 is a direct
vasodilator, but does not inhibit platelet aggregation. PGE2 also suppresses T cell
receptor signaling. PEDV decreased expression of the Gamma-Glutamyltransferase 1
gene (GGT1) after 4h (2-fold), but increased expression of this gene 2 hours later to
a 4-fold level compared to mock infected cells. GGT synthesizes Leukotriene D4
(LTD4) from LTC4. IgE-activated mast cells may secrete LTD4 and LTC4, together
with histamine and platelets activating factor (PAF). This vesicle mediated secretion
by mast cells (degranulation) results in stimulation of mucus production, and similar
to histamine, increases the permeability and smooth muscle contraction of the
vascular wall. In persons suffering from asthma this degranulation leads to an
immediate allergic response (bronchospasm, airflow obstruction and forming of
edema).
Genes involved in “Cilia and Synaptic cleft” formation.
GSEA detected “Axon Guidance” as the GO-term with the highest score for PEDV
(see Table 1). In addition, PEDV-DEGs were enriched coding for proteins involved in
calcium ion-dependent exocytosis from vesicles into the “synaptic clefts” between
two cells (e.g. between axons and dendrites), and DEGs coding for proteins involved
in formation of cilia. Cilia protruding from cells are found in many forms. They can
have a static (structural) function, e.g. in forming of clefts between two cells (see
Fig. 4), or a motile function. Motile cilia on the surface of ciliated cells lining up the
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

epithelial layers in the nose, trachea and bronchia sweep out superfluous mucus
containing dirt from the airways. PEDV DEGs matching the terms “Cilia” and
“Synaptic cleft” retrieved form the genotyping program VarElect were further
examined by consulting functional information in the NCBI Gene and GeneCards
reports in order to evaluate their association with these processes (see
supplementary file 3, sheet “Cilia and Synaptic cleft”). Based on this analysis we
identified genes in the set of PEDV DEGs which can i) negatively regulate cell
adhesion (RND1 and SEMA5A), ii) inhibit formation of cilia (kinases MAK1 and
CDK20, highly up-regulated at 6h), and iii) regulate cytoskeleton rearrangements
that facilitate axon growth and growth and stabilization of dendritic spines (F2RL2,
FEZ1, OPHN1 and PIK3CB). Except for PIK3CB (Phosphatidylinositol-4,5Bisphosphate 3-Kinase Catalytic Subunit Beta) and OPHN1 (Oligophrenin 1), all these
matching PEDV-DEGS were not regulated after infection with MRV. The gene coding
for “Fasciculation And Elongation Protein Zeta 1” (FEZ1) was highly up-regulated at 4
h.p.i. (21-fold). This protein associates with microtubules and kinesins to generate
the force needed to transport intracellular organelles (e.g. synaptic vesicles or
granules) to the cell membrane. The gene Oligophrenin 1 (OPHN1) was downregulated at 4h and up-regulated at 6 h. OPHN1 is also involved in regulation of
endocytosis of synaptic vesicles at presynaptic terminals.
A number of studies in recent years have shown that cell to-cell spread of enveloped
viruses can use structures with similar characteristics as the synaptic clefts between
neurons (32: reviewed in Sattentau et al. 2008). The space within these so-called
“virological clefts” eliminates fluid-phase diffusion and facilitates more effective
infection of neighboring cells. Synaptic cleft structures are also formed between
immune cells, e.g. between APC’s and T cells. Transmission of immune signals by
vesicle-mediated exocytosis of chemical stimuli from APC’s into the cleft space
between the APC and donor immune cell or by receptor-ligand binding in this space,
only activates the immune cell that forms the cleft with the APC. Regulation of genes
involved in histamine/biogenic amines (see above) and formation of cilia/clefts
suggested that gene expression related to this intersynaptic signaling between
immune cells could be affected in response to infection with PEDV (Fig 4). In
particular, the highly down-regulated gene IL4I1 (30-fold at 4h p.i.) is of interest
(see also above). IL4I1 is believed to be secreted from APC’s (e.g. DC’s) in the
immune cleft formed with T cells (31: Molinier-Frenkel et al. 2019). The mechanism
how IL4I1 transmits its signal to T cells is not completely understood. It could bind to
a receptor that concentrates this amino oxidase in the cleft, resulting in elevated
H2O2 and ammonia production, phenylalanine depletion and phenylpyruvate
production in the cleft space. These alteration in the concentration of these chemicals
in the cleft are sensed by the T cell. The paralog of IL4I1, amino oxidase MAOA
(down-regulated 11-fold by PEDV) could also play a similar role in this signaling
process. Remarkable was also the strong down-regulation of genes coding for the
Olfactory Receptor Family 2 Subfamily A Member 14 (OR2A14; 17-fold at 4h) and
Anoctamin 2 (ANO2, alias CaCC;14-fold at 4h). ANO2 is a calcium-activated chloride
channel imbedded in the basal membranes of neurons that harbor apical membrane
receptors like OR2A14 that sense odorants. By importing chloride ions into the
cytosol ANO2 contributes to the depolarization of these neurons
(https://www.kegg.jp/kegg-bin/show_pathway?hsa04740+57101). Loss of smell and
taste is one of the first noticeable symptoms of COVID-19. Genetic defects in the
ANO2 gene are associated with Von Willebrand disease, a bleeding disorder due to
defective platelet aggregation (33: Schneppenheim et al. 2007).

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Proposed involvement of regulated genes/proteins in the process of cilia/synaptic-cleft

formation and metabolism/vesicle-mediated secretion of biogenic amines (including histamine).
Genes regulated by PEDV with an important role in these processes are displayed in grey boxes,
with their subcellular location, regulation, up (↑) or down (↓), and time-point of regulation.
Subcellular locations of genes/proteins were retrieved from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot. data provided in
the GeneCards reports of these genes/proteins. The drawing was inspired by figures presented in
the publications of Molinier-Frenkel et al. (31:2019) and Sattentau (32: 2008).

Associations of PEDV-DEGs with COVID-19 pathology.
Development of pneumonia in COVID-19 patients may progress into respiratory
failure, i.e. acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), often leading to septic shock
and death (34: Xu et al. 2020). Numerous collateral complications were reported.
Failure of vital organs, like liver and kidneys, and numerous neurological
complications (seizures, strokes, encephalitis and lameness symptoms [e.g. Guillain–
Barré syndrome]). In addition, cardiovascular-related complications may occur,
including arrhythmia, inflammation of the cardiac muscles, complete heart failure
and abnormal blood clotting and thrombosis. Recent data of COVID-19 cases around
the world indicate that children and adolescents are less at risk and elderly above 70
years-old and persons with underlying diseases as COPD, diabetes/obesity,
hypertension and heart diseases show an increased risk for developing severe
symptoms (35: Onder et al. 2020, 1 Wu et al. 2020). Also disease incidence in adult
males is significantly higher than in females of the same age.
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To assess whether PEDV-DEGs relate to these pathological symptoms, the
genotyping program VarElect was used to identify genes matching the terms “ARDS”,
“Cardiomyopathy”, “Obesity (Diabetic)”, and “Platelets activation”. Detailed
information about all matching DEGs is provided in supplementary file 3 in separate
sheets for all 4 queried terms. DEGs matching to more than one query term are
displayed in Fig. 5. Remarkable associations of DEGs with these terms are mentioned
in sections beneath.

Fig. 5. Number of PEDV-DEGs that matched to the terms “ARDS”, “Cardiomyopathy”, “Obesity

(Diabetic)”, and “Platelets activation” according to the genotyping program “VarElect” (n= total per
term). The number of overlapping DEGs between two or three terms are depicted in blue and
black, respectively. Gene-symbols of DEGS matching 2 terms are provides in boxes in the Venn
diagram and with 3 term in a separate box outside the diagram. The DEGs COL1A1 and COL21A (in
the center) matched to all 4 terms (red number). Up-regulated genes are shown in green and
down-regulated genes are shown in red.

ARDS: PEDV-DEGs coding for proteins directly associated with ARDS according to the
VarElect program were i) Mucin 5AC (MUC5AC, down-regulated 14-fold at 4h), a gel
forming component of the mucus layer of gastric and airway epithelial layers and
which expression is regulated by IL6 or IL17, ii) transcription factor RORC (upregulated 11-fold at 4h), iii) CXCR1, the high-affinity receptor for CXCL8 (alias IL8:
down-regulated 8-fold at 4h), iv) the Thrombin-like 2 receptor F2RL2 (downregulated 16-fold at 4h) receptor, and v) Collagens 1A (COL1A, 8-fold upregulated at
4h), 2A (COL2A, 19-fold upregulated at 6h) and 9A3 (15-fold upregulated at 6h).
See the paragraph “Regulation of immune genes” (above) for functional information
about the genes RORC, F2RL2 and CXCR1. Further datamining and literature
searches revealed additional associations of specific PEDV-DEGs to respiratory
dysfunction. Related to the strong down-regulation of MUC5A at 4h, expression of
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the gene coding for the enzyme “Polypeptide N-Acetyl-galactosaminyltransferase 16
(GALNT16) was up-regulated 23-fold by PEDV at 6h. GALNT16 couples the first
galactose residue of a mucin type O-linked glycan to proteins, resulting in formation
of the so-called “T-antigen” (GalNaca1-Ser/Thr moiety)(36: Ju et al. 2011). MRV
infection did not altered expression of this gene or of other GALNT orthologs.
Instead, MRV highly stimulated gene expression of the enzyme “Core 1 Synthase,
Glycoprotein-N-Acetylgalactosamine 3-Beta-Galactosyltransferase 1” (C1GALT1, 26fold at 6h). C1GALT1 couples the second galactose residue to the T-antigen moiety,
further extending the mucin type O-linked glycan chain to a so-called “Tn-antigen”
(Galb1-GalNaca1-Ser/Thr moiety). Somatic mutations in the gene coding for the
essential chaperone of C1GALT1 (C1GALT1C1), causes Tn polyagglutination
syndrome (https://omim.org/entry/300622), a disorder caused by binding of natural
anti-Tn antibodies to the Tn-antigen expressed on the surface of erythrocytes and
other blood cells (including platelets and leukocytes). The high elevated expression
of GALNT16 may also support O-linked glycosylation of structural proteins of PEDV
(37: Fung et al. 2018). Recently, glycosylation sites on the spike protein of SARSCoV-2 were predicted, suggesting that the spikes of SARS-CoV-2 could bear an
unique N- and O-linked glycosylation architecture different from that of SARS-CoV-1
(38: Vankadari et al. 2020). It was proposed that this unique glycosylation
architecture plays a role in protecting SARS-CoV-2 for the hosts immune defense.
PEDV also elevated expression of genes coding for Extracellular Matrix Protein 2
(ECM2; 10-fold at 4h), and COLs 1A, 2A and 9A3 (see above for the FC of these COL
genes). Prolonged deposition of ECM proteins and collagens fibers synthesized by
fibroblast may lead to formation of excessive scar tissue. In the lungs this could
result in pulmonary fibrosis and, eventually, to interstitial lung diseases leading to
acute or chronic respiratory failure (39: Cutroneo et al. 2007, 40: Gagiannis et al.
2020).
Platelets activation: According to the BioGPS “Primary Cell Atlas” dataset, which
provides information of expression levels measured in different type of cells/tissues,
about 20 percent of the PEDV-DEGs code for proteins highly expressed in platelets
and/or in cells of the vascular system. Among them, also the COL1A1, 2A1 and 9A3
genes. Binding of COLs to integrin subunit alpha on the surface of platelets mediates
release of calcium from the ER into the cytosol, resulting in activation of functional
processes of platelets. Processes like shape change, induced by phosphorylation of
Myosin by Myosin Light Chain Kinase 2 (MYLK2; down-regulated 12-fold by PEDV),
and platelets aggregation activated by Talin 1 and/or Fermitin Family Member 3
(FERMT3, alias KINDLIN3). In response to PEDV infection, an increased gene
expression level was only observed for FERMT3 (18-fold at 4h), and not for Talin 1.
Gene expression of the F2RL2 surface receptor in response to PEDV infection was
reduced 15-fold at 6h (see also above). Binding of thrombin to this receptor also
activates functional processes in platelets and promotes vasodilation and
permeability of the vascular wall.
Cardiomyopathy: A clear association was found for the PEDV up-regulated cytokine
genes coding for Cardiotrophin-1 (CTF1)(41: Wollert et al. 1996) and for the
preproprotein of the neuroactive peptide hormone Endothelin 2 (EDN2)(42: Nagai et
al. 2007) with diseases of the heart-muscle. The active forms of the peptide
hormone EDN1 and 2 are secreted from endothelial cells and bind to the same class
of G-protein coupled receptors as the Angiotensin peptide hormones (AGT1-7). EDN2
and AGT2 are vasoactive peptides and binding of EDN2 and AGT2 to their receptors
on granular cells of the juxtaglomerular apparatus in the kidney raises free calcium
levels in the cytosol, leading to inhibition of cAMP-mediated secretion of the aspartylprotease renin (REN), the key regulator of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
(RAAS) (https://www.kegg.jp/kegg-bin/show_pathway?hsa04924+1907). REN
converts pre-angiotensinogen (AGT) to the endocrine peptide-hormone AGT1
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(https://www.kegg.jp/kegg-bin/show_pathway?hsa04614+5972). AGT1 is further
cleaved to variants with specific endocrine activity by Angiotensin I Converting
Enzymes (e.g. ACE and ACE2: ). On the surface of bronchial epithelial cells ACE2 was
identified as entry receptor for SARS-CoV-1 and -2 (43: Hoffmann et al. 2020). The
octamer peptide AGT2 stimulates secretion of the mineralocorticoid hormone
aldosterone by the adrenal glands. Aldosterone, and the AGT and EDN peptide
hormones regulate an array of physiological processes in the body, e.g. vascular
smooth muscle contraction, blood pressure, fluid and electrolyte homeostasis (44:
Agapitov et al. 2002). All processes that are important for proper functioning of the
vascular system, heart muscles and kidneys.
CTF1 is directly involved in the pathology of numerous cardiovascular diseases by
promoting cardiac myocyte hypertrophy (41: Wollert et al. 1996), which may lead to
the onset of heart-diseases like “hypertrophic cardiomyopathy” or “dilated
cardiomyopathy”, and eventually, to (lethal) heart failure. PEDV induced a strong
down- or up-regulation of several other genes directly involved in the function of
cardiomyocytes. Sodium voltage-gated channel subunit 4 (SCN4B) was strongly upregulated (15-fold) and MYLK2 (see above), Citrate Synthase (CS; down-regulation
24-fold) and Ankyrin Repeat Domain 1 (ANKRD1) were strongly down-regulated.
Down-regulation of CS may reduce oxidative capacity in cardiomyocytes. Gene
expression of ANKRD1 was down-regulated 12-fold in response to MRV infection at 4
h.p.i, but reverted to a 24-fold up-regulation 2h later. ANKRD1 is a putative
transcription factor involved in regulation of gene expression in hypertrophic
myocytes (https://www.wikipathways.org/index.php/Pathway:WP516)
Regulation of cytosolic calcium levels in the cytosol of cardiomyocytes, e.g. by
binding of COL1A1 and COL2A (up-regulated by PEDV, see above) to integrin subunit
alpha on the surface of cardiomyocytes or after import of calcium ions mediated by
calcium voltage-gated channels (e.g. by CACNA1H; down-regulated 5-fold at 4h by
PEDV) may also trigger myocyte hypertrophy. PEDV strongly down-regulated gene
expression of a potassium voltage-gated channel (KCNQ4;16-fold). This in contrast
to a strong up-regulation of the sodium symporter SCN4B. For the potassium
channel CACNA1H (alias Kv7.4) it was reported that this channel regulates the
membrane potential and Ca2+ permeability of mitochondria located in the vicinity the
sarcoplasmic reticulum in rat cardiomyocytes (45: Testai et al. 2016). All three above
mentioned ion channels are also involved in the process of excitation,
contraction/relaxation and repolarization of cardiac myocytes. MRV also downregulated gene expression 3 to 4-fold for the potassium (KCNQ4) and calcium
channel CACNA1H, but did not increased expression of the sodium symporter gene
SCN4B or orthologs of this gene.
Obesity/Diabetic
Chronic hypertension and heart disease/failure is a complication frequently observed
in obese/diabetic patients. In accordance with this, 16 out of the 65 PEDV DEGs
matching the term “Obesity” also matched with the term “Cardiomyopathy” (see
Fig.5 and supplementary file 3, sheet “A-C-O-P). The gene coding for receptor
activity modifying protein 1 (RAMP1; a calcitonin-like receptor) matching term
“Obesity” was 12-fold up-regulated in response to PEDV. Binding of the vasodilator
adrenomedullin (ADM) to this receptor inhibits MYLK2-mediated contraction of
vascular smooth muscle cells (46: Terata et al. 2000). The neuropeptide hormone
ADM is, inter ilia, expressed in lungs, adrenal glands, kidney, heart and vascular
smooth muscle cells. It was reported that paracrine and autocrine effects of ADM
contribute to prevent cardiovascular and renal damage (47: Dobrzynski et al. 2002
48: Tsuruda et al. 1998). Increased expression of ADM is also observed in blood
monocytes in Kawasaki disease (KD;
https://www.malacards.org/card/kawasaki_disease?). This acute inflammatory
disorder of the blood vessels is observed in hospitalized children with SARS-CoV-2.
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Susceptibility to KD is associated with a polymorphism in the Inositol-Trisphosphate
3-Kinase C gene (ITPKC). ITPKC is important for activation of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-AKT signaling. A signal transduction cascade that
steers an array of cellular processes, and in which the enzyme activities of
phosphoinositide 3-kinases (e.g. PIK3CB, 3-fold up-regulated by PEDV) are
executers of this cascade. (https://www.kegg.jp/keggbin/show_pathway?hsa04151+5291). Related to this, expression of the gene coding
for “ES Cell Expressed Ras” (ERAS; a paralog of NRAS), an activator of PIK3CB, was
13-fold down-regulated in response to PEDV infection.
The gene coding for H4 histone 16 (H4-16) was 15-fold up-regulated by PEDV at 6
h.p.i. H4-16 was found to be associated with familial hyperinsulinemia and
hypoglycemia in infants, and disturbance of modifications of core histones (including
H4-16) were also observed in diabetic hearts (49: Yerra et al. 2018, 50: Krishnan et
al. 2011). Like other core histones, H4-16 is also an autoantigen in autoimmune
diseases. Expression of the genes citrate synthase (CS) and 6-Phosphofructo-2Kinase/Fructose-2,6-Biphosphatase 1 (PFKFB1), both coding for enzymes directly
involved in glucose homeostasis, were down-regulated by PEDV. Enzyme activity of
PFKFB1 stimulates glycolysis and inhibits gluconeogenesis and is a key-regulator of
glucose homeostasis. Expression of the gene coding for transcription factor “singleminded BHLH Transcription Factor 2” (SIM2) was 10-fold up-regulated by PEDV at
6h. SIM transcription factors act in the paraventricular nucleus, a group of neurons in
the hypothalamus regulating energy homoeostasis and the feeding response. SIM1
and 2 variants with low transcriptional activity were identified in persons with earlyonset obesity (51: Hung et al. 2007). However, the mechanism how this
transcriptional regulation by SIM’s affects feeding and energy homeostasis is not
known. With regard to neurological regulation by the hypothalamus of energy
homoeostasis and feed intake, PEDV also up-regulated (16-fold) expression of the
gene coding for the “Protein Phosphatase, Mg2+/Mn2+ Dependent 1E (PPM1E) at 6
h.p.i.. PPM1E deactivates the AMPK-kinase (Protein Kinase AMP-Activated Catalytic
Subunit Alpha 1), a kinase that stimulates secretion of neuroendocrine peptides
(NP’s) that regulate lipogenesis and cholesterol metabolism in the body. PEDV highly
up-regulated (11-fold at 4h) gene expression of Neuropeptide B (NPB). Besides feed
intake, energy homeostasis and enhancement of cortisol secretion in adrenocortical
cells, NPB also influences the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal stress responses and
increases heart rate and blood pressure. Moreover, recent studies have revealed that
expression of NPB by, yet, not identified types of neurons in the Japanese rice fish
(Medaka) is female-specific, i.e. is mediated only by binding of ovarian sex hormones
(estrogens) to receptors of the androgen/estrogen signaling cascade (52: HirakiKajiyama et al. 2019).
Additional remarkable PEDV-DEGs.
Highly up- or down-regulated PEDV-DEGs not mentioned in the text, and to our
opinion interesting with regard to coronavirus infection, are briefly described in Table
2. Among these DEGs several genes coding for transcription factors and genes
transcribed in antisense RNA’s that inhibit translation of their coding counterparts.
For more functional information about these DEGs we refer to the weblinks provided
in supplementary file 3, sheet “PEDV KEY DEGs”.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table 2. Remarkable PEDV-DEGS not mentioned in the text.
Description

GENESYMBOL

h.p.i

FC (up or down )

Keratin 25

KRT25

6

13.7

cornified envelope formation

Late Cornified Envelope 3B

LCE3B

6

16.3

cornified envelope formation

KIAA1324L

0/6

-2.3/16.3

NADPH Oxidase 3

NOX3

6

-11.7

generation of superoxide, stress fiber formation

Fibrinogen Like 1

FGL1

6

-21.8

immune suppressive, inhibits antigen-specific T-cell activation

CTBP1 Divergent Transcript (CTBP1antisense transcript)

CTBP1-DT

4

-23.2

INHBA antisense RNA 1

INHBA-AS1

0/4

-26.6/16.3

P2RX5

6

16.2

Aldo-Keto Reductase Family 1 Member C1

AKR1C1

6

-11.6

Apolipoprotein L2

APOL2

6

15.4

lipid and steroid hormone transport
enzyme in storage lipid droplets hydrolyzing cholesteryl esters
to cholesterol (prevents forming of macrophage foam cells).

endosome-lysosome associated apoptosis
and autophagy regulator family member 2

Purinergic Receptor P2X 5

Carboxylesterase 1

function

estrogen-induced gene, regulating autophagy and promotes
cell survival under stress

inhibition CTBP1 mRNA translation; CTBP1=co-repressor notchmediated transcription
inhibition INHBA mRNA translation (INHBA=cytokine TGF
family)
ligand-(ATP)-gated ion channel family for calcium import in
cells
lipid and steroid hormone metabolism

CES1

6

15.4

PCDHB12

0/6

-36.1/-5.3

Neurotrimin

NTM

7

-17.5

Kruppel like factor 14

KLF14

0/6

-4.9/-17.7

Hes Family BHLH Transcription Factor 7

HES7

6

10.3

transcription factor (expression regulated by notch-signaling)

POU Class 2 Homeobox 3

Pou2f3

6

9.3

transcription factor, notch downstream signaling

Homeobox A7

HOXA7

4

29.0

transcription factor; active in basophils

Forkhead Box Q1

FOXQ1

6

15.1

transcription factor; active in NK and CD8+ T cells

YBX1

4

-15.5

transcription factor; cold shock domain protein, activated by
MAPK (ERK) signaling.

Protocadherin beta 12

Y-Box Binding Protein 1

calcium-dependent cell-adhesion protein
synthesis of GPI-anchored proteins
transcription co-repressor TGF-genes

Discussion.
In this report we measured the transcriptional response of Vero cells shortly after
infection with the coronavirus PEDV. The function of the responding host genes and
the biological processes in which they act were studied in detail by us to find
plausible relations to COVID-19 pathology. Because of the differences in genomic
organization and expression of viral proteins between SARS-CoV-2 and PEDV, we
paid less attention to couple the response of specific host genes to the function of
specific coronavirus proteins.
We were able to infect the majority of Vero cells (>50%) with PEDV and MRV
synchronically. This resulted in a unique set of highly up- and down-regulated DEGs
for PEDV. Not more than 14% of the 266 PEDV-DEGs (n=37) were similar to MRVDEGS (total of 727 MRV-DEGs). In contrast to MRV, we observed no typical response
of antiviral genes and related cytokine/chemokine genes in Vero cells within 6 h.p.i.
for PEDV. For MRV these processes started already before 4 h.p.i.. We have to notice
that PEDV replication started 2h later than MRV3 replication, which could in part be
the reason for not detecting transcriptional regulation of specific cytokine, chemokine
and antiviral genes for PEDV. Longer incubation times than 6h were not planned in
the original design of our experiments and would have resulted in a set of PEDVDEGs dominated by genes involved in syncytia forming and apoptotic/necrotic cell
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

death. Nevertheless, at 6h replication of PEDV RNA was detected by RT-PCR,
indicating that dsRNA was present in the cells and could have be sensed by cytosolic
pattern recognition receptors of the RIG-I-like family to initiate an antiviral and
related cytokine/chemokine response. Similar as observed in another study with
PEDV and Vero cells, and in analogy with SARS-CoV-1 and -2, we observed a high
up-regulation of the transmembrane serine protease gene (TMPRSS13) that acts as a
co-factor in the infection process of cells (25: Matsuyama et al. 2010). Therefore,
we are confident that PEDV infection delayed or suppressed an early antiviral
response and related cytokine/chemokine response, similar as was observed in
intestinal epithelial cells (53: Cao et al. 2015). In recent in vivo studies with SARSCoV-2, a delayed IFN I response was observed accompanied by only low levels of
type I and III IFNs expression and a reduced or relatively late (not before 24 h.p.i.)
antiviral response (19: Blanco-Melo et al. 2020, 20: Lamers et al. 2020). We
observed a reduced expression of EEF1A1, as part of a transcription factor-complex
that binds and activates the promotor of IFNγ, and of the cytokine EDA and its
receptor (EDARADD) involved in activation of canonical-NFKB transcription of
antiviral cytokine-chemokine genes like CXCL8 (alias IL8) an CXCL10. This reduced
expression of EEF1A1 and EDA and its receptor may play a crucial role in delaying or
downgrading an IFN-mediated antiviral and cytokine/chemokine response in our Vero
cell system.
The elevated transcription of many cytokine and chemokine genes in Vero cells by
MRV suggests that replication of this RNA virus in epithelial cells induces secretion of
these immune effectors (more information about the genes/processes that
responded to MRV infection will be published elsewhere). PEDV, and also the MRV3
strain we used both replicate in enterocytes lined up in the intestinal mucosal layer.
In the intestinal and bronchial epithelial layer, microfold (M) cells are imbedded
between these lined up epithelial cells. M-cells sense and engulf foreign
pathogens/antigens from the lumen to present them to residing immune cells.
According to pathway analysis, most T cell related immune genes regulated in
response to MRV infection were part of the pathways “T-helper 17 (Th17)
differentiation/activation” and “IL17 signaling”. Antigen presentation by M cells to
Th17 cells in the submucosal layers stimulate secretion of different types of IL17
cytokines (IL17A-D, IL25 and Il17F) resulting in activation of different types of
innate immune cells and T cells, including Th1/Th2 cells. Dysregulation of this
pathogen-induced IL17 response may disturb the balance between Th1/Th2-cell
mediated immune responses, resulting in excessive inflammation, damage to the
epithelial layer and on the long term, to autoimmune reactions. TF RORC (or specific
isoforms of this TF, see above) plays a pivotal in controlling IL17 expression and
secretion by Th17 cells. PEDV strongly up-regulated gene expression of RORC in
Vero cells whereas MRV down-regulated expression of this TF. This difference in
regulation of TF RORC suggests that virus-induced activation or suppression of IL17
secretion by Th17 cells in submucosal layers of airway epithelium can be an
important mechanism to dysregulate the activation of T cell responses. Therefore, TF
RORC might be a potential target for drug treatment/development. Drugs affecting
expression of RORC, like the fluorinated steroid “Dexamethasone” and the synthetic
tetracycline derivative “Doxycycline”
(http://ctdbase.org/basicQuery.go?bqCat=gene&bq=RAR+related+orphan+receptor
+C) are already under investigation in relation to SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis.
Transcriptional regulation of a set of genes coding for enzymes involved in biogenic
amine metabolism was unique for PEDV, and not observed for MRV. Most
associations of these PEDV-DEGs were found with histamine, a compound produced
by mast cells and basophils, and released by these cells in response to allergens and
pathogen-induced inflammation. The 10-fold up-regulation of the enzyme AOC1
suggests that histamine is converted to imidazole-acetaldehyde (see Fig. 3).
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

However, without data of intra- and extracellular concentrations of the chemicals this
remains speculative. Recent reports indicated that submucosal mast cells in the
lungs were triggered by SARS-CoV-2 infection to release pro-inflammatory cytokines
(IL1, IL6 and TNF-alpha) as well as histamine, leukotrienes (LCD4) and
prostaglandins (PGD2) (54: Kritas et al. 2020). This release by mast cells or
basophils can induce excessive inflammation in the lungs and bronchoconstriction,
leading to acute respiratory failure. As proposed by Raymond et al. (55: 2020),
testing of existing antihistamines and mast cell/basophil stabilizers in clinical trials to
evaluate their effectiveness as therapeutic drug for COVID-19, has potential.
An interesting finding was the strong down-regulation of the gene coding for the
amino acid oxidase IL4I1 4 h.p.i with PEDV. IL4I1 enzyme activity plays an
important role in “chemical signaling” in the cleft space between APCs and immune
effector cells. Recent studies showed that down-regulation of IL4I1 expression
resulted in inhibition of differentiation of monocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(Mo-MDSC) to polymorphonuclear MDSC (PMN-MDSC)(56: Gao et al. 2019). Mo- and
PMN-MDSCs use different mechanisms to suppress the activity of antigen-specific T
cells, NK cells, DCs and macrophages. Levels of MDSCs increase in the spleen, lymph
nodes, or in blood in response to inflammation of tissues or tumors in the body (57:
Movahedi et al. 2008). MDSCs infiltrate these tumors and inflamed tissues to
suppress the local activity of specific immune cells. Therefore, the role of infiltrating
MDSCs at inflammatory sites in the lungs of COVID-19 patients, as part of an SARSCoV-2 immune-evading strategy, and the role of IL4I1 in this process, is worthwhile
to investigate in more detail.
Expression of genes that promote or inhibit the formation and motility function of
cilia were time-dependently regulated by PEDV. The 20-fold up-regulation of FEZ1
gene expression at 4h (20-fold) descended within 2h to a moderate 6-fold upregulation. This descend occurred simultaneously with elevation of gene expression
of the kinases MAK and CDK20, both involved in inhibition of cilia formation. Because
PEDV efficiently replicates in enterocytes that carry ciliated membrane protrusions
(microvilli) on their luminal surface, regulation of these genes could be related to
structural changes in the cytoskeleton of cells imposed by virus replication (e.g.
syncytia forming in PEDV infected Vero cultures). Likewise, SARS-CoV-2 replication
could also impose structural changes in cilia protruding from the surface of upperairway epithelial cells (nose, trachea) and bronchi. Based on our results we cannot
pinpoint a specific process in which these cilia-regulating genes act. Possible
processes can either be formation of an immune cleft, a virological cleft to promote
more effective infection of neighboring cells, or cytoskeleton rearrangements to
support virus replication, morphogenesis and budding from cells. Interestingly, two
recent studies revealed a high level of expression of the SARS-CoV-2 entry receptor
ACE2 and its co-receptor TMPRSS2 in ciliated airway epithelial cells (58: Sungnak et
al. 2020), especially in bronchial “secretory cells” (59: Lukassen et al. 2020). These
latter cells are an intermediate population of cells in the differentiation process of
club or goblet cells to terminal ciliated cells. Motile cilia on the surface of nasal and
bronchial epithelial cells play an important role in mechanical clearance of hostile
particles from the airways, and SARS-CoV-1 and 2 may benefit from dysfunction of
this clearance system. Inhibition of cilia formation related to this mechanical
clearance and inhibition of formation of immune cleft are relatively unexplored
strategies of respiratory RNA viruses to evade the host defense (60: Ma et al.
2015). These processes deserve more attention, and may also be considered as
possible target-processes for interference with drugs.
Within our set of PEDV-DEGs, and the biological processes deduced from this set, we
found associations with diverse aspects of COVID-19 pathogenesis, i.e. “ARDS”,
“Cardiomyopathy”, “Obesity (Diabetic)”, and “Platelets activation”. However, it is
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

unknown whether the proteins encoded by these PEDV-DEGS indeed play a role in
the biological processes underlying the symptoms and complications observed in
hospitalized persons infected with SARS-CoV-2. Nevertheless, a part of these
genes/processes may be starting points for further dedicated research. Research to
fine tune drug treatment protocols that are already applied for COVID-19 patients, or
research that provides new insights for treatments with alternative prophylactic and
therapeutic approved drugs. In Table 3. we summarized the PEDV-DEGs that are, to
our opinion, of interest for modulation of the biological processes underlying the
pathogenesis of COVID-19.
Table 3. Possible target genes for COVID-19 therapy.
GENESYMBOL

regulation of
expression

Eukaryotic Translation Elongation Factor 1 Alpha 1

EEF1A1

down

inhibition IFNγ production

Heat Shock Protein Family A (Hsp70) Member 8

HSPA8

down

inhibition viral replication / antigen presentation

OR2A14
ANO2

down
down

loss of smell and taste
loss of smell and taste

histamine N-Methyltransferase

HNMT

down

(methyl)-histamine metabolism, mast cell and basophils response

Amine Oxidase Copper Containing 1

AOC1

up

(methyl)-histamine metabolism, mast cell and basophils response

Monoamine Oxidase A

MAOA

down

(methyl)-histamine metabolism / immune signaling via cleft

Interleukin 4 Induced 1

IL4I1

down

immune signaling via cleft

Male Germ Cell Associated Kinase

MAK

up

viral spread or immune signaling via cleft/changes in cilia of epithelial cells.

Fasciculation And Elongation Protein Zeta 1

FEZ1

up

viral spread or immune signaling via cleft/changes in cilia of epithelial cells.

RAR Related Orphan Receptor C

RORC

up

T(h17) cell mediated immune response

Cardiotrophin 1

CTF1

up

cardiomyopathy

Endothelin 2

EDN2

up

cardiomyopathy and vascular dysfunction

Myosin Light Chain Kinase 2

MYLK2

down

Receptor Activity Modifying Protein 1

RAMP1

up

cardiovascular and renal damage

NPB

up

increase heart rate and blood pressure
increase heart rate and blood pressure

Description

Olfactory Receptor Family 2 Subfamily A Member 14
Anoctamin 2

Neuropeptide B
Protein Phosphatase, Mg2+/Mn2+ Dependent 1E

functional relation to COVID-19 pathogenesis

cardiomyopathy

PPM1E

up

Mucin 5AC, Oligomeric Mucus/Gel-Forming

MUC5AC

down

Polypeptide N-Acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 16

GALNT16

up

loss of mucosal barrier function /polyagglutination syndrome erythrocytes

Collagen Type II Alpha 1 Chain

COL2A1

up

lung fibrosis/cardiomyopathy

Collagen Type I Alpha 1 Chain

COL1A1

up

lung fibrosis/cardiomyopathy

F2RL2

down

thrombosis/vascular dysfunction

FERMT3

up

thrombosis/vascular dysfunction

Coagulation Factor II Thrombin Receptor Like 2
Fermitin Family Member 3 (KINDLIN3)

loss of mucosal barrier function

Colophon.
The overwhelming amount of data published recently made it impossible for us to
oversee all (novel) facts about the SARS-CoV-2 virus and pathology of the COVID-19
disease. Some important genes and related processes imbedded in our set of PEDVDEGs may have been overlooked by us. Therefore, we encourage researchers,
especially medical, immunological and pharmaceutical specialists, to study this set of
DEGs in detail. The users-friendly supplementary file 3 with functional information
about DEGs and related biological processes can be down-loaded from the web. By
publishing these PEDV data ahead of our complete study, we hope that some of the
gene targets and cognate processes we have identified for the coronavirus PEDV will
contribute to a better understanding how hospitalized COVID-19 patients can be
treated and cured. A more condensed version of this manuscript, focusing on the
original goal of our study, will be submitted to a peer-reviewed virological journal
soon.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Competing interests.
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions.
WH and MH designed and arranged the in vitro infection experiments with Vero cells.
WH performed the in vitro infection experiments. RNAseq analysis, mapping of reads
to the reference genome of Cercopithecus aethiops and generation of RNAseq
datafiles of pairwise comparisons was performed by the firm GenomeScan B.V.
(Leiden, The Netherlands). MH extracted DEGs from RNAseq data files. MH and WH
performed the GSEA, functional bioinformatic analysis, and datamining. MH took the
lead in writing the manuscript together with WH. FL and WvdP facilitated the
research project and advised about the design and execution of the experiments. All
authors reviewed the manuscript and approved the final version.
Supplementary files.
Supplementary file 1: Materials and methods cell culture and virus propagation,
infection experiment, RT-PCR detection, Immune peroxidase monolayer assay
(IPMA), RT-PCR detection, Preparation of RNA pools and quality analysis of RNA.
Supplementary file 2a: RNAseq next generation sequencing report GenomeScan
(Leiden, The Netherlands).
Supplementary file 2b: RNAseq data analysis rapport GenomeScan (Leiden, The
Netherlands).
Supplementary file 3: Interactive Excel file with sortable tables in separate sheets.
Please, first read the sheet “read me” for an explanation and instructions for the use
of the tables. Excel sheets contain tables with i) PEDV and MRV DEGs extracted from
RNAseq data files, ii) functional information about the PEDV-DEGs, iii) GSEA
extracted pathways (for MRV and PEDV), GO-terms (only for PEDV) and compound
associations (only for PEDV), and iv) associations of PEDV-DEGs with the terms
“cytokines-chemokines”, “(anti)-viral”, “Biogenic amines”, “cilia and synaptic clefts”,
and the disorders “ARDS, “Cardiomyopathy”, “Obesity”, and “Platelets activation” (AC-O-P).

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1) Wu C, Chen X, Cai Y, et al. Risk Factors Associated With Acute Respiratory
Distress Syndrome and Death in Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pneumonia
in Wuhan, China [published online ahead of print, 2020 Mar 13]. JAMA Intern Med.
2020;180(7):1-11. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.0994
2) Pensaert, M., de Bouck, P., 1978. A new coronavirus-like particle associated with
diarrhea in swine. Arch Virol. 58:243-247.
3) Huang YW, Dickerman AW, Piñeyro P, et al. Origin, evolution, and genotyping of
emergent porcine epidemic diarrhea virus strains in the United States. mBio.
2013;4(5):e00737-13. Published 2013 Oct 15. doi:10.1128/mBio.00737-13
4) Jung K, Saif LJ., Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus infection: Etiology, epidemiology,
pathogenesis and immunoprophylaxis. Vet J. 2015;204(2):134-143.
doi:10.1016/j.tvjl.2015.02.017
5) Thimmasandra Narayanappa A, Sooryanarain H, Deventhiran J, et al. A novel
pathogenic Mammalian orthoreovirus from diarrheic pigs and Swine blood meal in
the United States. mBio. 2015;6(3):e00593-15. Published 2015 May 19.
doi:10.1128/mBio.00593-15
6) Lelli D, Beato MS, Cavicchio L, et al. Virol J. 2016;13:139. Published 2016 Aug 12.
doi:10.1186/s12985-016-0593-4
7) Hulst M, Hakze-van der Honing R, Vastenhouw S, et al. Identification of a Novel
Reassortant of a Mammalian Orthoreovirus in Faeces of diarrheic pigs in the
Netherlands: presentation at the 11th annual meeting of EPIZONE in Paris, 2017;
abstract C9 https://www.epizone-eu.net/upload_mm/3/a/0/69d0a5dc-6eae-48dd895a-5c2e89eb2476_EPIZONE2017%20Abstract%20book.pdf.
8) Steyer A, Gutiérrez-Aguire I, Kolenc M, et al. High similarity of novel orthoreovirus
detected in a child hospitalized with acute gastroenteritis to mammalian
orthoreoviruses found in bats in Europe. J Clin Microbiol. 2013;51(11):3818-3825.
doi:10.1128/JCM.01531-13
9) Tyler KL. Pathogenesis of reovirus infections of the central nervous system. Curr
Top Microbiol Immunol. 1998;233(Pt 2):93-124. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-72095-6_6
10) Chua KB, Voon K, Crameri G, et al. Identification and characterization of a new
orthoreovirus from patients with acute respiratory infections. PLoS One.
2008;3(11):e3803. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0003803.
11) Cheng P, Lau CS, Lai A, et al. A novel reovirus isolated from a patient with acute
respiratory disease. J Clin Virol. 2009;45(1):79-80. doi:10.1016/j.jcv.2009.03.001
12) Duan Q, Zhu H, Yang Y, Li WH, Zhou YS, He J. ReoV isolated from SARS
patients. Chin Sci Bull. 2003;48:1293–6.
13) Zuo T, Tan H, He J, Zhu H, Zhang H, et al. (2003) Cloning and identification of
reovirus isolated from specimens of SARS patients. Bull Acad Mil Med Sci 27:241–
243.
14) Huang C, Liu WJ, Xu W, et al. A Bat-Derived Putative Cross-Family Recombinant
Coronavirus with a Reovirus Gene. PLoS Pathog. 2016;12(9):e1005883. Published
2016 Sep 27. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1005883.
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

15) Obameso JO, Li H, Jia H, et al. The persistent prevalence and evolution of crossfamily recombinant coronavirus GCCDC1 among a bat population: a two-year followup. Sci China Life Sci. 2017;60(12):1357-1363. doi:10.1007/s11427-017-9263-6.
16) Brian DA, Baric RS. Coronavirus genome structure and replication. Curr Top
Microbiol Immunol. 2005;287:1-30. doi:10.1007/3-540-26765-4_1
17) Comparative tropism, replication kinetics, and cell damage profiling of SARSCoV-2 and SARS-CoV with implications for clinical manifestations, transmissibility,
and laboratory studies of COVID-19: an observational study. Hin Chu*, Jasper FukWoo Chan*, Terrence Tsz-Tai Yuen*, Huiping Shuai*, Shuofeng Yuan, Yixin Wang,
Bingjie Hu, Cyril Chik-Yan Yip,Jessica Oi-Ling Tsang, Xiner Huang, Yue Chai, Dong
Yang, Yuxin Hou, Kenn Ka-Heng Chik, Xi Zhang, Agnes Yim-Fong Fung, Hoi-Wah
Tsoi, Jian-Piao Cai, Wan-Mui Chan, Jonathan Daniel Ip, Allen Wing-Ho Chu, Jie Zhou,
David Christopher Lung, Kin-Hang Kok, Kelvin Kai-Wang To,Owen Tak-Yin Tsang,
Kwok-Hung Chan, Kwok-Yung Yuen. Lancet Microbe 2020; 1: e14–23.
18) Lamers MM, Beumer J, van der Vaart J, et al. SARS-CoV-2 productively infects
human gut enterocytes. Science. 2020;369(6499):50-54.
doi:10.1126/science.abc1669.
19) Osada N, Kohara A, Yamaji T, et al. The genome landscape of the african green
monkey kidney-derived vero cell line. DNA Res. 2014;21(6):673-683.
doi:10.1093/dnares/dsu029.
20) Chew T, Noyce R, Collins SE, Hancock MH, Mossman KL. Characterization of the
interferon regulatory factor 3-mediated antiviral response in a cell line deficient for
IFN production. Mol Immunol. 2009;46(3):393-399.
doi:10.1016/j.molimm.2008.10.010
21) Blanco-Melo D, Nilsson-Payant BE, Liu WC, et al. Imbalanced Host Response to
SARS-CoV-2 Drives Development of COVID-19. Cell. 2020;181(5):1036-1045.e9.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.026.
22) Rasmussen TB, Boniotti MB, Papetti A, et al. Full-length genome sequences of
porcine epidemic diarrhoea virus strain CV777; Use of NGS to analyse genomic and
sub-genomic RNAs. PLoS One. 2018;13(3):e0193682. Published 2018 Mar 1.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0193682.
23) Shi W, Fan W, Bai J, et al. TMPRSS2 and MSPL Facilitate Trypsin-Independent
Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea Virus Replication in Vero Cells. Viruses. 2017;9(5):114.
Published 2017 May 18. doi:10.3390/v9050114.
24) Zmora P, Blazejewska P, Moldenhauer AS, et al. DESC1 and MSPL activate
influenza A viruses and emerging coronaviruses for host cell entry. J Virol.
2014;88(20):12087-12097. doi:10.1128/JVI.01427-14.
25) Matsuyama S, Nagata N, Shirato K, Kawase M, Takeda M, Taguchi F. Efficient
activation of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike protein by the
transmembrane protease TMPRSS2. J Virol. 2010;84(24):12658-12664.
doi:10.1128/JVI.01542-10.
26) Rauen T, Juang YT, Hedrich CM, Kis-Toth K, Tsokos GC. A novel isoform of the
orphan receptor RORγt suppresses IL-17 production in human T cells. Genes Immun.
2012;13(4):346-350. doi:10.1038/gene.2011.85.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

27) de Groot RJ. Structure, function and evolution of the hemagglutinin-esterase
proteins of corona- and toroviruses. Glycoconj J. 2006;23(1-2):59-72.
doi:10.1007/s10719-006-5438-8
28) Chen Y, Cai H, Pan J, et al. Functional screen reveals SARS coronavirus
nonstructural protein nsp14 as a novel cap N7 methyltransferase. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2009;106(9):3484-3489. doi:10.1073/pnas.0808790106.
29) Daffis S, Szretter KJ, Schriewer J, et al. 2'-O methylation of the viral mRNA cap
evades host restriction by IFIT family members. Nature. 2010;468(7322):452-456.
doi:10.1038/nature09489.
30) Boulland ML, Marquet J, Molinier-Frenkel V, et al. Human IL4I1 is a secreted Lphenylalanine oxidase expressed by mature dendritic cells that inhibits T-lymphocyte
proliferation. Blood. 2007;110(1):220-227. doi:10.1182/blood-2006-07-036210
31) Molinier-Frenkel V, Prévost-Blondel A, Castellano F. The IL4I1 Enzyme: A New
Player in the Immunosuppressive Tumor Microenvironment. Cells. 2019;8(7):757.
Published 2019 Jul 20. doi:10.3390/cells8070757.
32) Sattentau Q. Avoiding the void: cell-to-cell spread of human viruses. Nat Rev
Microbiol. 2008;6(11):815-826. doi:10.1038/nrmicro1972.
33) Schneppenheim R, Castaman G, Federici AB, et al. A common 253-kb deletion
involving VWF and TMEM16B in German and Italian patients with severe von
Willebrand disease type 3. J Thromb Haemost. 2007;5(4):722-728.
doi:10.1111/j.1538-7836.2007.02460.x
34) Xu Z, Shi L, Wang Y, et al. Pathological findings of COVID-19 associated with
acute respiratory distress syndrome [published correction appears in Lancet Respir
Med. 2020 Feb 25;:]. Lancet Respir Med. 2020;8(4):420-422. doi:10.1016/S22132600(20)30076-X.
35) Onder G, Rezza G, Brusaferro S. Case-Fatality Rate and Characteristics of
Patients Dying in Relation to COVID-19 in Italy [published online ahead of print,
2020 Mar 23]. JAMA. 2020;10.1001/jama.2020.4683. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4683.
36) Ju T, Otto VI, Cummings RD. The Tn antigen-structural simplicity and biological
complexity. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2011;50(8):1770-1791.
doi:10.1002/anie.201002313.
37) Fung TS, Liu DX. Post-translational modifications of coronavirus proteins: roles
and function. Future Virol. 2018;13(6):405-430. doi:10.2217/fvl-2018-0008.
38) Vankadari N, Wilce JA. Emerging WuHan (COVID-19) coronavirus: glycan shield
and structure prediction of spike glycoprotein and its interaction with human CD26.
Emerg Microbes Infect. 2020;9(1):601-604. Published 2020 Mar 17.
doi:10.1080/22221751.2020.1739565.
39) Cutroneo KR, White SL, Phan SH, Ehrlich HP. Therapies for bleomycin induced
lung fibrosis through regulation of TGF-beta1 induced collagen gene expression. J
Cell Physiol. 2007;211(3):585-589. doi:10.1002/jcp.20972
40) Daniel Gagiannis, Julie Steinestel, Carsten Hackenbroch, Michael Hannemann,
Vincent G Umathum, Niklas Gebauer, Marcel Stahl, Hanno M Witte, Konrad
Steinestel. COVID-19-induced acute respiratory failure: an exacerbation of organ-

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

specific autoimmunity? medRxiv 2020.04.27.20077180; doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.27.20077180.
41) Wollert KC, Taga T, Saito M, et al. Cardiotrophin-1 activates a distinct form of
cardiac muscle cell hypertrophy. Assembly of sarcomeric units in series VIA
gp130/leukemia inhibitory factor receptor-dependent pathways. J Biol Chem.
1996;271(16):9535-9545. doi:10.1074/jbc.271.16.9535.
42) Nagai T, Ogimoto A, Okayama H, et al. A985G polymorphism of the endothelin-2
gene and atrial fibrillation in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ J.
2007;71(12):1932-1936. doi:10.1253/circj.71.1932
43) Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Schroeder S, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry
Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease
Inhibitor. Cell. 2020;181(2):271-280.e8. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052.
44) Agapitov AV, Haynes WG. Role of endothelin in cardiovascular disease. J Renin
Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst. 2002;3(1):1-15. doi:10.3317/jraas.2002.001.
45) Testai L, Barrese V, Soldovieri MV, et al. Expression and function of Kv7.4
channels in rat cardiac mitochondria: possible targets for cardioprotection.
Cardiovasc Res. 2016;110(1):40-50. doi:10.1093/cvr/cvv281.
46) Terata K, Miura H, Liu Y, Loberiza F, Gutterman DD. Human coronary arteriolar
dilation to adrenomedullin: role of nitric oxide and K(+) channels. Am J Physiol Heart
Circ Physiol. 2000;279(6):H2620-H2626. doi:10.1152/ajpheart.2000.279.6.H2620.
47) Dobrzynski E, Montanari D, Agata J, Zhu J, Chao J, Chao L. Adrenomedullin
improves cardiac function and prevents renal damage in streptozotocin-induced
diabetic rats. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2002;283(6):E1291-E1298.
doi:10.1152/ajpendo.00147.
48) Tsuruda T, Kato J, Kitamura K, et al. Adrenomedullin: a possible autocrine or
paracrine inhibitor of hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes. Hypertension. 1998;31(1 Pt
2):505-510. doi:10.1161/01.hyp.31.1.505.
49) Yerra VG, Advani A. Histones and heart failure in diabetes. Cell Mol Life Sci.
2018;75(17):3193-3213. doi:10.1007/s00018-018-2857-1.
50) Krishnan V, Chow MZ, Wang Z, et al. Histone H4 lysine 16 hypoacetylation is
associated with defective DNA repair and premature senescence in Zmpste24deficient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108(30):12325-12330.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1102789108.
51) Hung CC, Luan J, Sims M, et al. Studies of the SIM1 gene in relation to human
obesity and obesity-related traits. Int J Obes (Lond). 2007;31(3):429-434.
doi:10.1038/sj.ijo.0803443.
52) Hiraki-Kajiyama T, Yamashita J, Yokoyama K, et al. Neuropeptide B mediates
female sexual receptivity in medaka fish, acting in a female-specific but reversible
manner. Elife. 2019;8:e39495. Published 2019 Aug 6. doi:10.7554/eLife.39495.
53) Cao L, Ge X, Gao Y, et al. Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus inhibits dsRNA-induced
interferon-β production in porcine intestinal epithelial cells by blockade of the RIG-Imediated pathway. Virol J. 2015;12:127. Published 2015 Aug 18.
doi:10.1186/s12985-015-0345-x.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.224576; this version posted July 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

54) Kritas SK, Ronconi G, Caraffa A, Gallenga CE, Ross R, Conti P. Mast cells
contribute to coronavirus-induced inflammation: new anti-inflammatory strategy
[published online ahead of print, 2020 Feb 4]. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents.
2020;34(1):10.23812/20-Editorial-Kritas. doi:10.23812/20-Editorial-Kritas.
55) Raymond M, Ching-A-Sue G, Van Hecke O. Mast cell stabilisers, leukotriene
antagonists and antihistamines: A rapid review of effectiveness in COVID-19. May
18th 2020.https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/masT cell-stabilisers-leukotrieneantagonists-and-antihistamines-a-rapid-review-of-effectiveness-in-covid-19/.
56) Gao Y, Shang W, Zhang D, et al. Lnc-C/EBPβ Modulates Differentiation of MDSCs
Through Downregulating IL4i1 With C/EBPβ LIP and WDR5. Front Immunol.
2019;10:1661. Published 2019 Jul 17. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.01661.
57) Movahedi K, Guilliams M, Van den Bossche J, et al. Identification of discrete
tumor-induced myeloid-derived suppressor cell subpopulations with distinct T cellsuppressive activity. Blood. 2008;111(8):4233-4244. doi:10.1182/blood-2007-07099226.
58) Sungnak W, Huang N, Bécavin C, et al. SARS-CoV-2 entry factors are highly
expressed in nasal epithelial cells together with innate immune genes. Nat Med.
2020;26(5):681-687. doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0868-6.
59) Lukassen S, Chua RL, Trefzer T, et al. SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2 and TMPRSS2
are primarily expressed in bronchial transient secretory cells. EMBO J.
2020;39(10):e105114. doi:10.15252/embj.20105114.
60) Ma DY, Suthar MS. Mechanisms of innate immune evasion in re-emerging RNA
viruses. Curr Opin Virol. 2015;12:26-37. doi:10.1016/j.coviro.2015.02.005.

26

