bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Plasma proteomics reveals tissue-specific cell death and mediators of
cell-cell interactions in severe COVID-19 patients
Michael R. Filbin1,2,3,#,*, Arnav Mehta3,4,5,6,#,*, Alexis M. Schneider3,7, Kyle R. Kays1, Jamey R. Guess8,
Matteo Gentili3, Bánk G. Fenyves1,9, Nicole C. Charland1§, Anna L.K. Gonye3,11§, Irena Gushterova3,11§,
Hargun K. Khanna1§, Thomas J. LaSalle3,11§, Kendall M. Lavin-Parsons1§, Brendan M. Lilly1§, Carl L.
Lodenstein1§, Kasidet Manakongtreecheep3,10,11§, Justin D. Margolin1§, Brenna N. McKaig1§, Maricarmen
Rojas-Lopez6,12,13§, Brian C. Russo6,12,13§, Nihaarika Sharma3,11§, Jessica Tantivit3,10,11§, Molly F.
Thomas3,6,10,11,14§, Robert E. Gerszten6,15, Graham S. Heimberg3, Paul J. Hoover6,16, David J. Lieb3, Brian
Lin6,17, Debby Ngo6,18, Karin Pelka3, Miguel Reyes3,7, Christopher S. Smillie3, Avinash Waghray6,17, Thomas
E. Wood6,12,13, Amanda S. Zajac6,12,13, Lori L. Jennings19, Ida Grundberg8, Roby P. Bhattacharyya3,6,20, Blair
Alden Parry1, Alexandra-Chloé Villani3,5,6,10, Moshe Sade-Feldman3,5,6, Nir Hacohen3,5,6,#†, Marcia B.
Goldberg3,6,12,13,#†
* Denotes co-first authors, listed in alphabetical order.
§ All individuals contributed equally to sample collection and processing, listed in alphabetical order.
† Denotes co-senior authors.
#
Correspondence: marcia.goldberg@mgh.harvard.edu, nhacohen@broadinstitute.org,
mfilbin@mgh.harvard.edu, amehta@broadinstitute.org
1

Department of Emergency Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
Department of Emergency Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
3
Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA
4
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA
5
Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
6
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
7
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
8
Olink Proteomics, Inc, Watertown, MA, USA
9
Department of Emergency Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary
10
Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
11
Center for Cancer Research, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
12
Center for Bacterial Pathogenesis, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
13
Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
14
Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
15
CardioVascular Institute, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Boston, MA, USA
16
Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation, and Immunity, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
17
Center for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA
18
Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA
19
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA
20
Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA
2

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Summary
COVID-19 has caused over 1 million deaths globally, yet the cellular mechanisms underlying severe disease
remain poorly understood. By analyzing several thousand plasma proteins in 306 COVID-19 patients and 78
symptomatic controls over serial timepoints using two complementary approaches, we uncover COVID-19
host immune and non-immune proteins not previously linked to this disease. Integration of plasma proteomics
with

nine

published

scRNAseq

datasets

shows

that

SARS-CoV-2

infection

upregulates

monocyte/macrophage, plasmablast, and T cell effector proteins. By comparing patients who died to severely
ill patients who survived, we identify dynamic immunomodulatory and tissue-associated proteins associated
with survival, providing insights into which host responses are beneficial and which are detrimental to survival.
We identify intracellular death signatures from specific tissues and cell types, and by associating these with
angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) expression, we map tissue damage associated with severe disease
and propose which damage results from direct viral infection rather than from indirect effects of illness. We
find that disease severity in lung tissue is driven by myeloid cell phenotypes and cell-cell interactions with
lung epithelial cells and T cells. Based on these results, we propose a model of immune and epithelial cell
interactions that drive cell-type specific and tissue-specific damage in severe COVID-19.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
As of October 2020, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) has caused 34 million
cases

of

coronavirus

disease

2019

(COVID-19)

and

more

than

1

million

deaths

globally

(https://covid19.who.int/). The host immune response to SARS-CoV-2 varies considerably1–4, leading to
clinical manifestations ranging from an asymptomatic carrier state to severe illness, organ dysfunction and
death5. Immune dysfunction is implicated in the pathophysiology of severe disease, involving aspects of both
hyper-immune response (activated inflammatory cascades, cytokine storm, tissue infiltrates, damage) and
hypo-immune response (relative lymphopenia, impaired T-cell function, impaired interferon antiviral
responses, reduced viral clearance)5–8. To date, many studies addressing the host immune response to
SARS-CoV-2 are limited by small sample sizes or address narrow sets of immune mediators2,4,9–13. In a large
cohort of acutely-ill patients presenting to a large, urban, academic Emergency Department (ED), we
characterized the host proteomic responses to SARS-CoV-2 using two unbiased plasma proteomic
methodologies. This analysis uncovers unique protein signatures associated with COVID-19 disease,
severity, aging, tissue destruction, and cellular death that we map to specific cell types in the context of
relevant clinical phenotypes, thereby providing insight into underlying disease mechanisms.
Results
Evolution of viral response and IFN pathway proteins in the plasma of COVID-19 infected patients
We enrolled 384 unique subjects who presented to our ED with acute respiratory distress suspected or known
to be due to COVID-19. Of these, 306 patients were subsequently confirmed to have COVID-19 infection. We
classified patients by acuity levels A1-A5 on days 0, 3, 7, and 28, derived from the WHO Ordinal Outcomes
Scale14 (Fig, 1A). For confirmed COVID-19 cases, our primary outcome was the maximal acuity (Acuitymax)
within 28 days of enrollment: A1, death within 28 days (N=42, 14%; Fig. 1A-B; Table S1); A2, intubation,
mechanical ventilation, and survival to 28 days (N=67, 22%); A3, hospitalized and requiring supplemental
oxygen (N=133, 43%); A4, hospitalized without requiring supplemental oxygen (N=41, 13%); and A5,
discharged directly from the ED without subsequently returning and requiring admission within 28 days (N=23,
8%). A1 and A2 were classified as severe (N=109) and A3-A5 as non-severe (N=197).
COVID-19-positive patients were younger than COVID-19-negative patients (median age 58 vs. 67 years,
respectively), with a wide age distribution (Extended Data Fig. 1), and were predominantly Hispanic (54%
vs. 15%, respectively). Non-specific inflammatory markers measured clinically, such as C-reactive protein
(CRP) and ferritin, were significantly higher in COVID-19-positive versus COVID-19-negative patients; 28-day
outcomes were similar between groups (Extended Data Fig. 1). Notably, absolute lymphocyte count was not
significantly different between groups. We analyzed 1472 unique plasma proteins measured by Proximity
Extension Assay (PEA) using the Olink platform (Olink® Explore 1536) (online methods) on day 0 (D0;
N=383 samples), and for COVID-19-positive patients still hospitalized, also on days 3 (D3, N=218 samples)
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and 7 (D7, N=136 samples) (Tables S2, S3). Unsupervised clustering of D0 samples from 383 patients using
protein levels shows clustering by COVID-19 status, age, acuity, ethnicity and kidney disease (Extended
Data Fig. 2A).
To identify proteins differential between COVID-19-positive and COVID-19-negative patients, we created
linear models to fit each of the proteins at D0 with COVID-19 status as a main effect and adjusted for age,
demographics, and key comorbidities (Fig. 1B; Extended Data Figs. 2, 3, Table S4, online methods).
Hierarchical clustering of patients using these differentially-expressed proteins demonstrates a clear
separation of the majority of COVID-19-positive from COVID-19-negative patients (Fig. 1C; Extended Data
Fig. 2B). COVID-19-positive patients displayed higher expression of viral response and interferon pathway
proteins, including DDX58 (RIG-I), type II (IFNγ) and type III (IFNλ1) interferons, CCL7, CXCL10, and CXCL11
(Fig. 1D-E), with enrichment of proteins in pathways associated with vaccine response, innate immune
activation, and T cell function (Extended Data Fig. 2C-E). Among chemokines, we found decreased
expression of CCL16 and CCL24, among others, in the plasma of COVID-19-positive patients compared to
COVID-19-negative patients (Fig. 1C-E). Fifty (16%) COVID-19-positive patients clustered with COVID-19negative patients (Fig. 1C, left side) and expressed lower levels of the typical COVID-19 inflammatory
signature seen in other COVID-19-positive patients (Fig. 1C), yet their mortality was similar to the main cluster
of COVID-19-positive patients (Table S1); although significantly older than the other COVID-19-positive
patients (median age 69 vs 57 years), with more cardiac and kidney comorbidities, this subset is comparablyill with a distinct low-inflammatory proteomic signature.
To infer immune cell subtype origins of key proteins, we mapped the differential protein expression using the
Olink assay in COVID-19-infected patients to single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) profiles from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of COVID-19-infected patients8,15,16 (Fig. 1F; Extended Data Fig. 4). The
majority of proteins were selectively expressed in plasmablasts (e.g. RRM2, WARS and PRDX1) and myeloid
cells (e.g. CD14, SIGLEC1, SIGLEC10, IL1RN, CCL8 and CXCL10), particularly monocytes and neutrophils
(Fig. 1F; Extended Data Fig. 4), consistent with the reported expansion and activation of these cell
populations during infection1,15. Interestingly, monocyte subsets displayed distinct expressions of plasma
proteins, with certain subsets demonstrating potent pro-inflammatory responses (Extended Data Fig. 4). A
smaller group of proteins were expressed strongly in CD8 T cells and NK cells, reflecting cytotoxic responses
(IFNγ, GZMB, GZMH and LAG3; Fig. 1F).
Inflammatory pathways associated with severity in COVID-19-positive patients, acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS), and their relationship to age
We analyzed protein signatures of COVID-19-positive patients as a function of clinical parameters (Fig. 1B).
Similar to previous reports17–19, Acuitymax of COVID-19 patients was significantly correlated with age, D0 acute
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

kidney dysfunction, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), lymphopenia, acute inflammatory markers (ESR, CRP, Ddimer, and ferritin), and the pre-existing comorbidities kidney disease, diabetes, smoking, and heart disease
(Fig. 2A; Extended Data Fig. 5). Distinct from some previous reports17–19, Acuitymax was not significantly
correlated with race, ethnicity, or body mass index (BMI) (Extended Data Fig. 5). Moreover, neutralization
activity (online methods) was highly correlated with inflammatory markers and absolute neutrophil count
(ANC), but not with Acuitymax (Fig. 2A; Extended Data Figs. 5, 6).
Unsupervised clustering of all samples from COVID-19-positive patients demonstrates that samples cluster
by Acuitymax, severity, age, and time point (Fig. 2B). To identify proteins associated with Acuitymax levels and
severity, we fit linear mixed models (LMMs) to protein values with either Acuitymax or severity, and time as
main effects, and with covariates age, demographics, and key comorbidities (Extended Data Figs. 7-9, Table
S5-8, online methods). Because LMMs correct for non-independence in the data, LMMs identify important
interactions between variables. At D0, 257 Olink plasma proteins were differentially expressed between
severe and non-severe patients, and at D3 and D7, over 700 proteins (Extended Data Fig. 8B-F, Table S5).
D0 differential proteins were enriched for pathways involved in CD4+ and CD8+ T cell memory responses
and IFNα and IL6 signaling in monocytes, among others (Extended Data Fig. 8E). Hierarchical clustering of
patients by D0 severity-associated proteins revealed distinct clusters of severe patients (Fig. 2C), which
included a cluster with elevated monocyte inflammatory markers (e.g. OSM, IL6, IL8/CXCL8 and IL15) and a
cluster with elevated markers of regeneration and suppressive monocyte proteins (RETN, CLEC4D, GDF15,
and PDGFRA). Consistent with this, graphical clustering of patients revealed five patient phenotypes, with
three distinct severity patterns starting from D0 (Extended Data Fig. 10 and Table S9). As we saw when
analyzing proteins by COVID-19-positive status (Fig. 1), in the circulation, the majority of proteins associated
with severity were most highly transcriptionally expressed in myeloid and plasmablast subsets (Extended
Data Fig. 11).
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is the leading cause of death in COVID-19 infection. To gain
insight into the pathways contributing to death in patients with ARDS, we compared patients who died (A1,
N=42, median time to death 9 days [IQR 4-17]) to those receiving mechanical ventilation yet surviving (A2,
N=67) (Tables S6, S7); by clinical criteria, essentially all patients in these two groups had findings of ARDS.
At D7, 24 plasma proteins were significantly differentially expressed between the two groups; amongst those
elevated in patients that died were previously reported proinflammatory proteins (IL62,4,9,10,20–22, IL82,9,10,21,22,
CXCL102,9,10,21) and previously less well-described monocyte and regeneration proteins, including CCL2,
CCL7, CCL8, CCL20, AREG, IL1RL1, PTX3, and FLT1, as well as IL24 (Fig. 2D,E; Extended Data Fig.
9A,B). Most of these proinflammatory proteins showed similar elevation and upward trajectories for groups
A1 and A2 through D3, followed at D7 by a decline in survivors and a sustained elevation in those who died
(Fig. 2E; Extended Data Fig. 9B). Plasma levels of these proteins at D0 were associated with poorer survival
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Fig. 2F; Extended Data Fig. 9C). Interestingly, several exocrine pancreas proteases and protease inhibitors
(CTRC, CELA3A, CPA2, CTRB1, AMY2A, AMY2B) were reduced in the plasma of those who died (Fig. 2D;
Extended Data Fig. 9B); whereas the implication of these in COVID-19 remains uncertain, many have antiinflammatory effects in mouse models23–26. Of note, few patients received the anti-inflammatory
dexamethasone, which, since our study, has been established as standard-of-care. Taken together, these
findings suggest that survival from COVID-19 ARDS is associated with decreased pro-inflammatory and
increased anti-inflammatory responses over time.
Plasma proteomic signatures predict severity and uncover pathways associated with immune aging
To test whether D0 plasma proteins are predictive of severe disease at later time points, we built a classifier
based on the Olink data of severe disease (defined as Acuitymax of A1 or A2) using elastic-net logistic
regression with cross-validation; D0 plasma proteins levels yielded good predictive performance (AUC 0.85,
confidence interval (CI) 0.81-0.86) (Fig. 2G; Extended Data Fig. 9D, online methods). Consistent with our
LMM results (FIg. 2C; Table S5), IL6, IL1RL1, PTX3, and IL1RN were amongst the strongest weighted
proteins in the predictor; also amongst top weighted proteins were KRT19, a marker of epithelial damage27,
and TRIAP1, an inhibitor of apoptosis28 (Extended Data Fig. 9E). These proteins may therefore serve as
predictive biomarkers, which would need to be validated in larger independent cohorts.
As has been previously reported by others, severity was strongly associated with age (Fig. 2A). To identify
protein pathways specifically associated with age, we looked for proteins with the strongest pairwise
correlation with age (Table 10) and fit each to an LMM with age and time point as main effects (Extended
Data Fig. 12A, Table S11, online methods). This approach revealed several severity-associated proteins
and proteins previously reported as age-associated29–31 (GFAP, EGFR, MLN, EDA2R) that separated patients
by age. Plasma protein expression at D0, D3, or D7 accurately classifies patients by age group using
regularized logistic regression (AUC 0.93, 0.90 and 0.86, respectively) and identifies several age-related
proteins independent of (IL2RB, GZMA, FLT3, CD27, IL17D) or associated with (RSPO3, NT-proBNP,
CHI3L1, CD59, LAYN) disease severity (Extended Data Fig. 13). To identify temporal protein patterns
indicative of immune aging, we fit each protein to a LMM with disease severity, time point, and age (≤ or > 65
years) as main effects (Table S12, online methods), identifying four distinct dominant expression patterns
between young and aged, and non-severe and severe patients (Extended Data Fig. 12B), that together
highlight unique age-related responses to COVID-19 infection.
Plasma protein signatures of tissue damage highlight organ toxicity in severe COVID-19 infection
To elucidate patterns of tissue damage, we derived tissue-specific plasma proteomic signatures by analyzing
samples using the SomaScan platform32, as this provides complementary sampling of a broad range of the
plasma proteome, detecting over 4400 proteins via an aptamer-based technology. LMMs of severity and
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acuitymax resulted in largely overlapping sets of differentially expressed proteins with the Olink platform
(hypergeometric test p=0.002, 69% of severity-associated proteins overlapped with those identified by Olink
data) (Table S13, online methods). To derive organ-specific expression signatures, we leveraged gene
expression data from the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx)33 portal (online methods) and verified the cell
type of origin of each protein in a given signature within each tissue of interest, reassuringly finding that our
derived signatures were expressed primarily in epithelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 14). We then identified
plasma proteins in our datasets that overlapped with these gene sets (Table S14), looking specifically at
proteins that are intracellular and thus are likely to leak into circulation as a result of tissue damage (Fig. 3A;
Extended Data Fig. 15A). When possible, we validated our organ-specific signatures (Table S14) against
lab values measured clinically; this showed significant correlations of our heart signature with clinical troponin
levels (R=0.52, p < 0.001), our liver signature with clinical ALT (R=0.6, p < 0.001) and AST (R=0.46, p <
0.001), our skeletal muscle signature with clinical CPK (R=0.6, p < 0.001), and negative correlations between
our kidney signature and GFR (R=-0.36, p < 0.001) (Fig. 3B; Extended Data Fig. 16).
In patients with severe COVID-19 (A1, A2), heart, lung, and skeletal muscle intracellular protein signatures
were elevated in plasma as early as D0 and this elevation persisted to D7 (Fig. 3A). Consistent with this,
elevated heart and skeletal muscle protein signatures at D0 portended poor overall survival, but this was not
the case for lung, kidney, liver, and pancreas signatures (Fig. 3C; Table S15). Interestingly, in severely ill
patients, liver and pancreas intracellular protein signatures were decreased in the plasma at D3 and D7 (Fig.
3A); over the same timeframe, liver-specific secreted proteins were decreased, whereas pancreas-specific
secreted proteins were increased (Extended Data Fig. 17). Together these results suggest that COVID-19
illness drives damage to the heart and lung and that this damage signature can be detected early in the
circulation upon hospital presentation.
Lung damage in severe COVID-19 is a result of cell death within epithelial cells
We mapped intracellular severity-associated plasma proteins to specific tissues and cell types using
scRNAseq datasets (Extended Data Figs. 18, 19, online methods). Analysis of scRNAseq datasets from
healthy tissues revealed that plasma proteins at D0 (Table S5) are expressed in macrophage subsets and
epithelial cells, with notably increased relative expression in proximal tubule cells in the kidney, hepatocytes
in the liver, and stellate, ductal, and acinar cells in the pancreas (Extended Data Fig. 19). By analyzing
expression of intracellular severity-associated proteins (Table S5) in the more physiologically-relevant context
of single cells of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid from COVID-19 infected patients34, we found distinct
clusters of proteins expressed within lung epithelial cells and within T cells, with little expression in tissueassociated myeloid or B cells (Fig. 3D). These tissue-associated patterns highlight the distinct contributions
to the plasma proteome of cell types in the circulation and those in tissue (Fig. 3D; Extended Data Fig. 11).

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Within lung epithelial cells, expression of severity-associated proteins correlated with ACE2 expression
(R=0.49, p = 0.04), but not with TMPRSS2 expression (Fig. 3F; Extended Data Fig. 15B), which suggests
that the increased levels of these proteins in plasma results from SARS-CoV-2 infection and death of these
cells and that other proteases may be redundant with TMPRSS2 for priming during viral entry. In contrast,
heart cell-type plasma signatures did not correlate with ACE2 expression (Extended Data Fig. 18B),
suggesting that heart damage is largely an indirect effect of the disease process, putatively due to the
inflammatory response. The implications of the observed correlation with TMPRSS2 expression on cells
(R=0.62, p < 0.001; Fig. 3F) is unclear. Similarly, intracellular plasma signatures from cell subsets that do not
express ACE2 or TMPRSS2 (Fig. 3D) likely results from bystander cell death. Of note, unlike in the blood, a
larger subset of severity-associated plasma proteins is expressed in effector and cytotoxic CD8+ T cells and
NK cells located within the lung (Fig. 3D). Together, our data suggest that death of lung epithelial cells may
be a key driver of the pathology of severe disease, and this may be detected from signals in the circulating
proteome.
Cellular communication between lung epithelial cells, T cells, and myeloid cells is associated with
disease severity
To gain insights into inflammatory pathways activated in severe disease and given the likely role in disease
of elevated levels of circulating proteins, we looked for enrichment of these pathways among plasma proteins
that are normally secreted or membrane-bound. Among the D0 severity-associated proteome, NF-kB
signaling, NK cell activation, IL6 and IL10 signaling, and Th1 and Th2 activation were significantly enriched
(Extended Data Fig. 17A). To identify cellular mechanisms regulated by this subset of proteins, we analyzed
ligand-receptor interactions35,36 using the BAL fluid cell dataset from COVID-19-infected patients34 (Fig. 4A;
online methods). From D0 to D3, there was a dramatic increase in the number of predicted ligand-receptor
interactions (Fig. 4A), predominantly represented by ligand-receptor interactions occurring in lung epithelial
cells, T cells, and mast cells (Fig. 4B). Most dramatic were changes in mast cells, driven by their interactions
with other mast cells, CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets, and epithelial progenitors (Fig. 4B). Consistent with
this, the mast cell function marker tryptase was differentially expressed between severe and non-severe
patients and over time (Extended Data Fig. 20).
Whereas lung epithelial cells showed predicted ligand-receptor interactions with other epithelial cells,
monocytes and macrophages, and CD8+ T cells, and NK cells, pronounced COVID-19 severity and temporal
changes were observed in proteins mediating interactions between epithelial progenitors and
cytotoxic/effector CD8+ T cells or NK cells (Fig. 4B-F). To better understand the specific pathways mediating
disease severity, we constructed mappings of key ligand-receptor relationships of cells in BAL fluid with
plasma severity-associated ligands at D0 and D3 (Extended Data Fig. 21). Pairings of ligands from lung
epithelial cells with receptors on other lung epithelial cells were involved in alveolar maintenance and
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

protection, growth factor signaling, and tissue regeneration (HGF-MET, TGFA-EGFR, DKK1-LRP6, KITLGKIT, semaphorin-PLXNA receptors, among others; Fig. 4C). Moreover, several T cell activating and
exhaustion signals originated from lung epithelial cells, mediated by PVR signaling through TIGIT and CD96
as early as D0, and eventual activation of IL7 and IL18 pathways at D3 (Fig. 4C). To better understand the
pathways affecting lung epithelial cells, we focused on the receptors expressed in these cells, specifically
those that have ligands that were severity-associated in our model (Fig. 4D). A correlation matrix using
plasma expression levels of these ligands identified coregulated groups of proteins that act on lung epithelial
cells. Amongst these were clear protein modules for regeneration and growth factor signaling (module 1: EGF,
TGFB1, DKK1, VEGFA; module 2: BMP6, HGF, RSPO3, RSPO1) and for IL6 pathway signaling (OSM, LIF,
IL6) (Fig. 4D).
Amongst the severity-associated ligands expressed on monocytes/macrophages are many known to be
associated with death in COVID-19 (IL8, CXCL8, CCL2, CCL7, CCL8, and CCL20; Figs. 2D, 4E). We found
several previously poorly characterized monocyte/macrophage ligand-receptor interactions with lung
epithelial cells and other myeloid cells, most apparent at D3, that may be involved in driving later-stage
damage and regulating phagocytosis (e.g. TGFB1-ITGB6 and ITGB8, SPP1-ITGAV, SIRP1a-CD47; Fig. 4E).
The interaction of TGFB1 with its receptor ITGB6/8 likely suppresses beneficial immune responses, as it
releases active TGFB1 from its inhibitor latency-associated peptide38,39. Active TGFB1 suppresses cytotoxic
T cells, potentially inhibiting clearance of SARS-CoV-2-infected cells, inhibits proliferation of naïve T cells and
induces growth arrest of B cells, potentially contributing to COVID-19-associated lymphopenia, and promotes
differentiation of peripheral Tregs40. Of note, the majority of monocyte ligands function in T cell recruitment,
activation, and exhaustion as early as D0 (e.g., CXCL9-CXCR3, CXCL10-CXCR3, IL15-IL2R, CD74-LAG3,
CD274-PDCD1; Fig. 4E). Consistent with this, amongst the subset of severity-associated monocyte ligands
that affect receptors on T cells is a coexpressed module of monocyte death-associated cytokines/chemokines
(CXCL10, CCL7, CCL8, CCL2; Fig. 4F). Also notable are two coexpressed modules of receptors on T cells
associated with T cell activation and exhaustion (IL18, IL15, and PVR, and CXCL16, CD74 and CD27), the
ligands for which are expressed on monocytes (Fig. 4F). Based on these data, we propose a model of COVID19-induced immune and cellular responses within the lower airways in which early monocyte activation drives
T cell recruitment, activation, and exhaustion, leading to delayed activation of additional monocyte
inflammatory pathways and repair and regeneration within lung epithelial cells (Fig. 4G).
Discussion
This analysis of the plasma proteomes of 384 acutely-ill patients with COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 illnesses
provides a comprehensive longitudinal summary of the systemic host response to SARS-CoV-2. We found
that COVID-19 patients have dramatically different plasma proteomic profiles than COVID-19-negative
controls with respiratory distress (Fig. 1). We broadly characterize over 600 plasma proteins implicated in the
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

host viral and inflammatory response to SARS-CoV-2. Amongst COVID-19-infected patients, a small subset
had inflammatory signatures similar to COVID-19-negative controls but had outcomes similar to those seen
with other COVID-19-positive patients. Over 250 proteins were independently associated with COVID-19
severity, with several inflammatory mediators associated with death in ARDS patients, including previously
identified markers (IL62,4,9,10,20–22, IL82,9,10,21,22 and CXCL102,9,10,21) and several novel markers (CCL2, CCL7,
CCL8, CCL20, AREG, IL1RL1, FLT1 and IL24) (Fig. 2). Importantly, plasma proteins at D0 are strongly
predictive of disease severity. These may identify pathways associated with severity that are amenable to
existing or new therapeutics. Furthermore, they can be incorporated into diagnostics that stratify high-risk
patients for tailored therapies or earlier intervention.
By leveraging scRNAseq datasets from PBMCs of COVID-19 patients and healthy tissues, we deconvoluted
the relative contribution of different compartments to the plasma proteome, finding a subset of severityassociated plasma proteins expressed in circulating monocytes and plasmablasts, and a smaller subset in
circulating T cells and NK cells. To understand the effect of COVID-19 on host tissues, we leveraged gene
expression data from GTEX to derive organ-specific cellular death signatures. By applying the resulting
unbiased set of intracellular proteins to severity-associated proteins in plasma proteomes, we demonstrate
that severe patients have early signals of heart, lung, and skeletal muscle tissue damage (Fig. 3). Our derived
protein signatures correlate with clinical metrics of tissue-specific cellular damage and, by using scRNAseq
data, primarily show gene expression in epithelial cells within the respective tissues, providing support to their
validity. Our plasma organ-specific death signatures will have broader utility as a potential liquid biopsy for
organ damage and can be used to interpret the plasma proteome in the context of tissue-specific cell death
and inflammation.
By applying expression profiling of cells from BAL fluid to our intracellular cell death signatures, we
demonstrate that the severity-associated proteome is significantly associated with cell-type specific ACE2
gene expression, suggesting that direct infection of lung epithelial cells leads to cell death that is
measurable in plasma (Fig. 3). Of note, we make the assumption that circulating factors reflect the effect of
secreted factors in lung tissue, an assumption that requires validation in future studies. By analyzing the
interactions of circulating ligands with receptors within cells in BAL fluid, we discover a temporal order of
cellular communication in the lung that drives disease severity (Fig. 4). This starts with early activation of
monocytes/macrophages and T cell recruitment into tissues alongside activation and early expression of
exhaustion markers. Death of lung epithelial cells in turn activates regenerative and growth factor signaling,
and phagocytosis of cells by macrophages (Fig. 4G), consistent with proposed models of altered
differentiation dynamics of nasal epithelial cells upon SARS-CoV-2 infection37. By discriminating specific cell
types likely dying from direct viral infection from those likely dying from indirect effects of the illness, we
provide new details on the pathogenesis of the disease.
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In conclusion, we studied several thousand circulating proteins within the plasma proteome in a large number
of symptomatic COVID-19 patients and acutely-ill non-COVID-19 controls upon hospital arrival and during the
first week of hospitalization. We performed adjusted analyses to determine plasma proteins that are
independently-associated with COVID-19 disease and illness severity. In patients with ARDS, we identified
inflammation-related proteins associated with death, and non-inflammatory, potentially protective proteins that
are upregulated in those who survive. By mapping differentially-expressed proteins to published scRNAseq
data, we infer cellular origins of relevant circulating proteins and provide an important link between cellular
immune responses and tissue damage in severe disease to the clinically-accessible plasma proteome. This
work lays the foundation for understanding how the plasma proteome can be leveraged to gain insights into
underlying disease pathways and potential therapeutic targets, and to develop diagnostics that can be used
to stratify high-risk patients as candidates for tailored therapies and earlier interventions.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods
Patient cohort and clinical data collection
Patients were enrolled in the Emergency Department (ED) of a large, urban, academic hospital from
3/24/2020 to 4/30/2020 in Boston during the peak of the COVID-19 surge, with an institutional IRB-approved
waiver of informed consent. Included were patients 18 years or older with a clinical concern upon ED arrival
for COVID-19 and with acute respiratory distress, with at least one of the following: 1) tachypnea (≥22 breaths
per minute), 2) oxygen saturation ≤92% on room air, 3) a requirement for supplemental oxygen, or 4) positivepressure ventilation. The day 0 blood sample (N=384) was obtained concurrent with the initial clinical blood
draw in the ED, and day 3 (N=217) and day 7 (N=144) samples were obtained for COVID-19-positive patients,
if still hospitalized at those times, yielding 735 samples. In addition, blood was collected from some patients
at the time of substantial clinical deterioration (44 samples); these event-driven samples were excluded from
linear models. Clinical course was followed to 28 days post-enrollment or until hospital discharge, if that
occurred after 28 days. Of all 384 enrolled, 78 (20%) tested negative for SARS-CoV-2; among these, for 50
(64%), suspicion for COVID-19 was very low based on careful retrospective chart review by MRF and RPB,
an emergency physician and infectious diseases physician, respectively. Among the remaining 28 patients,
COVID-19 was a diagnostic possibility yet most had multiple negative PCR tests throughout their hospital
course. These 78 subjects were categorized as controls. We dichotomized COVID-19 subjects by illness
severity and outcome into severe (A1-A2) and less severe (A3-A5) groups. Of the 42 COVID-19 patients who
died, 24 (57%) received mechanical ventilation and 18 (43%) did not. The latter group was significantly older,
many with advanced directives to withhold aggressive care. Demographic, past medical history and clinical
data were collected and summarized for each outcome group, using medians with interquartile ranges and
proportions with 95% confidence intervals, where appropriate.
Plasma collection and processing
Blood samples were collected in EDTA tubes and processed no more than 3 hours post blood draw in a
Biosafety Level 2+ laboratory on site. Whole blood was diluted with room temperature RPMI medium in a 1:2
ratio to facilitate cell separation for other analyses using the SepMate PBMC isolation tubes (STEMCELL)
containing 16 mL Ficoll (GE Healthcare). Diluted whole blood was centrifuged at 1200 g for 20 minutes at 20
°C. After centrifugation, plasma (5 mL) was pipetted into 15 mL conical tubes and placed on ice during PBMC
separation procedures, centrifuged at 1000 g for 5 min at 4°C, aliquoted into cryovials, and stored at -80°C.
Study samples (45 µL) were randomly allocated onto 96-well plates based on disease outcome grouping and
were treated with 1% Triton X-100 for virus inactivation at room temperature for 2 hrs.
Olink plasma proteomic assays
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The Olink Proximity Extension Assay (PEA) is a technology developed for high-multiplex analysis of proteins
using 1 µL of sample. In PEA, oligonucleotide-labelled monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies (PEA probes) are
used to bind target proteins in a pair-wise manner thereby preventing all cross-reactive events. Upon binding,
the oligonucleotides come in close proximity and hybridize followed by extension generating a unique
sequence used for digital identification of the specific protein assay. With recent developments, PEA enables
an increased number of 384 multiplex assays and higher throughput using next-generation sequencing (NGS)
as a readout method. PEA probe design is based on addition of Illumina adapter sequences, unique barcodes
for protein identification and indexes to distinguish samples in multiplex sequencing. The protocol has also
been miniaturized and automated using liquid handlers to further improve robustness and maximize output.
The full library (Olink® Explore 1536) consists of 1472 proteins and 48 controls assays divided into four 384plex panels focused on inflammation, oncology, cardiometabolic and neurology proteins. In each of the four
384-plex panels, overlapping assays of IL-6, IL-8 (CXCL8), and TNF are included for quality control (QC)
purposes. Library content is based on target selection of low-abundant inflammation proteins, actively
secreted proteins, organ-specific proteins leaked into circulation, drug targets (established and from ongoing
clinical trials), and proteins detected in blood by mass spectrometry. Selection, classification, and
categorization of proteins were based on using various databases (e.g. Gene Ontology), the Blood Atlas –
the human secretome (www.proteinatlas.org), a collaboration with the Institute of Systems Biology, Seattle
WA, for tissue-specific proteins, www.clinicaltrials.gov for mapping of drug targets, detection of proteins in
blood measured by mass spectrometry and finally, various text-mining approaches identifying protein
biomarkers described in the literature. The analytical performance of PEA is carefully validated for each
protein assay; performance data are available at www.olink.com. Technical criteria include assessing
sensitivity, dynamic range, specificity, precision, scalability, endogenous interference, and detectability in
healthy and pathological plasma and serum samples.
In the immune reaction, 2.8 µL of sample is mixed with PEA probes and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Then, a
combined extension and pre-amplification mix is added to the incubated samples at room temperature for
PCR. The PCR products are pooled before a second PCR step following addition of individual sample index
sequences. All samples are thereafter pooled, followed by bead purification and QC of the generated libraries
on a Bioanalyzer. Finally, sequencing is performed on a NovaSeq 6000 system using two S1 flow cells with
2 x 50 base read lengths. Counts of known sequences are thereafter translated into normalized protein
expression (NPX) units through a QC and normalization process developed and provided by Olink.
Quality control for Olink plasma proteomics
The Olink PEA QC process consists of specifically engineered controls to monitor the performance of the
main steps of the assays (immunoreaction, extension and amplification/detection) as well as the individual
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

samples. Internal controls are spiked into each sample and represent a control using a non-human assay, an
extension control composed of an antibody coupled to a unique DNA-pair always in proximity and, finally, a
detection control based on a double stranded DNA amplicon. In addition, each plate run with Olink includes
a control strip with sample controls used to estimate precision (intra- and inter-coefficient of variation). A
negative control (buffer) run in triplicate is utilized to set background levels and calculate limit of detection
(LOD), a plate control (plasma pool) is run in triplicate to adjust levels between plates, and a sample control
(reference plasma) is included in duplicate to estimate CV between runs.
NPX is Olink’s relative protein quantification unit on a log2 scale and values are calculated from the number
of matched counts on the NovaSeq run. Data generation of NPX consists of normalization to the extension
control (known standard), log2-transformation, and level adjustment using the plate control (plasma sample).
SomaScan plasma proteomic assays
The SomaScan Platform for proteomic profiling uses 4979 SOMAmer reagents, single-stranded DNA
aptamers, to 4776 unique human protein targets. The modified aptamer binding reagents32, SomaScan
assay32,41, its performance characteristics29,42, and specificity43,44 to human targets have been previously
described. The assay used standard controls, including 12 hybridization normalization control sequences to
control for variability in the Agilent readout process and 5 human calibrator control pooled replicates and 3
quality control pooled replicates to mitigate batch effects and verify the quality of the assay run using standard
acceptance criteria.
Quality control for SomaScan plasma proteomics
The SomaScan Assay is run using 96-well plates; 11 wells are allocated for control samples used to control
for batch effects and to estimate the accuracy, precision, and buffer background of the assay over time. Five
pooled Calibrator replicates, three pooled QC replicates, and three buffer replicates are run on every plate.
The readout is performed using Agilent hybridization, scan, and feature extraction technology. Twelve
Hybridization Control SOMAmers are added alongside SOMAmers to be measured from the biological
samples and controls of each well during the SOMAmer elution step to control for readout variability. The
control samples are run repeatedly during assay qualification and robust point estimates are generated and
stored as references for each SOMAmer result for the Calibrator and QC samples. The results are used as
references throughout the life of the SOMAscan V4 Assay. Plate Calibration is performed by calculating the
ratio of the Calibrator Reference RFU value to the plate-specific Calibrator replicate median RFU value for
each SOMAmer. The resulting ratio distribution is decomposed into a Plate Scale factor defined by the median
of the distribution and a vector of SOMAmer-specific Calibration Scale Factors. Normalization of QC replicates
and samples is performed using adaptive normalization by maximum likelihood (ANML) with point and
variance estimates from a normal U.S. population. Post calibration accuracy is estimated using the ratio of
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the QC reference RFU value to the plate-specific QC replicate median RFU value for each SOMAmer. The
resulting QC ratio distribution provides a robust estimate of accuracy for each SOMAmer on every plate.
Plate-specific Acceptance Criteria: Plate Scale Factor between 0.4-2.5 and 85% of QC ratios between 0.8
and 1.2 must be met prior to release.
Data analysis and visualization
All statistical analyses for the clinical and proteomics data in this cohort was performed using R version 4.0.2.
All plots were generated using the ggplot2 package in R with the exception that the correlation plots were
generated using the corrplot() function in R. Pairwise Pearson correlations were calculated for all proteins,
and rows and columns of correlation plots were ordered based on hierarchical clustering. All heatmaps were
generated using the heatmap345 package and NPX values for each protein centered to have a mean of 0 and
scaled to have a standard deviation of 1 within each protein. Scaled data greater than either 4 or 5 standard
deviations from the mean were truncated at +/- 4 or 5. Rows and columns were ordered based on hierarchical
clustering.
Unsupervised clustering
Principal components analysis (PCA) was performed using all proteins and all samples using the prcomp()
function in R. Unsupervised clustering by UMAP was performed using all proteins, and either all samples or
just day 0 samples, using the umap() function in R, and UMAP coordinates were plotted using the ggplot2
package. Unsupervised clustering by tSNE was by first performing dimensionality reduction by PCA and then
taking the top principal components for a tSNE embedding using the Rtsne package and the argument
pca=TRUE. k-nearest neighbor (KNN) graphs and Louvain community detection was performed using custom
code and the FNN package provided in R.
Linear models
Linear regression models were fit independently to each protein using the lm package in R with protein values
(NPX for Olink data) as the dependent variable. The models included a term for COVID-19 status and
covariates for age, sex, ethnicity, heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, pulmonary disease,
kidney disease, immuno-compromised status to control for any potential confounding. P-values were adjusted
to control the false discovery rate (FDR) at 5% using the Benjamini-Hochberg method implemented in the
emmeans package in R.
Linear mixed models
Linear mixed effects models (LMMs) were fit independently to each protein using the lme446 package in R
with protein values (NPX for Olink data) as the dependent variable. The model for severity included a main
effect of time, a main effect of severity, the interaction between these two terms, and a random effect of patient
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ID to account for the correlation between samples coming from the same patient. Covariates for age, sex,
ethnicity, heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, pulmonary disease, kidney disease, and
immuno-compromised status were included in the model to control for any potential confounding. Significance
of the three model terms was determined with an F-test using Satterthwaite degrees of freedom and type III
sum of squares implemented with the lmerTest47 package in R. P-values for the three model terms of interest
were adjusted to control the FDR at 5% using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Group differences were
calculated for each protein passing the FDR threshold with p-values adjusted using the Tukey method
implemented by the emmeans package in R. Group differences with Tukey adjusted p-values less than 0.05
were considered statistically significant. Note, all other models were run similarly with time in addition to either
Acuitymax, age, or both age and severity as main effects instead of severity.
For SomaLogic data, LMMs for severity and time as main effects were run as was done for Olink. Overall,
significant proteins were found to be partially overlapping with those found for Olink; for example, at D0, of
the 1085 overlapping assays between the two platforms, 779 proteins were significant for severity or
interaction term in Olink data, and 669 in the SomaLogic data, with 460 proteins overlapping between the two
sets. The non-overlapping assays in part due to a narrower dynamic range for some of the SomaLogic assays.
Residuals
Model residual values were extracted from LMMs (as described above) independently fit to every protein
using NPX as the dependent variable, age, sex, ethnicity, heart disease, diabetes, hypertension,
hyperlipidemia, pulmonary disease, kidney disease, and immuno-compromised status as covariates and a
random effect of patient ID to account for the correlation between samples taken from the same patient. These
residuals represent the remaining unexplained variance in the protein expression after accounting for the
effects of the included covariates.
Permutation controls
For the Olink assay, the likelihood of observing 1131 statistically significant proteins for the Acuitymax model
term and 963 statistically significant proteins for the time and Acuitymax interaction term from the linear mixed
models was evaluated using permutation testing. Acuitymax group was randomly permuted 100 times among
patients and for each permutation the full LMM procedure was followed. None of the permutations produced
as many statistically significant results as were observed when using the true Acuitymax groupings.
Gene set enrichment and pathway analysis
For analysis of functional pathways, two different strategies were employed: (i) gene set enrichment analysis48
using the ClusterProfiler package in R using the C7 immunologic signature gene set from the molecular
signatures database v7.2 (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb); and (ii) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Qiagen) on our gene lists using default parameters from the vendor. Pathways were visualized in dot plots
and bar plots using the ggplot2 package in R.
Differential expression analysis of Louvain clusters
To identify plasma proteins that were differentially expressed between Louvain clusters, we created a linear
model (as described above) with an identifier variable for Louvain group as a main effect and clinical variables
(as described above) as covariates; that is, for proteins most significantly expressed in L1, our identifier
variable was a 1 for L1 and 0 for all other groups. The top 25 differentially-expressed proteins were then
visualized.
Prediction of severity
Predictive performance of severity within 28 days was performed using all proteins and model covariates and
was estimated using elastic net logistic regression implemented by the glmnet49 package in R and 100 repeats
of 5-fold cross validation. Model tuning was performed using the caret package in R. Variable scaling, model
tuning, and feature selection was performed independently for each held-out fold such that the predictive
model was never exposed to the held-out data. Measures of predictive performance are reported as medians
and 95% confidence intervals calculated from the 100 repeats of the cross validation. Features were ranked
by how frequently they were chosen to be included in the model.
Prediction of patient age and antibody neutralization level
Generalized linear models with lasso regularization were trained (using the R caret package) on COVID-19positive patient proteome samples (consisting of 1472 Olink protein features) from each selected day (0, 3,
and 7) to predict patient age (≤ or > 65 years) or neutralization levels (≤ or > 75%). For percent neutralization
predictions, protein levels at day 0 were used to predict binned neutralization categories at day 3. Repeated
5-fold cross validation (with a hyperparameter scan from 0.0001 to 1 to select the lambda constant yielding
the greatest prediction accuracy) was replicated 100 times to obtain a confidence interval for the area under
the ROC curve (where ROC curves were generated using each patient’s estimated probability while serving
as the held-out fold). The average feature weights of the final models from each of the 100 rounds of 5-fold
cross validation were used to identify proteins of importance. Orthogonally, 10-fold cross validation was used
to train and validate a random forest model (with default ntree=500 and mtry=38) to predict age (≤ or > 65
years) or neutralization quartiles (0-25, 25-50, 50-75, 75-100%) and important proteins were identified based
on mean decrease in Gini. To identify protein features that were independent from or overlapping with severity
markers, the union of the top 50 important features from the lasso and random forest models were intersected
with significantly variable proteins between severity groups on day 0 (from the LMM described above).
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Measurement of neutralization levels
Constructs
SARS-CoV-2 S was amplified by PCR (Q5 High-Fidelity 2X Master Mix, New England Biolabs) from pUC57nCoV-S (gift of Jonathan Abraham), in which the C-terminal 27 amino acids of SARS-CoV-2 S are replaced
by the NRVRQGYS sequence of HIV-1, a strategy previously described for retroviruses pseudotyped with
SARS-CoV S50. The truncated SARS-CoV-2 S fused to gp41 was cloned into pCMV by Gibson assembly to
obtain pCMV-SARS2ΔC-gp41. psPAX2 and pCMV-VSV-G were previously described51. pTRIP-SFFV-EGFPNLS was previously described52 (Addgene plasmid #86677). cDNA for human TMPRSS2 and the hygromycin
resistance gene were generated by synthesis (Integrated DNA Technologies). pTRIP-SFFV-Hygro-2ATMPRSS2 was generated by Gibson assembly.
Cell culture
293T cells were cultured in DMEM, 10% FBS (ThermoFisher Scientific), and PenStrep (ThermoFisher
Scientific). 293T ACE2 cells (gift of Michael Farzan) were transduced with pTRIP-SFFV-Hygro-TMPRSS2
using TransIT®-293 Transfection Reagent (Mirus Bio, MIR 2700) to obtain 293T ACE2/TMPRSS2 cells, which
were selected with 320 µg/ml of hygromycin (Invivogen) and used as a target in pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2
S lentivirus neutralization assays.
Pseudotyped SARS-CoV-2 lentivirus production and lentiviral production for transductions
The protocol for lentiviral production was previously described51. Briefly, 293T cells were seeded at 0.8 x 106
cells per well in a 6-well plate and were transfected the same day with a mix of DNA containing 1 µg psPAX,
1.6 µg pTRIP-SFFV-EGFP-NLS, and 0.4 µg pCMV-SARS2ΔC-gp41 using TransIT®-293 Transfection
Reagent. After overnight incubation, the medium was changed. SARS-CoV-2 S pseudotyped lentiviral
particles were collected 30-34 hrs post medium exchange and filtered using a 0.45 µm syringe filter. To
transduce 293T ACE2 cells, the same protocol was followed, with a mix containing 1 µg psPAX, 1.6 µg pTRIPSFFV-Hygro-2A-TMPRSS2, and 0.4 µg pCMV-VSV-G.
SARS-CoV-2 S pseudotyped lentivirus antibody neutralization assay
The day before the experiment, 293T ACE2/TMPRSS2 cells were seeded at 5 x 103 cells in 100 µl per well
in 96-well plates. On the day of lentiviral harvest, 100 µl SARS-CoV-2 S pseudotyped lentivirus was incubated
with 50 µl of plasma diluted in medium to a final concentration of 1:100. Medium was then removed from 293T
ACE2/TMPRSS2 cells and replaced with 150 µl of the mix of plasma and pseudotyped lentivirus. Wells in the
outermost rows of the 96-well plate were excluded from the assay. After overnight incubation, medium was
changed to 100 µl of fresh medium. Cells were harvested 40-44 hrs post infection with TrypLE (Thermo

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fisher), washed in medium, and fixed in FACS buffer containing 1% PFA (Electron Microscopy Sciences).
Percentage GFP was quantified on a Cytoflex LX (Beckman Coulter), and data was analyzed with FlowJo.
Processing and analysis of single-cell RNA-sequencing data
We analyzed 4 publicly available scRNAseq PBMC datasets from COVID-19 patients, which were obtained
from: 1) Wilk et al, 202015, COVID-19 atlas, https://www.covid19cellatlas.org/#wilk20; 2) Lee et al, 20208,
GEO accession GSE149689; 3) Arunachalam et al, 20204, GEO accession GSE155673; and 4) SchulteSchrepping et al, 202016, EGA accession EGAS00001004571. Gene expression matrices after filtering low
quality cells were used as provided by the respective investigators, and annotations were used as described
in each of the studies. scRNAseq data from BAL fluid of COVID-19 patients from Bost et al, 202034 was
obtained from GEO accession GSE145926 and GSE149443. Cell-type specific expression in lung tissue was
derived as described below. scRNAseq data from other tissues were obtained from the following sources: 1)
heart from Tucker et al, 202053, Broad Institute’s Single Cell Portal study ID SCP498; 2) kidney from Menon
et al, 202054, GEO accession GSE140989; 3) liver from MacParland et al, 201855, GEO accession number
GSE115469; and 4) pancreas from Baron et al, 201656, expression matrix obtained from the Itai Yanai lab.
Generation of expression data from cell subsets in lung tissue
To generate lung cell-type specific signatures, we collected and aggregated scRNAseq studies, normalized
each dataset, harmonized the published cell type annotations, and trained a multiclass logistic regression
model.
Dataset selection: Only studies with scRNAseq data from primary tissue (including healthy, fibrotic, and
COVID-19 donors), sequenced using the 10X Genomics platform, and published annotations were included.
Two additional studies (chosen to maximize the number of cell types in the test set) were held out for cross
validation to test cell type predictions and tune hyperparameters. The training datasets were Adams et al,
202057,58, Chua et al, 202037, Habermann et al, 202059, Travaglini et al, 202060, and two unpublished datasets.
The test datasets used were Vieira et al, 201961 and Laio et al, 202062.
Normalization: Single cell/nuclei RNA-seq datasets from individual studies were aggregated and normalized
using Scanpy63. Each study was subjected to identical pre-processing steps. First, UMI count values were
winsorized, those above the 99th percentile of non-zero counts were reduced to the value of the 99th
percentile (13 counts). Winsorized count data were normalized, so that UMI counts per cell/nucleus summed
to 10,000, and then were logged, resulting in log(1+10,000*UMIs / total UMIs) for each cell/nuclei ("logtp10k”).
Then the aggregated expression data were scaled using the scanpy `scale` function with zero_center=False.
To prepare cell type labels, we mapped each annotation to a common reference list before training. Cells
labeled with cell types with ambiguous mappings (e.g. "T cell" or "myeloid") were excluded from training.
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Signature extraction: Cell type signatures were learned using an L2 penalized logistic regression model
trained to predict the cell type from a single cell gene expression profile. The model was trained using
SciKitLearn's LogisticRegression function with the default parameters with the exception of C=.1,
max_iter=30, and multi_class='ovr'. During fitting, individual cells were weighted to balance with respect to
both cell type and study. Model coefficients learned were used as cell type signatures.
Analysis of scRNAseq data
All scRNAseq gene expression data was analyzed in R version 4.0.2 using custom code to look at average
expression of genes of interest in each cell type. For visualization, gene expression was normalized across
cell types (rows) with Z-scores and visualized in heatmaps using the heatmap3 function in R with hierarchical
clustering of both cell types and genes. Where cell types were annotated on heatmaps, this was done by
identifying cell types with the highest relative expression by Z-scores. The cell-type-specific intracellular gene
list was defined as the top 20 genes with the highest relative expression for that cell type.
Derivation of tissue-specific plasma proteomic signatures
Organ specific protein signatures were defined using RNA sequencing data from the Genotype-Tissue
Expression (GTEx) Portal (https://www.gtexportal.org/home/). The median transcripts per million (TPM) of
56,200 genes across 54 non-diseased tissue sites were obtained. For each tissue site, the intersection of the
top 500 highest TPM genes and the top 500 most variable genes (based on coefficient of variation across
tissue types) was identified (Table S14). Proteins that were also measured by SomaScan were extracted,
validated for high tissue specific expression, and consolidated across related tissues for each organ of
interest. Organ signatures were split based on localization (intracellular versus membrane/secreted) using
UniProt and literature annotations. The values for each protein across all COVID-19-positive patients were
scaled to Z scores, and the mean Z score of all proteins in an organ set was used as an overall signature
score for a given patient.
Ligand-receptor analysis
Single-cell RNAseq expression profiles (10X genomics) of immune cells isolated from BAL fluid of healthy
and COVID-19-infected patients of varying severity from Bost et al, 202034 was obtained from GEO accession
GSE145926 and GSE149443. Python 3.8 was used to run the python package Cellphonedb v2.1.4 with the
following parameters: database v2.0.0, statistical method analysis, 1000 iterations, 6000 cell subsampling.
The metadata cluster identities were previously assigned based on the published annotations. Analysis of
specific ligands and receptors was performed from a curated list of known ligand-receptor pairs, and cell types
were assigned to particular ligands and receptors by identifying cell types with the highest relative expression
by Z-scores.
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Data and code availability
Data for the Olink proteomics assay (1352 proteins screened in 384 patients) is publicly available at
https://www.olink.com/mgh-covid-study/. All other data and code will be made available at the time of
publication.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

Mathew, D. et al. Deep immune profiling of COVID-19 patients reveals distinct immunotypes with
therapeutic implications. Science 369, (2020).
Lucas, C. et al. Longitudinal analyses reveal immunological misfiring in severe COVID-19. Nature 584,
463–469 (2020).
Del Valle, D. M. et al. An inflammatory cytokine signature predicts COVID-19 severity and survival. Nat.
Med. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1051-9.
Arunachalam, P. S. et al. Systems biological assessment of immunity to mild versus severe COVID-19
infection in humans. Science 369, 1210–1220 (2020).
Williamson, E. J. et al. Factors associated with COVID-19-related death using OpenSAFELY. Nature
584, 430–436 (2020).
Kuri-Cervantes, L. et al. Comprehensive mapping of immune perturbations associated with severe
COVID-19. Sci Immunol 5, (2020).
Hadjadj, J. et al. Impaired type I interferon activity and inflammatory responses in severe COVID-19
patients. Science vol. 369 718–724 (2020).
Lee, J. S. et al. Immunophenotyping of COVID-19 and influenza highlights the role of type I interferons
in development of severe COVID-19. Science Immunology vol. 5 eabd1554 (2020).
Rodriguez, L. et al. Systems-Level Immunomonitoring from Acute to Recovery Phase of Severe
COVID-19. Cell Rep Med 1, 100078 (2020).
Long, Q.-X. et al. Clinical and immunological assessment of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections.
Nat. Med. 26, 1200–1204 (2020).
Messner, C. B. et al. Ultra-High-Throughput Clinical Proteomics Reveals Classifiers of COVID-19
Infection. Cell Syst 11, 11–24.e4 (2020).
Wilson, J. G. et al. Cytokine profile in plasma of severe COVID-19 does not differ from ARDS and
sepsis. JCI Insight 5, (2020).
Shen, B. et al. Proteomic and Metabolomic Characterization of COVID-19 Patient Sera.
doi:10.1101/2020.04.07.20054585.
World Health Organization. WHO R&D Blueprint - Novel Coronavirus, COVID-19 Therapeutic Trial
Synopsis. World Health Organization https://www.who.int/blueprint/priority-diseases/key-action/COVID19_Treatment_Trial_Design_Master_Protocol_synopsis_Final_18022020.pdf (2020).
Wilk, A. J. et al. A single-cell atlas of the peripheral immune response in patients with severe COVID19. Nat. Med. 26, 1070–1076 (2020).
Schulte-Schrepping, J. et al. Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid Cell
Compartment. Cell 182, 1419–1440.e23 (2020).
Zhou, F. et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan,
China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 395, 1054–1062 (2020).
Wu, F. et al. Evaluating the Association of Clinical Characteristics With Neutralizing Antibody Levels in
Patients Who Have Recovered From Mild COVID-19 in Shanghai, China. JAMA Intern. Med. 180,
1356–1362 (2020).
Wu, C. et al. Risk Factors Associated With Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome and Death in Patients
With Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA Intern. Med. 180, 934–943 (2020).
Fraser, D. D. et al. Novel Outcome Biomarkers Identified With Targeted Proteomic Analyses of Plasma
From Critically Ill Coronavirus Disease 2019 Patients. Crit Care Explor 2, e0189 (2020).
Laing, A. G. et al. Author Correction: A dynamic COVID-19 immune signature includes associations
with poor prognosis. Nat. Med. 26, 1663 (2020).
Del Valle, D. M. et al. An inflammatory cytokine signature helps predict COVID-19 severity and death.
medRxiv (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.05.28.20115758.
Jancsó, Z., Hegyi, E. & Sahin-Tóth, M. Chymotrypsin Reduces the Severity of Secretagogue-Induced
Pancreatitis in Mice. Gastroenterology 155, 1017–1021 (2018).
Bär, F. et al. Carboxypeptidase E modulates intestinal immune homeostasis and protects against
experimental colitis in mice. PLoS One 9, e102347 (2014).
Leung, L. L. K., Myles, T., Nishimura, T., Song, J. J. & Robinson, W. H. Regulation of tissue
inflammation by thrombin-activatable carboxypeptidase B (or TAFI). Mol. Immunol. 45, 4080–4083
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(2008).
26. Geisz, A., Jancsó, Z., Németh, B. C., Hegyi, E. & Sahin-Tóth, M. Natural single-nucleotide deletion in
chymotrypsinogen C gene increases severity of secretagogue-induced pancreatitis in C57BL/6 mice.
JCI Insight 4, e129717 (2019).
27. Stern, J.-B. et al. Cytokeratin 19 fragments in patients with acute lung injury: a preliminary observation.
Intensive Care Med. 32, 910–914 (2006).
28. Potting, C. et al. TRIAP1/PRELI complexes prevent apoptosis by mediating intramitochondrial transport
of phosphatidic acid. Cell Metab. 18, 287–295 (2013).
29. Williams, S. A. et al. Plasma protein patterns as comprehensive indicators of health. Nature Medicine
vol. 25 1851–1857 (2019).
30. Alpert, A. et al. A clinically meaningful metric of immune age derived from high-dimensional longitudinal
monitoring. Nat. Med. 25, 487–495 (2019).
31. Lehallier, B. et al. Undulating changes in human plasma proteome profiles across the lifespan. Nat.
Med. 25, 1843–1850 (2019).
32. Rohloff, J. C. et al. Nucleic Acid Ligands With Protein-like Side Chains: Modified Aptamers and Their
Use as Diagnostic and Therapeutic Agents. Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids 3, e201 (2014).
33. Ferraro, N. M. et al. Transcriptomic signatures across human tissues identify functional rare genetic
variation. Science 369, (2020).
34. Bost, P. et al. Host-Viral Infection Maps Reveal Signatures of Severe COVID-19 Patients. Cell 181,
1475–1488.e12 (2020).
35. Efremova, M., Vento-Tormo, M., Teichmann, S. A. & Vento-Tormo, R. CellPhoneDB: inferring cell-cell
communication from combined expression of multi-subunit ligand-receptor complexes. Nat. Protoc. 15,
1484–1506 (2020).
36. Efremova, M., Vento-Tormo, M., Teichmann, S. A. & Vento-Tormo, R. CellPhoneDB v2.0: Inferring cellcell communication from combined expression of multi-subunit receptor-ligand complexes.
doi:10.1101/680926.
37. Chua, R. L. et al. COVID-19 severity correlates with airway epithelium-immune cell interactions
identified by single-cell analysis. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 970–979 (2020).
38. Wang, R. et al. GARP regulates the bioavailability and activation of TGFβ. Mol. Biol. Cell 23, 1129–
1139 (2012).
39. Dong, X. et al. Force interacts with macromolecular structure in activation of TGF-β. Nature 542, 55–59
(2017).
40. Sanjabi, S., Oh, S. A. & Li, M. O. Regulation of the Immune Response by TGF-β: From Conception to
Autoimmunity and Infection. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 9, (2017).
41. Gold, L. et al. Aptamer-based multiplexed proteomic technology for biomarker discovery. PLoS One 5,
e15004 (2010).
42. Kim, C. H. et al. Stability and reproducibility of proteomic profiles measured with an aptamer-based
platform. Sci. Rep. 8, 8382 (2018).
43. Sun, B. B. et al. Genomic atlas of the human plasma proteome. Nature 558, 73–79 (2018).
44. Emilsson, V. et al. Co-regulatory networks of human serum proteins link genetics to disease. Science
361, 769–773 (2018).
45. Zhao, S., Guo, Y., Sheng, Q. & Shyr, Y. Heatmap3: an improved heatmap package with more powerful
and convenient features. BMC Bioinformatics vol. 15 P16 (2014).
46. Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S. Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Usinglme4. Journal
of Statistical Software vol. 67 (2015).
47. Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P. B. & Christensen, R. H. B. lmerTest Package: Tests in Linear Mixed
Effects Models. Journal of Statistical Software vol. 82 (2017).
48. Subramanian, A. et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 15545–15550 (2005).
49. Friedman, J., Hastie, T. & Tibshirani, R. Regularization Paths for Generalized Linear Models via
Coordinate Descent. Journal of Statistical Software vol. 33 (2010).
50. Moore, M. J. et al. Retroviruses pseudotyped with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
spike protein efficiently infect cells expressing angiotensin-converting enzyme 2. J. Virol. 78, 10628–
10635 (2004).
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

51. Gentili, M. et al. Transmission of innate immune signaling by packaging of cGAMP in viral particles.
Science 349, 1232–1236 (2015).
52. Raab, M. et al. ESCRT III repairs nuclear envelope ruptures during cell migration to limit DNA damage
and cell death. Science 352, 359–362 (2016).
53. Tucker, N. R. et al. Transcriptional and Cellular Diversity of the Human Heart. Circulation (2020)
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.045401.
54. Menon, R. et al. Single cell transcriptomics identifies focal segmental glomerulosclerosis remission
endothelial biomarker. JCI Insight 5, (2020).
55. MacParland, S. A. et al. Single cell RNA sequencing of human liver reveals distinct intrahepatic
macrophage populations. Nat. Commun. 9, 4383 (2018).
56. Baron, M. et al. A Single-Cell Transcriptomic Map of the Human and Mouse Pancreas Reveals Interand Intra-cell Population Structure. Cell systems 3, (2016).
57. Adams, T. S. et al. Single Cell RNA-seq reveals ectopic and aberrant lung resident cell populations in
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis. doi:10.1101/759902.
58. Adams, T. S. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals ectopic and aberrant lung-resident cell populations in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Sci Adv 6, eaba1983 (2020).
59. Habermann, A. C. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals profibrotic roles of distinct epithelial and
mesenchymal lineages in pulmonary fibrosis. Sci Adv 6, eaba1972 (2020).
60. Travaglini, K. J. et al. A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single cell RNA sequencing.
doi:10.1101/742320.
61. Vieira Braga, F. A. et al. A cellular census of human lungs identifies novel cell states in health and in
asthma. Nat. Med. 25, 1153–1163 (2019).
62. Liao, M. et al. Single-cell landscape of bronchoalveolar immune cells in patients with COVID-19. Nat.
Med. 26, 842–844 (2020).
63. Wolf, F. A., Angerer, P. & Theis, F. J. SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene expression data analysis.
Genome Biol. 19, 15 (2018).

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Main figure legends
Figure 1. SARS-CoV-2 infection induces viral response and IFN-pathway proteins detected in patient plasma.
(A) Schematic of all patients in our study cohort: 306 COVID-19-infected patients and 78 symptomatic COVID19-negative controls. Inclusion criteria are indicated. Maximal acuity level within 28 days (Acuitymax) is shown
for COVID-19-infected patients (A1, most severe, to A5, least severe), with N, proportion of patients, and
severe versus non-severe group assignment. (B) Schematic of study methodology. (C)-(E) Differentially
expressed proteins by COVID-19 status. Linear model fitting each Olink protein, with COVID-19 status as a
main effect and putative confounders as covariates (see online methods). p-values were calculated to
account for false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05, Benjamini-Hochberg method. (C) Heatmap of the top 200
differentially expressed proteins between COVID-19-positive and negative patients. Each row represents
expression of an individual protein over the entire cohort; each cell represents the Z score of protein
expression for all measurements across a row. COVID-19 signature scores were calculated by taking the
mean Z-score of the top 25 differentially expressed proteins in COVID-19-positive patients minus the top 25
differentially expressed proteins in COVID-19-negative patients. (D) Volcano plot showing differentiallyexpressed proteins based on normalized protein expression (NPX) values between COVID-19-positive and
negative patients. Blue circles, significantly differentially-expressed proteins. (E) Box plots of select
differentially-expressed viral response and interferon pathway proteins (from panel D), including interferon
gamma (IFNγ), DDX58 (or RIG-I), IFNλ1, and the chemokines CXCL10, CXCL11, CCL7, CCL16 and CCL24.
(F) Inference of cell of origin by mapping gene expression of differentially-expressed plasma proteins elevated
in COVID-19-positive versus negative patients in a scRNAseq peripheral blood cell COVID-19 dataset from
Wilk et al.15. Heatmaps show mean expression of COVID-19-related proteins (y-axis) in immune cell subtypes
(x-axis).
Figure 2. Plasma proteomic biomarkers and predictors of disease severity. (A) Pairwise correlation heatmap
of clinically annotated variables for COVID-19-positive patients showing correlations having p<0.05. (B)
Unsupervised clustering by UMAP for COVID-19-positive patients at days 0, 3 and 7, color-coded (left to right)
by day of sample collection, Acuitymax by day 28, severity, age decile, sex, and ethnicity. E, event-driven
samples (see online methods). (C) Linear mixed model fitting each Olink protein, with severity, timepoint
and the interaction of the two terms as main effects and putative confounders as covariates (see online
methods). Heatmap of significant differentially-expressed proteins between severe and non-severe patients
at day 0. Significance of the three model terms determined with an F-test, Satterthwaite degrees of freedom,
type III sum of squares. p-values for the three model terms of interest were calculated to account for FDR <
0.05, Benjamini-Hochberg method. Group differences calculated for each significant protein; p-values
adjusted using Tukey method. (D)-(F) Linear mixed model fitting each Olink protein, with Acuitymax, timepoint,
and the interaction between the two terms as main effects. Covariates and statistical analysis as in panel (C).
(D) Differentially-expressed proteins at day 7 between patients who had Acuitymax of A1 (death) versus A2
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(ARDS but survived). (E) Point-range plots for select proteins shown in (D). (F) Kaplan-Meier curves for overall
survival of patients stratified by higher or lower than median expression of IL-6, IL-8, CCL2, or IL-24. (G)
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve showing predictive performance of an elastic net logistic
regression classifier of disease severity, for Olink proteins of each patient at day 0. Performance was
evaluated using 100 repeats of 5-fold cross validation. Mean area under the curve (AUC) with 95% confidence
intervals.
Figure 3. Severe COVID-19-positive patients display elevated plasma markers of cell death from heart, lung,
and skeletal muscle. (A) Expression of tissue-specific plasma protein signatures in severe versus non-severe
patients at each timepoint. (B) Scatter plot showing the correlation of the D0 plasma heart signature as derived
in (A) with D0 clinical troponin measurements. (C) Kaplan-Meier curve showing overall survival of patients
with high or low expression (above or below median expression level) of the derived plasma heart signature
in (A). (D) Heatmap showing mean gene expression per cell type of severity-associated intracellular plasma
proteins at D0 derived from SomaScan data that map to scRNAseq of BAL fluid34, with TMPRSS2 and ACE2
expression indicated. (E)-(F) Scatter plots showing the difference between severe and non-severe patients
of lung (E) and heart (F) cell-specific intracellular death scores, derived from expression of differentiallyexpressed proteins at each timepoint versus cell type-specific ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression levels from
scRNAseq of BAL fluid34 (E) or heart single-nucleus RNA-seq data53 (F).
Figure 4. Interactions among lung epithelial cells, monocytes, and T cells drive disease severity and tissue
damage. (A) Heatmap showing the total number of ligand-receptor interactions at D0 and D3 inferred from
BAL fluid scRNAseq data34 using only ligands differentially expressed in the plasma of severe versus nonsevere COVID-19-positive patients. (B) Heatmap showing fold-change from D0 to D3 in the number of ligandreceptor interactions between each cell type identified from BAL fluid scRNAseq data34. (C) Ligand-receptor
contact map between ligands expressed by lung epithelial cells per BAL fluid scRNAseq data34 (left) and the
respective receptors for these ligands and their cell-specific expression from the same BAL dataset (right).
(D) Ligand-receptor contact map between receptors expressed on lung epithelial cells in BAL fluid34 (right)
and their respective severity-associated plasma ligands from our data (left). Ligand-receptor pairs are those
for which the ligand was significantly associated with severity in our models. (E) Ligand-receptor contact map
between ligands expressed on monocytes/macrophages in BAL fluid scRNAseq data34 (left) and the
respective receptors for these ligands and their cell-specific expression from the same BAL dataset (right).
(F) As in panel E, but on monocytes/macrophages in BAL fluid. In panels (C)-(F), each cell in the heatmaps
represents expression of the listed ligand or protein relative to its expression across all cell types. Ligands
and receptors are color-coded (vertical color bar) based on the cell type that demonstrates their highest
expression. Ligand-receptor pairs and their connecting lines are color-coded based on the time point (D3
only, or both D0 and D3) for which the interaction was present. (G) Model highlighting contributions to the
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

plasma proteome from circulating immune cells (primarily monocytes, plasmablasts, and CD8+ T and NK
cells) and damaged tissues. Temporally-ordered interaction network between monocyte/macrophages, T
cells, and lung epithelial cells that drives disease severity.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Extended Data Figure Legends
Extended Data Figure 1. Distributions of clinical characteristics of the study cohort. Age, disease acuity,
Acuitymax, BMI, symptom duration prior to ED arrival, D-dimer, CRP, absolute lymphocyte count (ALC), LDH,
ferritin, absolute neutrophil count (ANC), and glomerular filtration rate (GFR). All measurements, except
Acuitymax, symptom duration, and BMI, are at day 0. Significance is by the Mann-Whitney U-test (MWU) and
chi-squared test (chi2); p-values as indicated.
Extended Data Figure 2. Differentially-expressed plasma proteins between COVID-19-positive and negative
patients. (A) Unsupervised clustering (by UMAP), generated from plasma proteins of all patients on day 0,
color-coded (left to right) by COVID-19 status, age decile, acuity level at day 0, Acuitymax within 28 days,
severity, sex, ethnicity, previously known heart disease, previously known lung disease, and previously known
kidney disease. (B) Identification of differentially-expressed proteins by COVID-19 status using linear model
of Olink proteins with putative confounders as covariates (see online methods). Heatmap of residuals from
this model for each protein found to be significantly differentially-expressed between COVID-19-positive and
negative patients, using the model described in Fig. 1D and in (C)-(E) below. (C)-(E) Differentially-expressed
proteins by COVID-19 status. Linear model fitting each Olink protein, with COVID-19 status as a main effect
and putative confounders as covariates (see online methods). p-values were adjusted to control the false
discovery rate (FDR) at < 0.05, Benjamini-Hochberg method. (C) Gene-set enrichment analysis for pathways
enriched among plasma proteins differentially-expressed between COVID-19-positive and negative patients.
(D) Correlation heatmap of plasma protein levels of all proteins significantly differentially-expressed between
COVID-19-positive and negative patients. (E) Correlation heatmap of plasma protein levels of all proteins
significantly higher in COVID-19-positive patients than in COVID-19-negative patients.
Extended Data Figure 3. Quality control for Olink plasma proteomics data. (A) Histogram showing the time
from collection to freezing for each sample, separated by time point of collection. E, event-driven samples
(see online methods). (B) Histogram showing the coefficient of variation versus mean normalized protein
expression (NPX) for each of the 1356 assays performed by Olink. (C) Principal component plots using Olink
assays in four predefined Olink panels (cardiometabolic, inflammation, neurology, and oncology), each with
>300 protein assays. Shown are first two principal components (PC1 vs. PC2) for all patient samples. (D)
Scatterplot showing interquartile range (IQR) versus sample median for each sample. In (C) and (D), sample
C4-037_D0 was noted to be an outlier and was therefore excluded from downstream analyses. (E)
Unsupervised clustering by UMAP of all samples by assays in each predefined panel as in (C-D), color-coded
by plate label, confirming there were no plate-related biases.
Extended Data Figure 4. Inference of cell of origin by mapping gene expression of differentially-expressed
plasma proteins (elevated in COVID-19-positive versus COVID-19-negative patients) onto scRNAseq
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

peripheral blood cell COVID-19 datasets. Heatmaps of mean expression of COVID-19-related proteins (yaxis) in immune cell subtypes (x-axis) from (A) Lee et al.8 and (B) Schulte et al.16
Extended Data Figure 5. Clinical correlates for patients in this study cohort. (A)-(B) Correlation heatmap of
all clinically associated variables collected in this study ordered by hierarchical clustering (A) or correlation to
Acuitymax (B). For the purpose of displaying positive correlation with increasing disease severity, inverse
numbering was assigned to A1-A5 for these calculations, and kidney function was measured as the inverse
of the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). PC1 to PC5 are the loadings of the first five principal components for
the PCA plot of all samples using all proteins. (C) Logistic regression model predicting probability of severe
acuity (Acuitymax of A1 or A2) using patient age. (D) Unsupervised clustering by UMAP using plasma proteins
of all COVID-19-positive patients at days 0, 3 and 7, color-coded (left to right) by severity, previously known
heart disease, previously known lung disease, and previously known kidney disease.
Extended Data Figure 6. Predictors of neutralization and its association with disease severity and age. (A)
Box plot showing neutralization levels for COVID-19-negative and positive patients at day 0. Box edges mark
the interquartile range (IQR) and the line in the middle is the median. (B) Point-range plots showing
neutralization levels in non-severe and severe COVID-19-positive patients over time. Color coding is by
neutralization level at day 3, grouped into 0-25%, 25-50%, 50-75%, and 75-100%. (C) Proportion of nonsevere and severe patients within each of the day 3 bins defined in (B) over time. (D) Box plots showing
neutralization levels in non-severe and severe patients over time. Box edges mark the IQR and the line in the
middle is the median. (E) Scatter plot showing the correlation of age with the rate of change in neutralization
level in COVID-19-positive patients over time from day 0 to day 7. Rate of change is the negative of the
regression line slope through log2(fold change) in GFP levels at each timepoint compared to controls. (F)
Scatter plot showing the correlation of age with rate of change in neutralization level over time in A1 patients
(left) and A2 patients (right). (G) Logistic regression model predicting neutralization titers above 50% (left) or
above 75% (right), stratified by young (≤65 yrs) and elderly (>65 yrs) age. (H) Lasso regression model for
prediction of day 3 neutralization level (above or below 75%) using Olink plasma proteins at day 0 across all
COVID-19-positive patients. The prediction was performed with 5-fold cross-validation over 100 iterations;
AUC 0.83 (95% CI 0.80-0.85). (I) Selection frequency of the top selected features for the neutralization
predictor in (H). (J) Heatmap showing the Olink plasma protein expression of each of the top selected features
from the predictor in (H) that did not overlap with the top severity-associated proteins from the linear mixed
model described in Fig. 2D.
Extended Data Figure 7. Permutation analysis for linear mixed model on Olink data, with Acuitymax and time
as main effects. (A) Linear mixed model fitting each Olink protein, with Acuitymax, timepoint, and the interaction
of the two terms as main effects and putative confounders as covariates (see online methods). Significance
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of the three model terms was determined with an F-test using Satterthwaite degrees of freedom and type III
sum of squares. p-values for the three model terms of interest were adjusted to control the FDR at < 0.05,
Benjamini-Hochberg method. Group differences were calculated for each protein passing the 0.05 FDR
threshold with p-values adjusted using the Tukey method. Shown are the distribution of p-values obtained
from this linear mixed model and the distribution of p-values obtained from permutations of random Acuitymax
assignments to all patients. This result shows that the obtained distribution of p-values does not happen by
chance. (B) Distribution of the number of p-values < 0.05 obtained from 100 permutations of random Acuitymax
assignments for the linear mixed model described in (A). The red line indicates the number of significant
assays obtained from our true model with correct patient Acuitymax assignments.
Extended Data Figure 8. Protein associations with disease severity. (A) Time from sample collection to
freezing for all samples, color-coded by COVID-19 severity, indicating no clear difference between samples
from severe and samples from non-severe patients. (B) Linear mixed model fitting each Olink protein, with
severity, timepoint, and the interaction of the two terms as main effects and putative confounders as
covariates, as in Fig. 2D (see online methods). Volcano plots of differentially-expressed proteins between
severe and non-severe COVID-19-positive patients at each time point. Blue circles, proteins that are
significantly differentially-expressed. (C) Linear model fitting each Olink protein, with putative confounders as
covariates (see online methods). Heatmap of residuals from this model for each protein that was found to
be significant for interaction term in the model described in Fig. 2E. (D) Point range plots over time of a
selected set of proteins significant for interaction term in the model described in (B), color-coded by disease
severity. (E) Gene-set enrichment analysis for pathways enriched among plasma proteins differentiallyexpressed between severe and non-severe COVID-19-positive patients. (F) Correlation heatmap of plasma
protein expression levels of all proteins significantly differentially-expressed between severe and non-severe
COVID-19-positive patients.
Extended Data Figure 9. Protein associations with death in ARDS patients. (A) Differentially-expressed
proteins at day 3 between patients who had a maximum classification of A1 (death) versus A2 (ARDS but
survived) within day 28. Derived from linear mixed model fitting each Olink protein, with Acuitymax within day
28, timepoint, and the interaction between the two terms as main effects, as in Fig. 2E. (B) Point-range plots
for select proteins from the model in (A). (C) Kaplan-Meier curves for overall survival of patients stratified by
higher or lower than median expression of CCL7, CCL8, CXCL10, or IL1RL1. (D) Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve showing predictive performance of an elastic net logistic regression classifier of
disease severity using Olink plasma proteins for each patient at day 0. Shown are curves for each of the 100
repeats of 5-fold cross validation. Measures of performance are reported as medians and 95% confidence
intervals. Shown in the figure are the ROC curves for the original data with the true severity labels and the

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

curves for our data with random (permuted) severity assignments. (E) Frequency of protein feature selection
over the 100 iterations of the predictor in (D).
Extended Data Figure 10. Unsupervised patient clustering using Olink plasma proteomics data. (A)
Unsupervised clustering (using t-statistic stochastic network embedding, tSNE) of all patient samples using
all Olink plasma proteins with graphical clustering using the Louvain algorithm. The optimal solution was five
distinct clusters, labeled L1 to L5. (B) tSNE plots as in (A) labeled (left to right) by day of sample collection,
acuity level at day of sample, Acuitymax within day 28, and disease severity. E, event-driven samples (see
online methods). (C) Distribution of severity on the day of sample collection for samples in each Louvain
cluster in (A). (D) Louvain cluster on day 3 for the day 0 samples from each of the Louvain clusters. (E)
Louvain cluster on day 7 for the day 0 samples from each of the Louvain clusters. (F) Maximum severity within
day 28 in each of the Louvain clusters in (A). (G) Violin plots showing expression within each Louvain cluster
of cell-type specific plasma proteins, derived from gene expression data, for monocytes, MS1 monocytes,
plasma cells, lymphocytes, cytotoxic lymphocytes, and exhausted lymphocytes. (H) Differentially-expressed
proteins in each cluster compared to all other patient samples. Shown next to each protein is the gene
expression within scRNAseq of PBMCs of COVID-19-positive patients15. Cell types are color-coded. (I) Violin
plots showing expression of tissue-specific signatures, derived as in Fig. 3A, in each Louvain cluster. (J)
Violin plot showing neutralization level at the time of sample collection for each Louvain cluster. (K) Violin
plots showing neutralization at day 3 for all day 0 samples in each Louvain cluster.
Extended Data Figure 11. Expression of severity-associated plasma proteins in PBMCs from COVID-19
patients. (A) Gene expression of Olink plasma proteins expressed more highly in severe COVID-19 patients
shown within PBMCs using scRNAseq data15. (B) Protein expression as in (A), with cell types separated by
healthy, and COVID-19-positive patients, segregated by disease severity. (C)-(E) Expression of Olink plasma
proteins expressed more highly in severe COVID-19 patients within PBMCs show within another independent
dataset8 (C), or circulating monocytes, from two independent datasets4,16 (D)-(E). (F)-(I) Expression of
differentially-expressed Olink proteins at day 7 between patients whose maximum classification was A1
(death) versus A2 (ARDS but survived) within day 28, for two independent PBMC datasets8,15 ((F)-(G)) and
two independent peripheral monocyte datasets4,16 ((H)-(I)).
Extended Data Figure 12. Proteins implicated in severity and aging. (A) Linear mixed model with age group
(≤65 versus >65 years) and time point as main effects and all other clinical variables as covariates, as above,
for Olink proteins. Heatmap of top 100 differentially-expressed proteins at D0. (B) Linear mixed model fitting
each Olink protein, with age group, time point, disease severity and interaction terms as main effects and

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

covariates, as in panel. Examples are shown of distinct patterns of expression seen in aged and young
patients, with non-severe (mild) and severe disease.
Extended Data Figure 13. Prediction of patient age. (A) Lasso regression model for prediction of patient age
group using Olink plasma proteins at day 0 across all COVID-19-positive patients. Performed with 5-fold
cross-validation over 100 iterations; AUC 0.93 (95% CI 0.91-0.95). (B) Selection frequency of the top selected
features for age predictor in (A). (C)-(D) Plasma protein expression heatmaps of each of the top selected
features from the predictor in (A) that did not overlap (C) or did overlap (D) with the top severity-associated
proteins from the linear mixed model described in Fig. 2D. (E) Lasso regression model for prediction of patient
age group using Olink plasma proteins at day 3 across all COVID-positive patients. Performed with 5-fold
cross-validation over 100 iterations; AUC 0.90 (95% CI 0.88-0.92). (F) Selection frequency of the top selected
features for the age predictor in (E). (G) Lasso regression model for prediction of patient age level using Olink
plasma proteins at day 7 across all COVID-positive patients. Performed with 5-fold cross-validation over 100
iterations; AUC 0.86 (95% CI 0.82-0.90). (H) Selection frequency of the top selected features for the age
predictor in (G).
Extended Data Figure 14. Tissue-specific cell-type expression of organ damage plasma protein signatures.
(A)-(B) Expression of derived lung specific plasma proteins within (A) BAL fluid34 from COVID-19 patients and
(B) an integrated analysis of several lung scRNAseq datasets. (C) Expression of derived heart specific plasma
proteins within specific cell subsets from cardiac single-nucleus RNA-seq data53. (D) Expression of derived
kidney specific plasma proteins within specific cell subsets from kidney scRNAseq data54. (E) Expression of
derived liver specific plasma proteins within specific cell subsets from liver scRNAseq data55. (F) Expression
of derived pancreas specific plasma proteins within specific cell subsets from a pancreatic scRNAseq
dataset56.
Extended Data Figure 15. Organ-specific cell death signatures. (A) Expression of tissue-specific plasma
protein signatures in severe versus non-severe patients at each timepoint in select tissues. (B) Top
differentially-expressed genes per cell type obtained from the subset of severity-associated intracellular
plasma proteins at D0. ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression indicated by orange and blue circles, respectively.
Extended Data Figure 16. Organ damage plasma protein signature correlations with clinical laboratory
values. (A) Correlation of heart-specific plasma protein signature with clinical troponin measurements at day
0. (B)-(C) Correlation of kidney-specific plasma protein signature with glomerular filtration rate (GFR) colorcoded by time point of sample collection (B) or previously known kidney disease (C). (D)-(G) Correlation of
liver-specific plasma protein signatures with clinical measurements of alanine transaminase (ALT) (D),

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

aspartate transaminase (AST) (E), alkaline phosphatase (F), or total bilirubin (G). (H)-(I) Correlation of skeletal
muscle-specific plasma protein signature with AST to ALT ratio (H) or creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) (I).
Extended Data Figure 17. Plasma protein levels of tissue-specific secreted proteins. (A) Pathways enriched
amongst plasma proteins that are secreted or membrane-bound and are differentially-expressed at D0
between severe and non-severe COVID-19-positive patients. (B) Expression of derived tissue-specific (heart,
lung, kidney, liver, colon, or pancreas) secreted or membrane-bound protein signatures, comparing severe
and non-severe patients over time. Shown are the top associated secreted protein with each organ (up to 10).
Extended Data Figure 18. Lung and heart-specific cellular death signatures. (A) Heatmap showing cell-type
expression of severity-associated intracellular proteins, derived from SomaScan data mapped to cell types in
scRNAseq data of BAL fluid from COVID-19 patients34. (B) Heatmap showing cell-type expression of severityassociated intracellular proteins derived from SomaScan data mapped to cell types in scRNAseq data of
normal cardiac tissue53.
Extended Data Figure 19. Kidney, pancreatic and liver-specific cellular death signatures. (A) Heatmap
showing cell-type expression of severity-associated intracellular proteins derived from SomaScan data
mapped to normal kidney tissue54. (B) Heatmap showing cell-type expression of severity-associated
intracellular proteins derived from SomaScan data mapped to normal pancreatic tissue. (C) Heatmap showing
cell-type expression of severity-associated intracellular proteins derived from SomaScan data mapped to
normal liver tissue55.
Extended Data Figure 20. Expression of the mast cell marker tryptase (TPSAB1 assay by Olink) over time,
by Acuitymax level.
Extended Data Figure 21. Cellular communication between lung cell subsets in COVID-19-positive patients.
(A)-(B) Ligand-receptor relationships of severity-associated plasma ligands shown in BAL fluid of COVID-1934
patients for ligands significant on day 0 (A) or on day 3 (B).

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental tables
Table S1. Clinical metadata and associations with outcome for all patients in this cohort.
Table S2. List of proteins assayed using the Olink proteomics platform.
Table S3. Processed normalized protein expression (NPX) values used for this analysis from the Olink assay.
Table S4. Linear model outcome for the comparison of COVID-19-positive and negative patients.
Table S5. Linear mixed model outcome for the comparison of severity and time as main effects within COVID19-positive patients using the Olink assay.
Table S6. Linear mixed model outcome for the comparison of Acuitymax and time as main effects within
COVID-19-positive patients using the Olink assay.
Table S7. Linear mixed model outcome for the comparison of Acuitymax and time as main effects within
COVID-19-positive patients using the Olink assay, with group A1 split into intubated and non-intubated
patients.
Table S8. Residual values for the linear mixed model outcome using all potentially confounding covariates
within COVID-19-positive patients using the Olink assay.
Table S9. Clinical characteristics of patient endotypes defined by Louvain clusters.
Table S10. Pairwise correlations between patient age and each protein measured using the Olink platform.
Table S11. Linear mixed model outcome for the comparison of age and time as main effects within COVID19-positive patients using the Olink assay.
Table S12. Linear mixed model outcome for the comparison of age, time and severity as main effects within
COVID-19-positive patients using the Olink assay.
Table S13. Linear mixed model outcome for the comparison of severity and time as main effects within
COVID-19-positive patients using the SomaScan assay.
Table S14. Derived organ-specific intracellular plasma protein signatures.
Table S15. p-values for survival analysis using organ-specific intracellular plasma protein signatures.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acknowledgments
We owe deep gratitude to the participants in this study. We thank the all the clinical nursing staff that made
sample collection possible, and the Translational and Clinical Research Center (TCRC) for arranging
collection of all follow-up samples on inpatient floors and ICUs, in particular Grace Holland, RN, Katherine
Broderick, RN and Siobhan Boyce, RN. We thank the Departments of Emergency Medicine and Medicine,
Infection Control and the Center for Disaster Preparedness at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) for
institutional support to enable enrollment during a time when access to clinical spaces was severely limited.
We also thank the Departments of Emergency Medicine and Medicine for their financial support in maintaining
needed staffing levels during enrollment, when many research funding sources were being suspended. We
thank Caroline Beakes and Nicole Russell for assistance with data entry. Finally, we thank Jayaraj Rajagopal,
Itai Yanai, Patrick Ellinor and Mark Chaffin for access to their processed single-cell RNA-sequencing datasets.
Direct funding for this project was provided in part by a grant from the National Institute of Health (N.H., U19
AI082630), an American Lung Association COVID-19 Action Initiative grant (M.B.G.), and grants from the
Executive Committee on Research at MGH (M.B.G.), the Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative (A-C.V.). N.H. was also
funded by a gift from Arthur, Sandra and Sarah Irving for the David P. Ryan, MD Endowed Chair in Cancer
Research. This work was also supported by the Harvard Catalyst / Harvard Clinical and Translational Science
Center (National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health Awards UL1 TR
001102 and UL1 TR 002541-01). We are also very grateful for the generous contributions of Olink Proteomics
Inc. and Novartis (in collaboration with SomaLogic,Inc.) for providing in-kind all proteomics assays presented
in this work, without which our findings would not have been possible.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Author information
These authors jointly supervised this work: Michael R. Filbin, Arnav Mehta, Nir Hacohen, Marcia B. Goldberg.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Filbin (M.R.F.), Mehta (A.M.), Hacohen (N.H.), Goldberg (M.B.G.);
Resources: Filbin (M.R.F.), Hacohen (N.H.), Goldberg (M.B.G.), Grundberg (I.G.), and Jennings (L.L.J);
Methodology: Mehta (A.M.), Hacohen (N.H.), Filbin (M.R.F.), Goldberg (M.B.G.), Sade-Feldman (M.S-F.),
Villani (A-C.V.), Parry (B.A.P), Bhattacharyya (R.P.B.), Jennings (L.L.J.), Grundberg (I.G.), and Gerszten
(R.E.G.);
Investigation: (All) M.R.F., A.M., A.M.S., K.R.K., J.R.G., M.G., B.G.F., N.C.C., A.L.K.G., I.G., H.K.K., T.J.L.,
K.M.L-P., B.M.L., C.L.L., K.M., J.D.M., B.N.M., M.R-L., B.C.R., N.S., J.T., M.F.T., R.E.G., G.S.H., P.J.H.,
D.J.L., B.L., D.N., K.P., M.R., C.S.S., A.W., T.E.W., A.S.Z., L.L.J., I.G., R.P.B., B.A.P., A-C.V., M.S-F., N.H.,
and M.B.G.;
Formal Analysis: Mehta (A.M.), Schneider (A.M.S.), Guess (J.R.G.), Gentil (M.G.), Fenyves (B.G.F.) and Lin
(B.L.).
Writing – Original Draft: Mehta (A.M.), Filbin (M.R.F.), Hacohen (N.H.), and Goldberg (M.B.G.);
Writing – Review & Editing: Filbin (M.R.F.), Mehta (A.M.), Hacohen (N.H.), Goldberg (M.B.G.), Schneider
(A.M.S.), Gerstzen (R.E.G.), Fenyves (B.G.F.), Grundberg (I.D.), Jennings (L.L.J.), Villani (A-C.V.), SadeFeldman (M.S-F.), Zajak (A.S.Z.), Wood (T.E.W.), Russo (B.R.), Bhattacharyya (R.P.B.), and Parry (B.A.P.).
Corresponding authors
Correspondence to Marcia B. Goldberg, Nir Hacohen, Michael Filbin, Arnav Mehta.
Declaration of Interests
A.M.: Consultant for Third Rock Ventures
J.R.G. & I.G.: Employee of Olink Proteomics
G.S.H.: Employee of Genentech (as of November 2020)
L.L.J.: Employee and stockholder of Novartis

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

N.H.: Holds equity in BioNTech and is a consultant for Related Sciences
Funding Sources:
M.R.F.: Research grants received from Day Zero Diagnostics, Rapid Pathogen Screening Inc., Nihon Kohden
Corporation (all unrelated to this work)
A.M.: NIH / NCI T32 2T32CA071345-21A1 (unrelated to this work)
M.G.: Recipient of an EMBO Long-Term Fellowship (ALTF 486-2018) and a Cancer Research Institute /
Bristol-Myers Squibb Fellow (CRI2993) (unrelated to this work)
B.G.F.: Rosztoczy Foundation Scholarship (unrelated to this work)
A-C.V.: NIH / NCI DP2CA247831 and Damon Runyon-Rachleff Innovation Award
(unrelated to this work)
G.S.H.: James S. McDonnell Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship (unrelated to this work)
B.L.: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship, LIN19F0
A.S.Z.: NIAID F32 AI145128-01A1 (unrelated to this work)
B.A.P.: Supported by 1U24NS100659-01 & 1U10NS080369-01 (unrelated to this work)
N.H.: NIH / NIAID U19 AI082630; Chair and gift from Sandra, Sarah and Arthur Irving (unrelated to this work)
M.B.G.: Research grants from American Lung Association (COVID-19 Action Initiative), Executive Committee
on Research at MGH

37

Figure 1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

Enrolled
384 patients

Inclusion criteria:

1) Clinically at-risk for COVID-19
2) Respiratory dysfunction
a) Breathing ≥22 / min
b) O2sat ≤92% on room air
c) Requiring supp O2
d) Positive-pressure vent

Clinical course
Day 7

Detailed annotation
of clinical course and
evaluation of
outcome at day 28

384 patients
306 COVID+
78 COVID-

COVID-19
negative
78 (20%)

COVID-19
positive
306 (80%)

Day 3

Day 0

Plasma

Detection by NGS

...

1352 plasma proteins by Olink
(Proximity Extension Assay)

Primary outcomes
1) Acuitymax within 28d:
2) Severity within 28d:

A1

A2

Died

Intubated

A3

A4

supp O2

no supp O2

A5

Discharged
from ED

30
20
10

t-SNE2

Acuity level

Classification of patient
phenotypes using random
forests and Lasso regression

133 (43%) 41 (13%)35 (11%) 23 (8%)
133 (43%)
Non-severe: 197 (64%)

42 (14%)
67
67(22%)
(22%)
Severe: 109 (36%)

0
-10
-20
-30
-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

t-SNE1

Unsupervised clustering

F

COVID-19-associated proteins at day 0
Z-score
0

-4

<65
65+

4
PRDX1
PSME2
BST2
PSME1
CASC4
SHMT1
SAMD9L
ST6GAL1
NPM1
LGMN

DDX58
TRIM21
IL18R1
TNFSF14
CCL7
KRT18
KRT19
PLA2G2A
IL15
CLEC11A
CD274
CD70
CSF1
CD14
C1QA
CD48
LAG3
SIGLEC1
IFNγR2
C2
CLEC4G
IFNγ
IFNλ1
CXCL10
CCL8
CXCL11
GZMB
GZMH

COVID-19
signature
4.7

IL18R1
LAG3
IFNγ
GBP2
GZMB
GZMH
RRM2

CD1C
ITGAV
ITGB1
TMPRSS15
SERPINA9
IL7R
CD6
PDGFRB
CD58
CCL16
CCL24
CLEC4A
ICOSLG
CD207
TNFRSF10C
CCL14
KLK13
CD93
TGFBR3
TNFRSF21
IL10RB
CD46
TNFRSF4
TNFRSF9
CD300L

RRM2
LAP3
CTSH
WARS

Patient sample

D

30

TCN2

CXCL10

C4BPB
NADK

CASC4

E

IFNγ

SAMD9L
TPP1
RRM2
GZMB
BST2
LAMP3
MAD1L1
BRK1

MMP12
CCL24
CCL16
NTproBNP
PSG1
NPPB
MUC16
FGF23
GH1

NPX

TYMP
CCL8
CXCL11

CRTAC1

10

CCL7

LAP3

20

5

0

COVIDIFNγ

FKBP5 KRT19
FBP1 KRT18
PLA2G2A
SHMT1
AGR2

8

5.0

4

2.5

2

0.0

COVID+

CXCL11

COVID8

4

0

1

2

COVID-19-positive – COVID-19-negative

COVID-

COVID+

COVID-

COVID+

CXCL10
10

2

10.0

COVID-

COVID+

CCL24

7.5
5.0

2.5

2

-1

COVID+

5.0

2

0

LAP3
CTSH
WARS
NADK
SIGLEC5
HSPA1A
IL1RN
LGALS9
FBP1
TPP1
SIGLEC1
GRN
TYMP
CES1
CD14

4

7.5

4

SMPD1
MAD1L1
TRIM21
DDX58
TNFSF14
ALDH1A1
CLEC11A
PTX3

6

CCL16

CCL7

LGMN
FOLR2
TCN2
C1QA
CCL8
MATN3
CXCL10
BRK1
GRPEL1
CTSO
FURIN
NID1

8

COVID-

COVID+

6

6

IFNλ1

DDX58

6

−5

NPX

-log10(pvalue)

DDX58
IFNλ1

LGALS9

CDON

8

pDCs (26)
CD16 monocytes (8)
CD14 monocytes (3)
Activated granulocyte (27)
Neutrophil (25)
CD16 monocyte (10)
Dendritic cell (20)
CD14 monocyte (7)
CD14 monocyte (6)
CD16 monocyte (28)

Positive
Negative

0

0

Age
COVID-19 status
COVID-19 signature

COVID-19
status

-4.7

Mapping to published PBMC data
0

2.5

COVID-

COVID+

COVID-

COVID+

Proteins higher in COVID-19-positive patients (day 0)

-4
0
4
Age group

Linear mixed model for time
and severity effects, as well as
aging, neutralization and
lymphopenia

Z-score

Naive CD4 T cells (4)
Memory CD4 T cells (2)
CD4 T cells (19)
B cells (5)
gd T cells (22)
RBCs (12)
RBCs (14)
Platlets (17)
Eosinophils (24)
Class-switched B cells (9)
IgA plasmablasts (29)
IgA plasmablasts (21)
IgA plasmablasts (23)
IgG plasmablasts (18)
IgG plasmablasts (16)
NK cells (0)
NK cells (11)
Memory CD8 T cells (1)
Memory CD8 T cells (15)

C

Integrated analysis of
proteomic signatures with
scRNAseq from PBMCs,
BAL and normal tissues

Figure 2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B

Pulmonary disease
Heart disease
Kidney disease
Smoker
HTN
Age
Kidney dysfunction, day 0
D-dimer, day 0
Ferritin, day 0
Sex
Lymphopenia, day 0
LDH, day 0
Acuity level, day 7
Acuity level, day 3
Acuitymax
Acuity level, day 0
Intubated
BMI
Diabetes
Symptom duration
Race
Hispanic ethnicity
Neutralization, day 7
Neutralization, day 0
Neutralization, day 3

0 (n=305)
3 (n=214)
7 (n=136)
E (n=42)

Pearson
correlation

UMAP2

-1

ESR, day 0
CRP, day 0

Pulmonary disease
Heart disease
Kidney disease
Smoker
HTN
Age
Kidney dysfunction, day 0
D-dimer, day 0
Ferritin, day 0
Sex
Lymphopenia, day 0
LDH, day 0
Acuity level, day 7
Acuity level, day 3
Acuitymax
Acuity level, day 0
Intubated
BMI
Diabetes
Symptom duration
Race
Hispanic etnicity
Neutralization, day 7
Neutralization, day 0
Neutralization, day 3

20-30 (n=23)
30-40 (n=72)
40-50 (n=100)
50-60 (n=138)
60-70 (n=130)
70-80 (n=115)
80-90 (n=96)
90-100 (n=23)

Severity-associated proteins at day 0
-4

0

0

4

Age group
Severity
FETUB
IGFBP3
APOM
FASLG
OMG
IL18R1
TPP1
CEACAM1
ACE2

NAMPT
S100A4
PRDX1
SEMA4D
CDH2
CD274V
ANGPT2
GDF15
PCDH1
IGFBP2
RETN
CLEC4D
PDGFRA
TNFSF13
IL18BP
IFNγR1
TNFRSF12A
TNFRSF11A
TNFRSF14
CX3CL1
LAYN

NPX

NPX

5

3

Survival probability

7

NPX

NPX

1.00

0.75

0.75

0.50

0.50

0.5

6

3

Day

0

7

Acuitymax within 28 days

A1

A2

A3

A4

3

Day
A5

7

0.03
0.02
0.01

0

25 50 75 100

0.00

Prediction of severity
using protein levels at day 0
1.00

1.00

0.75

0.75

0.50

0.50

0.25

0.25

p<0.0001

0

25 50 75 100

0.00

25 50 75 100

0.50
0.25

AUC: 0.85
(CI: 0.81-0.86)

p=0.0007

0

25 50 75 100

Time (days)
Time (days)
Expression at day 0
High expression

0.75

p=0.0002

0

IL24

1.00

0.00

G

0.25

p<0.0001

CCL2

IL24
1.0

0.04

IL8

IL6

1.00

0.00

CCL2

p-value

−1
0
1
2
NPX difference (on day 7)

0.25

8.0

4

CCL2
CCL20
CXCL8
CCL8
AREG
IL1RL1
PTX3
FLT1
IL24
PDGFRA
AMBP
RARRES2
ASAH2
AMY2A
AMY2B
IL12B
IL12A_IL12B
CPA2
CELA3A
FETUB
CTRC

Sensitivity

9.0

6

Non-hispanic (n=311)
Hispanic (n=386)

(Acuity level A1 − Acuity level A2)

F

CCL8

SUSD2
DKK1
CD177
OSM
RNASE3
MZB1
IL15
CTSB
CCL2
CXCL8
CCL7
ST3GAL1
RRM2
CXCL9
TNFRSF10B
TNFRSF6B
IL6
IL1RL1
XCXL13

Survival probability

CCL7

Ethnicity

Male (n=390)
Female (n=307)

IL6
D CXCL10
CCL7

Z-score

CCL17
TNFSF12
FKBP5
LBR

0

Sex

Age decile (years)

Severity
Severe
Non-severe

7

Severe (n=320)
Non-severe (n=377)

0

Age group
<65
65+

E

Severity

1

ESR, day 0
CRP, day 0

C

Acuitymax
within 28 days
A1 (n=96)
A2 (n=224)
A3 (n=301)
A4 (n=53)
A5 (n=23)

Day

UMAP1

A

Low expression

0.00
0.00

0.25

0.50

0.75

1-specificity

1.00

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3

Non-severe

Severe

Heart (20 proteins)

Day 3

1.5 Day 0

p < 0.001

NS

Day 7
p < 0.01

4

1.0

2

0.0

0

Day 0

p < 0.001

p < 0.001

3

p = 0.05

NS

Day 3
p < 0.01

Day 7

D
NCL
RBBP4
APEX1
MRPL34
ISCU
GDI2
PGLS
DCXR
TPI1
SMC3
VRK1
CUTC
HIKESHI
BLMH
HPRT1

NS

1
0

Pancreas (4 proteins)

Liver (21 proteins)

Day 0

Day 0

Day 3

NS

p < 0.01

Day 7
p < 0.01

0
−1

Day 3

NS

2

1

Skeletal muscle (19 proteins)

Day 7

p < 0.001

0 Day 3 Day 7
2 Day
p < 0.001
p < 0.001
p < 0.001

p < 0.05

1

1

0

0

−1

C

200
100
0
−0.5 0.0
0.5
1.0
Plasma heart signature
(mean Z score)

1.0

1.0
r = 0.49, p = 0.04

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.50

0.25

High expression
Low expression

0.00

1.5

0

25

r = -0.12, p = 0.63

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
ACE2 expression

p < 0.0001

50
75
Time (days)

100

Bost et al. dataset
AT2
Cilitated cells
Club cells
Epithelial progenitors
Goblet cells
Ionocytes

Day of sample
collection

0.7

0.0

0
3
7

1
2
3
TMPRSS2 expression

Lung cells

PSME1
CELF2
SUMO2
HMOX2
LDHA
SSRP1
MYL6B
CBX5
REXO2
LDHB
RPS7
RPS3
RPL12
HNRNPA1
NPM1

SUB1
BIRC5
AURKB
CCNA2
CCNB2
CHEK1
YEATS4
PSIP1
TMPO
IL21R
ICAM3
SIRPG
BATF
GZMH
MATK

TNFRSF10D
DNAJB2
KMT5C
TMPRSS11A
LEMD1
PTK6
ANXA8
IL22RA1
TXNRD1
SHISA2
CAMK1D
UBD
BDH2
GOSR1
MB
ZNF264

HDGFL3
DNAJC11
FRS2
KMT2D
UBQLN2
ZNF329
ACY1
ZNF566
ROBO3
GALNT11
KIF1C
PCBD1
CYB5R1
PDIA4
PRDX4
COA3

TAX1BP1
MDH1
PFDN2
PNPO
EEA1
PSMD7
CISD2
CCDC90B
DLD
QDPR
PFDN1
XRCC4
PEBP1
FAM162A
CHCHD10
COLGALT2

GALNT3
EZR
GDA
GBP6
RBFOX2
MST1R
EVPL
FUT3
SULT2B1
LAYN

CHST6
GSTA1
FATE1
CHST4
CYB5A
ALDH1A1
SYT17
RBP1
ANXA8L1
RAB17

NR1D1
PTGS2
PRKCZ
NFATC4
FAM189A2
NNMT
NEDD9
HOPX
S100A14

SULT1C2
NRIP3
ENTPD3
TP53I3
KIF3A
TNNT3
MYCT1
IK
DPY30
HRK
FABP6
ELK3
HSPH1
CYB5R2

TMPRSS2
ACE2

0.75
Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells
Alveolar type 2
Goblet cells
Club cells
Ciliated cells
Ionocytes

300

1.00

Neutrophils
Mon-derived mac (IL1Bhi)
Mon-derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
Mon-derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Monocytes I
Monocytes II
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
Mast cells
Epithelial progenitors
DC
B cells
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Alveolar Macrophages
Tfh
CD4+ T cells
Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
T regs
NK cells
Trm (ZNF683hi)

r = 0.51
p = 5 x 10^−21

Plasma heart signature at day 0

Z-score

-5

F
1.00
Z-score (severe - non-severe)

Severe
Non-severe

400

Z-score (severe - non-severe)

Day 7

−2

2

E

Day 3

−1

−0.5

Troponin at day 0

Kidney (3 proteins)

Day 0

2

0.5

B

Lung (1 protein: KRT7)

Survival probability

Mean Z-score of tissue signature proteins

A

1.00

0.75

r = 0.62, p = < 0.001

0.75
r = -0.27, p = 0.08

0.50

0.50

0.25

0.25

0.00

0.00
−0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3

ACE2 expression

0.00

0.05

TMPRSS2 expression

Heart cells

0

0

5

Tucker et al. dataset
Adipocyte
Atrial cardio myocyte
Cytoplasmic cardio myocyte I
Cytoplasmic cardio myocyte II
Endothelium I
Endothelium II
Fibro blast I
Fibro blast II
Fibro blast III
Pericyte
Vascular smooth muscle
Ventricular cardio myocyte I
Ventricular cardio myocyte II
Ventricular cardio myocyte III

Day of sample
collection
0
3
7

Figure 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

500

0 3

0

0

5

Native lung cells
Monocytes / macrophages
Dendritic cells
Neutrophils

D

0

Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells

T cell activation and
exhaustion signals

Regeneration and
growth factor signals

Eosinophils
T cells / NK cells
B cells and plasma cells
Mast cells

Tfh

DC

5

MSTN
KITLG
VEGFD
CTF1
LRPAP1
EGF
CD40LG
TGFB1
DKK1
VEGFA
INHBC
NAMPT
OSM
LIF
IL6
ARTN
BMP6
HGF
PTN
SFRP1
CCL21
RSPO3
MDK
RSPO1
IL24
FGF21
IL19
IL17C
TNF
SEMA3F
DLL1
PGF
HSPG2
CCL19
COL4A1
SEMA4C
SPINT1
SEMA7A
PLAU
CXCL12
CXCL13
TNC
TGFA
GDF15
SPP1

Z-score
-1

0

0

1

Native lung cells
Monocytes / macrophages
Dendritic cells
Neutrophils

Eosinophils
T cells / NK cells
B cells and plasma cells
Mast cells

day 0 and 3
day3 only

receptors

Z-score

-5

0

0

5

ITGA4
CXCR3
LAG3
CXCR6
IL2RB
TIGIT
IL2RA
IL18R1
S1PR1
IL18RAP
TRAF2
ITGB1
PDCD1
BTLA
IL6ST
PVRIG
CCR2
IL2RG
CCR5
TNFRSF1B
CXCR1
CXCR2
SORL1
ACVR1
ALK
CCR3
ITGB3
ITGA9
TGFBR1
ACKR3
TGFBR2
TNFRSF17
CD4
ITGAV
IL15RA
IL6R
CD47
TNFRSF1A
SORT1
CCR6
TNFRSF13B
TNFRSF21
INSR
ITGB8
PTPRZ1
ITGB6
CCR1
CD63

day 0 and 3
day 3 only
CSF1
LGALS9
TNFSF12

day 0 only

HAVCR2
CSF1R
TNFRSF12A

T cell recruitment,
activation and
exhaustion signals

on epithelial cells

Receptors associated with lung T cells
ligands

CCL8
CXCL11
CCL19
IL18
CD48
SEMA7A
IL15
PVR
CXCL10
CCL7
CCL2
IL6
CTF1
IL7
VSIR
CD274
OSM
TNFSF14
LIF
CCL20
CXCL12
CCL4
CCL3
CXCL9
CXCL16
SPP1
CD74
CD27
LTBR
TNFRSF14
NECTIN2

Regeneration and
tissue damage module

T cell

Delayed tissue regeneration
and growth factor signaling
(by day 3)

Pancreas

proteins associated with death

Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells
CD4+ T cells
NK cells
Tregs
Tfh
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
Mast cells
Goblet cells
Epithelial progenitors
Ciliated cells
Ionocytes
Alveolar type 2
Club cells

IL6-family

ACVR2A
ACVR2B
ZNRF3
LRP5
BMPR1A
IL6ST
RET
NOTCH3
KDR
IL22RA1
LGR4
INSR
PLXNA1
FZD8
PLXNA3
IL17RE
ACVR1
ACVR1B
ITGAV
NRP2
KREMEN1
TRAF2
TGFBR2
SORL1
ITGB1
DPP4
PTPRS
TNFRSF21
LIFR
SDC4
ST14
PLXNB2
FZD6
IL20RA
ACKR4
FGFR2
IL20RB
ITGB8
PTPRZ1
BMPR1B
KIT
EGFR
LRP6
MET
OSMR
ITGB6

Neutrophils
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
B cells
CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)
Monocytes I
Monocytes II
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
Mon−derived mac (IL1Bhi)
DC
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Alveolar Macrophages

Regeneration and
growth factor signals

receptors

MSTN
KITLG
VEGFD
CTF1
LRPAP1
EGF
CD40LG
TGFB1
DKK1
VEGFA
INHBC
NAMPT
OSM
LIF
IL6
ARTN
BMP6
HGF
PTN
SFRP1
CCL21
RSPO3
MDK
RSPO1
IL24
FGF21
IL19
IL17C
TNF
SEMA3F
DLL1
PGF
HSPG2
CCL19
COL4A1
SEMA4C
SPINT1
SEMA7A
PLAU
CXCL12
CXCL13
TNC
TGFA
GDF15
SPP1

Liver

Cell death

T cell activation
and exhaustion

Organ signatures altered in
severe disease

F

Receptors associated with lung epithelial cells
ligands

Epithelial cells

ligands

NK cells
Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells
Ionocytes
Epithelial progenitors
Ciliated cells
Alveolar type 2
Goblet cells
Club cells

0

Skeletal muscle
damage

E Ligands associated with lung monocytes/macrophages

CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)
CD4+ T cells

-5

Exhaustion signals

Peripheral plasmablasts

Monocytes (IFNAhi)
Monocytes II
Monocytes I
Mon−derived mac (IL1Bhi)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
Alveolar Macrophages
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
Tregs

Z-score

Phagocytosis

CD74
MDK
TNF
CCL4
CXCL1
CCL20
TNFRSF14
IL6
IL15
IL18
TNFSF13
LRPAP1
CXCL16
CXCL8
CD274
NAMPT
TNFSF13B
CCL3
NECTIN2
CXCL9
CXCL11
TGFB1
CXCL10
SIRPRA
TIMP1
SPP1
CCL2
CCL7
CCL8

Mast cells
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
Neutrophils
B cells

Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells

CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)
NK cells
CD4+ T cells
Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
B cells
Tfh
Tregs
Mast cells
DC
Monocytes II
Monocytes I
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
Mon−derived mac (IL1Bhi)
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Alveolar Macrophages
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
Neutrophils
Alveolar type 2
Club cells
Ionocytes
Goblet cells
Ciliated cells
Epithelial progenitors

day 0 and 3
day3 only

Early recruitment
and activation
signals to T cells
(by day 0)

Macrophage

Heart
damage

Peripheral CD8 T cells
and NK cells

LRP5
ST14
LIFR
NOTCH3
KDR
IL20RB
PLXNB2
IL20RA
PTPRZ1
IL6ST
RET
PTPRS
NOTCH4
CCR3
ALK
KREMEN2
NOTCH1
CX3CR1
PVRIG
IL2RG
TGFBR2
ITGB1
KREMEN1
PLXNA1
PLXNA3
NRP2
NOTCH2
NRP1
TNFSF14
CXCR1
CXCR2
FLT1
ITGA5
HAVCR2
CCR1
TIGIT
CD96
IL18R1
CD226
IL18RAP
SELPLG
IL7R
CCR6
EGFR
LRP6
MET
KIT

Early monocyte activation that is
intensi ed over time
Express several severity-associated
cytokines and chemokines

Non-speci c
in ammation
and cell death

Lung
damage

Peripheral monocytes

receptors

CX3CL1
SEMA3F
SPINT1
TGFA
PTN
MDK
CXCL1
CXCL6
KITLG
SEMA4C
GAS6
DKK1
LIF
TNC
HSPG2
GDF15
CEACAM1
VEGFA
PLAU
CXCL8
ARTN
CTF1
PGF
CCL20
IL19
VSIR
DLL1
IL7
CCL15
HGF
NECTIN2
IL18
PVR
LTBR

Lung
tissue

Tissue and
cellular death

In ammatory

Ligands associated with lung epithelial cells
ligands

Mapping plasma proteins to single-cell RNA-seq data

Z-score
-1

0

0

1

CCL8
CXCL11
CCL19
IL18
CD48
SEMA7A
IL15
PVR
CXCL10
CCL7
CCL2
IL6
CTF1
IL7
VSIR
CD274
OSM
TNFSF14
LIF
CCL20
CXCL12
CCL4
CCL3
CXCL9
CXCL16
SPP1
CD74
CD27
LTBR
TNFRSF14
NECTIN2

receptors
TIGIT
IL2RA
S1PR1
IL7R
DPP4
IL18R1
PDCD1
CD70
BTLA
PVRIG
CCR2
IL2RG
CCR5
TNFRSF14
TNFSF14
CXCR4
SELPLG
CD4
IL6ST
LAG3
CD96
CXCR6
ITGA4
CXCR3
IL2RB
CD226
IL18RAP
CD244
ITGA1
CCR7
CCR6

day 0 and 3
day 3 only
day 0 only
TNFSF13B
CX3CL1
TNFSF13
CD40LG
LRPAP1
TGFBP1
TNC
GDF15
SPP1

ITGB1
CX3CR1
SORL1
TGFBR2
TNFRSF17

CD8+ T cell and NK

Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells

1000

Systemic host response to
SARS-CoV-2 by plasma
proteomics

Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells
Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
Tregs
CD4+ T cells
Tfh

C

1500

Alveolar type 2
Club cells
Goblet cells
Ciliated cells
Ionocytes
DC
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
Alveolar Macrophages
Epithelial progenitors
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
Mon−deried mac (IL1Bhi)
Monocytes I
Mon-derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Monocytes II
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
Neutrophils
Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
Tregs
Mast cells
Tfh
CD4+ T cells
B cells
CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)
NK cells
Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells

Day

G

Ef fector CD8+ T cells
Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells
NK cells
CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)
B cells
CD4+ T cells
Tfh
Mast cells
Tregs
Nai ve CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
Neutrophils
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
Monocytes II
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Monocytes I
Mon−derived mac (IL1Bhi)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Epithelial progenitors
Alveolar Macrophages
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
DC
Ionocytes
Ciliated cells
Go blet cells
Club cells
Alveolar type 2

Epithelial progenitors
Ciliated cells
Goblet cells
Ionocytes
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Alveolar Macrophages
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
Monocytes II
Monocytes I
Mon−derived mac (IL1Bhi)
DC
Neutrophils
Mast cells
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
Alveolar type 2
Club cells
B cells
NK cells
CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)

Alveolar Macrophages
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Alveolar type 2
B cells
CD4+ T cells
CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)
Ciliated cells
Club cells
Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells
DC
E
T cells
Epithelial progenitors
Goblet cells
Ionocytes
Mast cells
Mon-derived mac (IL1Bhi)
Mon-derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Mon-derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
Monocytes I
Monocytes II
Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
Neutrophils
NK cells
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
Tfh
Tregs

Fold change in the number of ligand-receptor
interactions from day 0 to day 3

Epithelial progenitors
Ciliated cells
Club cells
Goblet cells
Monocytes II
Monocytes I
Mon−derived mac (IL1Bhi)
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Alveolar Macrophages
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
Ionocytes
Alveolar type 2
Neutrophils
Mast cells
Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
B cells
DC
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
Tregs
CD4+ T cells
Tfh
NK cells
CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)

B

Total number of
ligand-receptor interactions

CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)
CD4+ T cells
Tfh
NK cells
Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
Tregs
Ciliated cells
Alveolar type 2
Mast cells
Epithelial progenitors
Ionocytes
Goblet cells
Club cells
B cells
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
DC
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Alveolar Macrophages
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
Neutrophils
Mon−derived mac (IL1Bhi)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
Mon−derived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Monocytes I
Monocytes II

A

Z-score

-5

0

0

5

Extended Data Figure 1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Number of patients

MWU test: p=0.012

chi2: NS

150

chi2: NS

150

10

100

count

count

15

50

100

50

5

0

0

20

40

60

80

A1

100

Age

A3

A4

0

A5

A1

Acuity at day 0

MWU test: p=0.0016

40

A2

A2

A3

A5

MWU: NS

MWU test: p=0.0001732

60

A4

Acuitymax
within 28 days

count

count

20

count

60

30

40

20

20

10

0

20

30

40

BMI

50

0

60

0

10

20

0

30

MWU test: p<0.0001

40

20

0

100

200

0

300

CRP at day 0
MWU test: p<0.0001

0

0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

ALC at day 0

10.0

0

500

1000 1500 2000 2500

LDH at day 0
MWU test: p<0.0005

MWU test: p=0.04386

40

30

50

25

30

count

count

count

40

20

75

0

MWU test: p<0.0001

60

count

count

count

0

2500 5000 7500 10000

D−dimer at day 0

80

MWU test: NS
60

10

0

Symptom duration (days)

30

20

40

20

10

10

0

3000

6000

9000

Ferritin at day 0
COVID-19-positive
COVID-19-negative

0

20

0

5

10

15

ANC at day 0

20

0

0

50

100

150

GFR at day 0

Extended Data Figure 2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

COVID-19 status

Positive (n=305)
Negative (n=78)

Acuity at day 0

20-30 (n=19)
30-40 (n=43)
40-50 (n=47)
50-60 (n=75)
60-70 (n=74)
70-80 (n=60)
80-90 (n=52)
90-100 (n=13)

Ethnicity
Non-hispanic (n=204)
Hispanic (n=179)

Severity

Acuitymax
within 28 days

A1 (n=3)
A2 (n=96)
A3 (n=186)
A4 (n=60)
A5 (n=38)

Severe (n=131)
Non-severe (n=252)

A1 (n=49)
A2 (n=83)
A3 (n=169)
A4 (n=51)
A5 (n=31)

Lung disease
Absent (n=279)
Present (n=104)

Heart disease
Absent (n=313)
Present (n=70)

Kidney disease
Absent (n=322)
Present (n=61)

UMAP2

Sex
Male (n=200)
Female (n=183)

Age decile (years)

UMAP1

B

C

Z-score

-4

0

0

COVID-19 status
Positive
Negative

4

COVID-19 model residuals at day 0

GSE18791_CTRL_VS_NEWCASTLE_VIRUS_DC_8H_DN

Age Group
<65
65+

GSE13485_DAY3_VS_DAY7_YF17D_VACCINE_PBMC_DN

Age
COVID-19 status

GSE2706_UNSTIM_VS_8H_R848_DC_DN

GSE21360_PRIMARY_VS_TERTIARY_MEMORY_CD8_TCELL_DN

TPP1
IFNL1
IFNG

GSE9316_IL6_KO_VS_IFNG_KO_INVIVO_EXPANDED_CD4_TCELL_DN

GSE13485_CTRL_VS_DAY7_YF17D_VACCINE_PBMC_DN

ST2B
SHMT1
FBP1
C4BPB

GSE13485_CTRL_VS_DAY3_YF17D_VACCINE_PBMC_DN

GSE42021_TREG_PLN_VS_CD24INT_TREG_THYMUS_DN

GSE14000_UNSTIM_VS_4H_LPS_DC_DN

SAMD9L
FKBP5

GSE18791_UNSTIM_VS_NEWCATSLE_VIRUS_DC_6H_DN

KRT18
RRM2
BRK1
CCL16

GSE13485_PRE_VS_POST_YF17D_VACCINATION_PBMC_DN

GSE16755_CTRL_VS_IFNA_TREATED_MAC_DN

GSE19888_ADENOSINE_A3R_INH_VS_TCELL_MEMBRANES_ACT_MAST_CELL_UP

GSE22140_GERMFREE_VS_SPF_ARTHRITIC_MOUSE_CD4_TCELL_DN

GSE37533_PPARG2_FOXP3_VS_FOXP3_TRANSDUCED_CD4_TCELL_DN

NPPB

GSE19888_ADENOSINE_A3R_INH_VS_ACT_WITH_INHIBITOR_PRETREATMENT_IN_MAST_CELL_UP

GSE37533_PPARG1_FOXP3_VS_FOXP3_TRANSDUCED_CD4_TCELL_DN

Count

GSE19888_ADENOSINE_A3R_INH_PRETREAT_AND_ACT_BY_A3R_VS_TCELL_MEMBRANES_ACT_MAST_CELL_UP

20
40
60

GSE21927_SPLEEN_C57BL6_VS_4T1_TUMOR_BALBC_MONOCYTES_DN

GSE37533_PPARG1_FOXP3_VS_PPARG2_FOXP3_TRANSDUCED_CD4_TCELL_PIOGLITAZONE_TREATED_DN

SERPINA9
GSE18791_CTRL_VS_NEWCASTLE_VIRUS_DC_4H_DN

GSE6259_FLT3L_INDUCED_DEC205_POS_DC_VS_CD8_TCELL_DN

MMP12

p.adjust

GSE42021_TREG_VS_TCONV_PLN_UP

COMP

GSE2770_TGFB_AND_IL4_ACT_VS_ACT_CD4_TCELL_2H_DN

GSE13485_DAY1_VS_DAY7_YF17D_VACCINE_PBMC_DN

0.00025

GSE41978_ID2_KO_VS_BIM_KO_KLRG1_LOW_EFFECTOR_CD8_TCELL_UP

0.00050

GSE42021_CD24HI_VS_CD24LOW_TCONV_THYMUS_DN

0.00075

GSE42724_NAIVE_BCELL_VS_PLASMABLAST_UP

GSE7509_UNSTIM_VS_FCGRIIB_STIM_DC_DN

GSE5589_LPS_VS_LPS_AND_IL10_STIM_IL6_KO_MACROPHAGE_180MIN_UP

0.5

D

Pearson
correlation
1

E

All proteins differentially expressed
in COVID-19 model

0

Pearson
correlation
1

1.0
1.5
GeneRatio

2.0

Proteins upregulated
in COVID-19-positive patients

0

-1

-1

RNASET2, CLEC1A, VCAM1, PDFGRA, CD97,
LTBP2, CD163, CCL27, LILRB1, IL18BP, TNFSF13B,
ICAM2, IL19, TIE1, SDC1, IL8, IL2RA, CDH2, CTSB,
DKK3, TNF, CD59, IL1RL, IL17A, TNFSF13, CD4, IL10,
IL4R, SIGLEC10, IL12RB1, IL17C, CXCL9, IL1B, CCL1,
IL20, CD48, CSF1, TNFRSF11B, CCL19 ,PLA2G10,
TNFRSF10A, TNFRSF6B, CD8A, HAVCR2 ,CD300C,
TNFRSF8, CD74, CD274, FLT3

SLAM6, GNLY, LILRA2, LILRB1, LILRB2,
IL17RB, IL18, LILRA5, CD274, VISG4, TNF,
IL12RB1, TNFSF13, HLA-E, CD38, CD30E,
LILRB4, FCRL2, FCRLB, TNFRSF13B,
MZB1, IL5RA, SLAMF7, CCL2, IL1RN, IL6,
AGER, AGR2, KRT19, KRT18, LGALS9,
JUN, F9, ITIH3, CLEC4G, IL6R, IFNLR1,
TNFRSF8, CD70, RRM2, BRK1, CCL7,
NADK, WARS, DCTPP1, TNFSF14, VWF,
IL15, SLC39A14, FALNT2, PCSK9, PLA2G2A,
FURIN, C4BPB, CASC4, LDLR, CXCL13, CST7,
DKK1, VEGFA, BAX, RRM2B, SOD2, CASP1,
S100A11, NPM1, SERPINB8, MAPK8

CD63, CCL5, IL7, TIMP3, IRAK1, SELP,
ITGB5, CDKN1A, BACH1
FLT3LG, IL1RAP, APM, GDF2
CD5, EPCAM, NTRK3, CD244, FASLG,
CD28, PDCD1, ITGB2, CD6, ITGB7, TNR,
CD24, FAP, ERBB2, ITGAV, ITGB1, NTRK2,
TNXB, CDH6, CD58, CTSV, CA6, ITGA11,
CD1C, KIT, CR2, CCL2, PDFGRB, IL1R1,
CDH5, IL7R, ITGA5, TNFSF12, CDH17,
CD109, IL17RA, ITGB6, CCN1

CDHR2, GGT1, CECAM1, BST2, NT5E, CES1,
C19orf12, ACAA1, PTS, DCXR, SORD, SHMT1,
EPHX2, FBP1, ADH4, ACY1, SCLY, KYNU, GLRX,
LXN, CCS, DNPH1, ANKRD54, SOD1, CPPED1,
PDCD5, S100A4, STIP1, PARK7, THOP1, NAMPT,
ALDH1A1, PRDX1, PSME2, PSME2, DCTN2,
ENO1, TRIM21, ADA, ENO2, CASP8, SF3B4,
FKBP4, PDGFC, F9, CLEC4G, IFNLR1, IL6R,
CD70, TNFRSF8, RRM2, BRK1, CCL7, NADK,
WARS, TNFSF14, VWF, PLAT, IL15, CDBPB,
FURIN, PCSK9, PLA2G2A, LBP, VWA1,
SLC39A14, ST6GAL1, GALNT2, LDLR, CXCL13,
VEGFA, SOD2, CASP1, S100A11, NPM1, MAPK9
CSTH, CA4, NCAN, DKK3, ANGPTL1,
LILRA2, LILRA1, LILRB2, CLEC6A, TNFSF13B,
CD48, LAG3, SIGLEC1, LAMP3, C1QA, CD14,
CSF1, IFNGR2, IL13RA1, ANGPTL2, NOTCH1,
IL18R1, CLEC11A, CDH2, SEMA4C, IL17RB,
IL18, CD274, TNF, IL12RB1, LILRB4, CD300E,
TNFSF13, HLA-E, CD38, FCRL2, FCRLB,
MZB1, TNFRSF13B, IL5RA, SLAMF7,
CCL2, IL1RN, IL6, AGER, KRT19, KRT18, JUN
TCL1A, GZMA, GZMB, GZMH, TNFSF10,
TLR3, IFNG, CCL8, IFNL1, CXCL10, CXCL11,
DDX58, AMY2B, AMY2A, CPA1, CDHR5,
C2, F7, PLA2G15
UMOD, FETUB, RET, EGFR, ERBB3

CD63, CCL5, IL7, SERPINE1, TIMP3,
IRAK1, SERPINB9, LGALS8, NUDC,
ATXN10, CDKN1A, BACH1
CDHR2, CEACAM1, NT5E, BST2, CES1,
C19orf12, ACAA1, PTS, DCXR, SORD, SHMT1,
EPHX2, FBP2, ADH4, ACY1, SCLY, KYNU

DKKL1, ICAM4, CA4, DKK3, ENTPD6,
ANGPTL1, CLEC6A, SIGLEC5, TNFSF13B,
CD48, LAG3, SIGLEC1, LAMP3, C1QA,
TCN2, CD14, CSF1, IFNGR2, IL13RA1,
ANGPTL2, NOTCH1, SEMA4C, IL18R1,
CLEC11A, CDH2, CTSL

CA11, IFNG, ENTPD5, CCCL8, INFL1,
CXCL10, CXCL11, DDX58, LAP3
CELA3A, AMY2B, AMY2A, CLPS, CPA1,
CTRB1, SOD1, PDCD5, S100A4, STIP1,
DNAJB1, MIF, NSFL1C, PARK7, AHCY,
THOP1, NAMPT, TXNRD1, ALDH1A1,
RBKS, QDPR, NUDT5, PRDX1, LHPP,
PPCDC, PSME1, PSME2, DCTN2, SCRN1,
IMPA1, ENO1, TRIM21, ADA, ENO2,
CASP8, SF3B4, HSPA1A, METAP2, DFFA,
FKBP4
TNFSF10, TLR3, SEMA4D, GZMA, GZMB,
GZMH, LEP, TCL1A, CDHR5, C2, F7, DPP7,
GLB1, PLA2G15
UMOD, NELL1, GFOD2, CRH, CNDP1,
FETUB, RET, LAMP2, EGFR, ERBB3

Extended Data Figure 3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

Count

Day 0

B

Day 3

HSP90B1_OID20829

40

200

20

150

0
Day 7

100

Day E

40

50

ISLR2_OID20889
PFDN2_OID20892

20

0
CEP164_OID20441
ACTN4_OID20435, SLIT2_OID20862

0

C

EIF5A_OID20423

5

10 15 20
5 10 15
Hours from Collection to Freezing

CARDIOMETABOLIC

0.0

20

2.5

5.0

7.5

Mean normalized protein expression (NPX)

D

INFLAMMATION

CARDIOMETABOLIC

10.0

INFLAMMATION
4.5

3.5

0.1

4.0
3.5

0.0

IQR

3.0

C4 037_D0

IQR

C4 037_D0

0.0

PC2 (12.71%)

PC2 (9.1%)

0.1

2.5

2.5

0.1

2.0

0.1
0.1

0.0

PC1 (28.67%)

0.1

0.1

0.0

PC1 (27.82%)

ONCOLOGY

NEUR OLOGY

2.0

C4 037_D0
1

0.1

3.0

2

3

Sample Median

4

C4 037_D0
1

2

3

4

Sample Median

5

ONCOLOGY

NEUROLOGY
3.5

0.1

0.0

C4 037_D0

3

0.0

IQR

3.0

IQR

C4 037_D0

PC2 (12.8%)

PC2 (12.18%)

0.1

2.5

2

2.0
0.1

0.1
0.1

0.0

PC1 (29.16%)

Quality control warning

E

UMAP2

CARDIOMETABOLIC

UMAP1

1.5
0.10

0.1

Pass

0.05

0.00

PC1 (27.43%)

0.05

0.10

1

Warning

2

3

Sample Median

4

Quality control warning

Plate ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

1

Pass

2

Sample Median

3

4

Warning

ONCOLOGY

NEUROLOGY

INFLAMMATION
Plate ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

C4 037_D0

C4 037_D0

Plate ID
1_8
2
3
4
5
6
7
9
10

Plate ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Extended Data Figure 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B

PBMCs

PBMCs, myeloid subsets

Z-score

Z-score

4

0

LBP
SIGLEC5
SHMT1
NADK

HSPA1A
PRDX1
LGALS9
TCN2
BST2
LAP3
DDX58
SAMD9L
TRIM21

Cluster 3

Cluster 6

Cluster 5

Cluster 4

GRN
FURIN
CD14
CES1
IL18R1
GRPEL1
IFNG

Cluster 7

CD14
CTSH
TYMP
GRN
C1QA
WARS
LGALS9
FBP1
PSME1
GBP2
PRDX1
PSME2
BST2
BRK1
LAP3
NADK
TPP1
HSPA1A
FURIN
SORD
CLEC11A
NID1
FOLR2
CXCL10
SIGLEC5
CTSO
FKBP5
CES1
ALDH1A1
PTX3
TCN2
SIGLEC1
IL1RN

0

Monocyte clusters

IL1RN
CCL8
SIGLEC1
TYMP
FKBP5
TPP1

3

GBP2
FBP1
C1QA
CXCL10
LGMN
WARS
CXCL11
ANGPTL1
C4BPB
NID1
ST6GAL1
HSPA1A
PRDX1
LGALS9
TCN2

SMPD1
CD70
LRIG1
GZMH
OXT
LAG3
GZMB
LXN
LAMP3
ENTPD5

CCL7
TINAGL1
SERPINE1
PTS
RRM2
PTX3
MAD1L1
IL1RN

PSME2
ELOA
DPY30
SORD
PSME1
FOLR2
CTSO
FKBP4

GRPEL1
IFNG
TNFSF14
CTSH
CASC4
CLEC11A
NPM1
ALDH1A1
BRK1

Proteins higher in COVID-19-positive patients (day 0)

LAG3
IL18R1
TNFSF14
GZMB
GZMH
RRM2

Proteins higher in COVID-19-positive patients (day 0)

NPM1
LGMN
CD70
ST6GAL1

RBC
Platelet
non-EM-like CD8
NK cell
Uncategorized
Dendritic cell
Non-classical monocyte
Classical monocyte
Intermediated monocyte

-3

Cluster 2

0

0

Cluster 1

-4

non-EM-like CD4
IgG- B cells
IgG+ B cells
EM-like CD4
EM-like CD8
Uncategorized

A

Extended Data Figure 5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acuitymax
Acuity level, day 3
Acuity level, day 7
Acuity level, day 0
Acuity level, day 28
Intubated
SOFA
ESR, day 7
CRP, day 7
CRP, day 3
Neutrophils, day 7
Lymphopenia, day 7
Age
CRP, day 0
D-dimer, day 3
LDH, day 0
LDH, day 3
PC1
Kidney dysfunction, day 3
Kidney dysfunction, day 0
PC3
Kidney dysfunction, day 7
Neutrophils, day 0
D-dimer, day 7
Neutrophils, day 3
Lymphopenia, day 0
D-dimer, day 0
ESR, day 3
Ferritin, day 0
Lymphopenia, day 3
LDH, day 7
Kidney disease
HTN
Smoker
Ferritin, day 3
Heart disease
ESR, day 0

Pearson
correlation

1
0
-1

Association of age with disease severity

D

Severe (n=320)
Non-severe (n=377)

0.6

0.4

0.2

UMAP2
20

40

60

Age

80

100

Pearson
correlation

1

PC4
Diabetes
Sex
Immunocompromised
HLD
Ferritin, day 7
Respiratory symptoms
Neutralization, day 0
COPD
BMI
Race
Neutralization, day 3
Monocytes, day 7
Monocytes, day 0
Monocytes, day 3
Neutralization, day 7
Pulmonary disease
Hispanic ethnicity
Asthma
Fever
PC2
PC5
Symptom duration
GI symptoms

Severity

UMAP1

Probability of severe acuity (A1 or A2)

C

ESR, day 0
ESR, day 3
Race
Hispanic ethnicity
PC5
Fever
Respiratory symptoms
Monocytes, day 7
PC2
Monocytes, day 3
Sex
Monocytes, day 0

COPD
Heart disease
Kidney disease
Immunocompromised
Diabetes
Hyperlipidemia
Symptom duration
GI symptoms
BMI
Pulmonary disease
Asthma
PC1
Kidney dysfunction, day 3
Kidney dysfunction, day 7
Smoker
HTN
Age
Kidney dysfunction, day 0
PC3
SOFA, day 0
Acuity level, day 7
Acuity level, day 3
Acuitymax
Acuity level, day 0
Intubated
CRP, day 0
CRP, day 3
D-dimer, day 7
D-dimer, day 0
D-dimer, day 3
Neutrophils, day 7
Neutrophils, day 0
Neutrophils, day 3
Ferritin, day 7
Ferritin, day 0
Ferritin, day 3
LDH, day 7
LDH, day 0
LDH, day 3
Acuity level, day 28
ESR, day 7
CRP, day 7
Lymphopenia, day 3
Lymphopenia, day 0
Lymphopenia, day 7
PC4
Neutralization, day 7
Neutralization, day 0
Neutralization, day 3

ESR, day 0
ESR, day 3
Race
Hispanic ethnicity
PC5
Fever
Respiratory symptoms
Monocytes, day 7
PC2
Monocytes, day 3
Sex
Monocytes, day 0

Clinical parameter correlation
ordered by strength of correlation

0
-1

Heart disease

Lung disease

Absent (n=592)
Present (n=105)

Absent (n=560)
Present (n=137)

PC4
Diabetes
Sex
Immunocompromised
HLD
Ferritin, day 7
Respiratory symptoms
Neutralization, day 0
COPD
BMI
Race
Neutralization, day 3
Monocytes, day 7
Monocytes, day 0
Monocytes, day 3
Neutralization, day 7
Pulmonary disease
Hispanic ethnicity
Asthma
Fever
PC2
PC5
Symptom duration
GI symptoms

B

Clinical parameter correlation
ordered by hierarchical clustering

COPD
Heart disease
Kidney disease
Immunocompromised
Diabetes
Hyperlipidemia
Symptom duration
GI symptoms
BMI
Pulmonary disease
Asthma
PC1
Kidney dysfunction, day 3
Kidney dysfunction, day 7
Smoker
HTN
Age
Kidney dysfunction, day 0
PC3
SOFA, day 0
Acuity level, day 7
Acuity level, day 3
Acuitymax
Acuity level, day 0
Intubated
CRP, day 0
CRP, day 3
D-dimer, day 7
D-dimer, day 0
D-dimer, day 3
Neutrophils, day 7
Neutrophils, day 0
Neutrophils, day 3
Ferritin, day 7
Ferritin, day 0
Ferritin, day 3
LDH, day 7
LDH, day 0
LDH, day 3
Acuity level, day 28
ESR, day 7
CRP, day 7
Lymphopenia, day 3
Lymphopenia, day 0
Lymphopenia, day 7
PC4
Neutralization, day 7
Neutralization, day 0
Neutralization, day 3

Acuitymax
Acuity level, day 3
Acuity level, day 7
Acuity level, day 0
Acuity level, day 28
Intubated
SOFA
ESR, day 7
CRP, day 7
CRP, day 3
Neutrophils, day 7
Lymphopenia, day 7
Age
CRP, day 0
D-dimer, day 3
LDH, day 0
LDH, day 3
PC1
Kidney dysfunction, day 3
Kidney dysfunction, day 0
PC3
Kidney dysfunction, day 7
Neutrophils, day 0
D-dimer, day 7
Neutrophils, day 3
Lymphopenia, day 0
D-dimer, day 0
ESR, day 3
Ferritin, day 0
Lymphopenia, day 3
LDH, day 7
Kidney disease
HTN
Smoker
Ferritin, day 3
Heart disease
ESR, day 0

A

Kidney disease
Absent (n=598)
Present (n=99)

Extended Data Figure 6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0.50
0.25
0.00

Negative

75
50
Neutralization
level at day 3 (%)
0-25
25-50
50-75
75-100

25
0
0

Positive

3

7

COVID-19 status

0
Day

3

E

% neutralization

D 1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25

Non-severe
Severe

0.00

0

3

7

H

Rate of change of neutralization over time

Acuity level A1
1.5

20

Prediction of day 3 neutralization level
by day 0 plasma proteins using Lasso

1.00

Sensitivity

0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

AUC = 0.83
(CI 0.80-0.85)
0

40

G

r = −0.026
p = 0.84

0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00

30

90

I

60

Age

90

60

Age

80

50

7
0
Day

3

7

100

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

75

Selection frequency

100

Severity

Non-severe
Severe

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

(20,65] (65,100]

Age

Age

CARDIOMETABOLIC
INFLAMMATION
NEUROLOGY
ONCOLOGY

25

3

(20,65] (65,100]

Olink panel

0

0

Non-severe
Severe

J

TNFSF10
RRM2
DKK3
KITLG
CBLIF
TNFRSF8
F9
PLA2G10
BRK1
WFIKKN1
TXNDC15
LGALS7B
APP
NTRK2
IL2
EGFR
PTEN
NID2
HSPB6
CRHR1

25

0.0

0.0

60

Neutralization
level (%)
0-25
25-50
50-75
75-100

0.5

0.5

Age

50

1.0

1.0

30

Severe

75

r = −0.22
1.5 p = 0.001

Acuity level A2

r = −0.39
p = 0.035

Non-severe

0

7

Day

F

100

Probability of D3 percent neutralization >75%

0.75

C

Severe

% of patients

neutralization level (%)

% neutralization

Non-severe
100

Probability of D3 percent neutralization >50%

B

1.00

Rate of change of neutralization over time

A

Age Group Neutralization (%)
<65
65+

[0,0.25]
(0.25,0.5]

(0.5,0.75]
(0.75,1]

Z-score

-6

0

Proteins independent of severity

0

6

Severity
Age group
Neutralization
TFRC
CRHR1
PTEN
ERBB4
EGFR
ENPP5
CD1C
TNFSF10
HSD11B1
IFNL1
CCL8
CES2
K R T5
PTH1R
PEAR1
ICOSLG
CD34
CCL25
TFF2
TFF1
CD300LG
LEFTY2
LGALS7B
KLK10
DKK3
PLA2G10
CBLIF
ITGA11
C R TAC1
NTRK2
COMP
KITLG
BPIFB1
TNFRSF8
F9
NID2
APP
WFIKKN1
IL11
FCRL5
IL2

Extended Data Figure 7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

Time:Acuitymax Interaction

1250

Acuitymax

Count

1000

Original

Permuted

750
500
250
0

0.00

B

0.25

0.50
p-value

0.75

Time:Acuitymax Interaction

Count

30
20
10
0
0

300
600
Number of p-values < 0.05

900

1.00

Extended Data Figure 8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

40

C

Day 7

9

-log10(p-value)

20
10

6

3

0
5

10

15

20

Z-score

-4

0

0

4

Severity model residuals at day 0

Severity
Severe
Non-severe
Age Group
<65
65+
Timepoint
D0
D3
D7

Max. Acuity: Severe vs. Non-severe

Non-severe
Severe

30

Count

Day 3

Day 0

12

Timepoint
Age group
Severity
SSC4D_OID20182

CBLN4_OID21386

XPNPEP2_OID21508
MSTN_OID20115
ENPP5_OID20736
CRNN_OID21427
ANGPTL7_OID21412
ITGB2_OID20315
RGMA_OID21065

ITIH3_OID20352
MZB1_OID20732
CXCL12_OID20464
TNFRSF13B_OID20702
P R TN3_OID20329
CLC_OID20126

Hours from
Collection to Freezing

0

NID2_OID21085

-1

0

1

2

3

-1

0

1

2

3

-1

0

1

2

3

CDHR2_OID21282

SORD_OID21453
ANGPTL2_OID20726
TMPRSS15_OID21364
SIGLEC15_OID20812
CPB1_OID20289

NPX Difference

D

B LVRB_OID21141

TCN2_OID20341
ENTPD5_OID20104

8

RNASET2

IL6

4.75

6

4.50

5

0

3

IL4R

7

CD40

5

5.5

8.0

4

5.0

7.5

CD300C

3

7

0

CCL19

3

0

7

IL1RL1
4.0

5.0

3.2

4.5

2.8

4.0

2.5

3.0

2.4

3.5

2.0

10.5

3

7

3

3

3

0

7

SPINK1

8.5

4.0

4.5

3.5

0

3

7

0

3

7

4.0

C2CD2L_OID20864
TBCB_OID20993
CHMP1A_OID20930
ARSB_OID21331
CD274_OID20966
PREB_OID20439
DNMBP_OID20956
NUDC_OID20623

CALCOCO1_OID21387
INPPL1_OID21314
SP R Y2_OID20475
CNST_OID20127
DECR1_OID20579
ITGB1BP2_OID20112
C OX5B_OID21297
PDLIM7_OID20729
PPP1R12A_OID21475
F OXO1_OID20515
MANF_OID20707
NCK2_OID20683
MZT1_OID21186
PRDX3_OID20483
MPI_OID21288
IPCEF1_OID20977
CLEC1B_OID21061
SCAMP3_OID21332
PTPN1_OID20908
ITGB5_OID21522
ICA1_OID20484
TIA1_OID20068
MAP3K5_OID21253
TACC3_OID21285
STXBP3_OID21240
BIN2_OID21067

1

3

SERPINA9_OID21284
TIE1_OID20303

3

7

ENPP2_OID20288
HGF_OID20656
MDK_OID21489
AR TN_OID20446
LILRB2_OID20301
MICB_MICA_OID20593
ESM1_OID20758
NPPB_OID20049
CA12_OID21344
LPL_OID20188
DKK3_OID20264
WNT9A_OID20460
FGF5_OID20490
EFEMP1_OID20414
TNFRSF21_OID21052
CST5_OID20995
TFF3_OID20371
CLEC1A_OID20099
PTPRN2_OID20912
SORCS2_OID21262
CLMP_OID21419
NBL1_OID21486
PIK3IP1_OID21094

4

7

3

6

2

5

1

4

0

7

3

PTN

8

0

0

7

SFRP1

5.5
5.0

TBCC_OID20942

2

9

4.5

7

PSRC1_OID21169

0

BST2

5.0

3

3

7

5.5

9.0

PCDH17_OID20132
MET_OID20269
ARSA_OID21138
TPP1_OID20750
GGH_OID20416
IGSF3_OID21312
CDCP1_OID20940
IGF2R_OID21146
NRP1_OID20390
DDR1_OID21009
PCDH1_OID20614
SIR PA_OID20304
CXADR_OID20561
CALB1_OID21306
CXCL16_OID20282
TACSTD2_OID21447
DRAXIN_OID20917
CCL20_OID20671
CCL19_OID21030
TNF_OID20473

CD163_OID20360

0

7

GDF15

9.5

8.0

0

SPP1

10.0

PG LYRP1_OID20338
LCN2_OID20392
FABP4_OID20245

3.0

3.5

0

PLA2G2A_OID20274
SLC39A14_OID20852
ST6GAL1_OID20302
HS6ST1_OID21441
PL AT_OID20247
IL6_OID21276
FST_OID20770
IL15_OID20562

SRP14_OID21324

0

3.5
4.0

NADK_OID20178
CCL2_OID21004

Severe
Non-severe

7.0

4.5

3

4.25

3.6

4.5

CD274

PLA2G2A

5.00

7

NPX

PRDX1_OID20962
LXN_OID21003

THPO_OID20098
FOLR2_OID21062
SIGLEC1_OID20690

0

3

7

CRIM1_OID20701
ICAM2_OID20248
IL6ST_OID20147
ANGPT2_OID21463
MMP10_OID20687
CLSTN2_OID20664
SPON2_OID20221
SIGLEC10_OID20537
NEFL_OID20871
APOH_OID21072

0

3

PILRA_OID21129
IL19_OID20158
PHOSPHO1_OID20922
GPR37_OID20095
IL18BP_OID20348
NUCB2_OID21448
IL15RA_OID20498
EGFL7_OID21252
WISP2_OID21068
CGREF1_OID20152
EPHA2_OID21342
CD27_OID21527
E DA2R_OID21451
FAS_OID20316
BCL2L11_OID20513
ESAM_OID20270
CD300C_OID21010
BSG_OID20626

7

CST3_OID20400
EFNA4_OID20935
CD99_OID21110

Day

E

F

GSE18281_CORTICAL_VS_MEDULLARY_THYMOCYTE_UP

Pearson
correlation
coefficient
1

All severity-associated proteins

GSE21360_SECONDARY_VS_QUATERNARY_MEMORY_CD8_TCELL_UP
0

GSE37533_UNTREATED_VS_PIOGLIZATONE_TREATED_CD4_TCELL_PPARG1_AND_FOXP3_TRASDUCED_UP
GSE19198_CTRL_VS_IL21_TREATED_TCELL_24H_UP

-1

GSE34156_NOD2_LIGAND_VS_TLR1_TLR2_LIGAND_6H_TREATED_MONOCYTE_DN

CD1C, CA6, CLEC4C, TNFSF10, FASLG,
CR2, TNFSF11, FETUB, CD200R1, SEMA4D,
IGFBP3, CTSV, DSG4, BCAN, CNTN5, CD34

GSE22140_HEALTHY_VS_ARTHRITIC_GERMFREE_MOUSE_CD4_TCELL_DN

CLEC4G, CCL17, TNFSF12, DKK1, CCN2

CES3, GUSB, CES1
GALNT3, NCAM2, WIF1, CTSC, TPP1, ENTPD6, ST3GAL1,
CRLF1, IFNL1, LAMP3, C1QA, TCN2, ANGPTL1, TINAGL1,
SFTPA2, BRK, AGR2, KRT19, CCL2, CXCL8, CXCL19, CCL7,
SFTPA1, AGER, LGALS9, PCSK9, LRIG1, FURIN, CASC4,
PLA2G2A, ST6GAL1, LBP, VWA1, IL6, SLC39A14, TXNDC15,
GALNT10, C1QTNF1, PLXNB2, SEMA4C, CLEC11A, NID1, ACP5,
ICAM2, CDH2, PVR, MERTK, GALNT2, CSF1, B4GALT1

GSE19401_UNSTIM_VS_RETINOIC_ACID_AND_PAM2CSK4_STIM_FOLLICULAR_DC_DN
GSE9316_IL6_KO_VS_IFNG_KO_INVIVO_EXPANDED_CD4_TCELL_DN
GSE34156_TLR1_TLR2_LIGAND_VS_NOD2_AND_TLR1_TLR2_LIGAND_24H_TREATED_MONOCYTE_UP

IL3RA, IL33, IL22RA1, SESTD1, FGF2,
FOXO3, DDX58, SAMD9L, ENO1, TRIM21,
SERPINB9, PRDX5, HCLS1, CASP10, MSRA,
RNF41, HRAS, CD2AP, DCTN1, DARS,
CDC37, FADD, CC2D1A, CD63, RRM2B,
MGMT, SOD2, CD274, DAG1, INPP1, LBR,
PAG1, HMOX2, BAX, FKBP5

GSE24634_TEFF_VS_TCONV_DAY7_IN_CULTURE_DN
GSE5589_LPS_AND_IL10_VS_LPS_AND_IL6_STIM_IL6_KO_MACROPHAGE_45MIN_UP
GSE24634_TEFF_VS_TCONV_DAY3_IN_CULTURE_DN

CEACAM3, LDLR, IGSF3, IL18R1, BST2, CEACAM1,
CDHR2, ACE2, SULT2A1, CA5A, RBP5, FABP1, HNMT,
SCP2, PTS, DCXR, SORD, SHMT1, AGXT, ACAA1, KYNU,
ACY1, SCLY, ATF2, BID, ZMB, GZMH, BLMH, THOP1, ADA,
KYAT1, ALDH1A1, RBKS, IMPA1, AHCY, LAP3, NAMPT,
TXNRD1, LTA4H, SERPINB8, KRT18, DDAH1, EPS8L2, TYMP,
FBP1, RRM2, GBP2, WARS, DCTPP1, NADK, SETMAR, SH2D1A,
PRKAB1, AIF1, NDRG1, CRIP2, CEBPB, VIM, RASSF2, FEN1,
MNDA, NCF2, RCOR1, PARP1, NMNAT1, NBN, NPM1, ELOA,
APEX1, PQBP1, MPHOSPH8, GPKOW, FUS, PSIP1, MAD1L1,
SERPINB1, CASP1, FGR, FMNL1, NFKBIE, ILKAP, EGLN1,
SRP14, ZBTB17, EZR, DPY30, CLTA, MAPK9, OGFR, PLIN3,
LPCAT2, IL16, S100A11, LSP1, JUN, POLR2F

GSE42021_CD24HI_VS_CD24LOW_TCONV_THYMUS_DN
GSE22886_NAIVE_TCELL_VS_MONOCYTE_DN
GSE24634_TREG_VS_TCONV_POST_DAY10_IL4_CONVERSION_DN
GSE16755_CTRL_VS_IFNA_TREATED_MAC_DN

ENTPD2, ALDH3A1, INFGR2, EPO, NPTX1, LEPR, OSMR,
ALCAM, IL6ST, NRCAM, ANGPT2, SPINT1, SDC1, FLT1, LIFR,
GDF15, PCDH1, CRIM1, FGF19, ACTN4, PCOLCE, PTPRS, REG4,
LGALS4, FABP2, RBP2, FGF21, TFF3, SPINK1, PRSS8, CXADR,
IL4R, NPPB, NTproBNP, TIMP4, IGFBP2, TNC
IL10, S100A16, IL17A, IL1B, CSF3, LIF

GSE22886_NAIVE_CD8_TCELL_VS_MONOCYTE_DN
GSE360_HIGH_DOSE_B_MALAYI_VS_M_TUBERCULOSIS_DC_DN

ARG1, LXN, TGM2, PKLR, CA2, BLVRB, PRDX6, PRDX1, LHPP,
PPCDC, PSME2, PSME1, TPMT, ATP6VID, CCT5, RABGAP1L,
CHAC2, STK11, ANKRD54, TBC1D17, PSMG3, AK1, DNPH1,
PSMD9, NSFL1C, EIF4EBP1, FHIT, SOD1, GLRX, PDCD5, PEBP1,
ABHD14B, PIK3AP1, GLO1, CPPED1, S100A4, MIF, PARK7, GLOD4,
AKR1B1, DCTN2, SCRN1, SF3B4, HDGF, QDPR, NUDT5, HSPA1A,
FKBP4, DFFA, SLC16A1, ARHGAP1, RAD23B, MAEA, NUDT2, BAG6,
CASP8, LACTB2, METAP2, SIRT2, STAMBP, CIAPIN1, RWDD1,
ENO2, VTA1, EIF4B, APRT, CRADD, HGS, DNAJB1, PLPBP, STIP1

GSE24634_TREG_VS_TCONV_POST_DAY7_IL4_CONVERSION_DN
GSE360_DC_VS_MAC_L_DONOVANI_UP

Count

400
600

GSE26343_UNSTIM_VS_LPS_STIM_NFAT5_KO_MACROPHAGE_DN
GSE46606_IRF4_KO_VS_WT_CD40L_IL2_IL5_3DAY_STIMULATED_BCELL_UP

NOS3, CXCL13, GP2, MMP3, PROK1, PTX3, MATN3, PADI4, S100P,
OLR1, MMP9, OSM, MMP8, CST7, S100A12, PRTN3, AZU1, RNASE3,
IL1R2, VNN2, FCAR, CA4, TGFA, RETN, CLEC5A, CLEC4D, CEACAM8,
PGLYRP1, LCN2, FOSB, HMOX1, VAT1, CD177, SLAMF7, IL5RA, IL1RN,
IL15, STC1, CCL20, VWF, PLAT, IL1RL1, HGF, TNFRSF11B, CTSL, CALCA,
TNFRSF10A, REN, TNNI3, IDI2, ANXA5, CALB2, PLIN1, PLA2G1B,
PHOSPHO1, NOS1, MB, HSPB6, CSTB, FABP5, LGALS1, ATOX1, DBI,
DCN, PRELP, CHRDL1, EDA2R, SCGB1A1, FABP4, SNCG, CD300LG,
ACTA2, SPINK4, CHGB, SCG2, SPARCL1, FGF23, LAIR2, AGRN, CD79B,
CD38, WFDC2, TNFRSF12A, FSTL3, ULBP2, NECTIN2, LTBR, EPHA2, IFNGR1,
NECTIN4, EFNA1, CD59, SCARB2, TNFRSF11A, TNFRSF14, TNFRSF1A, LAYN,
NPDC1, ACVRL1, RELT, COL6A3, IGFBP4, TNFRSF8, CD70, CXCL9, CCL23,
TNFRSF13B, MZB1, MSLN, ITGB6, AREG, F3, TACSTD2, CCDC80, CGREF1,
IGFBPL1, TXNDC5, CRELD2, CD300C, HAVCR2, TNFRSF1B, CHI3L1, SIGLEC10,
TNFRSF6B, WISP1, TIMP1, SPON2, VSIG4, TNFRSF10B, PLAUR, SUSD2,
CEACAM5, LRPAP1, LRP1, CCN1, BAG3, ENAH, ADGRG1, MSR1, MILR1,
MUC13, ANPTL7, MYOC, NOTCH3, LGALS3, NCS1, CA3, MMP10, CD276,
CX3CL1, DSG2, CA12, ITM2A, PDGFRA, VCAN, SPP1, SMOC1, IGFBP1,
ANGPTLA4, CTSB, THBS2, LTBP2, BCAM, LILRA5, TNFSF13, RNASET2,
IL18BP, CD74, SEMA3F, AGRP, CD300E, GPR37, ADM, NUCB2, MCFD2,
LILRB4, BTN3A2, ASGR1

800

GSE7509_UNSTIM_VS_IFNA_STIM_IMMATURE_DC_DN
GSE360_CTRL_VS_M_TUBERCULOSIS_DC_DN

p.adjust

GSE7218_IGM_VS_IGG_SIGNAL_THGOUGH_ANTIGEN_BCELL_DN
GSE9601_NFKB_INHIBITOR_VS_PI3K_INHIBITOR_TREATED_HCMV_INF_MONOCYTE_DN

2e−07

GSE22140_GERMFREE_VS_SPF_MOUSE_CD4_TCELL_DN

4e−07

GSE42021_TCONV_PLN_VS_TREG_PRECURSORS_THYMUS_DN

6e−07

GSE2405_S_AUREUS_VS_A_PHAGOCYTOPHILUM_NEUTROPHIL_UP
GSE35543_IN_VIVO_NTREG_VS_CONVERTED_EX_ITREG_DN

10

15

20

GeneRatio

25

Extended Data Figure 9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

VCAN

NPX

COMP

Assay

F7

9

CXCL8 / IL8

IL6

8

4.0

7

3.5

6

3.0

5

UXS1

2.5

4

CRHBP

IL1RL1

CXCL10

GP6

8

4.0

p-value

3.5
NPX

PRL

0.04
0.03

7

3.0

0.02

LAIR2

2.5

0.01

−1.0

−0.5

0.0

6

2.0

0.5

NPX difference (on day 3)
(Acuity level A1 − Acuity level A2)

4.5

C

CELA3A

CTRC

CCL8
1.00

+

0.75

+

0.50

0.50

0.25

0.25

0.00

p = 0.0008 0.00

0

25 50 75
Time (days)

100

Survival probability

0.75

25 50 75
Time (days)

0.50

0.25

0.25

0

25 50 75
Time (days)

100

+

25 50 75
Time (days)

100

Predicting severe COVID-19: 100 replications
Feature

1.00

Sensitivity

0.75
0.50

AUC: 0.85
(CI: 0.81-0.86)

0.25
Data

0.00
0.00

0.25

Original

0.50

Permuted

0.75

1-specificity

1.00

5.0
4.5

3.0

E

CPA2

5.5

3.5

p < 0.0001

0

100

6.0

4.0

+

p = 0.0009 0.00

0.00

3.5

2.5

0.75

+

0.50

D

p = 0.14

1.00

+

3.0

4.5

IL1RL1

1.00

4.0

FETUB

0

CXCL10

3.5

+

0.75

+

NPX

Survival probability

1.00

NPX

Low expression
High expression

A1
A2
A3
A4
A5

4.5

4.0

CCL7

Acuitymax
within 28 days

1.5

4.0

0

3
Day

7

0

3
Day

7

KRT19_OID20596
IL6_OID20101
IL6_OID20911
IL1RL1_OID20250
IL6_OID20563
IL6_OID21276
TRIAP1_OID21403
CHI3L1_OID20399
PTX3_OID20570
DDAH1_OID21299
IL1RN_OID20700
EPS8L2_OID21397
TNFRSF11B_OID20735
NDRG1_OID20792
MAPK9_OID20557
AGR2_OID20896
EZR_OID21017
AGER_OID20756
MMP8_OID21019
KDR_OID21497
FASLG_OID20665
ADGRG1_OID21294
IGFBP1_OID20246
SEMA4D_OID21020
DNER_OID20712
SETMAR_OID20948
F7_OID20372
IFNL1_OID20795
LTBP2_OID20254
FETUB_OID20404
S100P_OID20103
F3_OID21440
PROC_OID20402
PLA2G2A_OID20274
APLP1_OID20164
CLTA_OID20118
ANGPTL1_OID20211
CLEC4C_OID20547
OMG_OID21352
MYOC_OID21121
LTA_OID20586
KRT18_OID21296
CCL17_OID20745
TCL1B_OID20058
CD200R1_OID20595
S100A12_OID21374
OSM_OID20574
MUC13_OID20866
EPO_OID20522
ENTPD6_OID20100
BCAN_OID20998
TNFSF12_OID20624
CDHR5_OID20193
CLUL1_OID20198
CRHBP_OID20747
APOM_OID20374
CXCL10_OID20697
MATN3_OID20979
PXN_OID20822
IKZF2_OID21213
CTSV_OID21405
PRDX1_OID20962
CD34_OID21025
IL15_OID20562
NTproBNP_OID20125
CR2_OID20393
CEACAM5_OID21171
SCGB3A2_OID20723
NCAN_OID21055
CCL22_OID20765
NADK_OID20178
OSCAR_OID20776
FABP2_OID20200
BLMH_OID20336
POLR2F_OID21283
RETN_OID20327
ADM_OID21467
TACSTD2_OID21447
SDC1_OID20169
PTS_OID20847
CTSF_OID21500
HPGDS_OID21266
CCL7_OID20523
Immuno.comprimised1
LSP1_OID20530
KLRD1_OID20632
WISP1_OID21444
SLAMF6_OID21254
UMOD_OID20237
age.decile[50,60)
RBP2_OID21365
ST3GAL1_OID21322
SERPINB8_OID20630
WFIKKN1_OID20939
NPPB_OID20049
AMN_OID20492
FCRL1_OID20172
SEMA4C_OID21329
CD1C_OID21483
ENO1_OID21037
IL6R_OID20385
ANGPTL7_OID21412
GBP2_OID20489
INPP1_OID21345
BANK1_OID20594
PROK1_OID20543
ITGA6_OID20528
DFFA_OID20620
TNNI3_OID20050
SELPLG_OID20560
PCSK9_OID20235
ANG_OID20403
CXCL8_OID20153
GUSB_OID20296
CXCL8_OID20997
SFTPA2_OID21218
PPP1R9B_OID20643
age.decile[60,70)
NMNAT1_OID20913
NPM1_OID20961
PLIN3_OID20143
FLT1_OID21301
ANGPT2_OID21463
ACTA2_OID20079
CLEC5A_OID20165
ENPP5_OID20736
GP2_OID20090
AREG_OID21357
LBR_OID21034
SF3B4_OID21278
ACE2_OID20105
IFNG_OID20495
LAIR2_OID20965
TMSB10_OID21118
TIE1_OID20303
MPIG6B_OID20779
CDKN2D_OID21295
DCTN2_OID21334
PEBP1_OID21087
TYRO3_OID20161
PAMR1_OID21153
ALDH3A1_OID20512
PPM1A_OID21184
CXCL8_OID20631
BAG3_OID20972
CSF3_OID20491
IGFBP3_OID20398
FABP1_OID20778
COL4A1_OID20208
AMBN_OID20437
CAPG_OID21431
CXCL8_OID21430
SCGN_OID20457
TINAGL1_OID20180
GRK5_OID20066
FOXO3_OID21271
PLA2G7_OID21105
MARCO_OID20210
MMP9_OID21103
FMNL1_OID20884
XPNPEP2_OID21508
NCLN_OID20448
FBP1_OID20227
QPCT_OID20320
LRRN1_OID20438
GGH_OID20416
PCOLCE_OID20384
FOSB_OID20791
PODXL_OID21358
MICB_MICA_OID20593
ENO2_OID21046

0.0 0

0.25

0.5 0

Selection frequency

0.75

1.00

Extended Data Figure 10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B

Louvain clusters

L3

0
3
7
E

L1

D

Non-severe
Severe

Total number of patients

0.15

0.10

0.05

30

20
10

F

Louvain cluster
on day 7

L1
L2
L3
L4
L5

20

10

0

0

Maximum severity within 28 days
Non-severe
Severe

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

Louvain cluster

Louvain cluster on day 0

Louvain cluster on day 0

Louvain cluster on day 0

MS1

Monocytes

1

Plasma cells
3

2

2

2

1

1

1

0

Lymphocytes

3

0

0

Cytotoxic lymphocytes

2

1
0

0

0

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

Louvain cluster

Louvain cluster

Louvain cluster

Louvain cluster

Louvain cluster

Cluster L1

Z-score

-1

0

0

1

Z-score

Cluster L2

-1

Cluster L3

1

Z-score

-1

0

0

1

Z-score

Cluster L4

-1

CA2
TGM2
HMBS
HAGH
HBQ1
CA1
AHSP
CLEC4C
CA6
EPCAM
CTSV
GPA33
MSTN
ITGA11
CRH
FETUB
PON3
TNFSF11
XPNPEP2
LXN
IFNG
BLVRB

NDUFS6
PMVK
COX5B
EIF4G1
SKAP2
BAX
PPP1R9B
FKBP5
PDLIM7
SULT1A1
RHOC
TMSB10
MDK
SCAMP3
SFRP1
PTN
YES1
BANK1
CNST
GRAP2
CD69

Lung

WBCs

0

0

Heart

Kidney

Liver

J

2

1

2

0
0

2

2

1

1

0

0

1
0

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

Louvain cluster

Louvain cluster

Louvain cluster

Louvain cluster

Louvain cluster

1

Louvain cluster
Z-score

Cluster L5

Neutralization level at the
time of sample collection
Neutralization level

3

4

0

0

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5
-1

1.0
0.5
0.0
L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

Louvain cluster

0

0

1

DNPH1
EIF4EBP1
UBAC1
ATG4A
CARHSP1
LXN
RBKS
PSMD9
CCL20
LHPP
CCS
AK1
CHI3L1
ARG1
CA2
TGM2
HMBS
HAGH
HBQ1
CA1
AHSP
BLVRB

COX5B
DECR1
PMVK
SNAP23
CLIP2
PPP1R9B
CXCL3
MAVS
ITGB1BP2
IKBKG
CALCOCO1
YES1
PPP1R12A
RHOC
SKAP2
SULT1A1
MGLL
ARHGEF12
CNST
GRAP2
CD69
BANK1

3
2

Exhausted lymphocytes

2

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

MGLL
COX5B
DECR1
PMVK
PPP1R9B
PDP1
SNAP23
CLIP2
PDLIM7
PPP1R12A
YES1
ITGB1BP2
LAT
IKBKG
CALCOCO1
RHOC
SKAP2
SULT1A1
BANK1
CNST
GRAP2
CD69

Average z-score

Non-severe
Severe

L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

2
Average z-score

E

L1
L2
L3
L4
L5

30

0.00

I

Severity on
day of sample

1
2
3
4
5

K
Neutralization level on day 3

Proportion of all samples

C

tSNE2
Louvain cluster
on day 3

Total number of patients

tSNE2

H

1
2
3
4
5

L2
Severity on day of sample

G

Acuitymax
within 28 days

tSNE1

tSNE1

L4

L5

Acuity level on
day of sample)

Day of sample

Proportion of all samples

A

Monocytes and DCs
pDCs
Neutrophils
Eosinophils
T cells / NK cells
B cells and plasma cells
RBCs / platlets

Neuralization on day 3 from
day 0 samples in each cluster

1.0
0.5
0.0
L1 L2 L3 L4 L5

Louvain cluster on day 0

Extended Data Figure 11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B

PBMC

Z-score

H
N ealt
on h
Ve y_
0
H Vennt_
N ealt t_00
on h
Ve y_
1
V
H ennt_
N ealt t_11
on h
Ve y_
2
H Vennt_
N ealt t_22
on h
Ve y_
3
H Vennt_
N ealt t_33
on h
Ve y_
4
H Vennt_
N ealt t_44
on h
Ve y_
5
H Vennt_
e
N alt t_55
on h
Ve y_
6
H Vennt_
N ealt t_66
on h
Ve y_
7
H Vennt_
N ealt t_77
on h
Ve y_
8
H Vennt_
N ealt t_88
on h
Ve y_
H Ve nt_9
e
N alt nt_ 9
on h 9
Ve y_
1
H Vennt_ 0
N ealt t_110
on h 0
Ve y_
1
V
H ennt_ 1
N ealt t_111
on h 1
Ve y_
1
H Vennt_ 2
e
N alt t_112
on h 2
Ve y_
1
H Vennt_ 3
N ealt t_113
on h 3
Ve y_
1
H Vennt_ 4
N ealt t_114
on h 4
Ve y_
1
H Vennt_ 5
e
N alt t_115
on h 5
Ve y_
1
H Vennt_ 6
N ealt t_116
on h 6
Ve y_
1
V
H ennt_ 7
N ealt t_117
on h 7
Ve y_
1
H Vennt_ 8
N ealt t_118
on h 8
Ve y_
1
H Vennt_ 9
N ealt t_119
on h 9
Ve y_
2
H Vennt_ 0
N ealt t_220
on h 0
Ve y_
2
H Vennt_ 1
e
t
N alt _221
on h 1
Ve y_
2
H Vennt_ 2
N ealt t_222
on h 2
Ve y_
2
H Vennt_ 3
N ealt t_223
on h 3
Ve y_
2
H Vennt_ 4
e
t
N alt _224
on h 4
Ve y_
2
H Vennt_ 5
N ealt t_225
on h 5
Ve y_
2
H Vennt_ 6
N ealt t_226
on h 6
Ve y_
2
H Vennt_ 7
N ealt t_227
on h 7
Ve y_
2
N Ve nt_ 8
on nt 2
V _2 8
Veent 8
nt _2
_2 9
9

Class-switched B cells (9)
IgA plasmablasts (29)
IgA plasmablasts (21)
IgA plasmablasts (23)
IgG plasmablasts (18)
IgG plasmablasts (16)
Neutrophil (25)
CD16 monocyte (10)
Dendritic cell (20)
CD14 monocyte (6)
CD14 monocyte (7)
CD14 monocytes (3)
CD16 monocytes (8)

Monocytes and DCs
pDCs
Neutrophils
Eosinophils

T cells / NK cells
B cells and plasma cells
RBCs / platlets

2

IL8
PTX3
CCL8
CXCL10
AREG
IL1RL1
ASAH2
PDGFRA
AMY2B
CCL2
FLT1
IL6
CCL7
CCL20
AMBP
AMY2A
CTRC
FETUB
IL12B
CPA2
IL24

G

PBMCs

Z-score

-3

0

0

3

DC

classical Monocyte

NK cell

intermediate Monocyte

Z-score

2

-2

NC_MONO

C_MONO_IFN

CDC2

IL1RL1
AREG
RARRES2
ASAH2
IL24
CCL2
CCL8
FLT1
CCL7
CXCL10
IL6
AMBP
CTRC
AMY2B
PTX3
CCL20
PDGFRA
CXCL8

PDC

0

0

IL6
CXCL10
CCL8
CTRC
PDGFRA
AMBP
AMY2B
CXCL8
CCL20
AMY2A
AREG
CCL7
CCL2
FLT1
PTX3

Cluster 6

Peripheral moncoytes

Z-score

-2

Cluster 2

Platelet

B cell, IgG

Uncategorized2

RBC

B cell, IgG+

I

Peripheral monocytes

nonclassical Monocyte

H

CD8, non EM like

AREG
PDGFRA
IL6
CXCL10
AMY2B
CTRC
FLT1
CCL8
CCL20
CCL7
CCL2
PTX3
IL8
CD4, EM like

KYNU
SCLY
PRDX1
WARS
MSR1
CTSL
PVR
NAMPT
CD300E
ST3GAL1
IL15
HGF
IGSF3
BTN3A2
DDAH1
CXCL10
CD274
LGALS1
TIMP1
TYMP
LGALS9
SHMT1
CCL23
FBP1
FMNL1
S100A4
FGR
LGALS3
PLAUR
TNFRSF10B
RBKS
HNMT
CDHR2
CCL20
DKK1
ANGPTL4
ALDH1A1
FCAR
TGFA
TNC
PTX3
ASGR1
TNFRSF1A
LTBR
BLVRB
TNFRSF10A
ACVRL1
IL4R
CCL7
CLEC4D
CLEC5A
SNCG
AGRP
VCAN
CKAP4
VWF
VNN2
FSTL3
PHOSPHO1
RBP5
IL6
LGALS4
ENAH
CASC4
PRELP
LBR
CTSB
SAMD9L
TNNI3
FLT1
ADM
HSPB6
FKBP5
CCL2
PRTN3
RETN
LCN2
TIMP4
RNASE3
IGFBP2
RRM2
FURIN
TPP1
ACTA2
SPP1
LAP3
ANGPTL7
SDC1
TNFRSF12A
CXCL9
ACY1
IL1R2
TGM2
CST7
SORD
BLMH
IL5RA
CCDC80
TNFRSF11A
SETMAR
EFNA1
TACSTD2
LHPP
VSIG4
CRIP2
OLR1
OSM
SPINK1
ALDH3A1
CA2
EZR
IL1RL1
LAYN
VWA1
SULT2A1
NDUFS6
DNPH1
EDA2R
MB
CD59
DCXR
BRK1
NUDC
CD74
PLAT
TINAGL1
ADA
IDI2
SPON2
AK1
ST6GAL1
MUC13
SCGB3A2
CHI3L1
ADGRG1
GDF15
DAG1
LTBP2
WISP1
GALNT2
NADK
SCARB2
NDRG1
CHGB
B4GALT1
WFDC2
NUCB2
EPHA2
TNFRSF11B
EPS8L2
MZB1
TXNDC5
ANGPTL1
SRP14
ANGPT2
IL18R1
THOP1
CRELD2
LXN
LILRB4
MCFD2
NPDC1
SLC39A14

Cluster 7

Cluster 5
Cluster 2
Cluster 4
Cluster 6
Cluster 7
Cluster 1
Cluster 3

classical Monocyte

intermediate Monocyte

DC

nonclassical Monocyte

RBC

Platelet

NK cell

Uncategorized1

Uncategorized2

CD8, non EM like

B cell, IgG

B cell, IgG+

CD8, EM like

CD4, EM like

CD4, non EM like

Proteins significantly increased at day 0
in severe vs. non-severe patients

0

2

CD8, EM like

S100A4
CDHR2
RSPO3
TNFRSF10A
CD59
CKAP4
FURIN
CLEC4D
VCAN
CRIP2
RRM2
MZB1
EFNA1
IL18R1
AK1
ACVRL1
DDAH1
NAMPT
PLAUR
NPDC1
RBKS
OSM
CCL20
B4GALT1
TNFRSF12A
CCL7
TINAGL1
LGALS3
CCL2
MMP10
ANGPTL4
FLT1
PTX3
OLR1
CLEC5A
FCAR
IGSF3
PVR
ACY1
ENAH
HNMT
SRP14
ALDH1A1
FMNL1
ANGPT2
SNCG
HSPB6
SCLY
LGALS4
NOS1
AGRP
IL5RA
LBP
PHOSPHO1
TNC
CHI3L1
DAG1
SLC39A14
SETMAR
PLAT
CXCL13
CEACAM8
CD177
TNFRSF10B
NUCB2
LTBR
TNFRSF1A
LBR
TXNDC5
ASGR1
VNN2
BLVRB
IL4R
GALNT2
CST7
FSTL3
NDUFS6
TGFA
TIMP4
IGFBP2
BLMH
RETN
CTSB
IL1R2
LGALS1
FKBP5
RNASE3
PRTN3
TPP1
LTBP2
MUC13
LCN2
EPS8L2
VWF
CA2
WISP1
PCSK9
LXN
ADGRG1
SDC1
TNFRSF11A
SPON2
NDRG1
HGF
SORD
BTN3A2
SCGB3A2
DCXR
NUDC
SHMT1
THOP1
LHPP
BRK1
TACSTD2
CASC4
MCFD2
CD74
CXCL9
CCDC80
ST3GAL1
TIMP1
CTSL
CD300E
EZR
GDF15
SPP1
IL15
SCARB2
CD274
EDA2R
ANGPTL1
CCL23
FBP1
ADA
CXCL10
TGM2
MSR1
WARS
DNPH1
ST6GAL1
VSIG4
IL6
ADM
KYNU
LILRB4
LGALS9
LAP3
SAMD9L
TYMP
CRELD2
NADK
ACTA2
PRDX1
FGR

0

Uncategorized1

-2

3

0

Cluster 1

0

CA2
LCN2
TIMP1
CST7
ADGRG1
SPON2
TXNDC5
SDC1
SHMT1
CD59
DCXR
NUDC
THOP1
BLMH
CRELD2
DNPH1
NPDC1
PLAT
LGALS4
IL5RA
SCLY
RBKS
CD274
AK1
SLC39A14
SETMAR
ACTA2
EPS8L2
IL18R1
ST3GAL1
BTN3A2
NUCB2
LXN
IGFBP2
VWF
TGM2
LAYN
TACSTD2
TNFRSF11A
SORD
DAG1
GDF15
CCL23
CCDC80
FLT1
CXCL9
TIMP4
CD177
CCL7
TGFA
PRTN3
CRIP2
ST6GAL1
IL4R
PHOSPHO1
MZB1
RRM2
EPHA2
ADA
PRDX1
NDUFS6
SRP14
FMNL1
BRK1
MSR1
SCGB3A2
CXCL10
HGF
IL15
KYNU
SCARB2
NADK
B4GALT1
LHPP
ANGPT2
IL6
ENAH
MCFD2
TNFRSF10A
LBR
GALNT2
CASC4
SAMD9L
FURIN
VSIG4
TNFRSF12A
IL1R2
OSM
NDRG1
TNFRSF10B
CCL20
FSTL3
PVR
CLEC5A
OLR1
ACVRL1
RNASE3
CCL2
FKBP5
ADM
PTX3
FCAR
VNN2
CLEC4D
ALDH1A1
EZR
CD74
LGALS1
S100A4
VCAN
BLVRB
TNFRSF1A
HNMT
LTBR
TPP1
CKAP4
RETN
ASGR1
CTSL
WARS
LGALS9
FBP1
LILRB4
LAP3
CD300E
CTSB
NAMPT
PLAUR
LGALS3
TYMP
FGR

PBMCs

Z-score

-2

CD4, non EM like

-3

3

0

Cluster 4

0

Cluster 3

Z-score

0

F

Cluster 5

Z-score

Peripheral monocytes
Z-score

C_MONO
C_MONO_IFN

CD16 monocyte (28)
Activated granulocyte (27)
Naive CD4 T cells (4)
Memory CD4 T cells (2)
CD4 T cells (19)
Memory CD8 T cells (1)
gd T cells (22)
NK cells (0)
NK cells (11)
Memory CD8 T cells (15)
B cells (5)
Eosinophils (24)
RBCs (14)
Platlets (17)
RBCs (12)
pDCs (26)

Cluster separated by disease severity

D Peripheral monocytes E

PBMCs

Proteins higher at day 0 in severe patients

Proteins higher on day 0 in severe patients

C
0

NDUFS6
MCFD2
CASC4
THOP1
BLMH
SHMT1
NUDC
DNPH1
GALNT2
SAMD9L
LBR
PRDX1
SLC39A14
ST6GAL1
EZR
CD59
NUCB2
RRM2
CKAP4
PRTN3
CEACAM8
TACSTD2
LCN2
RNASE3
RETN
CHI3L1
TFF3
OLR1
CLEC5A
PTX3
SPINK1
STC1
NOS1
SCLY
SULT2A1
PHOSPHO1
IL1R2
CA2
VWF
ADA
B4GALT1
EPS8L2
TNFRSF11B
EPHA2
SRP14
NDRG1
IL18R1
SORD
LXN
CCL23
MMP3
ANGPTL4
TINAGL1
EFNA1
TNNI3
IL5RA
CCDC80
ALDH3A1
MATN3
FSTL3
BRK1
LAYN
LHPP
DCXR
CXCL13
SCGB3A2
OSM
CD274
SETMAR
DDAH1
THBS2
TNFRSF10A
CRIP2
IL1RL1
SPP1
VWA1
TNC
PLA2G2A
TGFA
ACE2
TNFRSF11A
RBKS
IL15
CXCL9
GDF15
CCL2
FLT1
IL6
ACTA2
ACY1
DAG1
DCN
FABP1
MUC13
ENAH
IGFBP2
ANGPT2
AK1
WFDC2
CHGB
MB
CDHR2
FABP2
PLAT
C1QTNF1
PCSK9
WISP1
ANGPTL1
PRELP
RBP5
LGALS4
LTBP2
MYOC
DKK1
CCL7
CCL20
SNCG
FABP4
AGRP
GPR37
TIMP4
EDA2R
IGSF3
TNFRSF12A
RSPO3
ANGPTL7
ALDH1A1
TNFRSF1A
HGF
PVR
TNFRSF10B
FMNL1
FURIN
ACVRL1
HNMT
NPDC1
ST3GAL1
FKBP5
IL4R
BTN3A2
CST7
SPON2
MSR1
CTSL
TIMP1
VSIG4
CXCL10
TGM2
NADK
PLAUR
TPP1
LTBR
LGALS9
FBP1
KYNU
ASGR1
LGALS3
BLVRB
SCARB2
LILRB4
LAP3
WARS
CD74
NAMPT
IL8
ADM
FCAR
CLEC4D
VNN2
TYMP
CD300E
CTSB
VCAN
LGALS1
FGR
S100A4
TXNDC5
CRELD2
SDC1
MZB1

3

3
DNPH1
MCFD2
NDUFS6
SHMT1
THOP1
NUDC
DCXR
CASC4
BLMH
CXCL13
LBR
SAMD9L
GALNT2
B4GALT1
ADA
SLC39A14
ST6GAL1
EZR
CD59
NUCB2
CA2
VWF
PHOSPHO1
SRP14
BRK1
TNFRSF11B
EPS8L2
NDRG1
IL18R1
EPHA2
CXCL10
MATN3
ACVRL1
TGM2
FURIN
HGF
PVR
IL15
TNFRSF10B
HNMT
ASGR1
ALDH1A1
IL4R
FKBP5
TGFA
CD274
OSM
FMNL1
LXN
IL1RL1
SPP1
IL5RA
VWA1
SCGB3A2
NPDC1
CXCL9
TNFRSF11A
LAYN
SORD
FLT1
ACE2
LHPP
IL6
ANGPTL1
SULT2A1
TNNI3
LGALS4
EFNA1
LTBP2
ANGPTL4
ANGPT2
CCL20
WFDC2
THBS2
ACY1
SETMAR
DAG1
AK1
CCDC80
ALDH3A1
GDF15
CCL2
ACTA2
IGFBP2
PCSK9
SNCG
SPINK1
RBKS
SCLY
TNC
NOS1
PRELP
RBP5
DDAH1
MMP3
FABP1
ENAH
CCL23
CCL7
PLA2G2A
MYOC
WISP1
MUC13
CDHR2
EDA2R
IGSF3
DKK1
TIMP4
C1QTNF1
AGRP
DCN
FABP4
CHGB
MB
TINAGL1
STC1
PLAT
ANGPTL7
TNFRSF12A
RSPO3
FABP2
GPR37
ST3GAL1
TNFRSF10A
CRIP2
BTN3A2
CST7
SPON2
TFF3
OLR1
PRTN3
CEACAM8
TACSTD2
LCN2
PTX3
FSTL3
CLEC5A
RNASE3
RETN
CLEC4D
FCAR
IL1R2
CHI3L1
CKAP4
PRDX1
LAP3
SCARB2
LILRB4
WARS
NADK
ADM
PLAUR
TNFRSF1A
KYNU
LTBR
FBP1
TPP1
LGALS9
VSIG4
MSR1
TIMP1
CTSL
CD74
NAMPT
IL8
VNN2
LGALS3
BLVRB
CTSB
TYMP
CD300E
VCAN
LGALS1
FGR
S100A4
TXNDC5
SDC1
CRELD2
RRM2
MZB1

-3

0

PDC

0

-3

0

CDC2
NC_MONO

-3

0

PBMCs from healthy, non-vented, and vented patients

Z-score

C_MONO

A

Proteins different between
Acuitymax A1 vs. A2

0

0

2

Extended Data Figure 12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

Age-associated proteins at day 0

Age group
<65
65+

Z-score

-4

Severity
Severe
Non-severe

0

0

4

Severity
Age group
SSC4D
FETUB
MSTN
KDR
BAIAP2
GALNT7
GGT1
LAMP2
SORD
ERBB2
SCLY
EGFR
ACY1
MEGF9
ADH4
CTSF
GSTA1
CTSV
ADAMTS13
CXCL10
CCL7
TNFSF13B
IGFBP1
LTBP1
LTBP2
DKK3
ADGRG1
CHI3L1
NTproBNP
SCGB3A2
MMP12
CXCL17
IGFBP2
TNC
SPON1

B

Group 1

Group 2

Age-related
in mild

Group 3

Age-related
in severe

Group 4

Severity associated
independent of age

Expression level

Age associated
independent of severity

EFEMP1
MLN
LEFTY2
OPTC
KLK4
GFAP
ANXA10
DPT
PRELP
IL17D
NEFL
WISP2
RSPO1
CHRDL1
EDA2R
RSPO3

day0

day3
FCN2
LEFTY2
SCLY
SIT1
WISP2
WNT9A

<65,mild

day7

day0
ACVRL1
CCDC80
CD79B
CD93
CLSTN2
COL6A3
COLEC12
CST3
CTSF
EPHA2
EPHB4
FAM3C
FST
FUT3_FUT5
GAS6
GFRA1
HAVCR1
HAVCR2

<65,severe

day3

day7

IGFBP4
IL10RB
LAIR1
LCN2
LILRB4
LTBR
MB
MDK
MMP10
NECTIN2
NECTIN4
NOS1
NPDC1
OSMR
PDGFRA
PLAUR

QPCT
REG1A
REG1B
REG3A
SPON2
SPP1
TFF2
TNFRSF10B
TNFRSF11A
TNFRSF12A
TNFRSF12B
TNFRSF14
TNFRSF19
VCAM1
VSIG4
WFDC2
WISP1

65+,mild

day0

day3

APOH
ARSA
BSG
CA3
CCL23
CCL7
CCL8
CDHR2
CLPS
CPA1
CPA2
CPB1

65+,severe

day7

CST6
CTRB1
CXCL10
FAM3B
FMNL1
IL6
MEPE
PLA2G1B
PRL
PRSS2
RARRES2
SLC16A1
SLC39A14

day0
ADAMTS15
AGRP
ANGPT2
ANGPTL3
ANGPTL4
ATOX1
B4GALT1
CALB1
CALCA
CANT1
CCL15
CCL2
CCL3
CD14
CD300C
CD300LF
CD300LG
CD59
CD99
CDCP1
CDH1
CDH3
CEACAM21
CEACAM8

day3

CFC1
CLEC4D
CRLF1
CSF1
CSTB
DBI
DCTPP1
DKK1
EFNA1
EFNA4
EGLN1
ENAH
ENPP5
F2R
FGF23
FKBP4
FLT1
FURIN
GALNT2
GBP2
GNLY
GRN

day7

HDGF
HMOX2
HSPG2
HTRA2
HYOU1
IFNGR2
IGF1R
IGFBPL1
IL1RL2
INPP1
LBP
MIF
MZB1
NADK
PGLYRP1
PLA2G2A
PON3
PTX3
PXN
RASSF2
RCOR1
RELT
REN

RNASE3
RTN4R
SDC1
SEMA4C
SERPINE1
SF3B4
SIGLEC10
SLC39A14
SPINK1
SPINK6
SPINT2
STK11
TIMD4
TINAGL1
TNFRSF10A
TNFRSF13B
TNFSF13B
TNNI3
VEGFA
VMO1
VWA1

Extended Data Figure 13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Sensitivity

A

Prediction of age group by day 0
plasma proteins using Lasso

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25

AUC = 0.93
(CI 0.91-0.95)

0.00
0

C

B

GFAP
MEGF9
ADAMTS13
HS6ST1
GSTP1
PPM1A
PODXL2
ADGRG1
FLT3
TNR
OPTC
KDR
LEFTY2
LRRN1
FABP9
MLN
EDA2R
NTF4
SMPD1
SIAE

Olink panel
CARDIOMETABOLIC
INFLAMMATION
NEUROLOGY
ONCOLOGY

0

0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00

25

1-specificity

Severity
Non-severe
Severe

Age Group
<65
65+

Z-score

-6

0

0

6

Age proteins independent of severity

50

75

D

Severity
Non-severe
Severe

Z-score

<65
65+

-6

Age proteins overlapping with severity

PPM1A
FLT3
DUSP3
IL2RB
MSTN
ENPP5
LRRN1
TCL1A
GZMA
GALANT7
GGT1
WFIKKN1
EGFR
MEGF9
LAMP2
KDR
ADAMTS13
CA14
CD207
FABP9
TNR
FCGR3B
CDH5
C R TAC1
SCGN
NTF4
CHIT1
MSLN
NPPB
IGFBP1
MLN
OPTC
LEFTY2
IGFBP6
NBL1
FAM3C
OGN
CCN3
GUCA2A
COLEC12
HSPG2
COL6A3
PIK3IP1
IGFBP4
RE LT
CD27
PTGDS
NECTIN4
FAS
SPON1
SCARF2
DTX3
MMP7
MMP12
G FAP
KLK4
CHRDL1
SMOC2
WISP2
WNT9A
NEFL
DPT
IL17D
PLA2G10
ANXA10
GSTP1
K R T5
INHBC
ACAN
HS6ST1
PODXL2
SMPD1
SIAE
CTSD

Sensitivity

Prediction of age group by day 3
plasma protein using Lasso
1.00

0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

G

AUC = 0.90
(CI 0.88-0.92)
0

0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00

Sensitivity

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

AUC = 0.86
(CI 0.82-0.90)
0

0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00

1-specificity

0

6

FETUB
CEACAM1
ADGRG1
TNC
CHI3L1
CCDC80
NTproBNP
E DA2R
RSPO3
WFDC2
TNFRSF12A
CD59
NPDC1
ACVRL1
LAYN
HSPB6
PRELP

F

EGFR
MEGF9
GFAP
RANGAP1
MLN
MSTN
NTRK3
CD33
ACAN
IL2
WISP2
GALNT7
KLK4
FOSB
CST6
MFGE8
SEPTIN9
ITGAM
DSG4
ALDH1A1

Olink panel
CARDIOMETABOLIC
INFLAMMATION
NEUROLOGY
ONCOLOGY

0

1-specificity

Prediction of age group by day 7
plasma protein using Lasso

0

Severity
Age

Severity
Age

E

100

Selection frequency

25

50

75

Selection frequency

H

MEGF9
LEFTY2
IL20
TNFSF11
NTF3
GALNT7
SLC16A1
CD33
F3
IL12A_IL12B
KDR
HK2
EGFR
TNNI3
SIGLEC15
SLAMF1
ADGRG1
CXCL1
CD276
ACAN

Olink panel
CARDIOMETABOLIC
INFLAMMATION
NEUROLOGY
ONCOLOGY

0

25

50

75

Selection frequency

100

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Extended Data Figure 14

A

B

BAL fluid

K

A
T

T

K

riv
riv

M ofibrobl

i l
l r n o

5

Z-score

-5

0

0

5

Alv

0

0

V

Eff

-5

v

Alv

T
A

A
Alv

Z-score

o

riv

Tr

Gob

T

A

C

D

Heart

Kidney

A
MY

X

b

-5

0

0

A

T

A

Z-score

-5

5

0

r

r

V

V

r

r

b

b

r

Z-score

MA

A

F

Liver

INS
AMY2B
IL22RA1
IL32
GATM
REG3A
ERP27
AKR7A3
SPINK1
PRSS3
REG1A
REG3G
AMY2A
GNMT
CELA2A
PRSS2
PNLIP
PRSS1
CELA3B
CLPS
SERPINI2
CTRB1
PNLIPRP2
CUZD1
CTRL
CTRB2
CPA2
PLA2G1B
CTRC
CPB1
REG1B
PNLIPRP1
DPEP1
TMEM52
ANPEP
GCG
SST

T

ANG

HA

Z-score

-5

0

0

5

pericyte
gamma
stellate
t_cell
endothelial
alpha
schwann
beta
mast
macrophage
epsilon
delta
ductal
acinar

E

0

5

Extended Data Figure 15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

Brain (32 proteins)

Colon (13 proteins)
2 Day 0 Day 3 Day 7

Mean Z-score

p < 0.001

NS

1.0

NS

1

0

Day 0
NS

Day 3
NS

NS

1

0.0

0

TMPRSS2

AT2

Goblet cells

S100A14
HOPX
NNMT
NFATC4
FAM189A2
NEDD9
PTGS2
TP53I3
PPA1
KIF1C
TXNRD1
RPL12
UCHL1
PRDX4
S100A10

GSTA1
S100A14
FATE1
CHST4
SULT2B1
UBD
GDA
SHISA2
MB
CAMK1D
PTK6
YBX2
NFATC4
BCCIP
SSRP1

Club cells
S100A14
SULT2B1
GDA
GBP6
TMPRSS11A
ANXA8
LEMD1
NR1D1
PTK6
SHISA2
CHST4
IL22RA1
TXNRD1
GSTA1
ANXA8L1

Day 3
NS

Day 7

−1

Non-severe

ACE2

0
2 Day
p < 0.001

0.5

−0.5

−1

B

Skin (7 proteins)

Day 7

Cilliated cells
GSTA1
GBP6
KIF3A
MYCT1
TNNT3
IK
GDA
FABP6
HSPH1
DPY30
MB
ELK3
ANXA8L1
CYB5R2
IL22RA1

Severe

Ionocytes

Epithelial
progenitors

RBP1
ANXA8L1
SULT1C2
COLGALT2
LDHB
TP53I3
ZNF10
CBX5
NRIP3
ACY1
ZNF566
DIDO1
IK
FAM162A
SULT2B1

NR1D1
FABP6
TNFRSF10D
ZNF10
TSNARE1
KMT5C
LONP1
ARMC5
HRK
DNAJB2
TSSC4
YBX2
RBM39
ANXA8
LGALS4

Common
(> 3 cell types)
RBFOX2
MST1R
RAB17
EZR
PRKCZ
EVPL
GALNT3
FUT3
ENTPD3
ALDH1A1
CYB5A
LAYN
CHST6
SYT17
CYB5R1

NS

Extended Data Figure 16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

C

0

200

GFR

GFR

400

Day
0

Kidney disease

0

7

0
0

0.0

0

0

2

Mean Z score
Soma Kidney Signature

Mean Z score
Soma Heart Signature

D

0

2

Mean Z score
Soma Kidney Signature

E

F
800

800

600

Day

400

0

AST

ALT

600

Day

Day

0

0

400

7

7

7

200
200

0

0
0

0

Mean Z score
Soma Liver Signature

2

0

Mean Z score
Soma Liver Signature

G

2

0

Mean Z score
Soma Liver Signature

H

2

I

0

CPK

Day

AST / ALT

20

6000

Day

Day

0

7

0

7

7

0

0

0.0

0

Mean Z score
Soma Liver Signature

2

0

Mean Z score
Soma Sceletal Muscle Signature

2

0

2

Mean Z score
Soma Sceletal Muscle Signature

Extended Data Figure 17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

Pathways enriched among secreted plasma
proteins elevated in severe patients at day 0

NF-kB signaling
NK cell signaling
IL-6 signaling
Th1 and Th2 activation
Granulocyte adhesion / diapedesis
IL-10 signaling
Immune cell communication
LXR/RXR activation
DC and NK cell cross-talk
p38 MAPK signaling
Glucocorticoid receptor signaling
Viral and bacterial patter recognition
STAT3 pathway
HMGB1 Signaling
Hepatic cholestasis
Cardiac hypertrophy signaling
COPD pathology

0

B

5

10

-log(p-value )

15

Heart (6 proteins)

Mean Z-score

1

0

Lung (6 proteins)
1

Mean Z-score

MB
PLA2G2A
NPPB
BMP10
NPPA
MYZAP

2

0

SFTA2
FCN3
SFTPD
SFTPB
AGER
SCGB3A1

−1

−2
−1

day 0

day 3

day 7

day 0

1

0

day 7

Liver (79 proteins)
SMIM24
GDF15
PDZK1
CLCNKB
PTH1R
UMOD
SPP1
WFDC2

Mean Z-score

Mean Z-score

Kidney (9 proteins)

day 3

0

−1

−2

−1

1.5

day 3

day 7

Colon (12 proteins)

Mean Z-score

1.0

0.5

0.0

−0.5

−1.0

day 0

day 3

day 0

TNC
ITGA5
PSD
DES
CLCA1
ZG16
LGALS4
TFF3
AGR2
FAM3D

day 7

1

0

day 0

day 7

Severity
Non-severe
Severe

day 3

Pancreas (33 proteins)

Mean Z-score

day 0

day 3

ALB
HP
SAA1
APOC3
FGG
APOA1
SERPINA1
CRP
APOA2
RBP4

day 7

PRSS2
PRSS1
REG1A
CLPS
PNLIP
CTRB2
PLA2G1B
CTRB1
CPB1
REG1B

Extended Data Figure 18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

Z-score

Lung tissue

-5

0

0

5

Plasma cell
pDC
B cell
Mast cell
NK cell
CD8+ T cell
Treg
CD4 T cell
NKT cell
Monoctye
CD16+ monocyte
cDC
Neutrophil
Pericyte
Smooth muscle cell
Myofibroblast
Neuroendocrine
Ionocyte
Mesothelial
Fibroblast
Ciliated
Club
Goblet
Basal
Squamous
AT1
AT2
Lymphatic endothelial
Vascular endothelial
Macrophage
Z-score

Heart tissue

-5

0

0

5

Intracellular severity-associated proteins at day 0

CTSC
THBS2
LDLR
SLC39A14
OSMR
CEACAM8
CA12
LRIG1
SHMT1
HNMT
LRP1
IL18R1
BTN3A2
LILRB4
TNFRSF11A
CD300E
FMNL1
FGR
HAVCR2
BLVRB
TYMP
ALDH1A1
WARS
NOS3
CD74
TNFRSF10B
NDRG1
CTSL
NADK
RBP5
LXN
PDGFRA
GALNT10
ADA
TGM2
TNFRSF12A
NDUFS6
AK1
SRP14
CRIP2
LAP3
SAMD9L
ACVRL1
TNFRSF14
LTBR
PLXNB2
ACP5
FBP1
VNN2
TPP1
SNCG
EPHA2
HGF
EZR
S100A4
PRDX1
TNFRSF10A
NPDC1
PCDH1
BCAM
LAYN
IFNGR1
CASC4
GPR37
DCXR
TACSTD2
PHOSPHO1
EDA2R
SUSD2
SORD
CDHR2
IL5RA
RRM2
CLEC5A
CLEC4D
TXNDC5
FABP1
CRELD2
ALDH3A1
PKLR
BRK1
CA2
IDI2
ACY1
SCLY
SULT2A1
IGSF3
EPS8L2
GUSB
SEMA4C
LBR
BLMH
LTA4H
LGALS4
NUDC
TBC1D17
SETMAR
MCFD2
TXNDC15
SCARB2
FABP2
DNPH1
LRPAP1
THOP1
CKAP4
LHPP
RBKS
RBP2
ITGB6
CD274
NOS1
ENAH
ACTN4
DDAH1
NOTCH3
FABP4
MSR1
KYNU
VSIG4
FKBP5
ACTA2
MB
TNNI3
CDH2

Adipocyte

Macrophage

Fibroblast III

Endothelium II

Pericyte

Endothelium I

Neuronal

Fibroblast I

Fibroblast II

Lymphocyte

Vascular Smooth Muscle

Cytoplasmic Cardiomyocyte I

Ventricular Cardiomyocyte I

Cytoplasmic Cardiomyocyte II

Ventricular Cardiomyocyte II

Atrial Cardiomyocyte

TMPRSS2
ACE2
Ventricular Cardiomyocyte III

B

Intracellular severity-associated proteins at day 0

WARS
SCLY
TBC1D17
BLMH
SETMAR
EDA2R
ACY1
BTN3A2
GALNT10
IL5RA
RBKS
IL18R1
CD274
CDH2
MB
HGF
NOS3
THOP1
TXNDC5
TXNDC15
CRELD2
RRM2
SRP14
NDUFS6
TNFRSF10A
LHPP
EZR
LGALS4
SHMT1
DCXR
CA2
LBR
SAMD9L
FMNL1
TNFRSF14
S100A4
NADK
CLEC4D
VNN2
ADA
FKBP5
BRK1
HAVCR2
GUSB
CTSC
CLEC5A
TPP1
LILRB4
LAP3
CD74
SNCG
LAYN
NDRG1
TNFRSF11A
ACTA2
NOTCH3
SEMA4C
NPDC1
CRIP2
TGM2
ACVRL1
IFNGR1
PDGFRA
LXN
ENAH
SLC39A14
CA12
MCFD2
CKAP4
TNFRSF12A
OSMR
CASC4
SORD
ALDH1A1
DNPH1
NUDC
LRIG1
PCDH1
ACTN4
PLXNB2
EPHA2
TACSTD2
ALDH3A1
PRDX1
EPS8L2
CEACAM8
LDLR
LTBR
BCAM
IGSF3
SUSD2
ITGB6
AK1
DDAH1
CD300E
FGR
TYMP
KYNU
TNFRSF10B
HNMT
BLVRB
LTA4H
SCARB2
LRP1
CTSL
LRPAP1
FABP4
MSR1
FBP1
VSIG4
ACP5

Extended Data Figure 19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

Z-score

Kidney tissue

-5

0

0

5

Z-score

-5

0

0

5

T cell
Mast cell
Macrophage
Schwann cell
Endothelial cell
Pericyte
Stellate cell
Epsilon cell
Gamma cell
Alpha cell
Delta cell
Beta cell
Acinar cell
Ductal cell

Fibroblast

Endothelial cell, peritubular

Endothelial cell

Glomerular capillary endothelial

Podocyte

Partial epithelial cell/Loop ofHenle

Principal cell

Descending thin limb cell

Ascending thin limb

Cprtical connecting tubule principal

Thick ascending limb

Connecting tubule

Intercalated alpha cell

Transitioning principal/intercalted

Intercalated beta cell

Distal convoluted tubule

Proximal tubule 5

Proximal tubule 1

Vascular smooth muscle

Proximal tubule 6

Proximal tubule 4

Proximal tubule 2

Monocyte

Proximal tubule 7

B cell

Macrophage

NK cell

Memory T cell

Proximal tubule 3

-5

0

0

5

MB

CA12
TNFRSF10A
TNFRSF11A
FABP4
CLEC5A
CLEC4D
ENAH
ACTN4
EPHA2
LTBR
ACVRL1
NOS1
NDRG1
NOTCH3
SUSD2
SRP14
TXNDC5
CRELD2
CKAP4
TXNDC15
IL5RA
LRPAP1
EZR
GALNT10
TNFRSF14
VNN2
SAMD9L
ADA
TYMP
LTA4H
CD300E
PHOSPHO1
LBR
AK1
BRK1
RBKS
LAP3
KYNU
BCAM
THOP1
MCFD2
DDAH1
EPS8L2
PLXNB2
NADK
GUSB
LHPP
ACY1
GPR37
PKLR
TNFRSF10B
CASC4
PCDH1
CDHR2
LRIG1
S100A4
HAVCR2
CTSC
BTN3A2
FMNL1
FGR
MSR1
VSIG4
SCARB2
HNMT
FKBP5
LILRB4
TPP1
IFNGR1
CA2
BLVRB
SORD
SHMT1
SLC39A14
LRP1
CDH2
LDLR
PRDX1
DNPH1
NDUFS6
ALDH1A1
FBP1
NUDC
RBP5
FABP1
DCXR
SULT2A1

Stellate cells

Hepatocytes 4

Hepatocytes 2

Hepatocytes 5

Hepatocytes 1

Hepatocytes 3

Erythroid cells

Hepatocytes 6

Cholangiocytes

Portal endothelial cells

Periportal LSECs

Central venous LSECs

Kupfer cells 2

Kupfer cells 1

Ab-secreting B cells

Mature B cells

gd T cells 2

NK-like cells

TMPRSS2
ACE2

Intracellular severity-associated proteins at day 0

THBS2
ACTA2
HGF
PDGFRA
TACSTD2
TNFRSF12A
LGALS4
CRIP2
SNCG
NPDC1
LXN
TGM2
ACP5
CTSL
CD74
RRM2
NOS3
OSMR
WARS
IGSF3
EDA2R
TNNI3
LAYN
BLMH
SEMA4C
CD274
IL18R1
TBC1D17
SCLY
ITGB6
SETMAR
ALDH3A1

gd T cells 1

TMPRSS2
ACE2

Z-score

Liver tissue

ab T cells

C

Cytotoxic T cell

Activated T cell

TMPRSS2
ACE2

Intracellular severity-associated proteins at day 0

BRK1
NDUFS6
NUDC
TBC1D17
PLXNB2
GUSB
AK1
ACY1
MB
IDI2
EZR
GPR37
CDHR2
DDAH1
TNFRSF12A
TNFRSF10A
TNFRSF10B
ACTN4
IGSF3
EPHA2
TACSTD2
ITGB6
CEACAM8
LGALS4
LDLR
SORD
FBP1
RBP2
CA12
THOP1
EPS8L2
BLMH
LHPP
SRP14
ENAH
NDRG1
GALNT10
DNPH1
SLC39A14
SCLY
CASC4
SCARB2
CRELD2
MCFD2
BLVRB
LTBR
TXNDC15
TNFRSF11A
IL18R1
IL5RA
CD274
RBKS
FKBP5
ALDH1A1
PKLR
NPDC1
BCAM
S100A4
TNFRSF14
BTN3A2
HNMT
VNN2
CA2
LRPAP1
NADK
IFNGR1
LTA4H
KYNU
LILRB4
MSR1
VSIG4
FGR
CLEC5A
CD74
ACP5
FMNL1
TYMP
CTSL
TPP1
DCXR
HAVCR2
SAMD9L
SHMT1
LAYN
CDH2
PCDH1
LBR
CRIP2
NOS3
RBP5
ACVRL1
SETMAR
FABP4
HGF
LXN
SNCG
LAP3
ADA
EDA2R
RRM2
CTSC
LRP1
WARS
TGM2
NOTCH3
ACTA2
SUSD2
THBS2
PDGFRA
CKAP4
SEMA4C
OSMR
PRDX1
TXNDC5
LRIG1

Intracellular severity-associated proteins at day 0

LXN
TBC1D17
LRIG1
CRELD2
TXNDC15
HGF
GUSB
NADK
CLEC4D
VNN2
TPP1
SAMD9L
TNFRSF14
IL18R1
EPHA2
CASC4
GALNT10
LDLR
LBR
SLC39A14
LAYN
ENAH
FABP4
LTBR
CD274
SEMA4C
NUDC
GPR37
SETMAR
MB
SCLY
TNNI3
THOP1
TXNDC5
EDA2R
LGALS4
ALDH3A1
BLMH
SULT2A1
FABP2
RRM2
TNFRSF11A
TNFRSF10B
PHOSPHO1
TNFRSF10A
RBP2
NOS1
PCDH1
IGSF3
KYNU
BRK1
LAP3
SUSD2
CDHR2
LHPP
RBKS
PKLR
CDH2
CTSC
OSMR
NOS3
WARS
FMNL1
ADA
BTN3A2
FKBP5
CLEC5A
MSR1
LILRB4
IFNGR1
HAVCR2
VSIG4
S100A4
TYMP
FGR
LTA4H
CD300E
CD74
BCAM
ACTN4
TNFRSF12A
TACSTD2
PLXNB2
EPS8L2
EZR
ITGB6
NPDC1
ACVRL1
TGM2
CRIP2
ACTA2
NOTCH3
SNCG
THBS2
PDGFRA
LRP1
NDRG1
CA2
CKAP4
LRPAP1
SCARB2
MCFD2
CTSL
AK1
SRP14
ALDH1A1
NDUFS6
BLVRB
DDAH1
PRDX1
ACP5
HNMT
ACY1
SHMT1
SORD
DNPH1
DCXR
RBP5
FBP1
FABP1
CA12

Pancreatic tissue

Extended Data Figure 20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

TPSAB1

NPX

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5
0

3

7

day
Acuitymax
in 28 days

1

2

3

4

5

Extended Data Figure 21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365536; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ligand-receptor interactions on day 0 (BAL)
ligands

receptors

Effector CD8+ T cells
Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells
CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)
NK cells
Tregs
CD4+ T cells
Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
Mast cells
Tfh
B cells
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
DC
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Alveolar Macrophages
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
rived mac (IL1Bhi)
rived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
rived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Monocytes I
Monocytes II
Neutrophils
Ciliated cells
Goblet cells
Ionocytes
Epithelial progenitors
Alveolar type 2
Club cells

DKK1
LIF
TNC
GDF15
SPINT1
TGFA
CX3CL1
SEMA4C
TNFRSF14
CCL20
CSF1
OSM
SEMA4D
CEACAM1
FASLG
CXCL13
CD74
TNFSF13
PVR
LTBR
HGF
CCL17
IL6
IL15
LGALS9
LRPAP1
RSPO3
TNFSF12
CXCL8
CD274
NAMPT
CXCL9
CXCL10
SPP1
TIMP1
CCL7
CCL2

Native lung cells
Monocytes / macrophages
Dendritic cells
Neutrophils
Eosinophils
T cells / NK cells
B cells and plasma cells
Mast cells

Ligand-receptor interactions on day 3 (BAL)

Club cells

Ciliated cells

Alveolar type 2

Epithelial progenitors

Tfh

Ionocytes

Goblet cells

Tregs

CD4+ T cells

Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells

Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)

NK cells

Effector CD8+ T cells

CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)

DC

Mast cells

Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)

Monocytes I

Monocytes II

rived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)

rived mac (IL1Bhi)

B cells and plasma cells
Mast cells

Monocytes (IFNAhi)

Eosinophils
T cells / NK cells

rived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)

Neutrophils

Alveolar Macrophages

Monocytes / macrophages
Dendritic cells

LAG3
CD96
CXCR6
ITGA4
CXCR3
IL2RB
CD226
IL18RAP
CD244
ITGA1
TIGIT
IL2RA
S1PR1
IL7R
DPP4
PDCD1
CD70
BTLA
IL18R1
CXCR5
TNFRSF13B
CCR6
CCR7
TNFRSF21
LIFR
SDC4
ST14
PLXNB2
FZD6
IL20RA
ACKR4
FGFR2
IL20RB
ITGB8
PTPRZ1
BMPR1B
PTPRS
ACVR2A
ACVR2B
ZNRF3
LRP5
BMPR1A
IL6ST
RET
NOTCH3
KDR
IL22RA1
LGR4
INSR
PLXNA1
FZD8
PLXNA3
IL17RE
ACVR1
ACVR1B
ITGAV
NRP2
KREMEN1
PVRIG
CCR2
IL2RG
CCR5
TNFRSF14
TNFRSF1B
TNFSF14
CXCR1
CXCR2
CXCR4
TRAF2
TGFBR2
TNFRSF17
ITGB1
SORL1
CX3CR1
KREMEN2
NOTCH4
ALK
CCR3
ITGB3
ITGA9
NOTCH1
ACKR3
NOTCH2
BMPR2
TGFBR1
XCR1
FZD2
SELPLG
CD4
HAVCR2
CCR1
CD40
SORT1
NRP1
ACVRL1
CD47
PLXNC1
IL6R
IL15RA
IL17RA
PRLR
FLT1
TNFRSF1A
ITGA5
CSF1R
KIT
CD63
EGFR
LRP6
MET
OSMR
ITGB6

B cells

Native lung cells

receptors

Neutrophils

DKK1
LIF
TNC
HSPG2
GDF15
MDK
CXCL1
CXCL6
CX3CL1
SEMA3F
SPINT1
TGFA
PTN
KITLG
SEMA4C
CD27
CD48
XCL1
SEMA7A
GAS6
ARTN
IL18
CCL19
DLL1
CTF1
IL7
CCL15
IL19
VSIR
CCL20
HGF
PGF
IL24
CXCL12
BMP6
RSPO3
PVR
LTBR
IL6
IL15
CXCL13
CD40LG
CEACAM1
VEGFA
TNFSF14
OSM
TNFRSF14
CSF1
PLAU
CXCL8
CD274
NAMPT
TNF
CCL4
TNFSF13B
CCL3
NECTIN2
CXCL9
CXCL11
LGALS9
TGFB1
CXCL10
SIRPA
TIMP1
SPP1
CCL2
CCL7
CCL8
CD74
TNFSF13
LRPAP1
CXCL16

Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)

ligands

Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
CD4+ T cells
Tregs
Mast cells
Effector CD8+ T cells
Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells
B cells
CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)
NK cells
Tfh
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
DC
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Alveolar Macrophages
Neutrophils
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
rived mac (IL1Bhi)
rived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
rived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Monocytes I
Monocytes II
Ciliated cells
Epithelial progenitors
Goblet cells
Ionocytes
Alveolar type 2
Club cells

B

SDC4
ST14
LRP5
ERBB2
LIFR
LGR4
INSR
ACKR4
PLXNB1
PLXNB2
TNFRSF12A
EGFR
LRP6
MET
OSMR
ITGA4
CXCR3
LAG3
CD96
IL2RB
TIGIT
IL2RA
S1PR1
CCR4
FAS
PDCD1
CD226
IL6ST
BTLA
CCR6
TNFSF14
CXCR1
CXCR2
CCR2
IL2RG
CX3CR1
SORL1
TGFBR2
TNFRSF17
ITGB1
CD4
FZD8
KREMEN2
CCR3
ITGB3
ITGA9
KREMEN1
ITGAV
IL15RA
IL6R
CD72
SORT1
HAVCR2
ITGA5
CSF1R
CXCR5
TNFRSF13B
CD63

B cells
rived mac (IL1Bhi)
rived mac (SPP1hi C1QAlo)
Monocytes II
Monocytes I
rived mac (SPP1hi C1QAhi)
Monocytes (IFNAhi)
Alveolar Macrophages (MARCOlo)
Alveolar Macrophages
Mast cells
DC
Plasmacytoid DC (pDC)
Neutrophils
NK cells
CD8+ Trm (ZNF683hi)
Effector CD8+ T cells
Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells
Naive CD4+ T cells (CCR7hi)
Tregs
CD4+ T cells
Tfh
Epithelial progenitors
Goblet cells
Ciliated cells
Ionocytes
Club cells
Alveolar type 2

A

