bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Impaired local intrinsic immunity to SARS-CoV-2 infection in severe COVID-19
Carly G. K. Ziegler1,2,3,4,5,*, Vincent N. Miao1,2,3,5,*, Anna H. Owings6,*, Andrew W. Navia2,3,5,7,*, Ying Tang8,*, Joshua D. Bromley2,3,5,9,*,
Peter Lotfy3,8, Meredith Sloan6, Hannah Laird10, Haley B. Williams10, Micayla George2,3,5, Riley S. Drake2,3,5, Taylor Christian6, Adam
Parker10, Campbell B. Sindel11, Molly W. Burger12, Yilianys Pride10, Mohammad Hasan10, George E. Abraham III11, Michal Senitko11,
Tanya O. Robinson10, Alex K. Shalek1,2,3,4,5,7,13,15,16,^, Sarah C. Glover10,^, Bruce H. Horwitz8,14,15,^, Jose Ordovas-Montanes3,8,15,16,^
1

Program in Health Sciences & Technology, Harvard Medical School & MIT, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
4
Harvard Graduate Program in Biophysics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
5
Institute for Medical Engineering & Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
6
Department of Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, USA
7
Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
8
Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA
9
Department of Microbiology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
10
Division of Digestive Diseases, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, USA
11
Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, USA
12
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, USA
13
Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
14
Division of Emergency Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA
15
Program in Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
16
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
* these authors contributed equally
^ these senior authors contributed equally
2
3

Correspondence to: Jose Ordovas-Montanes (jose.ordovas-montanes@childrens.harvard.edu), Bruce Horwitz
(bruce.horwitz@childrens.harvard.edu), Sarah C. Glover (scglover@umc.edu), and Alex K. Shalek (shalek@mit.edu)

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ABSTRACT
Infection with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can lead to severe lower respiratory illness
including pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome, which can result in profound morbidity and
mortality. However, many infected individuals are either asymptomatic or have isolated upper respiratory
symptoms, which suggests that the upper airways represent the initial site of viral infection, and that some
individuals are able to largely constrain viral pathology to the nasal and oropharyngeal tissues. Which cell
types in the human nasopharynx are the primary targets of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and how infection
influences the cellular organization of the respiratory epithelium remains incompletely understood. Here,
we present nasopharyngeal samples from a cohort of 35 individuals with COVID-19, representing a wide
spectrum of disease states from ambulatory to critically ill, as well as 23 healthy and intubated patients
without COVID-19. Using standard nasopharyngeal swabs, we collected viable cells and performed singlecell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq), simultaneously profiling both host and viral RNA. We find that following
infection with SARS-CoV-2, the upper respiratory epithelium undergoes massive reorganization: secretory
cells diversify and expand, and mature epithelial cells are preferentially lost. Further, we observe evidence
for deuterosomal cell and immature ciliated cell expansion, potentially representing active repopulation of
lost ciliated cells through coupled secretory cell differentiation. Epithelial cells from participants with
mild/moderate COVID-19 show extensive induction of genes associated with anti-viral and type I interferon
responses. In contrast, cells from participants with severe lower respiratory symptoms appear globally
muted in their anti-viral capacity, despite substantially higher local inflammatory myeloid populations and
equivalent nasal viral loads. This suggests an essential role for intrinsic, local epithelial immunity in curbing
and constraining viral-induced pathology. Using a custom computational pipeline, we characterized cellassociated SARS-CoV-2 RNA and identified rare cells with RNA intermediates strongly suggestive of active
replication. Both within and across individuals, we find remarkable diversity and heterogeneity among
SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ host cells, including developing/immature and interferon-responsive ciliated cells,
KRT13+ “hillock”-like cells, and unique subsets of secretory, goblet, and squamous cells. Finally, SARSCoV-2 RNA+ cells, as compared to uninfected bystanders, are enriched for genes involved in susceptibility
(e.g., CTSL, TMPRSS2) or response (e.g., MX1, IFITM3, EIF2AK2) to infection. Together, this work defines
both protective and detrimental host responses to SARS-CoV-2, determines the direct viral targets of
infection, and suggests that failed anti-viral epithelial immunity in the nasal mucosa may underlie the
progression to severe COVID-19.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
The novel coronavirus clade SARS-CoV-2 emerged in late 2019 and has quickly led to one of the most
devastating global pandemics in modern history. Similar to other successful respiratory viruses, high
replication within the nasopharynx1,2 and viral shedding by asymptomatic or presymptomatic individuals
contributes to high transmissibility3,4 and rapid community spread5–7. COVID-19, the disease caused by
SARS-CoV-2 infection, occurs in a fraction of those infected by the virus and carries profound morbidity
and mortality. The clinical pictures of COVID-19 vary widely – from some individuals who experience few
mild symptoms to some with prolonged and severe disease characterized by pneumonia, acute respiratory
distress syndrome, and diverse systemic effects impacting various other tissues8,9. To facilitate effective
preventative and therapeutic strategies for COVID-19, differentiating the host protective mechanisms that
support rapid viral clearance and limit disease severity from those that drive severe and fatal outcomes is
essential.
Rapid mobilization of the scientific community and a commitment to open data sharing early in the COVID19 pandemic enabled researchers across the globe to study SARS-CoV-2 and build initial models of
disease pathogenesis10–12. By analogy to related human betacoronaviruses13, we currently understand viral
tropism and disease progression to begin with SARS-CoV-2 entry through the mouth or nares where it
initially replicates within epithelial cells of the human nasopharynx, generating an upper respiratory infection
over several days14. A subset of patients develop symptoms of lower respiratory, where a combination of
inflammatory immune responses and direct viral-mediated pathogenesis can lead to diffuse damage to
distal airways, alveoli, and vasculature15,16. Recent studies have mapped the host immune profiles
associated with different stages along the COVID-19 disease trajectory. Reproducible immune correlates
of severe COVID-19 include prolonged detection of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, TNFa, and IL8, diminished type I and type III interferon, and marked lymphopenia, as well as mixed evidence for immune
exhaustion and dysfunctional myeloid populations17–25. These reports have measured host inflammatory
and immune signatures in peripheral blood, which may only partially reflect the immune status within virally
targeted tissues26,27. To date, few studies have directly addressed the impact of SARS-CoV-2 infection on
the respiratory epithelium of the human upper airways, or examined how this may relate to aberrant
inflammatory or anti-viral signaling described in the periphery.
A question central to understanding SARS-CoV-2-induced disease pathology is the precise identity of the
direct cellular targets of viral infection within human respiratory tissues. Early in the pandemic, multiple
groups conducted meta-analyses of existing single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) datasets from
diverse host tissues to map potential SARS-CoV-2 tropism based on ACE2 expression and co-expression
of host proteases required for spike protein cleavage28–32. Together, these studies nominated putative
SARS-CoV-2-targeted cells within the oropharyngeal, nasal, and upper airway tissues including subsets of

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ciliated, secretory, and goblet cells, and within the lung parenchyma, type II pneumocytes. Indeed, a study
jointly collecting nasopharyngeal and bronchoalveolar lavage samples from a cohort of COVID-19 patients
identified rare SARS-CoV-2 RNA-containing cells assigned to ciliated and secretory cell types33. Further
work using human tissues at autopsy found infected ciliated cells lining the trachea and distal airways within
the lungs34–36. In vitro studies have illustrated the capacity of SARS-CoV-2 to infect myriad organoid and
air-liquid interface models of tissues providing important lessons about mechanisms of entry and the antiviral or inflammatory responses induced37–44. However, the precise early targets for SARS-CoV-2 in the
nasopharynx, the scope of potential host cells, and the variance in viral tropism across patients and disease
courses have yet to be defined. A clearer understanding of viral tropism, how the airway epithelium
responds to infection, and the relationship to disease outcome may critically inform future therapeutic or
prophylactic strategies.
Further, we currently lack a clear understanding of the host factors responsible for susceptibility versus
resistance to viral infection. Researchers have employed in vitro systems to assess induction of anti-viral
defenses following SARS-CoV-2 infection. Compared to other common respiratory viruses, SARS-CoV-2
appears to elicit poor type I interferon responses in cultured human epithelial cells, and instead skews
towards proinflammatory cytokine profiles, in line with observations from human peripheral studies21,37,38.
To directly assay virally-targeted cell types or tissues in vivo, researchers have relied on emerging animal
models, including non-human primates45–47, hamsters48,49, mice50–53, and ferrets54,55. These animal models
vary widely in the severity of SARS-CoV-2-driven disease and associated immunopathology, and
incompletely reflect the diversity of viral infection outcomes and natural immune responses within the
human population56. Recent work leveraging human cohorts has identified enrichment of both inborn errors
of type I interferon signaling and the presence of auto-antibodies against type I interferons among patients
with severe COVID-19, providing potential explanations for failed or insufficient anti-viral immunity within a
subset of severe cases, and further supporting the need for human cohort studies that represent the breadth
of host-viral interactions57–59.
Here, we present a comprehensive analysis of the cellular phenotypes in the nasal mucosa during early
SARS-CoV-2 infection. To achieve this, we developed tissue handling protocols that enabled high-quality
scRNA-seq from frozen nasopharyngeal swabs collected from a large patient cohort (n = 58), and created
a detailed map of epithelial and immune cell diversity. We found that SARS-CoV-2 infection leads to a
dramatic loss of mature ciliated cells, which is associated with secretory cell expansion, differentiation, and
the accumulation of deuterosomal cell intermediates – potentially involved in the compensatory
repopulation of damaged ciliated epithelium. While we observe broad induction of interferon-responsive
and anti-viral genes in cells from individuals with mild/moderate COVID-19, severe COVID-19 is
characterized by a dramatically blunted interferon response, and mucosal recruitment of highly
inflammatory myeloid populations, which represent the primary sources of tissue pro-inflammatory

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

cytokines including TNF, IL1B, and CXCL8. Further, using unbiased whole-transcriptomic amplification, we
map not only host cellular RNA, but also cell-associated SARS-CoV-2 RNA, allowing us to trace viral
tropism to specific epithelial subsets and identify host pathways linked with susceptibility or resistance to
viral infection. Together, our data suggest that an early intrinsic failure of anti-viral immunity among nasal
epithelial cells responding to SARS-CoV-2 infection may predict progression to severe COVID-19.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

RESULTS
Defining Cellular Diversity in the Human Nasopharyngeal Mucosa
Nasopharyngeal swabs were collected from 58 individuals from the University of Mississippi Medical Center
between April and September 2020. This cohort consisted of 35 individuals who had a positive SARS-CoV2 PCR nasopharyngeal (NP) swab on the day of hospital presentation. A Control group consisted of 15
individuals who were asymptomatic and had a negative SARS-CoV-2 NP PCR, 6 intubated individuals in
the intensive care unit without a recent history of COVID-19 and negative SARS-CoV-2 NP PCR, and 2
additional individuals with recent history of COVID-19 and negative SARS-CoV-2 NP PCR, classified as
“Convalescent” (Table 1, see Methods for full inclusion and exclusion criteria). For the purposes of this
study a second NP swab was collected within 3 days of presentation. Using the World Health Organization
(WHO) guidelines for stratification and classification of COVID-19 severity based on the level of maximum
required respiratory support60: 14 of the individuals were considered COVID-19 mild/moderate (WHO score
1-5) and 21 had severe COVID-19 (WHO score 6-8, see Methods, Table 1, Supplementary Figures 1A,
1B). Nasopharyngeal samples were obtained by a trained healthcare provider and rapidly cryopreserved
to maintain cellular viability (Figure 1A, Supplementary Figure 1C). Swabs were later processed to
recover single-cell suspensions (mean ± SEM: 57,000 ± 15,000 total cells recovered per swab), before
generating single-cell transcriptomes using Seq-Well S3 61,62.
Among all COVID-19 and Control samples, we recovered 32,871 genes across 32,588 cells (following
filtering and quality control), with an average recovery of 562 ± 69 cells per swab (mean ± SEM). We found
roughly equivalent transcriptomic quality following uniform preprocessing steps between COVID-19 and
Control participants, despite variability in cellular recovery between participants (Supplementary Figures
1D, 1E). Following dimensionality reduction and clustering approaches to resolve individual cell types and
cell states, we annotated 18 clusters corresponding to distinct cell types across immune and epithelial
identities (Figures 1B-E, Supplementary Table 1). Consistent with the use of nasal swabs for cell
collection, we did not recover stromal cell populations such as endothelial cells, fibroblasts, or pericytes,
which were found in previous scRNA-seq datasets from nasal epithelial surgical samples63–65. Among
epithelial cell types, we readily identified basal cells by their expression of canonical marker genes including
TP63, KRT15, and KRT5, as well as mitotic basal cells based on the added expression of genes involved
in the cell cycle such as MKI67 and TOP2A (Figure 1F). We resolved large populations of both secretory
cells and goblet cells, identified by expression of KRT7, CXCL17, F3, AQP5, and CP. Despite strong
transcriptional similarity between secretory and goblet cells, we distinguished between them based on
expression of MUC5AC, which defines goblet cells, and BPIFA1, which we found primarily expressed within
secretory cell types and diminished in MUC5AC high cells. We also designated a small population of cells
“developing secretory and goblet cells” based on their lower expression of classic secretory/goblet cell
genes, as well as persistent expression of some basal cell markers (e.g., persistent COL7A1 and DST

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

expression, but diminishing KRT5, KRT15 expression). We also resolved a population of ionocytes, a
recently-identified specialized subtype of secretory cell involved in regulating mucus viscosity within
respiratory epithelia, defined by expression of FOXI1, FOXI2, and CFTR66,67. Squamous cells were
identified by their expression of SCEL, as well as multiple SPRR genes, and potentially derive from the
squamous epithelium of the anterior nose or posterior pharynx. We also recovered a very small population
of cells we term “enteroendocrine cells”, based on unique expression of gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP),
which is typically produced by intestinal and gastric enteroendocrine cells and LGR5, which classically
marks stem cell populations in the gastrointestinal mucosa68.
Ciliated cells, defined by expression of transcription factor FOXJ1 as well as numerous genes involved in
the formation of cilia, e.g., DLEC1, DNAH11, and CFAP43, were the most numerous epithelial cell type
recovered in this dataset. Similar to intermediate/developing cells of the secretory and goblet lineage, we
also identified two populations of precursor ciliated cells. One, termed “developing ciliated cells”, which
expressed canonical ciliated cell genes such as FOXJ1, CAPSL, and PIFO at lower levels than mature
ciliated cells and lacked expression of cilia-forming genes. We also identified a cluster defined by
expression of DEUP1, which is critical for centriole amplification as a precursor to cilium assembly, as well
as CCNO, CDC20B, FOXN4, and HES6. This profile matches that of a recently-defined cell type termed
deuterosomal cells, which represent a ciliated cell precursor cell type arising from secretory cell/goblet cell
differentiation64.
Immune cells were a minority of recovered cells, yet we resolved multiple distinct clusters and cell types,
representing major myeloid and lymphoid populations. Among lymphoid cells, we recovered T cells,
identified by CD3E, CD2, and TRBC2 expression, and B cells, identified by MS4A1, CD79A, and CD79B
expression. Among myeloid cell types, we recovered a large population of macrophages (CD14, FCGR3A,
VCAN), dendritic cells (CCR7, CD86), and plasmacytoid DCs (IRF7, IL3RA). Relative to true tissue-resident
abundances, we under-recovered granulocyte populations, likely due to the intrinsic fragility of these cell
types and the cryopreservation methods required in our sample pipeline (Supplementary Figure 1F). We
recovered a very small population of mast cells, defined by expression of GATA2, TPSB2, and PTGS2.
Each cell type is represented by cells from numerous participants, and from each participant we recovered
a diversity of cell types and states, though the cellular composition is highly variable between distinct
individuals (Figure 1G, 1H).
We directly tested whether cell types collected from nasal swabs following cryopreservation were
representative of cellular composition extracted from a freshly swabbed nasal epithelium, or if certain cell
types were lost during freezing (Supplementary Figure 1G-1L). Recovery of viable cells, technical metrics
of single-cell library quality, and cellular proportions after clustering and analysis were all largely stable

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

between matched fresh and cryopreserved swabs taken from the same individual. Importantly, no “new”
cell types (from healthy participants) were recovered from the freshly processed samples.
We interrogated each cell type for the expression of host factors utilized by common respiratory viruses to
facilitate cellular entry (Figure 1I)28,69–73. We find ACE2 expression highest among secretory cells and
goblet cells, and to a lesser extent on ciliated cells, developing ciliated cells, deuterosomal cells, and
squamous cells – suggesting these cells are likely targets for SARS-CoV-2 (and other betacoronaviruses
that use ACE2 as their primary cellular entry factor). SARS-CoV-2 spike protein requires “priming” by host
proteases such as TMPRSS2, TMPRSS4, CTSL, and FURIN for effective cell entry69. TMPRSS2, likely the
principal host factor for SARS-CoV-2 S cleavage, is found in highest abundance in squamous cells, followed
by modest expression in all other epithelial cell types. Similarly, CTSL (and other cathepsins) is found
across diverse epithelial and myeloid cell types. ANPEP and DPP4, host receptors targeted by other human
coronaviruses causing upper respiratory diseases, are found primarily in goblet cells and secretory
cells74,75. As expected, CDHR3, the receptor utilized by Rhinovirus C, is found primarily in ciliated cells and
developing ciliated cells76.
In order to assess compositional differences by disease severity, we grouped both SARS-CoV-2 positive
and SARS-CoV-2 negative participants by their level of respiratory support according to the WHO scoring
system: Control WHO 0 (comprising healthy SARS-CoV-2 PCR negative participants, n = 15), Control WHO
7-8 (SARS-CoV-2 PCR negative, incubated participants treated in the ICU for non-COVID-19 diagnoses, n
= 6), COVID-19 WHO 1-5 (SARS-CoV-2 PCR positive, mild/moderate disease, n = 14), and COVID-19
WHO 6-8 (SARS-CoV-2 PCR positive, intubated, severe disease, n = 21). We compared proportional cell
type abundances across these four groups (Figure 1J-1N). We found that the abundance of ciliated cells
is significantly impacted by group (Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s post-hoc testing, FDR-corrected p =
0.025), and is significantly reduced among COVID-19 WHO 6-8 participants compared to healthy controls
(17.1 ± 3.6% (mean ± SEM) of COVID-19 WHO 6-8 samples are ciliated cells, compared to 46.7 ± 7.4% of
Control WHO 0, p < 0.01) (Figure 1J). Deuterosomal cells, which represent a developmental intermediate
as secretory/goblet cells differentiate into ciliated cells, are significantly increased among samples obtained
from Control WHO 7-8, COVID-19 WHO 1-5, and COVID-19 WHO 6-8 samples, with the strongest
increases observed among samples obtained from participants with severe COVID-19 compared to Control
WHO 0 (Figure 1L). Likewise, developing ciliated cells are significantly increased among participants with
severe COVID-19 (Figure 1K). The percentage of secretory cells is also dramatically increased among all
COVID-19 participants compared to both the WHO 0 and WHO 7-8 control groups – 20.4 ± 5.0% (mean ±
SEM) of all epithelial cells are secretory cells within severe COVID-19 participants, while mild/moderate
COVID-19 participants contained 8.3 ± 2.8% secretory cells, and on average, fewer than 4% of cells per
participant are secretory among either Control WHO 0 and Control WHO 7-8 samples (Figure 1M). The
average percentage of goblet cells is higher in both groups of participants with COVID-19 compared to

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

controls, but this difference does reach significance (Figure 1N). Intriguingly, expansion of secretory cells
and loss of ciliated cells results in a net gain in epithelial diversity, calculated by Simpson’s index to calculate
the richness of the epithelial “ecosystem” (Figure 1O).
Epithelial Diversity and Remodeling Following SARS-CoV-2 Infection
Next, we sought to more completely delineate the diversity of epithelial cells through iterative clustering and
sub-clustering among epithelial cell types (see Methods). This enabled us to divide the 10 “coarse”
epithelial cell types into 25 “detailed” cell types/states (Figures 2A-2E, Supplementary Figure 2A, full
differentiating gene lists for epithelial subtypes found in Supplementary Table 1). Among some cell types,
we did not find additional within-type diversity, and thus the “coarse” annotations (Figure 2A) are equivalent
to the “detailed” identities (Figure 2D). This applied to ionocytes, deuterosomal cells, developing secretory
and goblet cells, basal cells, mitotic basal cells, and developing ciliated cells. We split goblet cells into 4
distinct detailed subtypes, each named by a representative defining marker or marker set. Likewise,
secretory cells, squamous cells, and ciliated cells were all divided into multiple specialized subtypes. Some
cellular subsets are similar to previously-described entities – including “KRT24highKRT13high secretory cells”,
which are highly similar to KRT13+ “hillock” cells, thought to be involved in airway epithelial responses to
remodeling and inflammatory challenge65,66. Further, some cell types are defined by canonical cellular
activation pathways, such as “interferon responsive” genes (e.g., IFITM3, IFI6, MX1) or “early response”
factors (e.g., JUN, EGR1, FOS). Finally, some cell types contain specialized transcriptomic profiles, which,
to our knowledge, have not been previously characterized. This included a subset of squamous cells
expressing markers classically associated with vascular endothelial cells including VWF and VEGFA, as
well as secretory populations expressing high abundances of multiple inflammatory cytokines, such as
“BPIFA1highchemokinehigh secretory cells” (chemokines include CXCL8, CCL2, CXCL1, and CXCL3)
(Figures 2D, 2E).
We again examined the epithelial subtypes for their expression of host entry factors which facilitate viral
entry among common upper respiratory pathogens (Supplementary Figure 2B). Here, we observed
substantial within-cell type heterogeneity in ACE2 expression among each of these cell types. Notably,
among goblet cells, AZGP1high goblet cells express the highest abundance of ACE2 mRNA, suggesting this
cell type may be a preferential target for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Likewise, early response secretory cells,
KRT24highKRT13high secretory cells, and interferon responsive secretory cells, all express elevated
abundances of ACE2. Many other secretory and goblet cell types express detectable ACE2, but lower
levels. Similarly, multiple detailed subsets of ciliated cells express ACE2, however ciliahigh and
BEST4highciliahigh ciliated cells did not appear to contain detectable levels of ACE2 mRNA.
To map the differentiation and lineage relationships between epithelial cell types, we applied single-cell
RNA velocity (scVelo), which leverages RNA splicing dynamics to infer developmental trajectories

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(Methods 77,78). Overlaid on the UMAPs of cell type identities and associated metadata in Figures 2A-2D,
vector fields (black lines and arrows) represent a smoothed estimate of cellular transitions based on RNA
velocity. Globally, RNA velocity appropriately places basal cells and mitotic basal cells as the “root” or
“origin” of cellular transitions, which then progresses through the developing secretory and goblet cells to
the secretory cells and goblet cells. Developing ciliated cells and ciliated cells are placed “later” in the
differentiation trajectory, distal to development of both secretory and deuterosomal cells, which is consistent
with current models where ciliated cells represent a terminally differentiated state and may arise from these
precursor cell types64. Together, this analysis enables us to map the developmental relationships between
major epithelial cell compartments discussed above and connect the loss of “terminally differentiated” or
“mature” cell types in COVID-19, e.g., ciliated cells, with the concurrent expansion of their apparent
precursors: secretory, deuterosomal, and developing ciliated cells (Figures 1J-1N, Supplementary Figure
2C).
We next analyzed developmental transitions among detailed epithelial cell subtypes (annotated in Figure
2D) to better trace the relationships between finer-resolved subsets, and map alterations in cellular behavior
and development during COVID-19. When considering only basal, goblet, and secretory cell subtypes, we
found LGR5, TP63, EGFR, and KRT5 expression gradually decline across basal and developing secretory
and goblet cells, while expression of secretory and goblet cell specific markers such as KRT7 and AQP5
progressively increase (Figure 2F-2I). The majority of secretory and goblet clusters are represented by
cells from individuals with positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR (as observed previously, Figure 1K, 2G), with
significant expansion of SERPINB11high secretory cells (which represent a “generic” or un-differentiated
secretory subtype), BPIFA1high secretory cells, and KRT24highKRT13high secretory cells (which resemble
KRT13+ “hillock” cells) among cells from individuals with severe COVID-19 (Figure 2J). Notably, transitions
between detailed secretory and detailed goblet cells are more complex than those among the coarse cell
types or as seen in ciliated cell subsets (discussed below). RNA velocity curves predict multiple routes for
development between different secretory and goblet subtypes (Figure 2F), which suggests maintained
capacity for differentiation and de-differentiation even among this “mature” cell type, and is consistent with
the current understanding of respiratory secretory cell plasticity79.
Ciliated cell subtypes were analyzed by their RNA velocity and pseudotemporal ordering in the same
manner (Figures 2K-2N). The velocity pseudotime predicts progression from developing ciliated cells, to
FOXJ1high ciliated cells, to BEST4highciliahigh ciliated cells, and terminating in ciliahigh ciliated cells. (Figure
2M). Interferon responsive ciliated cells and early response FOXJ1high ciliated cells represent phenotypic
deviations from this ordered progression, and therefore appear collapsed/unresolved along this trajectory
with the same pseudotime range as FOXJ1high ciliated cells. Among COVID-19 participants, we observe
decreased proportions of both ciliahigh and BEST4highciliahigh ciliated cells, two cell subsets which represent
the most terminally differentiated ciliated cell subtypes (Figure 2O). This effect is particularly pronounced

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

among individuals with severe disease and suggests that the overall reduction in upper airway ciliated cells
during COVID-19 (Figure 1J) preferentially affects terminally differentiated subsets, potentially due to
delayed replenishing from secretory/deuterosomal precursors or enhanced susceptibility to viral-mediated
pathogenesis. Among individuals with mild/moderate COVID-19, we find a substantial increase in the
proportion of interferon responsive ciliated cells – averaging 15.9% of all epithelial cells among
mild/moderate COVID-19 participants – compared to < 1% among healthy controls (Figure 2O).
Finally, we directly mapped the developmental transitions among nasal epithelial cells within Control
(Figure 2P) or COVID-19 participants only (Figure 2Q). Confirming our above analysis, cells from Control
participants poorly populated the intermediate regions that bridge secretory and goblet cell types to mature
ciliated cells. Conversely, regions annotated as multiple secretory cell subsets and developing ciliated cells
are uniquely captured from COVID-19 participants. Together, our analysis defines both the cellular diversity
among cells collected from nasopharyngeal swabs, as well as the nuanced developmental relationships
between epithelial cells of the upper airway. Further, we observe substantial expansion of
immature/intermediate and specialized subtypes of secretory, goblet, and ciliated cells during COVID-19,
presumably as a result of direct viral targeting and pathology, as well as part of the intrinsic capacity of the
nasal epithelium to regenerate and repopulate following damage.
Alterations to Nasal Mucosal Immune Populations in COVID-19
As with epithelial cells, we further clustered and annotated detailed immune cell populations. Multiple cell
types could not be further subdivided from their coarse annotation (Figure 1B, Supplementary Figure 3A3E), including mast cells, plasmacytoid DCs, B cells, and dendritic cells. Among macrophages (coarse
annotation), we resolved 5 distinct subtypes (Supplementary Figure 3B). FFAR4high macrophages are
defined by expression of FFAR4, MRC1, CHIT1, and SIGLEC11, as well as chemotactic factors including
CCL18, CCL15, genes involved in leukotriene synthesis (ALOX5, ALOX5AP, LTA4H), and toll-like
receptors TLR8 and TLR2 (Supplementary Figure 3F, full differentiating gene lists for immune subtypes
found in Supplementary Table 1). Interferon responsive macrophages are distinguished by elevated
expression of anti-viral genes such as IFIT3, IFIT2, ISG15, and MX1, akin to the epithelial subsets labeled
“interferon responsive”, along with CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL11, which are likely indicative of IFNg
stimulation. MSR1highC1QBhigh macrophages are defined by cathepsin expression (CTSD, CTSL, CTSB)
and elevated expression of complement (C1QB, C1QA, C1QC), and lipid binding proteins (APOE, APOC,
and NPC2). The fourth “specialized” subtype of macrophage we term “inflammatory macrophages”, which
uniquely express inflammatory cytokines such as CCL3, CCL3L1, IL1B, CXCL2, and CXCL3. The
remaining “ITGAXhigh” macrophages are distinguished from other immune cell types by ITGAX, VCAN,
PSAP, FTL, FTH1 and CD163 (though these genes are shared by other specialized macrophages subsets).
T cells are largely CD69 and CD8A positive, consistent with a T resident memory-like phenotype80, and we
are not able to resolve a separate cluster of CD4 T cells. Two specialized subtypes of CD8 T cells are

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

annotated from this dataset: one defined by exceptionally high expression of early response genes (FOSB,
NR4A2, and CCL5), and the other termed “interferon responsive cytotoxic CD8 T cells”, defined by
granzyme and perforin expression (GZMB, GZMA, GNLY, PRF1, GZMH), anti-viral genes (ISG20, IFIT3,
APOBEC3C, GBP5) and genes associated with effector CD8 T cell function (LAG3, IL2RB, IKZF3, TBX21).
Among immune cells, macrophages appear to markedly increase in abundance relative to other immune
cell types during severe COVID-19 (Supplementary Figure 3G, 3H). Multiple specialized myeloid cell
types are uniquely detected and enriched among COVID-19 participants, albeit in a subset of participants,
and biased to severe COVID-19 cases: ITGAXhigh macrophages, FFAR4high macrophages, inflammatory
macrophages, and interferon responsive macrophages (Supplementary Figure 3H). Through rare,
plasmacytoid DCs and mast cells are only recovered as > 1% of immune cells among COVID-19
participants, though this enrichment did not reach statistical significance. Somewhat surprisingly, we do not
find T cells and T cell subtypes to be dramatically altered between disease groups. Finally, we assessed
the correlation between distinct cell types across all participants. When samples from all disease groups
were considered, we find that proportional abundance of dendritic cells, mast cells, and macrophages were
highly-correlated with one another (p < 0.01), likely indicative of the coordinated recruitment of these
immune subtypes during inflammation. Among detailed immune cell types, interferon responsive
macrophages are correlated with interferon responsive cytotoxic CD8 T cells (p < 0.01, Supplementary
Figure 3I), suggesting potential direct communication between IFNG-expressing tissue resident T cells and
CXCL9/10/11 expressing myeloid cells.
Collectively, these analyses demonstrate how the epithelial and immune compartments are dramatically
altered during COVID-19, likely reflecting both protective anti-viral and regenerative responses, as well as
pathologic changes underlying progression to severe disease.
Cellular Behaviors Associated with COVID-19 Severity
Thus far, we have characterized how severe COVID-19 elicits major cell compositional changes within the
nasopharyngeal mucosa, including expansion of the secretory cell/deuterosomal cell compartments
associated with lost mature ciliated cells, and recruitment of highly inflammatory myeloid cells. Next, we
examined how each individual cell type responds across the full spectrum of disease severity. Here, we
analyzed pairwise comparisons between Control WHO 0, COVID-19 WHO 1-5 (mild/moderate), and
COVID-19 WHO 6-8 (severe), and compared both high-level “coarse” cell types, and “detailed” cell subsets
(Figure 3A, Supplementary Figure 4A, Supplementary Tables 2-4). Among all coarse cell types, the
largest magnitude transcriptional changes (measured by the number of differentially expressed (DE) genes
with FDR < 0.001, and log fold change > 0.25) are observed primarily within the epithelial compartment,
most strikingly within ciliated cells, developing ciliated cells, secretory cells, goblet cells, and ionocytes
(Supplementary Figure 4A). Among detailed cell types, we observed the largest transcriptional changes

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

among AZGP1high goblet cells, early response FOXJ1high ciliated cells, FOXJ1high ciliated cells, MUC5AChigh
goblet cells, SERPINB11high secretory cells, early response secretory cells, and interferon responsive
ciliated cells. Broadly, major differences are observed in the identity of cell types with large transcriptional
responses – with mild/moderate COVID-19 driving differences principally in MUC5AChigh goblet cells and
ionocytes, while severe COVID-19 included major perturbations among basal cells and AZGP1high goblet
cells. Ciliated subsets are profoundly altered in both mild/moderate and severe COVID-19 compared to
cells from Control WHO 0 participants. Finally, when we directly compared mild/moderate to severe COVID19, we found that multiple cell types show robust transcriptional changes, most drastically among ciliated
cell subtypes (interferon responsive ciliated cells, FOXJ1high ciliated cells, early response FOXJ1high ciliated
cells, developing ciliated cells), ionocytes, SERPINB11high secretory cells, early response secretory cells,
and AZGP1high goblet cells.
We further examined the specific DE genes among ciliated cells (all, coarse annotation) between each
group (Figure 3B, Supplementary Tables 2-4). Compared to ciliated cells from Control WHO 0
participants, cells from both mild/moderate COVID-19 and severe COVID-19 robustly upregulate genes
involved in the host response to virus, including IFI27, IFIT1, IFI6, IFITM3, and GBP3, and both groups
induce expression of MHC-I and MHC-II genes (including HLA-A, HLA-C, HLA-F, HLA-E, HLA-DRB1, HLADRA) and other factors involved in antigen processing and presentation (Supplementary Figures 4B, 4C).
Notably, large sets of interferon-responsive and anti-viral genes are exclusively induced among ciliated
cells from COVID-19 WHO 1-5 participants when compared to Control WHO 0 participants. In a direct
comparison of ciliated cells from mild/moderate to severe COVID-19, the cells from individuals with
mild/moderate disease show strong upregulation of diverse anti-viral factors, including IFI44L, STAT1,
IFITM1, MX1, IFITM3, OAS1, OAS2, OAS3, STAT2, TAP1, HLA-C, ADAR, XAF1, IRF1, CTSS, CTSB, and
many others (Supplementary Figure 4C). Ciliated cells from severe COVID-19 uniquely upregulate IL5RA
and NLRP1 (compared to both control and mild/moderate COVID-19). Together, these DE gene sets are
suggestive of exposure to secreted inflammatory factors and type I/II/III interferons, as well as direct cellular
sensing of viral products. Using previously published data from human nasal basal cells treated in vitro with
either type I (IFNa) or type II (IFNg) interferon29, we created gene sets that represent the “shared” gene
responses to type I and type II interferon, and the cellular responses specific to either type (Figure 3B).
Using gene set enrichment analysis, we tested whether the genes that discriminate ciliated cells from
different groups (e.g., mild/moderate COVID-19 vs. severe COVID-19) imply exposure to specific interferon
types. We found that ciliated cells in mild/moderate COVID-19 robustly induce type I interferon-specific
gene signatures, both compared to cells from healthy controls, as well cells from severe COVID-19. Further,
when compared to cells from healthy individuals, ciliated cells from individuals with severe COVID-19 did
not significantly induce type I or type II interferon responsive genes, potentially underlying poor control of
viral spread.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We next investigated whether these effects were observed among other cell types and subsets.
Surprisingly, even among cells defined as “interferon responsive” ciliated cells, cells from mild/moderate
COVID-19 participants express higher fold changes of interferon-responsive genes compared to cells from
COVID-19 WHO 6-8 participants or Control WHO 0 (Figures 3C, 3D, Supplementary Tables 2-4). Other
detailed epithelial and immune cell types display a similar pattern: broad interferon-responsive genes
(largely type I specific) are strongly upregulated among cells from mild/moderate COVID-19 participants,
while cells from severe COVID-19 upregulate few shared markers with mild/moderate COVID-19
participants, and instead skew towards inflammatory genes such as S100A8 and S100A9 instead of antiviral factors (Figures 3E-3H, Supplementary Figures 3J-3L, 4D). In some cases, cells from individuals
with severe COVID-19 express levels of interferon responsive or anti-viral genes indistinguishable from
healthy controls. Strongest induction of type I specific interferon responses among mild/moderate COVID19 cases is observed in MUC5AChigh goblet cells, SCGB1A1high goblet cells, early response secretory cells,
deuterosomal cells, interferon responsive ciliated cells, and BEST4highciliahigh ciliated cells (Figure 3G).
Rare cell types from individuals with severe COVID-19 induce comparable type I interferon responses to
their mild/moderate counterparts, including AZGP1highSCGB3A1highLTFhigh goblet cells, interferon
responsive secretory cells, and VEGFAhigh squamous cells. Expression of type II interferon specific genes
is globally blunted across all cell types from COVID-19 samples when compared to type I interferon module
scores (Figure 3G, Supplementary Figures 3K, 4D). Further, the absence of a transcriptional response
to secreted interferon cannot be explained by a lack of either interferon alpha receptor (IFNAR1, IFNAR2)
or interferon gamma receptor (IFNGR1, IFNGR2) expression. Previous work has identified ACE2, the host
receptor for SARS-CoV-2, as among the interferon-induced genes in nasal epithelial cells, with uncertain
significance for SARS-CoV-2 infection29,81–83. Indeed, we find modest upregulation of this gene among cells
from COVID-19 participants compared to healthy controls. Further, some of the cell subtypes identified as
expanded during COVID-19 (e.g., interferon responsive ciliated cells, BPIFA1high secretory cells,
BPIFA1highchemokinehigh secretory cells, and KRT24highKRT13high secretory cells) express relatively high
abundances of ACE2 (Supplementary Figure 4E).
A sizable proportion of COVID-19 participants in our study were concurrently treated with corticosteroids,
which mediate broad anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects. We were curious as to whether
depressed interferon and anti-viral responses could be explained by higher rates of corticosteroid treatment
among the severe COVID-19 group (Table 1). We therefore stratified our groups further into SteroidTreated vs. Untreated and assessed expression of genes previously identified as DE between Control WHO
0, COVID-19 WHO 1-5, and COVID-19 WHO 6-8. For some genes, corticosteroid treatment is associated
with a partially suppressed interferon response within each group – for instance, ciliated cells from
Untreated COVID-19 WHO 1-5 participants show higher abundances of IFITM1, OAS2, IFI6, and IFI27 than
their Steroid-Treated counterparts – while still maintaining strong differences in expression between groups
(with abundance in COVID-19 WHO 1-5 > COVID-19 WHO 6-8 > COVID-19 WHO 0, see annotations on

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 4C). Interestingly, induction of FKBP5 expression among ciliated cells from severe
COVID-19 participants is fully explained by corticosteroid treatment, which is consistent with the role for
this protein in modulating glucocorticoid receptor activity. Other sets of anti-viral genes were equivalently
expressed within each group, independent of treatment, including STAT1, STAT2, IFI44, and ISG15. For
many anti-viral factors in multiple cell types, we observed no effect of corticosteroid treatment on the intrinsic
anti-viral response during COVID-19.
Together, these data demonstrate global blunting of the anti-viral/interferon response among
nasopharyngeal epithelial cells during severe COVID-19. Individuals with mild/moderate COVID-19
recurrently upregulate interferon-responsive factors including STAT1, MX1, HLA-B, HLA-C, among others
(compared to matched cell types among Control WHO 0 participants), while cells from individuals with
severe COVID-19 repeatedly induced a distinct set of genes, including S100A9, S100A8 and stress
response factors (HSPA8, HSPA1A, DUSP1, Figure 3H). We next attempted to query the source of local
interferon, particularly in the COVID-19 WHO 1-5 samples where cell types appeared to be maximally
responding to interferon stimulation. Notably, we expect many of the tissue-resident immune cells to reside
principally within the deeper lamina propria and submucosal spaces, and are therefore poorly represented
in our dataset due to sampling type (swabbing of surface epithelial cells)65. Accordingly, we find exceedingly
few immune cell types producing interferons: IFNA and IFNB are absent, rare IFNL1 UMI are observed
among T cells and macrophages, and IFNG is robustly produced from interferon responsive cytotoxic CD8
T cells, despite limited evidence for type II responses among epithelial cells (Supplementary Figure 4F).
Further, we could not detect expression of any interferon types among epithelial cells, which is differs
dramatically from previous observations of robust type I/III interferon expression among nasal ciliated cells
during influenza A and B infection (also captured via Seq-Well S3 84 (Supplementary Figure 4F). Rather,
we observe robust induction of other inflammatory molecules from both immune and epithelial cell types.
CXCL8 is produced by several specialized secretory cell types, including those uniquely expanded in
COVID-19. Inflammatory macrophages and interferon responsive macrophages represent the primary
sources of local TNF, IL6, and IL10, and uniquely express high abundances of chemoattractant molecules
such as CCL3, CCL2, and CXCL8. Interestingly, interferon responsive macrophages appear to be a
principal source of CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 (Supplementary Figures 4F).
Co-Detection of Viral and Host RNA and Correlates of Nasal Viral Load
Given a comprehensive picture of host cell biology during COVID-19 and across the spectrum of disease
severity, we next tested whether the observed epithelial phenotypes were associated with altered local viral
abundance. ScRNA-seq protocols utilize poly-adenylated RNA capture and reverse transcription to
generate snapshots of the transcriptional status of each individual cell. As several pathogens and
commensal microbes also utilize poly-adenylation for RNA intermediates, or contain poly-adenylated
stretches of RNA within their genomes, they may also be represented within scRNA-seq libraries. First, to

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

perform an unbiased search for co-detected viral, bacterial, and fungal genomic material, we used
metatranscriptomic classification to assign reads according to a comprehensive reference database
(previously described, see Methods)85,86. As expected, the majority (28/38) of swabs from individuals with
COVID-19 contain reads classified as SARS coronavirus species (Figure 4A, Supplementary Figures
5A-5C). Among samples containing SARS coronavirus genomic material, the read abundance ranged from
2e0 to 8.8e6 reads (1.8e-3 to 1.9e4 reads/million (M) total reads). We found little evidence for co-occurring
respiratory viruses, which may be partially explained by the season when many of the swabs were collected
(April-September 2020) and concurrent social distancing practices. Swabs from two individuals contain rare
reads classified as Influenza A virus species (maximum 5 reads per donor, within range for spurious
classification), and we observe no evidence for other seasonal human coronaviruses, Influenza B virus,
metapneumovirus, or orthopneumovirus. Swabs from two individuals with mild/moderate COVID-19 contain
exceptionally high abundances of reads classified as Rhinovirus A (2.1e5 and 2.4e5 reads). Finally, we
recover low abundances of SARS coronavirus assigned reads from two participants from the Control WHO
0 group.
Next, we analyzed all SARS-CoV-2-aligned UMI following alignment to a joint genome containing both
human and SARS-CoV-287. We took the sum of all SARS-CoV-2 aligning UMI from a given participant –
both associated with high-complexity single-cell transcriptomes and ambient RNA – as a representative
measure of the total SARS-CoV-2 burden within the tissue microenvironment. As observed using
metatranscriptomic classification, we found relatively low/spurious alignments to SARS-CoV-2 among
Control participants, while swabs from COVID-19 participants contained a wide range of SARS-CoV-2
aligning reads (Figure 4B, 4C, Supplementary Figures 5D, 5E). Samples from participants with severe
COVID-19 contained significantly higher abundances of SARS-CoV-2 aligning reads than both control
groups, with an average of 1.1e2 ± 2.8e0 (geometric mean ± SEM) UMI per million (M) aligned UMI (ranging
from 0 to 1.5e5 per sample). Swabs from participants with mild/moderate COVID-19 contained slightly fewer
SARS-CoV-2 aligning UMI, with an average of 1.1e1 ± 4.3e0 (geometric mean ± SEM) UMI per M.
Given the large diversity in SARS-CoV-2 abundance across all COVID-19 participants, we interrogated
whether cell composition correlated with total SARS-CoV-2 (NB: contemporaneous work by our group has
evaluated the accuracy of single-cell RNA-seq-derived estimates of total SARS-CoV-2 abundance with
more established protocols such as qRT-PCR)88. Among all cell types, we observe that secretory cells are
significantly positively correlated with the total viral abundance (Spearman’s rho = 0.49, Bonferronicorrected p = 0.0015), while FOXJ1high ciliated cells are significantly negatively correlated (Spearman’s rho
= -0.43, Bonferroni-corrected p = 0.020, Figures 4D, 4E). This observation is in line with findings outlined
in Figures 1 and 2 where epithelial pathology during SARS-CoV-2 infection manifests as loss of mature
ciliated cell types, which may stimulate secretory cells to expand and repopulate lost epithelial cell types,
although direct virally-mediated effects on secretory cell expansion have not been ruled out. Next, we

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

binned the samples from COVID-19 participants into “Viral Low” and “Viral High” groupings (based on an
arbitrary cutoff of 1e3 SARS-CoV-2 UMI per M; our findings (below) are robust to a range of partition
choices, Supplementary Figures 5E, 5F). Interferon responsive ciliated cells are expanded among “Viral
High” COVID-19 samples and plasmacytoid DCs are absent from “Viral High” samples. Finally, in a subset
of patients for whom we obtained matched plasma samples on the same day of nasopharyngeal swab (n
= 36), we observe SARS-CoV-2 UMI abundance is inversely correlated with the SARS-CoV-2 IgM and IgG
titers (Supplementary Figure 5G), suggesting that individuals with high viral loads are sampled early in
their disease trajectory89–91.
Cellular Targets of SARS-CoV-2 Infection in the Nasopharynx
Next, we aimed to differentiate SARS-CoV-2 UMI derived from ambient or low-complexity cell barcodes
from

those

likely

reflecting

intracellular

RNA

molecules

within

high-complexity

single-cell

transcriptomes84,88,92,93. First, we filtered to only viral UMIs associated with cells presented in Figure 1,
thereby removing those associated with low-complexity or ambient-only cell barcodes (Supplementary
Figure 5H). Using a combination of computational tools to 1) estimate the proportion of ambient RNA
contamination per single cell and 2) estimate the abundance of SARS-CoV-2 RNA within the
extracellular/ambient environment (i.e., not cell-associated) per sample, we were able to test whether the
amount of viral RNA associated with a given single-cell transcriptome was significantly higher than would
be expected from ambient spillover. Together, this enabled us to identify cell barcodes whose SARS-CoV2 aligning UMI were likely driven by spurious contamination, and annotate single cells that contain probable
cell-associated or intracellular SARS-CoV-2 RNA (Figure 4C, Supplementary Figure 5H). Across all
single cells, we recover 415 high-confidence SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells across 21 participants, and we
confirmed that cell assignment as “SARS-CoV-2 RNA+” is not driven by technical factors such as
sequencing depth or cell complexity (Supplementary Figure 5I). 262 SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells are from
participants with severe COVID-19 and 150 from mild/moderate COVID-19. We detect 3 SARS-CoV-2
RNA+ cells from participants with negative SARS-CoV-2 PCR: two from a participant identified as “COVID19 Convalescent”, and one from a Control participant. Among participants with any SARS-CoV-2 RNA+
cell, we detect 20 ± 7 (mean ± SEM) SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells per sample (range 1-119), amounting to 4 ±
1.3% (range 0.1-24%) of the total recovered cells per sample. Within a given single cell, the abundance of
SARS-CoV-2 UMI ranges from 1 to 12,612, corresponding to 0.01-98% of all human and viral UMI per cell.
To further understand the biological significance of SARS-CoV-2 aligning UMI within a single cell, and to
better identify cells with the highest-likelihood of actively supporting viral replication, we analyzed the
specific viral sequences and their alignment regions in the viral genome87,94,95. During SARS-CoV-2
infection, viral uncoating from endosomal vesicles releases the positive, single-stranded, 5' capped, polyadenylated genome into the host cytosol (Figures 4F, 4G). Here, translation of non-structural proteins
proceeds first by templating directly off of the viral genome, generating a replication and transcription

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

complex. The viral replication complex then produces both 1) negative strand genomic RNA intermediates,
which serve as templates for further positive strand genomic RNA and 2) nested subgenomic mRNAs which
are constructed from a 5' leader sequence fused to a 3' sequence encoding structural proteins for
production of viral progeny (e.g., Spike, Envelope, Membrane, Nucleocapsid). Generation of nested
subgenomic mRNAs relies on discontinuous transcription occurring between pairs of 6-mer transcriptional
regulatory sequences (TRS), one 3' to the leader sequence (termed leader TRS, or TRS-L), and others 5'
to each gene coding sequence (termed body TRS, or TRS-B)96. We reasoned that SARS-CoV-2 aligning
UMI could be readily distinguished by their strandedness (aligning to the negative vs. positive strand) and
whether they fell within coding regions, across intact TRS (indicating RNA splicing had not occurred for that
RNA molecule at that splice site) or across a TRS with leader-to-body fusions (corresponding to
subgenomic RNA, Figure 4F, 4G, Supplementary Figure 6A). Single cells containing higher abundances
of spliced TRS or negative strand aligning reads are therefore more likely to represent truly virally-infected
cells with a functional viral replication and transcription complex. Critically, the co-detection of host
transcriptomic and viral genomic material associated with a single cell barcode cannot definitively establish
the presence of intracellular virus and/or productive infection. Rather, below we integrate these and other
aspects of the host and viral transcriptomes to refine and contextualize our confidence in “SARS-CoV-2
RNA+” cells.
The majority of SARS-CoV-2 aligning UMI among SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells are found heavily biased
towards the 3' end of the genome, attributed to the 3' UTR, ORF10, and N gene regions, as expected due
to poly-A priming (Figure 4H). A majority (68.7%) of SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells contain reads aligning to the
viral negative strand, increasing the likelihood that many of these cells represent true targets of SARS-CoV2 virions in vivo. In addition to negative strand alignment, we find roughly ~ 1/4 of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA+
cells contain at least 100 UMI that map to more than 20 distinct viral genomic locations per cell. Finally,
comparing spliced to unspliced UMI, we find a minor fraction of cells with reads mapping directly across a
spliced TRS sequence (4.6%), while 35% of SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells contain reads mapping across the
equivalent 70mer window around an unspliced TRS. Notably, single cells containing reads aligning to
spliced (subgenomic) RNA are heavily skewed toward those cells that contain the highest overall
abundances of viral UMI – this may be an accurate reflection of coronavirus biology, wherein subgenomic
RNA are most frequent within cells robustly producing new virions and total viral genomic material, but also
points to inherent limitations in the detection of low-frequency RNA species by single-cell RNA-seq
technologies.
Next, we integrated 1) the strand and splice information among SARS-CoV-2 aligning UMIs, 2) participantto-participant diversity and 3) cell type annotations to gain a comprehensive picture of the identity and range
of SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells within the nasopharyngeal mucosa (Figures 5A-D, Supplementary Figures
6A-6E). We observe incredible diversity in both the identity of SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells, as well as the

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

distribution of SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells within and across participants. The majority of SARS-CoV-2 RNA+
cells are ciliated, goblet, secretory, or squamous. Highest-confidence SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells (containing
UMI aligning across a spliced TRS, negative strand UMI, and > 100 SARS-CoV-2 UMI/cell) tended to be
found

MUC5AChigh

among
high

KRT24

high

KRT13

goblet

cells,
high

secretory cells, CCL5

AZGP1high

goblet

cells,

BPIFA1high

secretory

cells,

squamous cells, developing ciliated cells, and each ciliated

cell subtype. A high proportion of interferon responsive macrophages contained SARS-CoV-2 genomic
material, and rare ITGAXhigh macrophages are found to contain UMI aligning to viral negative strand or
spliced TRS regions – likely representing myeloid cells that have recently engulfed virally-infected epithelial
cells or free virions. We did not find major differences in the presumptive cellular tropism by COVID-19
severity. A few cell types are commonly found to be SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ across all participants (including
participants with only rare viral RNA+ cells): most frequently, participants have at least one developing
ciliated or squamous cell with SARS-CoV-2 RNA, followed by MUC5AChigh goblet cells, ciliahigh ciliated cells,
and FOXJ1high ciliated cells (Figure 5D). However, among the individuals with the highest abundances of
SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells, viral RNA is spread broadly across many different cell types, including those
outside of the expected tropism for SARS-CoV-2 (e.g., also found within basal cells, ionocytes). Further,
the cell types harboring the highest proportions of SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells represent the same cell types
uniquely expanded or induced within COVID-19 participants, such as KRT24highKRT13high secretory cells,
AZGP1high goblet cells, and interferon responsive ciliated cells, and contain the highest abundances of
ACE2-expressing cells (Figure 5C, Supplementary Figure 6F). Whether these cell types represent
specific phenotypes elicited by intrinsic viral infection (potentially alongside induction of anti-viral genes) or
are uniquely susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 entry (e.g., enhanced entry factor expression) will require further
investigation.
Finally, we compared the relative abundance of viral RNA within each cell type and found developing
ciliated cells contain significantly higher SARS-CoV-2 RNA molecules per-cell, including positive strand,
negative strand-aligning reads, and spliced TRS reads (Supplementary Figure 6G). Intriguingly, among
ciliated cell subtypes, interferon responsive ciliated cells, despite representing one of the most frequent
“targets” of viral infection, contain the lowest per-cell abundances of SARS-CoV-2 RNA, potentially
reflecting the impact of elevated anti-viral factors curbing high levels of intracellular viral replication
(Supplementary Figure 6H).
Cell Intrinsic Responses to SARS-CoV-2 Infection
Above, we carefully mapped the specific cell types and states harboring SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells,
identifying the subsets of epithelial cells that appear to actively support viral replication in vivo across distinct
individuals (Figure 5). Further, we characterized robust and cell-type-specific host responses among cells
from COVID-19 participants, ostensibly representing both the bystander cell response to local virus and an
inflammatory microenvironment, as well as the intrinsic response to intracellular SARS-CoV-2 RNA (Figure

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

3). Here, by directly comparing single cells containing SARS-CoV-2 RNA to their matched bystanders, we
aimed to map both the cell-intrinsic response to direct viral infection, as well as the host cell identities that
may potentiate or enable SARS-CoV-2 tropism and replication.
To control for variability among different SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cell types and individuals, we compared
SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells to bystander cells of the same cell type and participant. Among cell types with at
least 5 SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells, we observe robust and specific transcriptional changes compared to both
matched bystander cells as well as cells from healthy individuals (Figures 6A, 6B). Notably, many of the
genes previously identified as increased within all cells from COVID-19 participants, e.g., anti-viral factors
IFITM3, IFI44L, are also upregulated among SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells compared to matched bystanders
within multiple cell types. SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells from participants with mild/moderate COVID-19 show
stronger induction of anti-viral and interferon responsive pathways compared to those from participants with
severe COVID-19, despite equivalent abundances of cell-associated viral UMI (Supplementary Figure
7A). EIF2AK2, which encodes protein kinase R and drives host cell apoptosis following recognition of
intracellular double-stranded RNA, is among the most reliably expressed and upregulated genes among
SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells compared to matched bystanders across diverse cell types, suggesting rapid
activation of this locus following intrinsic PAMP recognition of SARS-CoV-2 replication intermediates97.
Therefore, direct sensing of intracellular viral products amplifies interferon-responsive and anti-viral gene
upregulation, though these pathways are also elevated within bystander cells.
The majority of genes induced within SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells are shared across diverse cell types,
suggesting a conserved anti-viral response, as well as common features that facilitate or restrict infection
(Figures 6B-6D). SARS-CoV-2 RNA appears to robustly stimulate expression of genes involved in antiviral sensing and defense (e.g., MX1, IRF1, OAS1, OAS2), as well as genes involved in antigen
presentation via MHC class I (Figure 6C, Supplementary Table 5). SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells expressed
significantly higher abundances of multiple proteases involved in the cleavage of SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein, a required step for viral entry (TMPRSS4, TMPRSS2, CTSS, CTSD). This suggests that within a
given cell type, natural variations in the abundance of genes which support the viral life cycle may partially
account for which cells are successfully targeted by the virus. Among the core anti-viral/interferonresponsive gene sets induced within SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells, we observed repeated and robust
upregulation of IFITM3 and IFITM1. Multiple studies have demonstrated that while these two interferoninducible factors can disrupt viral release from endocytic compartments among a wide diversity of viral
species, IFITMs can instead facilitate entry by human betacoronaviruses95,98. Therefore, enrichment of
these factors within presumptive infected cells may reflect viral hijacking of a conserved host anti-viral
responsive pathway. Genes involved in cholesterol and lipid biosynthesis are also upregulated among
SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells, including FDFT1, MVK, FDPS, ACAT2, HMGCS1, all enzymes involved in the
mevalonate synthesis pathway. In addition, SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells show increased abundance of low-

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

density lipoprotein receptors LDLR and LRP8 compared to matched bystanders. Intriguingly, various genes
involved in cholesterol metabolism were recently identified as critical host factors for SARS-CoV-2
replication via CRISPR screens from multiple independent research groups99,100. Further, these groups
found that direct inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis decreased SARS-CoV-2 (as well as coronavirus
strains 299E and OC43) replication within cell lines, and suggest S-mediated entry relies on host
cholesterol. When we queried the full collections of presumptive replication factors identified by four
published CRISPR screens99–102, we observed significant enrichment among SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells for
RAB GTPases (e.g. RAB9A, RHOC, RASEF), vacuolar ATPase H+ pump subunits, as well as
transcriptional modulators such as SPEN, SLTM, CREBBP, SMAD4 and EGR1 (Supplementary Figure
7B).
Finally, we found multiple genes implicated in susceptibility and response to SARS-CoV-2 infection which
have not been previously described, including S100/Calbindin genes such as S100A6, S100A4, and
S100A9, which may directly play a role in leukocyte recruitment to infected cells. IFNAR1 was substantially
increased in many bystander cells compared to both cells from Control participants as well as matched
SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells (Figure 6D). Blunting of interferon alpha signaling via downregulation of IFNAR1
within SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells may partially explain high levels of viral replication compared to neighboring
cells. Finally, bystander cells expressed significantly higher abundances of MHC-II molecules compared to
SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells, including HLA-DQB1, HLA-DRB1, HLA-DRB5, HLA-DRA, and CD74.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

DISCUSSION
We present a comprehensive map of SARS-CoV-2 infection of the human nasopharynx using scRNA-seq.
We hypothesize that the host response at the site of initial infection, the nasal mucosa, is an essential
determinant of overall COVID-19 disease trajectory. By dissecting the nature of host-pathogen interactions
at this primary viral target across the spectrum of disease outcomes, we can characterize both protective
and pathogenic responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection. This enables us to begin to untangle the myriad
factors that may restrict viral infection to the upper respiratory tract or support the development of severe
lower respiratory tract disease.
First, we find that mature ciliated cells decline dramatically within the nasopharynx of COVID-19 samples,
directly correlated with the tissue abundance of SARS-CoV-2 RNA at the time of sampling. Conversely,
secretory cell populations expand among samples with high viral loads, which potentially represents a
conserved response for epithelial re-population of lost mature ciliated cells through a recently-identified
mechanism of secretory/goblet differentiation, using deuterosomal cells as intermediates64,65. Accordingly,
deuterosomal cells and immature/developing ciliated cells are considerably expanded among COVID-19
samples, suggesting interdependence between each of these compartments in maintaining epithelial
homeostasis during viral challenge. SARS-CoV-2 infection also induces dramatic increases in the diversity
of epithelial cell types, both with respect to shifted compositional balance among major cell identities, and
also via expansion of specialized secretory and goblet cell subsets, including a subset termed
KRT24highKRT13high secretory cells, which closely match the recently-identified KRT13+ “hillock” cell,
previously associated with epithelial regions experiencing rapid cellular turnover and inflammation65–67.
Other specialized subsets of secretory and goblet cells, such as early response secretory cells, AZGP1high
goblet cells, and SCGB1A1high goblet cells, are expanded among COVID-19 participants. However, we
observe expansion of these cells within discrete subsets of individuals, and they are not homogenous
across the disease groups we sampled here. Indeed, understanding whether heterogeneous responses in
the epithelial compartment between individuals with COVID-19 underscores differences in disease
manifestations will require larger cohort studies, with a focus on longitudinal responses following initial
infection. Further work is required to understand how the epithelial responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection
within the nasal mucosa relates to epithelial responses during other upper respiratory viral infections and
inflammatory states84,103.
Beyond cellular compositional changes during COVID-19, our study identifies marked variability in the
induction of anti-viral gene expression that is associated with disease severity. We find robust upregulation
of interferon stimulated genes among epithelial and immune cells isolated from individuals with
mild/moderate COVID-19, and this is particularly evident in cells that contain SARS-CoV-2 RNA.
Surprisingly, despite strong induction of anti-viral gene expression, we find little to no mRNA corresponding

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

to type I or type III interferons amongst any recovered cell types. In a related study mapping the nasal
epithelium during influenza infection, we and our colleagues observe extensive upregulation of IFNA,
IFNB1, and IFNL1-3 within ciliated cells and goblet cells, highlighting not only the capacity of superficial
nasal epithelial cells to secrete local interferons during viral infection, but also the technical capacity of the
scRNA-seq platform used in both studies to capture interferon mRNA84. The precise sources and signals
which motivate a broad anti-viral response among mild COVID-19 cases in our study remain unknown –
they may originate from immune cells contained deeper within the respiratory mucosa (therefore
inaccessible through the superficial sampling used here), from sparse, highly transient interferon
expression from superficial epithelial or immune cells, or may derive from direct PAMP/DAMP sensing or
alternative inflammatory signals.
Remarkably, in comparison to individuals with mild/moderate disease, we find that anti-viral gene
expression is profoundly blunted in cells isolated from individuals with severe disease, even in cells
containing SARS-CoV-2 RNA. This effect is observed among diverse cell types, including those thought to
represent direct targets of viral infection, such as ciliated cells and secretory cells, and also bystanders and
co-resident immune cells. Notably, individuals with severe COVID-19 disease have equivalent or even
elevated levels of nasal SARS-CoV-2 RNA at the time of sampling, and contained expanded inflammatory
and type II-interferon responsive macrophages compared to mild/moderate cases. Indeed, published
peripheral immune studies comparing mild and severe COVID-19 also observe diminished type I and type
III interferon abundances in severe cases, and note restricted interferon stimulated gene expression among
circulating immune cells21–23. Other human betacoronaviruses including MERS and SARS-CoV exhibit
multiple strategies to avoid triggering pattern recognition receptor pathways, including degradation of host
mRNA within infected cells104,105, sequestration of viral replication intermediates (e.g., double stranded
RNA) from host sensors106, and direct inhibition of immune effector molecules95,97,107, thereby leading to
diminished induction of anti-viral pathways and blunted autocrine and paracrine interferon signaling.
Strategies to avoid innate immune recognition have now been extended to SARS-CoV-2 as well, indicating
that avoiding host recognition is likely an essential aspect of viral success108–110. The close association we
observe between disease severity and weak anti-viral gene expression among nasal epithelial cells is
intriguing given recent observations of inborn defects in TLR3, IRF7, IRF9, and IFNAR1, or antibodymediated neutralization of type I interferon responses within individuals who develop severe COVID-1957–
59

. Taken together, these findings strongly suggest that severe infection can arise in the setting of an intrinsic

impairment of epithelial anti-viral immunity, and that timely induction of anti-viral responses is an essential
aspect of successful viral control. We surmise that the combined effects of a viral strain with naturally poor
interferon induction and intrinsic defects in immune or epithelial anti-viral responses within the nasal
mucosa may predispose to severe disease via enhanced viral replication in the upper airway, eventually
leading to immunopathology characteristic of severe COVID-19.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Critically, our work does not address the dynamics of nasal epithelial anti-viral responses during SARSCoV-2 infection in individual patients, nor does it directly relate intrinsic mucosal responses in the
nasopharynx to potential interferon or anti-viral responses in the lung or distal airways. Very recent work in
this area profiling the earliest steps of host-virus interaction via nasopharyngeal transcriptional profiling and
airway organoid models found that SARS-CoV-2 replicates with a doubling time of approximately 6 hours
until interferon defenses begin to limit replication after ~ 2 days39. However, different types of interferon
may promote distinct host outcomes depending on when and where they are induced, as related work
suggests type III interferons are present in the lungs, but not the nasopharynx, during SARS-CoV-2
infection, and may contribute to tissue damage late in disease course111,112. Further, while individuals in our
cohort were not sampled during the asymptomatic phase, they were intentionally sampled as early within
their disease course as possible and the majority have elevated viral levels within their nasopharynx,
suggesting that a muted interferon response in severe patients can occur early even when viral loads are
still matched with mild/moderate individuals. Further work will be required to directly link the nasopharyngeal
profiles presented here to tissue and peripheral response during the hyper-inflammatory “late” stages of
severe COVID-19. However, among individuals who develop severe COVID-19 in our cohort, we observe
unique recruitment of highly inflammatory macrophages that represent the major tissue sources of
proinflammatory cytokines including IL1B, TNF, CXCL8, CCL2, CCL3 and CXCL9/10/11 – of likely relation
to the immune dysregulation characterized by elevation of the same factors in the periphery in late, severe
disease and observe in lung tissue among those who succumbed to COVID-1988. In addition, we note
specific upregulation of alarmins S100A8/S100A9 (i.e., calprotectin) among epithelial cells in severe
COVID-19 compared to mild and control counterparts, and even higher expression of S100A9 within SARSCoV-2 RNA+ cells from those same individuals. A recent study identified these as potential biomarkers of
severe COVID-19, and proposed that these factors directly drive excessive inflammation and precede the
massive cytokine release characteristic of late disease113. Our work suggests that severe COVID-19specific expression of calprotectin may originate within the virally-infected nasal epithelia, and suggests
that further work to understand the epithelial cell regulation of S100A8/A9 gene expression may help clarify
maladaptive responses to SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Finally, we provide a direct investigation into the host factors that enable or restrict SARS-CoV-2 replication
within epithelial cells in vivo. Here, we recapitulate expected “hits” based on well-described host factors
involved in viral replication – e.g., TMPRSS2, TMPRSS4 enrichment among presumptive virally infected
cells. We similarly observe expression of anti-viral genes which are globally enriched among cells from
mild/moderate COVID-19 participants, with even higher expression among the viral RNA+ cells themselves.
In accordance with previous studies into the nasal epithelial response to influenza infection84, we observe
bystander epithelial cell upregulation of both MHC-I and MHC-II family genes; however, we find that SARSCoV-2 RNA+ cells only express MHC-I, and poorly express MHC-II genes compared to matched
bystanders. To our knowledge, downregulation of host cell pathways for antigen presentation by

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

coronaviruses has not been previously described. A recent study found that CIITA and CD74 can
intrinsically block entry of a range of viruses (including SARS-CoV-2) via endosomal sequestration, and
therefore cells that upregulate these (and other) components of MHC-II machinery may naturally restrict
viral entry114.
Together, our work demonstrates that many of the factors associated with the clinical trajectory following
SARS-CoV-2 infection may stem from initial host-viral encounters in the nasopharyngeal epithelium.
Further, it suggests that there may be a clinical window in which severe disease can be subverted by
focusing preventative or therapeutic interventions early within the nasopharynx115–118, thereby bolstering
anti-viral responses and curbing pathological inflammatory signaling prior to development of severe
respiratory dysfunction or systemic disease.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the study participants and their families for enabling this research, the clinical support staff at
UMMC for assistance in sample collection, and the members of the Shalek, Ordovas-Montanes, Horwitz,
and Glover labs for thoughtful discussion and comments on the project. This project has been made
possible in part by grant number 2020-216949 from the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative DAF, an advised fund
of Silicon Valley Community Foundation to A.K.S. and J.O.M.. C.G.K.Z. was supported by T32GM007753
from the NIH. J.O.M is a New York Stem Cell Foundation – Robertson Investigator. J.O.M was supported
by the Richard and Susan Smith Family Foundation, the AGA Research Foundation’s AGA-Takeda
Pharmaceuticals Research Scholar Award in IBD – AGA2020-13-01, the Food Allergy Science Initiative,
and The New York Stem Cell Foundation. B.H.H. was supported by DK122532-01A1, NIH; 12019PGCD002, The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust; SRA #54518, and Crohn’s and Colitis
Foundation. P.L. was supported by 5T32AG000222 from the NIH. A.W.N. was supported by the Ludwig
Center for Molecular Oncology at MIT. A.K.S. was supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation,
Sloan Fellowship in Chemistry, the NIH (5U24AI118672), and the Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and
Harvard. We thank Joshua Gould, Katherine Siddle, Bo Li, Stephen Fleming, and the Broad Institute viralngs and Cumulus teams for assistance with computational pipelines.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization: J.O.-M., A.K.S., S.C.G., B.H.H.
Methodology: C.G.K.Z., V.N.M., A.W.N., Y.T., T.O.R., S.C.G., J.O.-M., A.K.S., B.H.H.
Formal analysis: C.G.K.Z., Y.T., A.H.O., P.L.
Investigation: C.G.K.Z., V.N.M., A.W.N., Y.T., J.D.B., M.G., R.S.D., H.B.W., M.Sl., A.H.O., M.H., H.L.,
Resources: S.C.G., A.H.O., M.Sl., H.L., A.P., C.B.S., M.W.B., M.Se., M.H., G.E.A.
Data Curation: T.O.R., Y.T., M.Sl. A.H.O., H.L., H.B.W., T.C., C.G.K.Z.
Writing – Original Draft: C.G.K.Z., J.O.-M., A.K.S., S.C.G., B.H.H.
Writing – Review & Editing: C.G.K.Z., V.N.M., A.H.O., A.W.N., Y.T., J.D.B., P.L., M.Sl., H.L., H.B.W., M.G.,
R.S.D., T.C., A.P., C.B.S., M.W.B., Y.P., M.H., G.E.A., M.Se., T.O.R., A.K.S., S.C.G., B.H.H., J.O.-M.
Visualization: C.G.K.Z., Y.T.
Supervision: J.O.-M., A.K.S., S.C.G., B.H.H., T.O.R.
Project Administration: Y.P., T.O.R.
Funding Acquisition: J.O.-M., A.K.S., S.C.G., B.H.H.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
A.K.S. reports compensation for consulting and/or SAB membership from Merck, Honeycomb
Biotechnologies, Cellarity, Repertoire Immune Medicines, Hovione, Ochre Bio, and Dahlia Biosciences.
J.O.M. reports compensation for consulting services with Cellarity and Hovione.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

METHODS
Study Participants and Design
Eligible participants were recruited from outpatient clinics, medical surgical units, intensive care units (ICU),
or endoscopy units at the University of Mississippi Medical Center (UMMC) between April 2020 and
September 2020. The UMMC Institutional Review Board approved the study under IRB#2020-0065. All
participants or their legally authorized representative provided written informed consent. Participants were
eligible for inclusion in the COVID-19 group if they were at least 18 years old, had a positive nasopharyngeal
swab for SARS-CoV-2 by PCR, had COVID-19 related symptoms including fever, chills, cough, shortness
of breath, and sore throat, and weighed more than 110 lb. Participants were eligible for the Control group
if they were at least 18 years old, had a current negative SARS-CoV-2 test (PCR or rapid antigen test), and
weighed more than 110 lb. Participants were considered “Convalescent” if they met the criteria of the
Control group, however had previously tested SARS-CoV-2 PCR positive and diagnosed with COVID-19,
and their symptoms had subsided for at least 40 days. Convalescent samples were treated as an
independent group, and excluded from comparisons between “Control” and “COVID-19” groups. Exclusion
criteria for the cohort included a history of blood transfusion within 4 weeks and subjects who could not be
assigned a definitive COVID-19 diagnosis from nucleic acid testing. 35 individuals with COVID-19 were
included, both male (n = 19) and female (n = 16). For the Control group, 21 participants were included – 11
identified as male, 10 as female. The median age of COVID-19 participants was 55 years old; the median
age of Control participants was 62 years old. Among hospitalized COVID-19 participants, the median day
NP swabs were collected was hospital day 2 (inter-quartile range: 1, range 1-9). COVID-19 participants
were classified according to the 8-level ordinal scale proposed by the WHO representing their peak clinical
severity and level of respiratory support required60. See Table 1 and Supplementary Figure 1A.
Sample Collection and Biobanking
Nasopharyngeal samples were collected by a trained healthcare provider using FLOQSwabs (Copan
flocked swabs) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Collectors would don personal protective
equipment (PPE), including a gown, non-sterile gloves, a protective N95 mask, a bouffant, and a face
shield. The patient’s head was tilted back slightly, and the swab inserted along the nasal septum, above
the floor of the nasal passage to the nasopharynx until slight resistance was felt. The swab was then left in
place for several seconds to absorb secretions and slowly removed while rotating swab. The swab was
then placed into a cryogenic vial with 900 µL of heat inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 100 µL of
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Vials were placed into a Mr. Frosty Freezing Container (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) for optimal cell preservation. A Mr. Frosty containing the vials was placed in a cooler with dry ice
for transportation from patient areas to the laboratory for processing. Once in the laboratory, the Mr. Frosty
was placed into a -80°C freezer overnight, and on the next day, the vials were moved to liquid nitrogen
storage containers.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Dissociation and Collection of Viable Single Cells from Nasopharyngeal Swabs
Swabs in freezing media (90% FBS/10% DMSO) were stored in liquid nitrogen until immediately prior to
dissociation. A detailed sample protocol can be found here: https://protocols.io/view/humannasopharyngeal-swab-processing-for-viable-si-bjhkkj4w.html119. This approach (Supplementary Figure
1C) ensures that all cells and cellular material from the nasal swab (whether directly attached to the nasal
swab, or released during the washing and digestion process), are exposed first to DTT for 15 minutes,
followed by an Accutase digestion for 30 minutes. Briefly, nasal swabs in freezing media were thawed, and
each swab was rinsed in RPMI before incubation in 1 mL RPMI/10 mM DTT (Sigma) for 15 minutes at 37ºC
with agitation. Next, the nasal swab was incubated in 1 mL Accutase (Sigma) for 30 minutes at 37ºC with
agitation. The 1 mL RPMI/10 mM DTT from the nasal swab incubation was centrifuged at 400 g for 5
minutes at 4ºC to pellet cells, the supernatant was discarded, and the cell pellet was resuspended in 1 mL
Accutase and incubated for 30 minutes at 37ºC with agitation. The original cryovial containing the freezing
media and the original swab washings were combined and centrifuged at 400 g for 5 minutes at 4ºC. The
cell pellet was then resuspended in RPMI/10 mM DTT, and incubated for 15 minutes at 37ºC with agitation,
centrifuged as above, the supernatant was aspirated, and the cell pellet was resuspended in 1 mL
Accutase, and incubated for 30 minutes at 37ºC with agitation. All cells were combined following Accutase
digestion and filtered using a 70 µm nylon strainer. The filter and swab were washed with RPMI/10% FBS/4
mM EDTA, and all washings combined. Dissociated, filtered cells were centrifuged at 400 g for 10 minutes
at 4ºC, and resuspended in 200 µL RPMI/10% FBS for counting. Cells were diluted to 20,000 cells in 200
µL for scRNA-seq. For the majority of swabs, fewer than 20,000 cells total were recovered. In these
instances, all cells were input into scRNA-seq.
Flow Cytometry of Cells Isolated from Nasopharyngeal Swabs
Single-cell suspensions were isolated from nasopharyngeal swabs of healthy donors, as described above.
Cells were first stained with Fixable Aqua Dead Cell Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 15 mins to assess
viability. Cells were washed with staining buffer (PBS/2% FBS), and then treated with Human TruStain FcX
(Fc receptor blocking solution, Cat. No. 422302, BioLegend) for 5 mins. Cells were then stained with a
surface marker antibody cocktail on ice for 15 mins, which contained PerCP-Cy5.5-conjugated anti-human
CD45 (clone: HI30, BioLegend), Brilliant Violet 711-conjugated anti-human CD3 (clone: SK7, BioLegend),
APC-Cy7-conjugated anti-human CD8 (clone: SK1, BioLegend), PE-conjugated anti-human CD4 (clone:
RPA-T4, BioLegend), Brilliant Violet 786-conjugated anti-human CD326 (clone: 9C4, BioLegend), PE-Cy5conjugated anti-human CD19 (clone: HIB19, BioLegend), PE-Cy7-conjugated anti-human CD66b (clone:
G10F5, BioLegend), Brilliant Violet 650-conjugated anti-human CD11c (clone: Bu15, BioLegend), FITCconjugated anti-human CD14 (clone: M5E2, BioLegend), and Brilliant Violet 421-conjugated anti-human
CD56 (clone: 5.1H11, BioLegend). Finally, cells were fixed using BD Fixation Buffer (Cat. No. 554655, BD
Biosciences). AbC Total Antibody Compensation Beads (Cat. No. A10497, Life Technologies) and ArC

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Amine Reactive Compensation Beads (Cat. No. A10346, Life Technologies) were used for compensation.
Data were acquired on an LSRFortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) using BD FACSDiva software,
and analyzed by FlowJo software (Version 10.7.1, Tree Star Inc.).
Single Cell RNA-Sequencing
Seq-Well S3 was run as previously described61,62,120. Briefly, a maximum of 20,000 single cells were
deposited onto Seq-Well arrays preloaded with a single barcoded mRNA capture bead (ChemGenes) per
well121. cells were allowed to settle by gravity into wells for 10 minutes, after which the arrays were washed
with PBS and RPMI, and sealed with a semi-permeable membrane for 30 minutes, and incubated in lysis
buffer (5 M guanidinium thiocyanate/1 mM EDTA/1% BME/0.5% sarkosyl) for 20 minutes. Arrays were then
incubated in a hybridization buffer (2M NaCl/8% v/v PEG8000) for 40 minutes, and then the beads were
removed from the arrays and collected in 1.5 mL tubes in wash buffer (2M NaCl/3 mM MgCl2/20 mM TrisHCl/8% v/v PEG8000). Beads were resuspended in a reverse transcription master mix, and reverse
transcription, exonuclease digestion, second-strand synthesis, and whole transcriptome amplification were
carried out as previously described. Libraries were generated using Illumina Nextera XT Library Prep Kits
and sequenced on NextSeq 500/550 High Output 75 cycle v2.5 kits to an average depth of 180 million
aligned reads per array: read 1: 21 (cell barcode, UMI), read 2: 50 (digital gene expression), index 1: 8
(N700 barcode).
Data Preprocessing and Quality Control
Pooled

libraries

were

demultiplexed

using

bcl2fastq

(v2.17.1.14)

with

default

settings

(mask_short_adapter_reads 10, minimum_trimmed_read_length 10, implemented using Cumulus,
snapshot 4, https://cumulus.readthedocs.io/en/stable/bcl2fastq.html)122. Libraries were aligned using STAR
within the Drop-Seq Computational Protocol (https://github.com/broadinstitute/Drop-seq) and implemented
on Cumulus (https://cumulus.readthedocs.io/en/latest/drop_seq.html, snapshot 9, default parameters)121.
A custom reference was created by combining human GRCh38 (from CellRanger version 3.0.0, Ensembl
93) and SARS-CoV-2 RNA genomes. The SARS-CoV-2 viral sequence and GTF are as described in Kim
et al. 2020 (https://github.com/hyeshik/sars-cov-2-transcriptome, BetaCov/South Korea/KCDC03/2020
based on NC_045512.2)87. The GTF includes all CDS regions (as of this annotation of the transcriptome,
the CDS regions completely cover the RNA genome without overlapping segments), and regions were
added to describe the 5’ UTR (“SARSCoV2_5prime”), the 3’ UTR (“SARSCoV2_3prime”), and reads
aligning to anywhere within the Negative Strand (“SARSCoV2_NegStrand”). Trailing A’s at the 3’ end of the
virus were excluded from the SARS-CoV-2 FASTA, as these were found to drive spurious viral alignment
in pre-COVID19 samples. Finally, additional small sequences were appended to the FASTA and GTF that
differentiate reads that align to the 70-nucleotide region around the viral TRS sequence – either across the
intact,

unspliced

genomic

“SARSCoV2_Unspliced_Leader”)

sequences
or

(e.g.
various

named
spliced

“SARSCoV2_Unspliced_S”
RNA

species

or
(e.g.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

“SARSCoV2_Spliced_Leader_TRS_S”), see schematics in Figures 4F, 4G, Supplementary Figures 6A.
Alignment references were tested against a diverse set of pre-COVID-19 samples and in vitro SARS-CoV2 infected human bronchial epithelial cultures37 to confirm specificity of viral aligning reads. Aligned cell-bygene matrices were merged across all study participants, and cells were filtered to eliminate barcodes with
fewer than 200 UMI, 150 unique genes, and greater than 50% mitochondrial reads. Swabs from 58
individuals are included in the study. Three additional swabs were thawed and processed but contained no
high-quality cell barcodes after sequencing (NB: these samples contained < 5,000 viable cells prior to SeqWell array loading).This resulted in a final dataset of 32,871 genes and 32,588 cells across 58 study
participants (35 SARS-CoV-2+, 23 SARS-CoV-2-). Preprocessing, alignment, and data filtering was applied
equivalently to samples from the fresh vs. frozen cohort. For analysis of RNA velocity, we also recovered
both

exonic

and

intronic

alignment

information

using

DropEst

(Cumulus

(https://cumulus.readthedocs.io/en/latest/drop_seq.html, snapshot 9, dropest_velocyto true, run_dropest
true)123.
Cell Clustering and Annotation
Dimensionality reduction, cell clustering, and differential gene analysis were all achieved using the Seurat
(v3.1.5) package in R programming language (v3.0.2)124. Dimensionality reduction was carried out by
running principal components analysis (PCA) over the 3,483 most variable genes with dispersion > 0.8
(tested over a range of dispersion > 0.7 to dispersion > 1.2; dispersion > 0.8 was determined as optimal
based on number of variable genes, and general stability of clustering results across these cutoffs was
confirmed). Only variable genes from human transcripts were considered for dimensionality reduction and
clustering. Using the Jackstraw function within Seurat, we selected the first 36 principal components that
described the majority of variance within the dataset, and used these for defining a nearest neighbor graph
and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) plot. Cells were clustered using Louvain
clustering, and the resolution parameter was chosen by maximizing the average silhouette score across all
clusters. Differentially expressed genes between each cluster and all other cells were calculated using a
likelihood ratio test, implemented with Seurat’s FindAllMarkers function, test.use set to “bimod”125. Clusters
were merged if they failed to contain > 25 significantly differentially expressed genes (FDR < 0.001). We
proceeded iteratively through each cluster and subcluster until “terminal” cell subsets/cell states were
identified – we defined “terminal” cell states when PCA and Louvain clustering did not confidently identify
additional sub-states, as measured by abundance of differentially expressed genes between potential
clusters (often > 25 cluster-specific marker genes with FDR < 0.001). Among two samples, we recovered
erythroblast-like cells, defined by expression of hemoglobin subunits including HBB and HBA2 (these were
from swabs noted to be slightly red-tinged on day of processing). For visualization in Figure 2, we pooled
all cells determined to be of epithelial origin from coarse-grained annotation (ciliated cells, secretory cells,
goblet cells, basal cells, mitotic basal cells, developing secretory and goblet cells, developing ciliated cells,
squamous cells, deuterosomal cells, and ionocytes) and used the methods for dimensionality reduction as

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

above (dispersion cutoff > 1, 30 principal components). We applied similar approaches for immune cell
types (Supplementary Figure 3), including iterative subclustering to resolve and annotate all constituent
cells types and subtypes. Gene module scores were calculated using the AddModuleScore function within
Seurat.
We annotated epithelial subtypes according to the following groups and representative markers: goblet
cells were split into 4 distinct sets: MUC5AChigh goblet cells, which lacked additional specialized markers
beyond classic goblet cell identifiers, SCGB1A1high goblet cells, AZGP1high goblet cells, and
AZGP1highSCGB3A1 highLTFhigh goblet cells. Secretory cells were divided into 6 distinct detailed subtypes:
SERPINB11high secretory cells (which, similar to MUC5AChigh goblet cells, represented a more “generic” or
un-differentiated secretory cell phenotype), BPIFA1high secretory cells, early response secretory cells (which
expressed genes such as JUN, EGR1, FOS, NR4A1), KRT24highKRT13high secretory cells,
BPIFA1highchemokinehigh secretory cells (chemokines include CXCL8, CXCL2, CXCL1, and CXCL3), and
interferon responsive secretory cells (defined by higher expression of broad anti-viral genes including
IFITM3, IFI6, and MX1). Subsets of squamous cells were also found – detailed squamous cell subtypes
include CCL5high squamous cells, VEGFAhigh squamous cells (which express multiple vascular endothelial
genes including VEGFA and VWF), SPRR2Dhigh squamous cells (which, in addition to SPRR2D, express
the highest abundances of multiple SPRR- genes including SPRR2A, SPRR1B, SPRR2E, and SPRR3),
and HOPXhigh squamous cells. Finally, ciliated cells could be further divided into 5 distinct subtypes:
interferon responsive ciliated cells (expressing anti-viral genes similar to other “interferon responsive”
subsets, such as IFIT1, IFIT3, IFI6), FOXJ1high ciliated cells, early response FOXJ1high ciliated cells (which,
in addition to high FOXJ1, also express higher abundances of genes such as JUN, EGR1, FOS than other
ciliated cell subtypes), ciliahigh ciliated cells (which broadly express the highest abundances of structural
cilia genes, such as DLEC1 and CFAP100), and BEST4highciliahigh ciliated cells (in addition to cilia
components, also express the ion channel BEST4).
RNA Velocity and Pseudotemporal Ordering of Epithelial Cells
RNA velocity was modeled using the scVelo package, version 0.2.377,78. Briefly, RNA velocity analysis
leverages the dynamic relationships between expression of unspliced (intron-containing) and spliced
(exonic) RNA across thousands of variable genes, enabling 1) estimation of the directionality of transitions
between distinct cells and cell types, and 2) identification of putative driver genes behind these transitions.
Using cluster annotations previously assigned from iterative clustering in Seurat, cells from epithelial cell
types were pre-processed according to the scVelo pipeline: genes were normalized using default
parameters (pp.filter_and_normalize), principal components and nearest neighbors in PCA space were
calculated (using defaults of 30 PCs, 30 nearest neighbors), and the first and second order moments of
nearest neighbors were computed, which are used as inputs into velocity estimates (pp.moments). RNA
velocity was estimated using the scVelo tool tl.recover_dynamics with default input parameters, which maps

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the full splicing kinetics for all genes and tl.velocity, with mode=’dynamical’. Top velocity transition “driver”
genes were identified by high “fit_likelihood” parameters from the dynamical model, and are used for
visualization in Supplementary Figure 2C. The same approaches were used for modeling RNA velocity
among only basal, secretory, and goblet cells (Figures 2F-2I), only ciliated cells (Figures 2K-2N), and only
COVID-19 or only Control cells (Figures 2P, 2Q). For RNA velocity analysis of ciliated cells or basal,
secretory and goblet cells, the velocity pseudotime was calculated using the tl.velocity_pseudotime function
with default settings.
Metatranscriptomic Classification of Reads from Single-Cell RNA-Seq
To identify co-detected microbial taxa present in the cell-associated or ambient RNA of nasopharyngeal
swabs, we used the Kraken2 software implemented using the Broad Institute viral-ngs pipelines on Terra
(https://github.com/broadinstitute/viral-pipelines/tree/master)86. A previously-published reference database
included human, archaea, bacteria, plasmid, viral, fungi, and protozoa species and was constructed on May
85

5, 2020, therefore included sequences belonging to the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus
were:

kraken2_db_tgz

=

krona_taxonomy_db_kraken2_tgz
ncbi_taxdump_tgz

=

. Inputs to Kraken2

”gs://pathogen-public-dbs/v1/kraken2-broad-20200505.tar.zst”,
=

”gs://pathogen-public-dbs/v1/krona.taxonomy-20200505.tab.zst”,

”gs://pathogen-public-dbs/v1/taxdump-20200505.tar.gz”,

”gs://pathogen-public-dbs/v0/contaminants.clip_db.fasta”

and

spikein_db

=

trim_clip_db

=

”gs://pathogen-public-

dbs/v0/ERCC_96_nopolyA.fasta”. Viral species with fewer than 5 reads were considered spurious and
excluded.
Correction for Ambient Viral RNA
Data from high-throughput scRNA-seq platforms frequently experience low-levels of non-specific RNA
assigned to cell barcodes that does not represent true cell-derived transcriptomic material, but rather
contamination from the ambient pool of RNA. To safeguard against spurious assignment of SARS-CoV-2
RNA to cells without true intracellular viral material, i.e., viral RNA non-specifically picked up from the
microenvironment as a component of ambient RNA contamination, we employed the following corrections
and statistical tests to control for ambient viral RNA and enable confident assignments for SARS-CoV-2
RNA+ cells. Similar to approaches previously described, we tested whether the abundance of viral RNA
within a given single cell was significantly higher than expected by chance given the estimate of ambient
RNA contaminating that cell, as well as the proportion of viral RNA of the total ambient RNA pool84,88,92,93.
First, this required modeling and estimating the ambient RNA fraction associated with each individual swab.
Here, we employed CellBender (https://github.com/broadinstitute/CellBender), a software package built to
learn the ambient RNA profile per sample and provide an ambient RNA-corrected output93. Input UMI count
matrices contained the top 10,000 cell barcodes, therefore including at least 70% cell barcodes sampling
the ambient RNA and low-complexity cell barcodes. CellBender’s remove-background function was run
with default parameters and --fpr 0.01 --expected-cells 500 --low-count-threshold 5. Using the corrected

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

output from each sample’s count matrix following CellBender, we calculated the proportion of ambient
contamination per high-quality cell by comparing to the single-cell’s transcriptome pre-correction, and
summed all UMI from background cell barcodes to recover an estimate of the total ambient pool. Next, we
tested whether the abundance of viral RNA in a given single cell was significantly above the null abundance
given the ambient RNA characteristics using an exact binomial test (implemented in R: binom.test):
&!

!(#) = (&())!)! * ) +&()

where x = SARS-CoV-2 UMI per cell, n = total UMI per cell

p = (ambient fraction per cell)*(SARS-CoV-2 UMI fraction of all ambient UMI), and q = 1-p
P-values were FDR-corrected within sample, and cells whose SARS-CoV-2 UMI abundance with FDR <
0.01 were considered “SARS-CoV-2 RNA+”.
Differential Expression by Group, Cell Type, or Viral RNA Status
To compare gene expression between cells from distinct disease groups we employed a likelihood ratio
test assuming a negative binomial distribution. Cells from each cell type belonging to either COVID-19 WHO
1-5 (mild/moderate), COVID-19 WHO 6-8 (severe), or Control WHO 0 were compared in a pairwise manner,
implemented using the Seurat FindAllMarkers function (test.use = “negbinom”). We considered genes as
differentially expressed with an FDR-adjusted p value < 0.001 and log fold change > 0.25. To compare
gene expression between SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells and bystander cells (from COVID-19 participants, but
without intracellular viral RNA) we used a negative binomial generalized linear model implemented using
DESeq2126. Here, we employed the following criteria for SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ vs. bystander testing: 1) we
only tested cell types containing at least 15 SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells, 2) for each cell type, we restricted
our bystander cells to the same participants as the SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells, 3) in comparisons where
bystander cells were substantially more numerous than SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells, we randomly subsampled the bystander cells to at most 4x the number of SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells, and 4) we ensured that
the sampled bystander cells for comparison matched the cell quality distribution of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA+
cells, based on binned deciles of UMI/cell. DESeq2 was run with default parameters and test = “Wald”.
Gene ontology analysis was run using the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery
(DAVID)127. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was completed using the R package fgsea over genes
ranked by average log foldchange expression between each group, including all genes with an average
expression > 0.5 UMI within each respective cell type128. Gene lists corresponding to “Shared IFN
Response”, “Type I IFN Specific Response” and “Type II IFN Specific Response” are derived from
previously-published population RNA-seq data from nasal epithelial basal cells treated in vitro with 0.1
ng/mL – 10 ng/mL IFNa or IFNg for 12 hours29. Module scores were calculated using the Seurat function
AddModuleScore with default inputs.
Statistical Testing

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

All statistical tests were implemented either in R (v4.0.2) or Prism (v6) software129. Comparisons between
cell type proportions by disease group were tested using a Kruskal-Wallis test with FDR correction across
all cell types, implemented in R using the kruskal.test, and p.adjust functions. Post-tests for between-group
pairwise comparisons used Dunn’s test. Spearman correlation was used where appropriate, implemented
using the cor.test function in R. All testing for differential expression was implemented in R using either
Seurat, scVelo, or DESeq2, and all results were FDR-corrected as noted in specific Methods sections. Pvalues, n, and all summary statistics are provided either in the results section, figure legends, figure panels,
or supplementary tables.
Data and Code Availability
Prism (v6), R (v4.0.2) packages ggplot2 (v3.3.2130), Seurat (v3.2.2131), ComplexHeatmap (v2.7.3132),
Circlize (0.4.11133), fgsea (v.1.16.0128), DESeq2 (v1.30.0126), and Python (v3.8.3) package scVelo (v0.3.077)
were used for visualization. All raw, normalized, and annotated data is available for download and
visualization via the Single Cell Portal: https://singlecell.broadinstitute.org/single_cell/study/SCP1289/.
Data

was

also

deposited

in

a

single-cell

data

resource

for

COVID-19

studies:

https://www.covid19cellatlas.org134. Custom reference FASTA and GTF for SARS-CoV-2 is available for
download: https://github.com/ShalekLab/SARSCoV2-genome-reference.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1
A

viable nasal
epithelial cells

freeze swab in
cryopreservation
medium

process to
recover single-cell
suspension

generate single-cell
transcriptomic
libraries

isolate
single cells

sequence

Seq-Well array
SARS-CoV-2

swab

B

C

Cell Types

D

SARS-CoV-2 PCR

E

Peak Level of Respiratory Support

Participant

Basal Cells
Mitotic Basal Cells

Developing Secretory
and Goblet Cells

Goblet Cells
Deuterosomal Cells

Squamous Cells

Secretory Cells
Ciliated Cells
T Cells

Developing Ciliated Cells

Plasmacytoid
DCs

Erythroblasts

Ionocytes

B Cells
Dendritic Cells

Mast Cells
UMAP 2

Macrophages
SARS-CoV-2 PCR

Enteroendocrine Cells

UMAP 1

0 1 3 4 5 6 7 8

M

BB
H
BA
2
C
AC
N
G A1
IP
A
C
TB
P
M 1−
KI A
S
6
TO 7
P2
KR A
T5
KR
T1
TP 5
63
C
O
L7
FG A1
FR
EG 3
FR
C
M
YA
BP 5
IF
SE A1
R
P
R IN
AR B3
AQ RE
P5 S1
BP
IF
B1
C
P

H

F

WHO Score

+

U
C
PI 5AC
3
C
FT
R
FO
XI
SP 1
R
R
M 3
AL
SC
EL
C
D
C
C 20B
C
N
O
FO
XN
M 4
M
A
BE CH
ST C
SA 1
A
PI 1
FO
C
AP
FO SL
XJ
D 1
LE
C
D 1
N
A
TP H11
SB
PT 2
G
S
G 2
AT
A
M 2
S4
A
PT 2
PR
C C
C
R
7
H
LA
−
C DQ
D
86 A1
IT
G
AX
SO
D
VC 2
AN
C
D
14
FC
G
C R3
D A
1
JC 63
H
A
IR IN
F7
IL
3R
G A
ZM
B
C
D
2
C
D
8A
TR
BC
M 2
S4
C A1
D
79
A

-

Coarse Cell Types

B Cells
T Cells
Plasmacytoid DCs
Macrophages
Dendritic Cells
Mast Cells
Ciliated Cells
Dev. Ciliated Cells
Deuterosomal Cells
Squamous Cells
Ionocytes
Goblet Cells
Secretory Cells
Dev. Secretory and Goblet Cells
Basal Cells
Mitotic Basal Cells
Enteroendocrine Cells
Erythroblasts
log(1 + UMI per 10K)

50

25

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

9
D
VI

on

-1

t ro

l

8
6-

5
-1

9

W

H

O

1-

78

O

O

H

H

W
9

-1

D

D

VI
O

C

C

% of Sample

0
O
H
lW

lW

tro

tro

on

on

C

VI

O
H
W

1.0

0.0

8
6-

8

1-

7-

O

O

H

H

W

9

9
-1

D

D

VI
O

C

VI

-1

O
H
lW

lW

tro

tro

on
C

5

0

0

0

on

C

40

20

68

15

O
W

H

O

O

H

H

W

-1
9

D

D

VI
O

C

lW

lW

tro

tro

on

on

VI

C

O
C

-1
9

H

O

7-

8

0

8

60

20

C

% of Sample

40

Epithelial Diversity
(** p = 0.007)
Simpson's Index of Diversity

80

60

O

% of Sample

5

6-

5
-1

9

W

H

O

O

H

H

W
9

-1

D

D
O

O

1-

8
7-

O
H
lW

lW

tro

tro

on

on

VI

C

O
C

VI

8
6O

W

H

O

O

VI

D

-1

9

W

H

O
H

9
-1

D
C

VI

1-

78

O
H
lW

lW

tro

tro

100

***

*

10

0

0

0

5

0

0

20

O

on

40

20

C

C

60

C

40

on

100

**

25

50

75

100

B Cells
T Cells
Plasmacytoid DCs
Macrophages
Dendritic Cells
Mast Cells
Ciliated Cells
Dev. Ciliated Cells
Deuterosomal Cells
Squamous Cells
Ionocytes
Goblet Cells
Secretory Cells
Dev. Secretory and Goblet Cells
Basal Cells
Mitotic Basal Cells
Enteroendocrine Cells
Erythroblasts
COVID-19

O
Goblet Cells
(p = 0.58)

80

C

% of Sample

60

C

15

**

80

C

% of Sample

80

N
Secretory Cells
(*** p < 0.0001)

O

100

**

M
Deuterosomal Cells
(* p = 0.030)

C

100

L
Developing Ciliated
Cells (p = 0.052)

C

K
Ciliated Cells
(* p = 0.025)

COVID-19 Participant 25
COVID-19 Participant 10
COVID-19 Participant 33
COVID-19 Participant 4
COVID-19 Participant 6
COVID-19 Participant 35
COVID-19 Participant 5
COVID-19 Participant 37
COVID-19 Participant 23
COVID-19 Participant 7
COVID-19 Participant 26
COVID-19 Participant 38
COVID-19 Participant 2
COVID-19 Participant 39
COVID-19 Participant 34
COVID-19 Participant 32
COVID-19 Participant 29
COVID-19 Participant 36
COVID-19 Participant 3
COVID-19 Participant 8
COVID-19 Participant 21
COVID-19 Participant 40
COVID-19 Participant 12
COVID-19 Participant 11
COVID-19 Participant 28
COVID-19 Participant 9
COVID-19 Participant 27
COVID-19 Participant 31
COVID-19 Participant 14
COVID-19 Participant 13
COVID-19 Participant 22
COVID-19 Participant 18
COVID-19 Participant 15
COVID-19 Participant 17
COVID-19 Participant 30
COVID-19 Participant 20
COVID-19 Participant 19

Control Participant 3
Control Participant 9
Control Participant 5
Control Participant 17
Control Participant 15
Control Participant 4
Control Participant 12
Control Participant 6
Control Participant 14
Control Participant 19
Control Participant 13
Control Participant 10
Control Participant 1
Control Participant 2
Control Participant 21
Control Participant 18
Control Participant 7
Control Participant 8
Control Participant 11
Control Participant 20
Control Participant 16

0

O

% of Sample

75

J

% of Cell Type
0

B Cells
Ciliated Cells
T Cells
Squamous Cells
Dev. Ciliated Cells
Plasmacytoid DCs
Secretory Cells
Macrophages
Goblet Cells
Dendritic Cells
Basal Cells
Mast Cells
T Cells
Ciliated Cells
Macrophages
Dev. Ciliated Cells
Deuterosomal Cells
Dev. Secretory and Goblet Cells
Deuterosomal Cells
Ionocytes
Squamous Cells
Erythroblasts
Ionocytes
Mitotic Basal Cells
Goblet Cells
Enteroendocrine Cells
Secretory Cells
Dendritic Cells
Dev.
Secretory
and
Goblet
Cells
B Cells
Basal Cells
Plasmacytoid DCs
Mast Cells
Mitotic Basal Cells
Enteroendocrine Cells
Erythroblasts

Other coronaviruses
(MERS-CoV, Influenza A, B
SARS-CoV-1 HCoV-229E,
SARS-CoV-2 HCoV-OC43)
Rhinovirus A-C

Control

% Expressing

COVID-19

C

Control
100

I

Scaled Average Expression

H

ACE2
TMPRSS2
TMPRSS4
CTSL
NRP1
FURIN
ANPEP
DPP4
IFITM1
IFITM2
IFITM3
ST3GAL1
ST3GAL4
ICAM1
CDHR3
LDLR

G

80
60
40
20

2
1
0
−1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. Cellular Composition of Human Nasopharyngeal Mucosa
A. Schematic of method for viable cryopreservation of nasopharyngeal swabs, cellular isolation, and
scRNA-seq using Seq-Well S3 (created with BioRender).
B. UMAP of 32,588 single-cell transcriptomes from all participants, colored by cell type (following
iterative Louvain clustering).
C. UMAP as in B, colored by SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic PCR status.
D. UMAP as in B, colored by peak level of respiratory support (WHO COVID-19 severity scale).
E. UMAP as in B, colored by participant.
F. Violin plots (log(1+normalized UMI per 10k)) of cluster marker genes (FDR < 0.01) for coarse cell
type annotations (as in B).
G. Proportional abundance of coarse cell types by participant (ordered within each group by increasing
ciliated cell abundance).
H. Proportional abundance of participants by coarse cell types. Shades of red: COVID-19. Shades of
blue: Control.
I.

Expression of entry factors for SARS-CoV-2 and other common upper respiratory viruses. Dot size
represents fraction of cell type (rows) expressing a given gene (columns). Dot hue represents
scaled average expression by gene column.

J. Proportion of ciliated cells by sample. Statistical test above graph represents Kruskal-Wallis test
results across all groups (following FDR correction across cell types). Statistical significance
asterisks within box represent results from Dunn’s post-hoc testing. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p <
0.001.
K. Proportion of developing ciliated cells by sample.
L. Proportion of deuterosomal cells by sample.
M. Proportion of secretory cells by sample.
N. Proportion of goblet cells by sample.
O. Simpson’s Diversity index (plotted as 1-D, where increasing values represent higher diversity)
across epithelial cell types in COVID-19 vs. Control. Significance by student’s t-test. Lines
represent mean and S.E.M.
See also Figure S1, Table S1

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2
A

B

Coarse Cell Types

C

SARS-CoV-2 PCR

D

Peak Level of Respiratory Support

Detailed Cell Types
SPRR2Dhigh Squamous Cells
Early Resp.
FOXJ1high
Ciliated Cells

Squamous Cells
Ciliated Cells

CCL5high
Squamous
Cells

IFN Resp.
Ciliated Cells

HOPXhigh Squamous Cells
BPIFA1high
Secretory
Cells

FOXJ1high
Ciliated Cells

VEGFAhigh Squamous Cells

BEST4highCiliahigh
Ciliated Cells

Secretory Cells

BPIFA1highChemokinehigh Secretory Cells
IFN Resp. Secretory Cells

Goblet Cells

AZGP1high Goblet Cells
AZGP1highSCGB3A1highLTFhigh
Goblet Cells

Dev. Ciliated Cells
SERPINB11high Secretory Cells

Developing Ciliated Cells

KRT24

high

KRT13

high

Early Resp. Secretory Cells

Secretory Cells

Ciliahigh Ciliated Cells

Deuterosomal Cells

MUC5AChigh Goblet Cells

Developing Secretory
and Goblet Cells
UMAP 2

SCGB1A1high Goblet Cells

Deuterosomal Cells

Dev. Secretory
and Goblet Cells

Mitotic Basal Cells

Ionocytes

Mitotic Basal Cells

Basal Cells

Ionocytes

SARS-CoV-2 PCR
UMAP 1

-

+

0 1 3 4 5 6 7 8

M

KI
6
TO 7
P2
C A
EN
P
KR F
T
KR 5
T1
TP 5
63
AD
AM
FG 28
FR
EG 3
FR
M
U
C
AN 5AC
PE
N P
O
S2
SC
G
C B1A
YP 1
2
PI A1
3
3
AZ
G
P
AQ 1
P5
S1
00
SC P
G
TC B3A
N 1
1
LT
F
C
XC
L
KR 17
T7
R
AR
C RE
XC S
L 1
BP 8
IF
C A1
XC
L
FO 1
S
JU
N
EG
R
N 1
R
4A
KR 1
T2
KR 4
T
KR 4
T1
C 3
XC
L
C 3
XC
L
IS 2
G
15
IF
I6
IF
IT
M
C 3
FT
R
AS
C
L
FO 3
XI
C 1
C
N
C O
D
C
2
FO 0B
X
M N4
M
AC
BE H
ST C
PI 1
FO
IF
IT
1
IF
IT
3
C
AP
FO S
XJ
D 1
N
A
BE H5
ST
C 4
FA
P
D 15
LE 7
C
C 1
FA
P
C 10
FA 0
P
SP 70
R
R
M 3
AL
C
C
L5
C
R
N
SP N
R
R
SP 2A
R
R
VE 2D
G
VW FA
F
H
O
P
KR X
T7
IL 8
1R
N

E

Basal Cells

WHO Score

Ciliated
Cells

Secretory
Cells

Goblet
Cells
Basal and
Suprabasal
Cells

Detailed Cell Types

HOPXhigh Squamous Cells
VEGFAhigh Squamous Cells
SPRR2Dhigh Squamous Cells
CCL5high Squamous Cells
Ciliahigh Ciliated Cells
BEST4highCiliahigh Ciliated Cells
FOXJ1high Ciliated Cells
Early Response FOXJ1high Ciliated Cells
Interferon Responsive Ciliated Cells
Developing Ciliated Cells
Deuterosomal Cells
Ionocytes
Interferon Responsive Secretory Cells
high
BPIFA1 Chemokinehigh Secretory Cells
high
KRT24 KRT13high Secretory Cells
Early Response Secretory Cells
BPIFA1high Secretory Cells
SERPINB11high Secretory Cells
AZGP1highSCGB3A1highLTFhigh Goblet Cells
AZGP1high Goblet Cells
SCGB1A1high Goblet Cells
MUC5AChigh Goblet Cells
Developing Secretory and Goblet Cells
Basal Cells
Mitotic Basal Cells

Squamous
Cells

log(1 + UMI per 10K)

Basal, Goblet, and Secretory Cells

F

G

Detailed Cell Types
BPIFA1 Chemokine
Secretory Cells
high

BPIFA1
Secretory Cells
high

H

SARS-CoV-2 PCR

RNA Velocity-Based Pseudotime

K

Developing Ciliated Cells

Early Response
Secretory Cells

MUC5AChigh
Goblet Cells

Velocity Pseudotime

SARS-CoV-2 PCR

LGR6

-

AZGP1high Goblet Cells

TP63

1

KRT5

+

0

EGFR

FGFR3

KRT7

AQP5

S100P

N

PIGR

KLF6

PIFO

FOXJ1
4

40

10

8

8

40

5

4

4

20

1 0

1 0

20

0

BEST4

CFAP100

ZNF440

2

25

1

DNAH5

DLEC1

6

16

10
30

10

5

4

0

CAPS

+

50

10

8

2

2

2

-

1

4

4

4

DGE

Velocity Pseudotime

SARS-CoV-2 PCR

Ciliahigh Ciliated Cells

high

DGE

AZGP1 SCGB3A1
LTFhigh Goblet Cells
high

I

RNA Velocity-Based Pseudotime

Interferon Responsive
Ciliated Cells

BEST4highCiliahigh
Ciliated Cells

KRT24highKRT13high
Secretory Cells
Developing Secretory
and Goblet Cells

M

SARS-CoV-2 PCR

Early Response FOXJ1high
Ciliated Cells
FOXJ1high
Ciliated Cells

SERPINB11high
Secretory Cells

Basal Cells

L

Detailed Cell Types

high

Interferon
Responsive
Secretory Cells

SCGB1A1high
Goblet Cells

Mitotic Basal Cells

Ciliated Cells

3

8

5

5

15

0

CCL5high
Squamous Cells

Developing
Ciliated Cells

BEST4highCiliahigh
Ciliated Cells

SERPINB11high
Secretory Cells
KRT24highKRT13high
Secretory Cells
Ciliahigh Ciliated Cells

BPIFA1
Secretory Cells
high

UMAP 2

Deuterosomal Cells

UMAP 1

SCGB1A1high
Goblet Cells

1 0

1 0

1 0

Interferon Responsive
Ciliated Cells (* p = 0.021)

BEST4highCiliahigh
Ciliated Cells (* p = 0.021)

50

60

80

40

40

% of Epithelial Cells

Control WHO 0
COVID-19 WHO 1-5
COVID-19 WHO 6-8
20

lW
H
lW O
H 0
O
C
O 19
VI
W 7-8
D
H
-1
O
9
W 1-5
H
O
68

tro

tro

on

D

VI

C

on

C

O

tro

tro

-1

D

on
C

on

Control WHO 7-8

0

VI

C

*

40

C

% of Epithelial Cells

20

O

lW
H
lW O
0
D
-1 HO
C
O
9
VI
W 7-8
D
-1 HO
9
W 1-5
H
O
68

tro

Ciliahigh Ciliated
Cells (p = 0.061)

0

tro

on
C

on

C

lW
H
lW O
H 0
O
C
O 19
VI
W 7-8
D
H
-1
O
9
W 1-5
H
O
68

tro

tro

D

VI

on
C

on

C

tro
H
lW O
0
-1 HO
9
W 7-8
D
-1 HO
9
W 1-5
H
O
68
D

VI

VI

O

O
C

40

1

Ciliahigh Ciliated Cells

60

***

lW
H
lW O
H 0
O
C
O
9
VI
W 7-8
D
-1 HO
9
W 1-5
H
O
68

0

0

C

*
60

C

% of Epithelial Cells

10

*

20

VI

10

20

O

20

30

**

40

C

30

*

1 0

BEST4highCiliahigh
Ciliated Cells

Early Response FOXJ1high
Ciliated Cells (* p = 0.025)

% of Epithelial Cells

FOXJ1high Ciliated
Cells (p = 0.12)

lW
tro
on
C

COVID-19
Interferon Responsive
Ciliated Cells

1 0

Velocity Pseudotime

50

on

lW
H
lW O
0
D
-1 HO
C
O
9
VI
W 7-8
D
-1 HO
9
W 1-5
H
O
68

tro
on

tro

VI

O

C

on

C

tro
lW
tro
H
lW O
0
-1 HO
O
9
VI
W 7-8
D
-1 HO
9
W 1-5
H
O
68
D

Q

1 0

FOXJ1high
Ciliated Cells

0

0

C

C

on

C

tro
lW
tro
H
lW O
H 0
O
C
O 19
VI
W 7-8
D
-1 HO
9
W 1-5
H
O
68
D

on
C

on

% of Epithelial Cells

20

5

0

VI

C

lW
tro
H
lW O
0
-1 HO
9
VI
W 7-8
D
H
-1
O
9
1
W
H 5
O
68
D

on

VI

O

% of Epithelial Cells

40

10

C

% of Epithelial Cells

10

60

0

tro

Control

C

on
C

lW
H
lW O
H 0
O
C
O 19
VI
W 7-8
D
H
-1
O
9
W 1-5
H
O
68
tro

D

C

C

on

tro
on
C

20

0

VI

8

5

6-

19

W

H

O

0

8

O

7-

O

O

H

H

W

lW

9

-1

-1

D

D
VI

C

O

VI

tro
O
C

P

% of Epithelial Cells

5

**

O

80

30

1 0

O

15

10

1 0

C

BPIF1A1highChemokinehigh
Secretory Cells (p = 0.17)

100

0

H
lW
tro
on
C

on

KRT24highKRT13high
Secretory Cells (* p = 0.025)

40

O

10

0

C

% of Epithelial Cells

% of Epithelial Cells

20

O

% of Epithelial Cells

10

Early Response Secretory
Cells (p = 0.16)

15

0

Developing Ciliated Cells

Interferon Responsive
Secretory Cells (p = 0.58)

20

30

1

Secretory and Goblet Cells

on

**

40

1 0

25

O

**

20

1 0

VI

BPIFA1high Secretory
Cells (* p = 0.025)
50

C

SERPINB11high
Secretory Cells (* p = 0.025)
30

C

J

1 0

Velocity Pseudotime

C

1 0

Developing Secretory
and Goblet Cells

O

1 0

C

1 0

Basal Cells

C

0

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. Altered Epithelial Cell Composition in the Nasopharynx During COVID-19
A. UMAP of 28,948 epithelial cell types following re-clustering, colored by coarse cell types. Arrows
represent smoothed estimate of cellular differentiation trajectories
B. UMAP as in A, colored by SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic PCR status.
C. UMAP as in A, colored by peak level of respiratory support (WHO illness severity scale).
D. UMAP as in A, colored by detailed cell types resolved by iterative re-clustering.
E. Violin plots (log(1+normalized UMI per 10k)) of marker genes (FDR < 0.01) for detailed epithelial
cell type annotations (as in D).
F. UMAP of 9,209 basal, goblet, and secretory cells, following sub-clustering and resolution of detailed
cell annotations.
G. UMAP of only basal, goblet, and secretory cells as in F, colored by SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic PCR
status.
H. UMAP of only basal, goblet, and secretory cells as in F, colored by inferred velocity pseudotime
(darker blue shades: precursor cells, intense yellow shades: more terminally differentiated cell
types)
I.

Plot of gene expression by basal, goblet, and secretory cell velocity pseudotime for select genes
(all significantly correlated with velocity expression). Points colored by detailed cell type
annotations.

J. Proportion of secretory cell subtypes (detailed annotation) by sample, normalized to all epithelial
cells. Statistical test above graph represents Kruskal-Wallis test results across all groups (following
FDR correction). Statistical significance asterisks within box represent results from Dunn’s posthoc testing. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. Lines represent mean and S.E.M.
K. UMAP of 13,913 ciliated cells, following sub-clustering and resolution of detailed cell annotations.
L. UMAP of ciliated cells as in K, colored by SARS-CoV-2 PCR status at time of swab.
M. UMAP of ciliated cells as in K, colored by inferred velocity pseudotime (darker blue shades:
precursor cells, intense yellow shades: more terminally differentiated cell types).
N. Plot of gene expression by ciliated cell velocity pseudotime for select genes (all significantly
correlated with velocity expression). Points colored by detailed cell type annotations.
O. Proportion of ciliated cell subtypes (detailed annotation) by sample, normalized to all epithelial cells.
P. UMAP of 13,210 epithelial cells (using UMAP embedding from A) from SARS-CoV-2 PCR negative
participants (Control). Arrows represent smoothed estimate of cellular differentiation trajectories
(via RNA velocity) calculated using only cells from Control participants.
Q. UMAP of 15,738 epithelial cells (using UMAP embedding from A) from SARS-CoV-2 PCR positive
participants (COVID-19). Arrows represent smoothed estimate of cellular differentiation trajectories
(via RNA velocity) calculated using only cells from COVID-19 participants. Named cell types
highlight those significantly altered between disease groups.
See also Figure S2, Table S1

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

B

Ciliated Cells (All)

Ø

Ø
Ø

Ø

GBP1

Ø
Ø

Ø
Ø

0

Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø

STAT2
TAPBP
OASL
IRF7
CFAP54 CFAP70
DNAH7
DNAH11
DNAH10
ZBBX

−2

−1

TUBA1A
ADAR
TNFSF10
CTSS
HIST1H1C
HLA−DRB1
HLA−DPA1
DUOX2
SAMHD1
LDLR

0

1

Average logFC

Control WHO 0

RBM3
DLEC1
DNAH11
DNAH3
IL33
CFAP44
MUC4 IRAK3

−2

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

−1

0

* NES: -1.57

250
200

IFI44L
ISG15

IFITM3
MX1 PARP14
IFITM1
IFI44
STAT1
IFI6 IFIT3 OAS2
STAT2
IFIT1
DUOX2
XAF1MX2
PIGR OAS1 TNFAIP2 CFAP53
GBP1 IRF1 TAP1
FKBP5
CTSS
NLRP1
S100A6 IL33
LDLRAD1
HLA−C CTSB
SPR IGFBP5
HLA−DRA
S100A9
IL5RA
HLA−DPA1 CIITA

−2

−1

0

Average logFC

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

* NES: -1.61

n.s. NES: -1.44

2

*** NES: 1.81

*** NES: 1.87

n.s. NES: -1.41

Ranked Average logFC

1

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

Enrichment Score

*** NES: -2.28

Type II IFN
Specific Response

TBC1D8

Enrichment Score

Type I IFN
Specific Response

2

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

Enrichment Score

*** Normalized Enrichment Score (NES): -2.29

1

Average logFC

Control WHO 0

Shared IFN
Response

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

300
TNFAIP2

2

HLA−C
CD74
LDLRAD1
HLA−F
HLA−B
POLR2I
S100P
HLA−E
ISG15
IFIT1
CFAP53
LDLR
XAF1 PTGES3
SAMHD1 SPON2
IGFBP5
HLA−DRA
IFITM2
C3 HLA−G
OAS1 HLA−DRB1
CP
HLA−DRB5
IL5RA

150

Ø

Ø

Ø

HLA−F

TAP1

FKBP5
IFITM3

100

Ø

HLA−E

MX2

HLA−A

50

Ø

Ø

OAS3

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

−log10(FDR−Adjusted p−value)

Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø

Ø

HLA−C
HLA−A
IFITM1

IFI44

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

0

MX1

IFIT1

250

up in
up in
COVID-19 WHO 1-5 COVID-19 WHO 6-8

Control WHO 0
300

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

200

Control WHO 0
400

150

200

0

0

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

up in
COVID-19 WHO 6-8

−200

300

Control WHO 0

up in
Control WHO 0

400 −400

250

up in

200

200

up in

0

100

# DE Genes
(FDR < 0.001, logFC > 0.25)

−200

50

COVID-19 WHO 1-5 vs. COVID-19 WHO 6-8

# DE Genes
(FDR < 0.001, logFC > 0.25)
400 −400

150

200

100

0

Ø

SERPINB11high Secretory Cells
Dendritic Cells
Deuterosomal Cells
Inflammatory Macrophages
MSR1highC1QBhigh Macrophages
Interferon Responsive Macrophages
BPIFA1highChemokinehigh Secretory Cells
Developing Secretory and Goblet Cells
FFAR4high Macrophages
HOPXhigh Squamous Cells
Plasmacytoid DCs
Enteroendocrine Cells
Interferon Responsive Cytotoxic CD8 T Cells
Erythroblasts
Interferon Responsive Secretory Cells
Mast Cells
KRT24highKRT13high Secretory Cells
B Cells
Mitotic Basal Cells
Early Response Secretory Cells
SCGB1A1high Goblet Cells
Early Response T Cells
Interferon Responsive Ciliated Cells
AZGP1highSCGB3A1highLTFhigh Goblet Cells
BPIFA1high Secretory Cells
Ciliahigh Ciliated Cells
SPRR2Dhigh Squamous Cells
MUC5AChigh Goblet Cells
VEGFAhigh Squamous Cells
BEST4highCiliahigh Ciliated Cells
CCL5high Squamous Cells
ITGAXhigh Macrophages
Ionocytes
Basal Cells
CD8 T Cells
Developing Ciliated Cells
FOXJ1high Ciliated Cells
Early Response FOXJ1high Ciliated Cells
AZGP1high Goblet Cells

−200

−log10(FDR−Adjusted p−value)

Control WHO 0 vs. COVID-19 WHO 6-8

# DE Genes
(FDR < 0.001, logFC > 0.25)
−400

50

Control WHO 0 vs. COVID-19 WHO 1-5
Ø not tested

−log10(FDR−Adjusted p−value)

Figure 3
A

n.s. NES: 1.40

Ranked Average logFC

Ranked Average logFC

Interferon Responsive Ciliated Cells

SCGB1A1
IFITM3
ISG15
HLA−C
IFITM1
IFI44L
HLA−B

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

100

−1

0

*** NES: -1.65

* NES: -1.41

60
40
20

−log10(FDR−Adjusted p−value)

80

80

0

Average logFC

1

2

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

*** NES: 2.20

*** NES: 2.43

** NES: 1.64

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

−2

−1

0

1

2

XAF1
LGALS3
BPIFA1 ALDH1A1
IGFBP3
B3GALT5

−2

Average logFC
Control WHO 0

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

n.s. (NES): -1.31

Type I IFN
Specific Response

* NES: -1.42

n.s. NES: -0.79

−1

1

2

50
40
30
−2

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

−1

* NES: -1.96

n.s. NES: -0.85

0

Average logFC

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

n.s. NES: -1.50

Ranked Average logFC

SP100

STAT1
IFIT1
MX2
XAF1
TNFAIP2
IFIT3
IFI27
TNFSF10
TRIM22
ISG15
IFI6
STAT2
ADAR OAS3
BST2

IFI27
IFI6 MX1

0

Average logFC

Control WHO 0

IFI44L IFI44
MX1

S100A9

1

2

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

n.s. NES: 1.20

** NES: 1.32

n.s. NES: 0.86

Enrichment Score

Shared IFN
Response

−log10(FDR−Adjusted p−value)

50
40
30

TNFAIP2

0

0

ALDH3A1

PARP14

0

20
10

CYP1B1
ALDH3A1

ISG15
MX2
BST2 IFIT3
OAS2
IFITM3
HLA−E
NFAT5

20

IFI44L
STAT1
IFI6

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

60

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

10

−log10(FDR−Adjusted p−value)

40
30

IFI44

Ranked Average logFC

Scaled DGE

Ranked Average logFC

***
******

*** ***
***
*** *

*
******

** *

***
**

6

5
4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0

***
******

0.0

***
******
***
******

***
******

******

*** ***
*** *

******

***
*** ***

0.0

% Expressing

1.0

** *

0.5

*****

***

*** *

M
G UC
ob 5
le AC
t C hig
el h
ls
SC
G GB
ob 1
l
A
et 1 h
AZ
ig
C
G
el h
ls
LT P1 hig
F hig Sh
h
C
G GB
ob 3
le A1
t C hig
el h
ls
Ea
r
Se ly
cr Re
et s
or po
In
y n
te
C se
rfe
el
ro
ls
Se n R
cr es
et po
or n
y si
C ve
el
ls
D
eu
te
ro
so
In
C ma
te
el l
rfe
ls
ro
n
C Res
ilia p
te on
d si
C ve
el
ls
BE
ST
C 4 hig
ilia h
te Cil
d ia h
ig
C
el h
ls
Sq
ua V
m EG
ou F
s A hig
C
el h
ls

0.0

6

4

*

0.5

7

5

10
20
30
40
50

Control WHO 0
COVID-19 WHO 1-5
COVID-19 WHO 6-8

Common DE Genes Upregulated in
COVID-19 WHO 6-8 vs. Control WHO 0

AGR2
AHNAK2
CYR61
ELF3
FKBP5
HSP90AA1
HSPA1A
HSPA8
KRT19
KRT23
KRT24
KRT7
LCN2
RSPH1
S100A8
SERF2
SERPINB3
SLC44A4
VAMP8
CYP4B1
DHCR24
DUSP1
FTH1
GLUL
S100A9
SAA1

1.5

Common DE Genes Upregulated in
COVID-19 WHO 1-5 vs. Control WHO 0

7

ACTB
ADH7
AL357093.2
APOL6
ARHGAP18
DDX24
DDX58
DDX60
EIF2AK2
EPSTI1
ETV6
FAM107B
GSTA2
HERC6
HLA−B
HLA−C
IFIT1
IFIT3
IFITM1
MTUS1
MX2
MYOF
NCL
OAS2
PARP9
PGD
PRDX1
PSMB3
RBM25
RHBDD2
SP100
STOM
TAPBP
TRIM22
WARS
XAF1
XIST
ACTG1
ADAR
ALDH1A1
ISG15
LMO7
PROM1
RNF213
SFPQ
SLC6A6
STAT2
ABCA13
AD000090.1
IFI27
PIGR
RBM3
TNFAIP2
IFI44
IFI44L
MX1
PARP14
STAT1
TBC1D8
IFI6

H

# Cell Types DE
(FDR < 0.001, logFC > 0.25)

5

IFNGR1
IFNGR2
IFNAR1
IFNAR2

Shared IFN Response
Module Score

S100A9
BTNL9
MUC12
S100A8 SAA1
CSTA
SPR

Ranked Average logFC

60

60
50

XAF1

SP100

TNFSF10
Type II IFN
TCF25
Specific Response
XAF1
IFI27

Type I IFN Specific Response
Module Score

n.s. NES: -1.16

Enrichment Score

HLA−E

Type II IFN Specific Response
Module Score

n.s. NES: -1.16

Control WHO 0

Enrichment Score

BST2
OAS2
OAS3
SAMHD1
IFIT1
IFITM3

1.5

−1

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

n.s. NES: -1.00

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

IFI27

MX2
IFIT3

0.5

−2

Ranked Average logFC

MX1

TRIM22

1.0

2

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

20

Control WHO 0

−log10(FDR−Adjusted p−value)

MX1
IFI44
IFI44L
STAT1
IFI6
ISG15
SP100

1.5

1

OAS3

TAPBP

10

F

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

CEACAM5

1.0

0

Average logFC

OAS2

OXTR
IFI6 IFIT1
IFI27
TRIM22
MX2
ADAR
IFIT3
DUOX2
STAT2
HLA−E
IRF1
XAF1
STAT3
GBP1
GBP5
IFI35
TNFRSF19

Enrichment Score

*** (NES): -1.57

Type I IFN
Specific Response
Type II IFN
Specific Response

−1

STAT1
IFI44L
MX1
IFITM3
ISG15
IFI44
PARP14
IFITM1

Enrichment Score

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

LGALS3
CP

G

60
−2

Control WHO 0

Shared IFN
Response

TNFAIP2

0

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

MUC5AChigh Goblet Cells

Control WHO 0

−5

40

2

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

Ranked Average logFC

5

E

IFI6
HSPH1 IFI27
POLR2I TUBB4B
HLA−C
HLA−A
TUBA1A
HLA−F HLA−B

TBC1D8
ATP12A

Enrichment Score

0

1

Average logFC

Control WHO 0

Scaled DGE

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

0

CD74

−2

20

ISG15
IFI44L HLA−E HLA−C
IFITM1
IFIT1 MX1
FTL XAF1 TUBA1A HLA−B
HLA−A
IFI44
PARP14 TUBB4B

−log10(FDR−Adjusted p−value)

IFI27

IFITM3

0

80

−log10(FDR−Adjusted p−value)

IFI6

0

XAF1

−5

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

TBC1D8

MX1
HLA−E
HLA−F

IFI6
IFI27
HLA−A
POLR2I

Control WHO 0
100

Control WHO 0

100

D

COVID-19 WHO 6-8

60

COVID-19 WHO 1-5

40

Control WHO 0

20

C

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Cell-Type Specific and Shared Transcriptional Responses During COVID-19
A. Abundance of significantly differentially expressed (DE) genes by detailed cell types between
Control WHO 0 vs. COVID-19 WHO 1-5 samples (left), Control WHO 0 and COVID-19 WHO 6-8
samples (middle), COVID-19 WHO 1-5 and COVID-19 WHO 6-8 samples (right). Restricted to
genes with FDR-corrected p < 0.001, log2 fold change > 0.25 (likelihood ratio test assuming an
underlying negative binomial distribution). ø = comparison not tested, too few cells (< 10).
B. Top: Volcano plots of average log fold change (FC) vs. -log10(FDR-adjusted p-value) for ciliated
cells (all, coarse annotation). Left: Control WHO 0 vs. COVID-19 WHO 1-5 (mild/moderate). Middle:
Control WHO 0 vs. COVID-19 WHO 6-8 (severe). Right: COVID-19 WHO 1-5 (mild/moderate) vs.
COVID-19 WHO 6-8 (severe). Horizontal red dashed line: FDR-adjusted p-value = 0.05. Bottom:
gene set enrichment analysis plots across shared, type I interferon specific, and type II interferon
specific stimulated genes. Genes ranked by their average log FC between each comparison. Black
lines represent the ranked location of genes belonging to the annotated gene set. Bar height
represents running enrichment score (NES: Normalized Enrichment Score). P-values following
Bonferroni-correction: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
C. Heatmap of significantly DE genes between interferon responsive ciliated cells from different
disease groups. Values represent row(gene)-scaled digital gene expression (DGE) following
log(1+UMI per 10K) normalization.
D. Top: Volcano plots related to C. Average log FC vs. -log10(FDR-adjusted p-value) for interferon
responsive ciliated cells. Horizontal red dashed line: FDR-adjusted p-value = 0.05. Bottom: gene
set enrichment analysis across shared, type I, and type II interferon stimulated genes.
E. Heatmap of significantly DE genes between MUC5AChigh goblet cells from different disease groups.
Values represent row(gene)-scaled digital gene expression (DGE) following log(1+UMI per 10K)
normalization.
F. Top: Volcano plots related to E. Average log FC vs. -log10(FDR-adjusted p-value) for MUC5AChigh
goblet cells. Horizontal red dashed line: FDR-adjusted p-value = 0.05. Bottom: gene set enrichment
analysis across shared, type I, and type II interferon stimulated genes.
G. Top: Dot plot of IFNGR1, IFNGR2, IFNAR1, and IFNAR2 gene expression among subset of
detailed epithelial subtypes. Bottom: Violin plots of module scores, split by Control WHO 0 (blue),
COVID-19 WHO 1-5 (red), and COVID-19 WHO 6-8 (pink). Gene modules represent transcriptional
responses of human basal cells from the nasal epithelium following in vitro treatment with IFNa or
IFNg. Significance by Wilcoxon signed-rank test. P-values following Bonferroni-correction: * p<
0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
H. Common DE genes across detailed cell types. Left (red): genes upregulated in multiple cell types
when comparing COVID-19 WHO 1-5 vs. Control WHO 0. Right (pink): genes upregulated in
multiple cell types when comparing COVID-19 WHO 6-8 vs. Control WHO 0.
See also Figures S3, S4, Tables S2-S4

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4
B

COVID-19
WHO 6-8

5
4
3
2
1

103
102
101
100

3

102

101

100
0

Spearman ρ = 0.49
Bonferroni-corrected p-value = 0.0015

80

60

40

20

0

E

Spearman ρ = -0.43
Bonferroni−corrected p−value = 0.020
40

30

20

10

0
0

C
on
tro
lW
on
H
tro
O
0
lW
C
H
O
O
VI
7D
C
8
19
O
VI
C
D
on
-1
v
9
.
C
W
O
H
VI
O
D
-1
19
5
W
H
O
68

ORF7b
ORF7a
ORF8
ORF10
ORF3a ORF6
S
EM
N 3' UTR
genomic RNA
transcription regulatory sequences (TRS)
S
ORF3a
E
M
ORF6
ORF7a
Disease/Severity
ORF7b
ORF8
COVID-19 WHO 6-8
N
COVID-19 WHO 1-5
COVID-19 Conv.
3'
Control WHO 0
25000
30000

ORF1b

104

10

100

100

102

104

106

SARS-CoV-2 UMI per M

C

ORF1a

5' UTR

D
**

104

# SARS-CoV-2 UMI/Cell

COVID-19 Participant 9

COVID-19 Participant 3

COVID-19 Participant 38

COVID-19 Participant 16

COVID-19 Participant 4

COVID-19 Participant 32

COVID-19 Participant 21

COVID-19 Participant 15

COVID-19 Participant 27

COVID-19 Participant 31

COVID-19 Participant 2

COVID-19 Participant 19

COVID-19 Participant 17

COVID-19 Participant 13

COVID-19 Participant 12

COVID-19 Participant 20

COVID-19 Participant 23

COVID-19 Participant 30

COVID-19 Participant 26

COVID-19 Participant 14

COVID-19 Participant 28

COVID-19 Participant 18

COVID-19 Participant 10

COVID-19 Participant 40

COVID-19 Participant 36

COVID-19 Participant 11

COVID-19 Participant 22

COVID-19 Participant 5

COVID-19 Participant 24

COVID-19 Participant 1

COVID-19 Participant 35

COVID-19 Participant 7

COVID-19 Participant 8

COVID-19 Participant 6

COVID-19 Participant 29

COVID-19 Participant 25

COVID-19 Participant 37

COVID-19 Participant 39

Control Participant 19

COVID-19 Participant 33

Control Participant 16

COVID-19 Participant 34

Control Participant 18

Control Participant 17

Control Participant 21

Control Participant 20

Control Participant 7

Control Participant 4

Control Participant 1

Control Participant 14

Control Participant 5

Control Participant 13

Control Participant 15

Control Participant 10

Control Participant 9

Control Participant 11

Control Participant 3

Control Participant 12

Control Participant 2

Control Participant 8

C

log10(1+reads)

***

105

10-1
0

0

Canonical RNA Species

Control Participant 6

Influenza A virus
Influenza B virus
Rhinovirus A
Rhinovirus B
Enterovirus A
Enterovirus B
Enterovirus C
Human metapneumovirus
Human orthopneumovirus
Bat coronavirus
Alphacoronavirus 1
Betacoronavirus 1
MERS related coronavirus
Human coronavirus HKU1
Human coronavirus 299E
Human coronavirus NL63
SARS related coronavirus

F

106

% Secretory Cells (all)

COVID-19
WHO 1-5

% FOXJ1high Ciliated Cells

Control COVID-19 Conv.
WHO 0
WHO 7-8

Control
WHO 0

SARS-CoV-2 UMI per M

A

H

5'
0

5000

10000

15000

20000

Alignment Region

SARS-CoV-2 Genome
5' UTR
nsp1
nsp2
nsp3
nsp4
nsp5
nsp6
nsp7
nsp8
nsp9
nsp10
nsp12
nsp13
nsp14
nsp15
nsp16
S
ORF3a
E
M
ORF6
ORF7a
ORF7b
ORF8
N
ORF10
3' UTR
Negative Strand

5' UTR
nsp1
nsp2
nsp3
nsp4
nsp5
nsp6
nsp7
nsp8
nsp9
nsp10
nsp12
nsp13
nsp14
nsp15
nsp16
S
ORF3a
E
M
ORF6
ORF7a
ORF7b
ORF8
N
ORF10
3' UTR
Negative Strand

Unspliced Leader
Unspliced S
Spliced Leader | TRS | S
Unspliced ORF3a
Spliced Leader | TRS | ORF3a
Unspliced E
Spliced Leader | TRS | E
Unspliced M
Spliced Leader | TRS | M
Unspliced ORF6
Spliced Leader | TRS | ORF6
Unspliced ORF7a
Spliced Leader | TRS | ORF7a
Unspliced ORF7b
Spliced Leader | TRS | ORF7b
Unspliced ORF8
Spliced Leader | TRS | ORF8
Unspliced N
Spliced Leader | TRS | N

Unspliced Leader
Unspliced S
Spliced Leader | TRS | S
Unspliced ORF3a
Spliced Leader | TRS | ORF3a
Unspliced E
Spliced Leader | TRS | E
Unspliced M
Spliced Leader | TRS | M
Unspliced ORF6
Spliced Leader | TRS | ORF6
Unspliced ORF7a
Spliced Leader | TRS | ORF7a
Unspliced ORF7b
Spliced Leader | TRS | ORF7b
Unspliced ORF8
Spliced Leader | TRS | ORF8
Unspliced N
Spliced Leader | TRS | N

Alignment Regions

G

3’

5’

5'

3'
0

5000

10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

SARS-CoV-2 Genome
Leader TRS

UMI (Post Viral Ambient Correction)
0 100

S

N
ORF3a E M
ORF6
ORF7a ORF8
ORF7b
Body TRS

101

102

103

Single Cells

Region
Length (nt)
100 101 102 103 104 105

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Co-Detection of Human and SARS-CoV-2 RNA
A. Metatranscriptomic classification of all scRNA-seq reads using Kraken2 (Methods). Results shown
from selected respiratory viruses. Only results with > 5 reads are shown.
B. Normalized abundance of SARS-CoV-2 aligning UMI from all scRNA-seq reads (including those
derived from ambient cell barcodes). P < 0.0001 by Kruskal-Wallis test. Pairwise comparisons using
Dunn’s post-hoc testing. ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
C. SARS-CoV-2 UMI per high-complexity single-cell transcriptome. Results following correction for
ambient viral reads.
D. Proportional abundance of secretory cells (all, coarse annotation) vs. total SARS-CoV-2 UMI
(normalized to M total UMI).
E. Proportional abundance of FOXJ1high ciliated cells vs. total SARS-CoV-2 UMI (normalized to M total
UMI).
F. Schematic for SARS-CoV-2 genome and subgenomic RNA species.
G. Schematic for SARS-CoV-2 genomic features annotated in the custom reference genome.
H. Heatmap of SARS-CoV-2 gene expression among SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ single cells (following
correction for ambient viral reads). Top color bar indicates disease group (red: COVID-19 WHO 15, pink: COVID-19 WHO 6-8, black: COVID-19 Convalescent, blue: Control WHO 0). Middle
heatmap: SARS-CoV-2 genes and regions organized from 5' to 3'. Bottom heatmap: alignment to
70-mer regions directly surrounding viral transcription regulatory sequence (TRS) sites, suggestive
of spliced RNA species (joining of the leader to body regions) vs. unspliced RNA species (alignment
across TRS).
See also Figures S5, S6

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5
A

B

SARS-CoV-2

Control

COVID-19

WHO 0

WHO 7

WHO 8

Conv.

WHO 1

WHO 3

WHO 4

WHO 5

WHO 6

WHO 7

WHO 8

# SARS-CoV-2
RNA+ Cells

140
120
100
80
60
40
20

AZGP1high
Goblet Cells

KRT24highKRT13high
Secretory Cells

CCL5high
Squamous Cells

Developing Interferon Responsive
Ciliated Cells
Ciliated Cells

% SARS-CoV-2
RNA+ Cells

0

Top SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ Cell Types

30

20

10

0

D
C

Positive Strand
Negative Strand

% Cells Expressing
(of Sample)

Unspliced TRS

# of Cells

10

15

20

Goblet Cells

Secretory Cells

Ciliated Cells

Squamous Cells

Lymphoid Cells

% SARS-CoV-2 RNA+
2.5

5.0

7.5

Myeloid Cells/
Granulocytes

10.0

Fraction Negative
Strand UMI
1

Spliced TRS
Unspliced TRS
Negative Strand
Positive Strand

COVID-19 Participant30

COVID-19 Participant28

COVID-19 Participant27

COVID-19 Participant26

COVID-19 Participant23

COVID-19 Participant21

COVID-19 Participant19

COVID-19 Participant18

COVID-19 Participant17

COVID-19 Participant15

COVID-19 Participant14

COVID-19 Participant9

COVID-19 Participant13

COVID-19 Participant4

COVID-19 Participant12

COVID-19 Participant2

COVID-19 Participant38

COVID-19 Participant3

COVID-19 Participant32

COVID-19 Participant20

COVID-19 Participant31

COVID-19 Participant22

COVID-19 Participant6

COVID-19 Participant11

COVID-19 Participant5

COVID-19 Participant10

COVID-19 Participant8

COVID-19 Participant29

COVID-19 Participant25

COVID-19 Participant7

COVID-19 Participant40

COVID-19 Participant39

COVID-19 Participant37

COVID-19 Participant36

COVID-19 Participant35

Control Participant17

COVID-19 Participant34

Control Participant16

COVID-19 Participant33

Control Participant21

Control Participant20

Control Participant19

Control Participant18

Control Participant15

Control Participant14

Control Participant13

Control Participant12

Control Participant9

Control Participant11

Control Participant8

Other
Control Participant10

0.5

Control Participant7

0

Control Participant6

Samples

Basal/
Suprabasal Cells

Control Participant5

COVID-19 Participant32
COVID-19 Participant6
COVID-19 Participant30
COVID-19 Participant29
COVID-19 Participant14
COVID-19 Participant18
COVID-19 Participant25
COVID-19 Participant20
COVID-19 Participant28
COVID-19 Participant26

Detailed
Cell Types

Mitotic Basal Cells
Basal Cells
Developing Secretory and Goblet Cells
MUC5AChigh Goblet Cells
SCGB1A1high Goblet Cells
AZGP1high Goblet Cells
AZGP1highSCGB3A1highLTFhigh Goblet Cells
SERPINB11high Secretory Cells
BPIFA1high Secretory Cells
Early Response Secretory Cells
KRT24highKRT13high Secretory Cells
BPIFA1highChemokinehigh Secretory Cells
Interferon Responsive Secretory Cells
Ionocytes
Deuterosomal Cells
Developing Ciliated Cells
Interferon Responsive Ciliated Cells
Early Response FOXJ1high Ciliated Cells
FOXJ1high Ciliated Cells
BEST4highCiliahigh Ciliated Cells
Ciliahigh Ciliated Cells
CCL5high Squamous Cells
SPRR2Dhigh Squamous Cells
VEGFAhigh Squamous Cells
HOPXhigh Squamous Cells
B Cells
CD8 T Cells
Early Response T Cells
Interferon Responsive Cytotoxic CD8 T Cells
Plasmacytoid DCs
Dendritic Cells
ITGAXhigh Macrophages
Inflammatory Macrophages
high
MSR1 C1QBhigh Macrophages
Interferon Responsive Macrophages
FFAR4high Macrophages
Mast Cells
Erythroblasts
Enteroendocrine Cells
Control Participant8
COVID-19 Participant34
COVID-19 Participant7
COVID-19 Participant22
COVID-19 Participant31
COVID-19 Participant12
COVID-19 Participant17
COVID-19 Participant2
COVID-19 Participant13
COVID-19 Participant23
COVID-19 Participant4

5

0

Control Participant4

20

Control Participant3

40

Control Participant2

60

Control Participant1

80

Spliced TRS

% Cells Expressing
(of Cell Type)
2.5

5.0

7.5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. Cellular Targets of SARS-CoV-2 in the Nasopharynx
A. Summary schematic of top SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells. (created with BioRender).
B. SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cell number (top) and percent (bottom) per participant. Results following
correction for ambient viral reads.
C. Abundance of SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells by detailed cell type, bars colored by participant. Results
following correction for ambient viral reads.
D. Dot plot of SARS-CoV-2 RNA presence by sample (columns) and detailed cell types (rows). Dot
size reflects fraction of a given participant and cell type containing SARS-CoV-2 RNA (following
viral ambient correction). Dot color reflects fraction of aligned reads corresponding to the SARSCoV-2 positive strand (yellow) vs. negative strand (black). Top dot plot across columns: alignment
of viral reads by participant, separated by RNA species type. Right dot plot across rows: alignment
of viral reads by detailed cell type, separated by RNA species type.
See also Figures S5, S6

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6
A

B

log(1 + UMI per 10K)
IFITM3
0

1

2

MX1
3

4 0

1

2

3

STAT2
4

0

1

2

EIF2AK2
3

4

0

1

2

IFITM1

3

4

0

1

2

FDFT1

IFI44L
3

4 0

1

2

3

4

0

1

2

3

Common Upregulated Genes among
SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ Cells (vs. Bystander Cells)

4

Interferon Responsive
Ciliated Cells

p-value (Fisher's Exact Test)
10-9

10-7

10-5

10-3

10-1

Antiviral defense
(IFITM3, IFITM1, MX1, ...)

AZGP1
Goblet Cells

high

Immunity
(IFI6, IRF1, CTSS, CTSD, ...)

Developing
Ciliated Cells

IPR013787:S100/CaBP-9k-type, calcium binding, subdomain
(S100A6, S100A14, ...)

KRT24highKRT13high
Secretory Cells

IPR026774:2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthase
(OAS1, OAS3, OASL, ...)

CCL5high
Squamous Cells

GO:0002479~antigen processing and presentation of exogenous peptide
antigen via MHC class I, TAP-dependent (HLA-E, PSMD2, PSME3, ...)
Cholesterol biosynthesis
(MVK, EBP, FDPS, ...)

BPIFA1high
Secretory Cells

GO:0005681~spliceosomal complex
(SF3B2, SF3A1, PRPF8, ...)

FOXJ1
Ciliated Cells

high

GO:0045454~cell redox homeostasis
(TXN, GSN, ...)

BEST4highCiliahigh
Ciliated Cells

IPR001806:Small GTPase superfamily
(RASEF, RAB9A, RHOC, ...)

MUC5AChigh
Goblet Cells

IPR002172:Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor class A repeat
(LDLR, LRP8, ...)

Ciliahigh
Ciliated Cells

domain:SRCR
(TMPRSS4, TMPRSS2, ...)

SCGB1A1high
Goblet Cells

GO:0019221~cytokine-mediated signaling pathway
(STAT3, IL6R, IL13RA1, ...)

SPRR2Dhigh
Squamous Cells

Common Downregulated Genes among
SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ Cells (vs. Bystander Cells)

SERPINB11high
Secretory Cells

GO:0042613~MHC class II protein complex
(CD74, HLA-DRB5, HLA-DRA, HLA-DPA1, ...)

Early Response FOXJ1high
Ciliated Cells

hsa05164:Influenza A
(IFNAR1, TNFSF10, ...)

Early Response
Secretory Cells

chain:Serum amyloid protein A(4-101)
(SAA1, SAA2)

Deuterosomal
Cells

0

10

20

30

N Genes

Control (Negative)
COVID-19 Bystander
COVID-19 SARS-CoV-2 RNA+

C

D

Consistently Higher in SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ Cells

Consistently Higher in Bystander Cells
SCGB1A1high Goblet Cells
SERPINB11high Secretory Cells
BEST4highCiliahigh Ciliated Cells
KRT24highKRT13high Secretory Cells
MUC5AChigh Goblet Cells
SPRR2Dhigh Squamous Cells
Deuterosomal Cells
Interferon Responsive Ciliated Cells
FOXJ1high Ciliated Cells
CCL5high Squamous Cells
Developing Ciliated Cells
BPIFA1high Secretory Cells
Ciliahigh Ciliated Cells
AZGP1high Goblet Cells
Early Response Secretory Cells

log2 Fold Change
SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ vs. Bystander
higher in Bystander

higher in SARS-CoV-2 RNA+
−2

−1

0

1

2

H

LA

−D
LG QB
A 1
F L
LD CG S8
H LR BP
H LA− AD
LA D 1
H − R
LA D A
−DRB
R 5
C B1
D
SA 74
A1

1

3
BP

AR

N

G

IF

B1

A2

G
M
H

SA

13
R
A
PC 1
B
TN HL P2
FR A−
SF E
21
LD
LR

3

F1
IR

IL

O
AS

1

M
E
D 3
D DIT
U 4
O
X
IL 1
C 6R
TM TS
PR S
SS
IF 2
IT
3

O
AS

PS

2

C
1
EB 5
P

IT
IF

AJ
N
D

LG IF
A I6
IF LS3
IT
M
IF 3
I2
S1 M 7
X
0
S1 0A1
0 6
IF 0A
IT 9
M
S1 IFI 1
00 44
AL
C 10
TM TSH
PRMV
SK
EI STAS4
F T
PS2AK3
M 2
C D2
TS
IL D
1R
EG N
R
C SL 1
C PI
N
D O D1
N A
AJ S
CL
IS 21
G
15

Early Response FOXJ1high Ciliated Cells

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. Intrinsic and Bystander Responses to SARS-CoV-2 Infection
A. Violin plots of selected genes upregulated in SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells in at least 3 individual cell
type comparisons. Blue: cells from Control participants, Red: bystander cells from COVID-19
participants, Dark red: SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells.
B. Enriched gene ontologies among genes consistently up- or down-regulated among SARS-CoV-2
RNA+ cells across cell types.
C. Heatmap of genes consistently higher in SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells across multiple cell types.
Colors represent log fold changes between SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells and bystander cells (SARSCoV-2 RNA negative cells, from COVID-19 participants) by cell type. Restricted to cell types with
at least 5 SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells. Yellow: upregulated among SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells, blue:
upregulated among bystander cells.
D. Heatmap of genes consistently higher in bystander cells across multiple cell types.
See also Figure S7, Table S5

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table 1
Control
(WHO score 0)

Intubated Control
(WHO score 7-8)

COVID-19 m/m
(WHO score 1-5)

COVID-19 severe
(WHO score 6-8)

COVID-19 conv.
(WHO score 0)

25.9% (15/58)

10.3% (6/58)

24.1% (14/58)

36.2 (21/58)

3.4% (2/58)

27

33

19

28

20

58 (16)

65.5 (31)

49.5 (17.8)

62 (13)

N/A

73

71

69

84

57

Female

60% (9/15)

16.7% (1/6)

42.9% (6/14)

47.6% (10/21)

50% (1/2)

Male

40% (6/15)

83.3% (5/6)

57.1% (8/14)

52.4% (11/21)

50% (1/2)

0% (0/15)

0% (0/6)

0% (0/14)

4.8% (1/21)

0% (0/2)

100% (15/15)

100% (6/6)

100% (14/14)

95.2% (20/21)

100% (2/2)

66.7% (10/15)

66.7% (4/6)

71.4% (10/14)

61.9% (13/21)

50% (1/2)

33.3% (5/15)

33.3% (2/6)

28.6% (4/14)

23.8% (5/21)

50% (1/2)

American Indian

0% (0/15)

0% (0/6)

0% (0/14)

14.3% (3/21)

0% (0/2)

Median (IQR)

37.5 (14.4)

30.5 (18.1)

23.0 (11.6)

31.9 (14.2)

40.7

Diabetes

40% (6/15)

33.3% (2/6)

28.6% (4/14)

71.4% (15/21)

0% (0/2)

Chronic kidney disease

6.7% (1/15)

0% (0/6)

7.1% (1/14)

19.0% (4/21)

0% (0/2)

Congestive heart failure

6.7% (1/15)

16.7% (1/6)

0% (0/14)

4.8% (1/21)

0% (0/2)

Lung disorder

6.7% (1/15)

16.7% (1/6)

28.6% (4/14)

38.1% (8/21)

0% (0/2)

Hypertension

86.7% (13/15)

50% (3/6)

42.9% (6/14)

81.0% (17/21)

0% (0/2)

13.3% (2/15)

0% (0/6)

0% (0/14)

0% (0/21)

50% (1/2)

Corticosteroids

N/A

33.3% (2/6)

42.9% (6/14)

66.7% (14/21)

N/A

Remdesivir

N/A

0% (0/6)

42.9% (6/14)

85.7% (18/21)

N/A

0% (0/15)

33.3% (2/6)

0% (0/14)

76.2% (16/21)

0% (0/2)

Case number
Age (years)
Minimum
Median (IQR)
Maximum
Sex

Ethnicity
Hispanic
Not Hispanic
Race
Black/African American
White

BMI

Pre-existing conditions

IBD
Treatment

28-day mortality
m/m: mild/moderate

conv: convalescent

IQR: inter-quartile range

BMI: body mass index

IBD: inflammatory bowel disease

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table 1. Participant characteristics

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

REFERENCES
1.

Pan, Y., Zhang, D., Yang, P., Poon, L. L. M. & Wang, Q. Viral load of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical samples. The Lancet
Infectious Diseases (2020) doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30113-4.

2.

Sanche, S. et al. RESEARCH High Contagiousness and Rapid Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome

3.

Meyerowitz, E. A., Richterman, A., Gandhi, R. T. & Sax, P. E. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2: A Review of Viral, Host, and

4.

Fears, A. C. et al. Persistence of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 in Aerosol Suspensions. Emerg.

Coronavirus 2. Emerg. Infect. Dis. (2020) doi:10.3201/eid2607.200282.
Environmental Factors. Ann. Intern. Med. (2021) doi:10.7326/m20-5008.
Infect. Dis. (2020) doi:10.3201/eid2609.201806.
5.

Arons, M. M. et al. Presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infections and Transmission in a Skilled Nursing Facility. N. Engl. J. Med.

6.

Wang, Y. et al. Clinical outcome of 55 asymptomatic cases at the time of hospital admission infected with SARS-

7.

Sakurai, A. et al. Natural History of Asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infection. N. Engl. J. Med. (2020)

(2020) doi:10.1056/nejmoa2008457.
Coronavirus-2 in Shenzhen, China. J. Infect. Dis. (2020) doi:10.1093/infdis/jiaa119.
doi:10.1056/nejmc2013020.
8.

Guan, W. et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. N. Engl. J. Med. (2020)
doi:10.1056/nejmoa2002032.

9.

Huang, C. et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet (2020)
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30183-5.

10.

Chan, J. F. W. et al. Genomic characterization of the 2019 novel human-pathogenic coronavirus isolated from a patient
with atypical pneumonia after visiting Wuhan. Emerg. Microbes Infect. (2020) doi:10.1080/22221751.2020.1719902.

11.

Zhou, P. et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature (2020)
doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7.

12.

Wu, F. et al. A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China. Nature (2020) doi:10.1038/s41586-

13.

Frieman, M. & Baric, R. Mechanisms of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Pathogenesis and Innate Immunomodulation.

14.

Harrison, A. G., Lin, T. & Wang, P. Mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 Transmission and Pathogenesis. Trends in Immunology

020-2008-3.
Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. (2008) doi:10.1128/mmbr.00015-08.
(2020) doi:10.1016/j.it.2020.10.004.
15.

Borczuk, A. C. et al. COVID-19 pulmonary pathology: a multi-institutional autopsy cohort from Italy and New York City.

16.

Ackermann, M. et al. Pulmonary Vascular Endothelialitis, Thrombosis, and Angiogenesis in Covid-19. N. Engl. J. Med.

17.

Lucas, C. et al. Longitudinal analyses reveal immunological misfiring in severe COVID-19. Nature (2020)

18.

Mathew, D. et al. Deep immune profiling of COVID-19 patients reveals distinct immunotypes with therapeutic implications.

Mod. Pathol. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41379-020-00661-1.
(2020) doi:10.1056/nejmoa2015432.
doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2588-y.
Science (80-. ). (2020) doi:10.1126/SCIENCE.ABC8511.
19.

Schulte-Schrepping, J. et al. Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid Cell Compartment. Cell (2020)
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.08.001.

20.

Su, Y. et al. Multi-Omics Resolves a Sharp Disease-State Shift between Mild and Moderate COVID-19. Cell (2020)
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.037.

21.

Galani, I. E. et al. Untuned antiviral immunity in COVID-19 revealed by temporal type I/III interferon patterns and flu
comparison. Nat. Immunol. (2021) doi:10.1038/s41590-020-00840-x.

22.

Hadjadj, J. et al. Impaired type I interferon activity and inflammatory responses in severe COVID-19 patients. Science (80-.
). (2020) doi:10.1126/science.abc6027.

23.

Stephenson, E. et al. The cellular immune response to COVID-19 deciphered by single cell multi-omics across three UK
centres. medRxiv (2021).

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

24.

Wilk, A. J. et al. A single-cell atlas of the peripheral immune response in patients with severe COVID-19. Nat. Med. (2020)

25.

Kusnadi, A. et al. Severely ill COVID-19 patients display impaired exhaustion features in SARS-CoV-2-reactive CD8 + T

26.

Szabo, P. A. et al. Analysis of respiratory and systemic immune responses in COVID-19 reveals mechanisms of disease

doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0944-y.
cells . Sci. Immunol. (2021) doi:10.1126/sciimmunol.abe4782.
pathogenesis. medRxiv (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.10.15.20208041.
27.

Ren, X. et al. COVID-19 immune features revealed by a large-scale single cell transcriptome atlas. Cell (2021).

28.

Sungnak, W. et al. SARS-CoV-2 entry factors are highly expressed in nasal epithelial cells together with innate immune

29.

Ziegler, C. G. K. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Receptor ACE2 Is an Interferon-Stimulated Gene in Human Airway Epithelial Cells and

30.

Huang, N. et al. Integrated Single-Cell Atlases Reveal an Oral SARS-CoV-2 Infection and Transmission Axis. medRxiv

31.

Muus, C. et al. Integrated analyses of single-cell atlases reveal age, gender, and smoking status associations with cell

genes. Nat. Med. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0868-6.
Is Detected in Specific Cell Subsets across Tissues. Cell (2020) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.035.
(2020).
type-specific expression of mediators of SARS-CoV-2 viral entry and highlights inflammatory programs in putative target
cells. bioRxiv 2020.04.19.049254 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.04.19.049254.
32.

Lukassen, S. et al. SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are predominantly expressed in a transient secretory cell
type in subsegmental bronchial branches. bioRxiv (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.03.13.991455.

33.

Chua, R. L. et al. COVID-19 severity correlates with airway epithelium–immune cell interactions identified by single-cell
analysis. Nat. Biotechnol. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0602-4.

34.

Schaefer, I. M. et al. In situ detection of SARS-CoV-2 in lungs and airways of patients with COVID-19. Mod. Pathol. (2020)

35.

Hou, Y. J. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Reverse Genetics Reveals a Variable Infection Gradient in the Respiratory Tract. Cell (2020)

36.

Zhu, N. et al. Morphogenesis and cytopathic effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection in human airway epithelial cells. Nat.

doi:10.1038/s41379-020-0595-z.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.042.
Commun. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41467-020-17796-z.
37.

Ravindra, N. G. et al. Single-cell longitudinal analysis of SARS-CoV-2 infection in human airway epithelium. bioRxiv (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.05.06.081695.

38.

Blanco-Melo, D. et al. Imbalanced Host Response to SARS-CoV-2 Drives Development of COVID-19. Cell (2020)
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.026.

39.

Cheemarla, N. R. et al. Magnitude and timing of the antiviral response determine SARS-CoV-2 replication early in infection.
medRxiv (2021).

40.

Mykytyn, A. Z. et al. Sars-cov-2 entry into human airway organoids is serine protease-mediated and facilitated by the
multibasic cleavage site. Elife (2021) doi:10.7554/ELIFE.64508.

41.

Lamers, M. M. et al. An organoid-derived bronchioalveolar model for SARS-CoV-2 infection of human alveolar type II-like
cells. EMBO J. (2021) doi:10.15252/embj.2020105912.

42.

Huang, J. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Infection of Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Human Lung Alveolar Type 2 Cells Elicits a Rapid
Epithelial-Intrinsic Inflammatory Response. Cell Stem Cell (2020) doi:10.1016/j.stem.2020.09.013.

43.

Pellegrini, L. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Infects the Brain Choroid Plexus and Disrupts the Blood-CSF Barrier in Human Brain
Organoids. Cell Stem Cell (2020) doi:10.1016/j.stem.2020.10.001.

44.

Purkayastha, A. et al. Direct Exposure to SARS-CoV-2 and Cigarette Smoke Increases Infection Severity and Alters the

45.

Speranza, E. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals SARS-CoV-2 infection dynamics in lungs of African green

46.

Munster, V. et al. Respiratory disease and virus shedding in rhesus macaques inoculated with SARS-CoV-2. bioRxiv

47.

Chandrashekar, A. et al. SARS-CoV-2 infection protects against rechallenge in rhesus macaques. Science (80-. ). (2020)

Stem Cell-Derived Airway Repair Response. Cell Stem Cell (2020) doi:10.1016/j.stem.2020.11.010.
monkeys. Sci. Transl. Med. (2021) doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.abe8146.
(2020) doi:10.1101/2020.03.21.001628.

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

doi:10.1126/science.abc4776.
48.

Chan, J. F. W. et al. Simulation of the Clinical and Pathological Manifestations of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in
a Golden Syrian Hamster Model: Implications for Disease Pathogenesis and Transmissibility. Clin. Infect. Dis. (2020)
doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa325.

49.

Sia, S. F. et al. Pathogenesis and transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in golden hamsters. Nature (2020) doi:10.1038/s41586-

50.

Sun, S. H. et al. A Mouse Model of SARS-CoV-2 Infection and Pathogenesis. Cell Host Microbe (2020)

020-2342-5.
doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.020.
51.

Bao, L. et al. The pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 in hACE2 transgenic mice. Nature (2020) doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2312-y.

52.

Jiang, R. Di et al. Pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 in Transgenic Mice Expressing Human Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2.

53.

Israelow, B. et al. Mouse model of SARS-CoV-2 reveals inflammatory role of type i interferon signaling. J. Exp. Med. (2020)

54.

Kim, Y. Il et al. Infection and Rapid Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Ferrets. Cell Host Microbe (2020)

55.

Richard, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted via contact and via the air between ferrets. Nat. Commun. (2020)

56.

Muñoz-Fontela, C. et al. Animal models for COVID-19. Nature (2020) doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2787-6.

57.

Zhang, Q. et al. Inborn errors of type I IFN immunity in patients with life-threatening COVID-19. Science (80-. ). (2020)

58.

Bastard, P. et al. Autoantibodies against type I IFNs in patients with life-threatening COVID-19. Science (80-. ). (2020)

Cell (2020) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.027.
doi:10.1084/JEM.20201241.
doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.03.023.
doi:10.1038/s41467-020-17367-2.

doi:10.1126/science.abd4570.
doi:10.1126/science.abd4585.
59.

Combes, A. J. et al. Global absence and targeting of protective immune states in severe COVID-19. Nature (2021)

60.

World Health Organization. WHO R&D Blueprint novel Coronavirus COVID-19 Therapeutic Trial Synopsis. World Heal.

61.

Gierahn, T. M. et al. Seq-Well: Portable, low-cost rna sequencing of single cells at high throughput. Nat. Methods (2017)

doi:10.1038/s41586-021-03234-7.
Organ. (2020).
doi:10.1038/nmeth.4179.
62.

Hughes, T. K. et al. Highly Efficient, Massively-Parallel Single-Cell RNA-Seq Reveals Cellular States and Molecular
Features of Human Skin Pathology. bioRxiv (2019) doi:10.1101/689273.

63.

Ordovas-Montanes, J. et al. Allergic inflammatory memory in human respiratory epithelial progenitor cells. Nature (2018)
doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0449-8.

64.

Garcıá, S. R. et al. Novel dynamics of human mucociliary differentiation revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing of nasal
epithelial cultures. Dev. (2019) doi:10.1242/dev.177428.

65.

Deprez, M. et al. A single-cell atlas of the human healthy airways. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. (2020)
doi:10.1164/rccm.201911-2199OC.

66.

Montoro, D. T. et al. A revised airway epithelial hierarchy includes CFTR-expressing ionocytes. Nature (2018)

67.

Plasschaert, L. W. et al. A single-cell atlas of the airway epithelium reveals the CFTR-rich pulmonary ionocyte. Nature

68.

Basak, O. et al. Induced Quiescence of Lgr5+ Stem Cells in Intestinal Organoids Enables Differentiation of Hormone-

doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0393-7.
(2018) doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0394-6.
Producing Enteroendocrine Cells. Cell Stem Cell (2017) doi:10.1016/j.stem.2016.11.001.
69.

Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven

70.

Li, W. et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the SARS coronavirus. Nature (2003)

71.

Yan, R. et al. Structural basis for the recognition of SARS-CoV-2 by full-length human ACE2. Science (80-. ). (2020)

Protease Inhibitor. Cell (2020) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052.
doi:10.1038/nature02145.

51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

doi:10.1126/science.abb2762.
72.

Wrapp, D. et al. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation. Science (80-. ). (2020)
doi:10.1126/science.aax0902.

73.

Wang, Q. et al. Structural and Functional Basis of SARS-CoV-2 Entry by Using Human ACE2. Cell (2020)
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.045.

74.

Raj, V. S. et al. Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is a functional receptor for the emerging human coronavirus-EMC. Nature (2013)

75.

Yeager, C. L. et al. Human aminopeptidase N is a receptor for human coronavirus 229E. Nature (1992)

76.

Bochkov, Y. A. et al. Cadherin-related family member 3, a childhood asthma susceptibility gene product, mediates

77.

Bergen, V., Lange, M., Peidli, S., Wolf, F. A. & Theis, F. J. Generalizing RNA velocity to transient cell states through

78.

La Manno, G. et al. RNA velocity of single cells. Nature (2018) doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0414-6.

79.

Tata, P. R. et al. Dedifferentiation of committed epithelial cells into stem cells in vivo. Nature (2013)

doi:10.1038/nature12005.
doi:10.1038/357420a0.
rhinovirus C binding and replication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. (2015) doi:10.1073/pnas.1421178112.
dynamical modeling. Nat. Biotechnol. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0591-3.

doi:10.1038/nature12777.
80.

Cosgrove, P. R., Redhu, N. S., Tang, Y., Monuteaux, M. C. & Horwitz, B. H. Characterizing T cell subsets in the nasal
mucosa of children with acute respiratory symptoms. Pediatr. Res. (2021) doi:10.1038/s41390-021-01364-2.

81.

Blume, C. et al. A novel ACE2 isoform is expressed in human respiratory epithelia and is upregulated in response to
interferons and RNA respiratory virus infection. Nat. Genet. (2021) doi:10.1038/s41588-020-00759-x.

82.

Ng, K. W. et al. Tissue-specific and interferon-inducible expression of nonfunctional ACE2 through endogenous

83.

Onabajo, O. O. et al. Interferons and viruses induce a novel truncated ACE2 isoform and not the full-length SARS-CoV-2

84.

Cao, Y. et al. Single-cell analysis of upper airway cells reveals host-viral dynamics in influenza infected adults. bioRxiv

85.

Lemieux, J. E. et al. Phylogenetic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 in Boston highlights the impact of superspreading events.

retroelement co-option. Nat. Genet. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41588-020-00732-8.
receptor. Nat. Genet. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41588-020-00731-9.
(2020) doi:10.1101/2020.04.15.042978.
Science (80-. ). (2020) doi:10.1126/science.abe3261.
86.

Wood, D. E., Lu, J. & Langmead, B. Improved metagenomic analysis with Kraken 2. Genome Biol. (2019)
doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1891-0.

87.

Kim, D. et al. The Architecture of SARS-CoV-2 Transcriptome. Cell (2020) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.011.

88.

Delorey, T. et al. A single-cell and spatial atlas of autopsy tissues reveals pathology and cellular targets of SARS-CoV-2.

89.

Garcia-Beltran, W. F. et al. COVID-19-neutralizing antibodies predict disease severity and survival. Cell (2021)

90.

Zohar, T. et al. Compromised Humoral Functional Evolution Tracks with SARS-CoV-2 Mortality. Cell (2020)

bioRxiv (2021).
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.12.015.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.052.
91.

Long, Q. X. et al. Antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 in patients with COVID-19. Nat. Med. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41591020-0897-1.

92.

Kotliar, D. et al. Single-Cell Profiling of Ebola Virus Disease In Vivo Reveals Viral and Host Dynamics. Cell (2020)
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.002.

93.

Fleming, S. J., Marioni, J. C. & Babadi, M. CellBender remove-background: A deep generative model for unsupervised
removal of background noise from scRNA-seq datasets. bioRxiv (2019) doi:10.1101/791699.

94.

Hu, B., Guo, H., Zhou, P. & Shi, Z. L. Characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. Nature Reviews Microbiology (2020)
doi:10.1038/s41579-020-00459-7.

95.

Fung, T. S. & Liu, D. X. Human Coronavirus: Host-Pathogen Interaction. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. (2019)
doi:10.1146/annurev-micro-020518-115759.

52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

96.

Sawicki, S. G., Sawicki, D. L. & Siddell, S. G. A Contemporary View of Coronavirus Transcription. J. Virol. (2007)

97.

Krähling, V., Stein, D. A., Spiegel, M., Weber, F. & Mühlberger, E. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus

98.

Zhao, X. et al. Interferon induction of IFITM proteins promotes infection by human coronavirus OC43. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.

99.

Daniloski, Z. et al. Identification of Required Host Factors for SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Human Cells. Cell (2021)

doi:10.1128/jvi.01358-06.
Triggers Apoptosis via Protein Kinase R but Is Resistant to Its Antiviral Activity. J. Virol. (2009) doi:10.1128/jvi.01245-08.
U. S. A. (2014) doi:10.1073/pnas.1320856111.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.030.
100.

Wang, R. et al. Genetic Screens Identify Host Factors for SARS-CoV-2 and Common Cold Coronaviruses. Cell (2021)
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.12.004.

101.

Wei, J. et al. Genome-wide CRISPR Screens Reveal Host Factors Critical for SARS-CoV-2 Infection. Cell (2021)
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.028.

102.

Schneider, W. M. et al. Genome-Scale Identification of SARS-CoV-2 and Pan-coronavirus Host Factor Networks. Cell
(2021) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.12.006.

103.

Ordovas-Montanes, J., Beyaz, S., Rakoff-Nahoum, S. & Shalek, A. K. Distribution and storage of inflammatory memory in
barrier tissues. Nat. Rev. Immunol. (2020) doi:10.1038/s41577-019-0263-z.

104.

Kamitani, W., Huang, C., Narayanan, K., Lokugamage, K. G. & Makino, S. A two-pronged strategy to suppress host protein
synthesis by SARS coronavirus Nsp1 protein. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. (2009) doi:10.1038/nsmb.1680.

105.

Lokugamage, K. G. et al. Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus nsp1 Inhibits Host Gene Expression by
Selectively Targeting mRNAs Transcribed in the Nucleus while Sparing mRNAs of Cytoplasmic Origin. J. Virol. (2015)
doi:10.1128/jvi.01352-15.

106.

Knoops, K. et al. SARS-coronavirus replication is supported by a reticulovesicular network of modified endoplasmic
reticulum. PLoS Biol. (2008) doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060226.

107.

Menachery, V. D. et al. Pathogenic influenza viruses and coronaviruses utilize similar and contrasting approaches to
control interferon-stimulated gene responses. MBio (2014) doi:10.1128/mBio.01174-14.

108.

Konno, Y. et al. SARS-CoV-2 ORF3b Is a Potent Interferon Antagonist Whose Activity Is Increased by a Naturally
Occurring Elongation Variant. Cell Rep. (2020) doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108185.

109.

Banerjee, A. K. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Disrupts Splicing, Translation, and Protein Trafficking to Suppress Host Defenses. Cell

110.

Snijder, E. J. et al. A unifying structural and functional model of the coronavirus replication organelle: Tracking down RNA

(2020) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.004.
synthesis. PLoS Biol. (2020) doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.3000715.
111.

Broggi, A., Granucci, F. & Zanoni, I. Type III interferons: Balancing tissue tolerance and resistance to pathogen invasion. J.

112.

Major, J. et al. Type I and III interferons disrupt lung epithelial repair during recovery from viral infection. Science (80-. ).

Exp. Med. (2020) doi:10.1084/jem.20190295.
(2020) doi:10.1126/science.abc2061.
113.

Silvin, A. et al. Elevated Calprotectin and Abnormal Myeloid Cell Subsets Discriminate Severe from Mild COVID-19. Cell

114.

Bruchez, A. et al. MHC class II transactivator CIITA induces cell resistance to ebola virus and SARS-like coronaviruses.

(2020) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.08.002.
Science (80-. ). (2020) doi:10.1126/science.abb3753.
115.

Feld, J. J. et al. Peginterferon-lambda for the treatment of COVID-19 in outpatients. medRxiv (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.11.09.20228098.

116.

Monk, P. D. et al. Safety and efficacy of inhaled nebulised interferon beta-1a (SNG001) for treatment of SARS-CoV-2
infection: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. Lancet Respir. Med. (2020) doi:10.1016/S22132600(20)30511-7.

117.

Wang, N. et al. Retrospective Multicenter Cohort Study Shows Early Interferon Therapy Is Associated with Favorable

118.

Hoagland, D. A. et al. Leveraging the antiviral type-I interferon system as a first line defense against SARS-CoV-2

Clinical Responses in COVID-19 Patients. Cell Host Microbe (2020) doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.07.005.

53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.20.431155; this version posted February 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pathogenicity. Immunity (2021) doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2021.01.017.
119.

Tang, Y. et al. Human Nasopharyngeal Swab Processing for Viable Single-Cell Suspension. protocols.io (2020).

120.

Aicher, T. P. et al. Seq-Well: A sample-efficient, portable picowell platform for massively parallel single-cell RNA

121.

Macosko, E. Z. et al. Highly parallel genome-wide expression profiling of individual cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell

122.

Li, B. et al. Cumulus provides cloud-based data analysis for large-scale single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq. Nat.

sequencing. in Methods in Molecular Biology (2019). doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-9240-9_8.
(2015) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.002.
Methods (2020) doi:10.1038/s41592-020-0905-x.
123.

Petukhov, V. et al. dropEst: Pipeline for accurate estimation of molecular counts in droplet-based single-cell RNA-seq
experiments. Genome Biol. (2018) doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1449-6.

124.

Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data. Cell (2019) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.031.

125.

McDavid, A. et al. Data exploration, quality control and testing in single-cell qPCR-based gene expression experiments.

126.

Love, M. I., Anders, S. & Huber, W. Differential analysis of count data - the DESeq2 package. Genome Biology (2014).

127.

Huang, D. W., Sherman, B. T. & Lempicki, R. A. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID

Bioinformatics (2013) doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts714.

bioinformatics resources. Nat. Protoc. (2009) doi:10.1038/nprot.2008.211.
128.

Korotkevich, G. et al. Fast gene set enrichment analysis. bioRxiv (2021) doi:10.1101/060012.

129.

R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing (2019).

130.

Wickham, H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in
Society) (2016).

131.

Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across different

132.

Gu, Z., Eils, R. & Schlesner, M. Complex heatmaps reveal patterns and correlations in multidimensional genomic data.

133.

Gu, Z., Gu, L., Eils, R., Schlesner, M. & Brors, B. Circlize implements and enhances circular visualization in R.

134.

Ballestar, E. et al. Single cell profiling of COVID-19 patients: An international data resource from multiple tissues. medRxiv

conditions, technologies, and species. Nat. Biotechnol. (2018) doi:10.1038/nbt.4096.
Bioinformatics (2016) doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw313.
Bioinformatics (2014) doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu393.
(2020) doi:10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355.

54

