bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The aging transcriptome and cellular landscape
of the human lung in relation to SARS-CoV-2
Ryan D. Chow 1,2,3,4 and Sidi Chen 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,#

Affiliations
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
System Biology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, Connecticut, USA
Center for Cancer Systems Biology, Yale University, West Haven, Connecticut, USA
M.D.-Ph.D. Program, Yale University, West Haven, Connecticut, USA
Immunobiology Program, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
Combined Program in the Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA
7. Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA
8. Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
9. Yale Stem Cell Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
10. Yale Liver Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
11. Yale Center for Biomedical Data Science, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA
12. Yale Center for RNA Science and Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA
# Correspondence:
SC (sidi.chen@yale.edu)
+1-203-737-3825 (office)
+1-203-737-4952 (lab)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Since the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in December 2019, Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19)
has rapidly spread across the globe. Epidemiologic studies have demonstrated that age is one of
the strongest risk factors influencing the morbidity and mortality of COVID-19. Here, we
interrogate the transcriptional features and cellular landscapes of the aging human lung through
integrative analysis of bulk and single-cell transcriptomics. By intersecting these age-associated
changes with experimental data on host interactions between SARS-CoV-2 or its relative SARSCoV, we identify several age-associated factors that may contribute to the heightened severity of
COVID-19 in older populations. We observed that age-associated gene expression and cell
populations are significantly linked to the heightened severity of COVID-19 in older populations.
The aging lung is characterized by increased vascular smooth muscle contraction, reduced
mitochondrial activity, and decreased lipid metabolism. Lung epithelial cells, macrophages, and
Th1 cells decrease in abundance with age, whereas fibroblasts, pericytes and CD4+ Tcm cells
increase in abundance with age. Several age-associated genes have functional effects on SARSCoV replication, and directly interact with the SARS-CoV-2 proteome. Interestingly, ageassociated genes are heavily enriched among those induced or suppressed by SARS-CoV-2
infection. These analyses illuminate potential avenues for further studies on the relationship
between the aging lung and COVID-19 pathogenesis, which may inform strategies to more
effectively treat this disease.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Main Text
Age is one of the strongest risk factors for severe outcomes among patients with COVID-19

1,2

.

For instance, the case-fatality rate of patients 50-59 years old was reported to be 1.0% in Italy (as
of March 17, 2020) and 1.3% in China (as of February 11, 2020) 3,4; in contrast, the case-fatality
rate of patients ≥ 80 years old was 20.2% in Italy, and 14.8% in China during that same time frame
(Figure 1a). Similarly, in the United States, the Center for Disease Control (CDC) estimated that
from February 12 to March 16, 2020, the case-fatality rate of patients 55-64 years old was 1.4 –
2%, and 10.4 -27.3% for patients ≥ 85 years old 5 (Figure 1a). Furthermore, a recent analysis of
Chinese CDC data revealed that while patients of all ages shared a similar probability of becoming
infected by SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of COVID-19

6–8

, the clinical manifestations of

infection in children (< 18 years old) were less severe than in adults. With the exception of infants
and younger children (< 1 years old and 1-5 years old, respectively), most children were
asymptomatic or experienced mild illness9. Collectively, these observations indicate a strong
association between age and COVID-19 morbidity and mortality. However, it must be emphasized
that younger patients can still frequently contract the disease, possibly leading to hospitalization,
ICU admission, or death (Supplementary Figure 1).
While the effects of age on COVID-19 are likely to be multifactorial, involving a complex blend
of systemic and local factors, we hypothesized that tissue-intrinsic changes that occur with aging
may offer valuable clues. To explore possible mechanisms by which age influences the clinical
manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 infection, here we investigate the transcriptomic features and
cellular landscape of the aging human lung in relation to SARS-CoV-2.
Results
We focused our analysis on the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project10,11, a comprehensive
public resource of gene expression profiles from non-diseased tissue sites. As the lung is the
primary organ affected by COVID-19, we specifically analyzed lung RNA-seq transcriptomes
from donors of varying ages (20-79 years old) (Figure 1b). A total of 578 lung RNA-seq profiles
were compiled, of which 31.66% were from women.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

An initial hypothesis for why SARS-CoV-2 differentially affects patients of varying ages is that
the expression of host factors essential for SARS-CoV-2 infection may increase with aging. To
assess this possibility, we examined the gene expression of ACE2, which encodes the protein
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 that is coopted as the host receptor for SARS-CoV-2

8,12–15

.

There was no statistically significant association between age and ACE2 expression levels
(Kruskal-Wallis test, p = 0.92) (Figure 1c). While ACE2 is the direct cell surface receptor for
SARS-CoV-2, transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) and cathepsin L (CTSL) have been
demonstrated to facilitate SARS-CoV-2 infection by priming the spike protein for host cell entry14.
Expression of the corresponding genes TMPRSS2 and CTSL was modestly associated with age (p
= 0.0039 and p = 0.026, respectively) (Figure 1c), but TMPRSS2 and CTSL expression levels
tended to decrease with age. Of note, biological sex was not significantly associated with
expression of ACE2, TMPRSS2, or CTSL (Supplementary Figure 2a-c), though it has been
observed that males are more likely to be affected by COVID-19 than females16–18. Taken together,
these data indicate that differential expression of SARS-CoV-2 host entry factors alone is unlikely
to explain the relationship between age and severity of COVID-19 illness.
To discern the host cell types involved in COVID-19 entry, we turned to a single cell RNA-seq
(scRNA-seq) dataset of 57,020 human lung cells from the Tissue Stability Cell Atlas19. In
agreement with prior reports, analysis of the single cell lung transcriptomes revealed that alveolar
type 2 (AT2) cells were comparatively enriched in ACE2 and TMPRSS2-expressing cells

20,21

(Supplementary Figure 3a-b). However, ACE2-expressing cells represented only 1.69% of all
AT2 cells, while 47.52% of AT2 cells expressed TMPRSS2. Alveolar type 1 (AT1) cells also
showed detectable expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2, but at lower frequencies (0.39% and
26.70%). CTSL expression could be broadly detected in many different cell types including AT2
cells, but its expression was particularly pronounced in macrophages (Supplementary Figure 3c).
Since the expression of host entry factors ACE2, TMPRSS2 and CTSL did not increase with age,
we next sought to identify all age-associated genes expressed in the human lung (Methods). Using
a likelihood-ratio test22, we pinpointed the genes for which age significantly impacts their
expression. With a stringent cutoff of adjusted p < 0.0001, we identified two clusters of genes in
which their expression progressively changes with age (Figure 1d). Cluster 1 is composed of 643

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

genes that increase in expression with age, while Cluster 2 contains 642 genes that decrease in
expression with age. Gene ontology and pathway analysis of Cluster 1 genes (increasing with age)
revealed significant enrichment for cell adhesion, vascular smooth muscle contraction, oxytocin
signaling, and platelet activation, in addition to several other pathways (Figure 1e). These findings
are consistent with known physiologic changes of aging, including decreased pulmonary
compliance23, and heightened risk for thrombotic diseases24. Of note, deregulation of the reninangiotensin system has been implicated in the pathogenesis of acute lung injury induced by SARSCoV 25,26, the closely related coronavirus responsible for the SARS epidemic of 2002-2003 27. In
mice, SARS-CoV infection downregulates ACE2, leading to disinhibition of angiotensin II
production by ACE

25,26,28–30

and subsequent vasoconstriction. A possible hypothesis is that

increased baseline vascular smooth muscle contraction in older patients may predispose the
development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in the setting of SARS-CoV and/or
SARS-CoV-2 infection. In line with this hypothesis, recent analyses of COVID-19 cohorts in
China and Italy have found that patients with hypertension were more likely to develop ARDS 17,
require ICU admission

31

, and die from the disease

32

, though we note that correlative

epidemiologic studies do not necessarily demonstrate causality.
Cluster 2 genes (decreasing with age) were significantly enriched for mitochondrion,
mitochondrial translation, metabolic pathways, and mitosis, among other pathways (Figure 1f),
which is consistent with prior observations of progressive mitochondrial dysfunction with aging33–
35

. Of note, Cluster 2 was also enriched for genes involved in lipid metabolism, fatty acid

metabolism, peroxisome, and lysosomal membranes. Age-associated alterations in lipid
metabolism could impact SARS-CoV-2 infection, as SARS-CoV can enter cells through
cholesterol-rich lipid rafts 36–39. Similarly, age-associated alterations in lysosomes could influence
late endocytic viral entry, as the protease cathepsin L cleaves SARS-CoV spike proteins from
within lysosomes 40,41.
Having compiled a high-confidence set of age-associated genes, we sought to identify the lung cell
types that normally express these genes, using the human lung single cell transcriptomics dataset
from the Tissue Stability Cell Atlas19. By examining the scaled percentage of expressing cells
within each cell subset, we identified age-associated genes predominantly enriched in different

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

cell types. Cell types with highly enriched expression for certain Cluster 1 genes (increasing with
age) included fibroblasts, muscle cells, and lymph vessels (Figure 2a). In contrast, cell types with
highly enriched expression for certain Cluster 2 genes (decreasing with age) included
macrophages, dividing dendritic cells (DCs)/monocytes, and AT2 cells (Figure 2b). Similar
results were found using an independent human lung scRNA-seq dataset from the Human Lung
Cell Atlas (Supplementary Figure 4a-b)42. Examining the muscle-enriched genes that increased
in expression with age, gene ontology analysis revealed enrichment for vascular smooth muscle
contraction, cGMP-PKG signaling, Z-disc, and actin cytoskeleton, among other pathways (Figure
2c). As for the AT2-enriched genes that decreased in expression with age, gene ontology analysis
revealed enrichment for metabolic pathways, biosynthesis of antibiotics, lipid metabolism,
extracellular exosome, and mitochondrial matrix (Figure 2d). A subset of these enriched gene
ontologies had also been identified by the bulk RNA-seq analysis (Figure 1e-f). Thus, integrative
analysis of bulk and single-cell transcriptomes revealed that many of the age-associated
transcriptional changes in human lung can be mapped to specific cell subpopulations, suggesting
that the overall abundance of these cell types, their transcriptional status, or both, may be altered
with aging.
As the pathophysiology of viral-induced ARDS involves an intricate interplay of diverse cell types,
most notably the immune system43,44, aging-associated shifts in the lung cellular milieu23 could
contribute an important dimension to the relationship between age and risk of ARDS in patients
with COVID-19

31

. To investigate the cellular landscape of the aging lung, we applied a gene

signature-based approach45 to infer the enrichment of different cell types from the bulk RNA-seq
profiles. Since bulk RNA-seq measures the average expression of genes within a cell population,
such datasets will reflect the relative proportions of the cell types that comprised the input
population, though with the caveat that cell types can have overlapping expression profiles and
such profiles may be altered in response to stimuli. Using this approach, we identified ageassociated alterations in the enrichment scores of several cell types (Figure 3a). Whereas epithelial
cells decreased with age, fibroblasts increased with age (Figure 3b). This finding is consistent
with the progressive loss of lung parenchyma due to reduced regenerative capacity of the aging
lung46, as well as the increased risk for diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pulmonary fibrosis47. In addition, these results are concordant with the findings from analysis of
human lung single-cell transcriptomes (Figure 2a-b).
Among the innate immune cell populations, the enrichment scores of total macrophages were
inversely associated with age (Figure 3c). Macrophages are major drivers of innate immune
responses in the lung, acting as first-responders against diverse respiratory infections48. Thus, the
age-associated decrease in macrophage abundance may be a possible factor related to the greater
severity of lung pathology in patients with COVID-19. Although macrophage accumulation is
often associated with the pathologic inflammation of viral ARDS

49,50

, pulmonary macrophages

can act to limit the duration and severity of infection by efficiently phagocytosing dead infected
cells and released virions 51–53. Notably, macrophages infected with SARS-CoV have been found
to abort the replication cycle of the virus54,55, further supporting their role in antiviral responses.
However, macrophages may suppress antiviral adaptive immune responses
clearance in mouse models of SARS-CoV infection

57

48,56

, inhibiting viral

. In aggregate, these prior reports suggest

that the precise role of lung macrophages in SARS-CoV-2 pathophysiology is likely contextdependent. It is also plausible that the increased numbers of macrophages are not the primary
distinction between young and old patients, but rather the functional status of the macrophages. In
line with this, we observed that the age-associated changes in macrophages were specifically
attributed to the pro-inflammatory M1 macrophage subset but not the immunoregulatory M2
subset 58 (Figure 3c), though this binary classification scheme represents an oversimplification of
macrophage function. Nevertheless, elucidating the consequences of age-associated changes in
lung macrophages may reveal insights into the differential outcomes of older patients with
COVID-19. Further studies are needed to investigate whether macrophages or other innate immune
cells respond to SARS-CoV-2 infection, and how their numbers or function may change with
aging.
Among the adaptive immune cell populations, we observed that Th1 cells and CD4+ Tcm cells
trended in opposite directions with aging (Figure 3d). While the lungs of younger donors were
enriched for Th1 cells, they were comparatively depleted for CD4+ Tcm cells; the inverse was true
in the lungs of older donors. Of note, mouse models of SARS-CoV infection have indicated
important roles for CD4+ T cell responses in viral clearance

59,60

. Additionally, Th1 cells are

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

responsive to SARS-CoV vaccines 61 and promote macrophage activation against viruses 62. It is
therefore possible that age-associated shifts in CD4+ T cell subtypes within the lung may influence
the subsequent host immune response in response to coronavirus infection. However, future
studies will be needed to determine the role of Th1 cells and other adaptive immune cells in the
response to SARS-CoV-2, and how these dynamics may change with aging.
We next explored the roles of lung age-associated genes in host responses to viral infection. Since
functional screening data with SARS-CoV-2 has not yet been described (as of March 30, 2020),
we instead searched for data on SARS-CoV. While these two viruses belong to the same genus
(Betacoronaviridae) and are conserved to some extent 8, they are nevertheless two distinct viruses
with different epidemiological features, indicating unique virology and host biology. Therefore,
data from experiments performed with SARS-CoV must be interpreted with caution.
We reassessed the results from a prior in vitro siRNA screen of host factors involved in SARSCoV infection 63. In this kinase-focused screen, 130 factors were determined to have a significant
effect on SARS-CoV replication. Notably, 11 of the 130 factors exhibited age-associated gene
expression patterns (Figure 4a), with 4 genes in Cluster 1 (increasing with age) and 7 genes in
Cluster 2 (decreasing with age). The 4 genes in Cluster 1 were all associated with increased SARS
infectivity upon siRNA knockdown; these genes included CLK1, AKAP6, ALPK2, and ITK.
Paradoxically, while knockdown of CLK1 was associated with increased SARS infectivity, cell
viability was also found to be increased (Figure 4b). Of the 7 genes in Cluster 2, 6 were associated
with increased SARS infectivity and reduced cell viability upon siRNA knockdown (AURKB,
CDKL2, PDIK1L, CDKN3, MST1R, and ADK). Age-related downregulation of these 6 factors
could be related to the increased severity of illness in older patients. However, we emphasize that
until rigorous follow-up experiments are performed with SARS-CoV-2, the therapeutic potential
of targeting these factors in patients with COVID-19 is unknown.
Using the human lung scRNA-seq data, we then determined which cell types predominantly
express these host factors. Of the 4 genes in Cluster 1 that had a significant impact on SARS-CoV
replication, CLK1 was universally expressed, while ALPK2 expression was rarely detected
(Figure 4c, Supplementary Figure 5a). ITK was preferentially expressed in lymphocytic

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

populations, and AKAP6 was most frequently expressed in ciliated cells and muscle cells. Of the
7 overlapping genes in Cluster 2, AURKB and CDKN3 were predominantly expressed in
proliferating immune cell populations, such as macrophages, DCs/monocytes, T cells, and NK
cells (Figure 4d, Supplementary Figure 5b). MST1R, PDIK1L, and PSKH1 were infrequently
expressed, through their expression was detected in a portion of AT2 cells (5.54%, 5.30%, and
5.47%, respectively). Finally, ADK and CDKL2 exhibited preferential enrichment in AT2 cells
(51.40% and 34.43%). In aggregate, these analyses showed that the age-associated genes with
functional roles in SARS-CoV are expressed in specific cell types of the human lung.
We then investigated whether age-associated genes in the human lung interact with proteins
encoded by SARS-CoV-2. A recent study interrogated the human host factors that interact with 27
different SARS-CoV-2 proteins

64

, revealing the SARS-CoV-2 : Human protein interactome in

cell lines expressing recombinant SARS-CoV-2 proteins. By cross-referencing the interacting host
factors with the set of age-associated genes, we identified 20 factors at the intersection (Figure
5a). 4 of these genes showed an increase in expression with age (i.e. Cluster 1 genes), while 16
decreased in expression with age (Cluster 2 genes). Mapping these factors to their interacting
SARS-CoV-2 proteins, we noted that the age-associated host factors which interact with M,
Nsp13, Nsp1, Nsp7, Nsp8, Orf3a, Orf8, Orf9c, and Orf10 proteins generally decrease in expression
with aging (Figure 5b). However, a notable exception was Nsp12, as the age-associated hostfactors that interact with Nsp12 both showed increased expression with aging (CRTC3 and
MYCBP2) (Figure 5c). Nsp12 encodes for the primary RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)
of SARS-CoV-2, and is a prime target for developing therapies against COVID-19. The
observation that CRTC3 and MYCBP2 increase in expression with aging is intriguing, as these
genes may be related to the activity of Nsp12/RdRp in host cells. Of note, MYCBP2 is a known
repressor of cAMP signaling

65,66

, and cAMP signaling potently inhibits contraction of airway

smooth muscle cells 67. Thus, age-associated increases in MYCBP2 could promote smooth muscle
contraction, which is concordant with our analyses on age-associated gene signatures in the lung
(Figure 1e). MYCBP2 might possibly contribute to COVID-19 pathology by not only interacting
with SARS-CoV-2 RdRp, but also through its normal physiologic role in promoting smooth
muscle contraction.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To assess the cell type-specific expression patterns of these various factors, we further analyzed
the lung scRNA-seq data. Of the SARS-CoV-2 interacting genes that increase in expression with
age, MYCBP2 was frequently expressed across several populations, particularly proliferating
immune populations (DC/monocyte, T cells, macrophages), muscle cells, fibroblasts, and lymph
vessels (Figure 5d). MYCBP2 was also expressed in 21.86% of AT2 cells. CEP68 was
preferentially expressed in lymph vessels, while AKAP8L and CRTC3 showed relatively uniform
expression frequencies across cell types, including a fraction of AT2 cells (8.53% and 9.07%
expressing cells, respectively). Of the SARS-CoV-2 interacting genes that decrease in expression
age, NPC2 and NDUFB9 were broadly expressed in many cell types, including AT2 cells (99.96%
and 81.91%, respectively) (Figure 5e). AT2 cells also frequently expressed ATP1B1, ALG5,
NEU1, and ATP6V1A (70.21%, 50.64%, 43.24%, and 27.78%). Analysis of the independent
Human Lung Cell Atlas dataset revealed similar conclusions (Supplementary Figure 6a-b).
Together, these analyses highlight specific age-associated factors that interact with the SARSCoV-2 proteome, in the context of the lung cell types in which these factors are normally
expressed.
Finally, we assessed whether SARS-CoV-2 infection directly alters the expression of lung ageassociated genes. A recent study profiled the in vitro transcriptional changes associated with
SARS-CoV-2 infection in different human lung cell lines 68. We specifically focused on the data
from A549 lung cancer cells, A549 cells transduced with an ACE2 expression vector (A549ACE2), and Calu-3 lung cancer cells. Several age-associated genes were found to be differentially
expressed upon SARS-CoV-2 infection (Figure 6a-c). Of note, the overlap between lung ageassociated genes and SARS-CoV-2 regulated genes was statistically significant across all 3 cell
lines (Figure 6d-f), suggesting a degree of similarity between the transcriptional changes
associated with aging and with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Among the age-associated genes that were
induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection, the majority of these genes increase in expression with age
(Cluster 1) (Figure 6g-i). Conversely, among the age-associated genes that were repressed by
SARS-CoV-2 infection, most of these genes decrease in expression with age (Cluster 2). Of note,
the directionality of SARS-CoV-2 regulation (induced or repressed) and the directionality of ageassociation (increase or decrease with age) were significantly associated across all 3 cell lines
(Figure 6g-i).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To identify a consensus set of age-associated genes that are regulated by SARS-CoV-2 infection,
we integrated the analyses from all 3 cell lines. 603 genes were consistently induced by SARSCoV-2 infection (Figure 7a). Of these, 20 genes are in Cluster 1 (increase with age) and 2 genes
are in Cluster 2 (decrease with age). The 20 induced genes in Cluster 1 include several factors
involved in RAS signaling (RAB8B, RASA2, and RASGRP1) as well as CLK1, which was shown
to be involved in host responses to SARS-CoV infection (Figure 4a-b). On the other hand, 641
genes were concordantly repressed by SARS-CoV-2 infection (Figure 7b), with 7 genes in Cluster
1 and 49 genes in Cluster 2. Interestingly, ontology analysis of the 49 repressed genes in Cluster 2
revealed enrichment for mitochondrion, oxidoreductase, oxidative phosphorylation, pyruvate
metabolism, and lysosome (Figure 7c), indicating that these pathways are affected both by aging
and by SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Within the consensus set of all 78 age-associated genes that are perturbed by SARS-CoV-2
infection, the directionality of SARS-CoV-2 regulation (induced or repressed) and the
directionality of age-association (increase or decrease with age) were significantly associated
(Figure 7d). Analysis of the human lung scRNA-seq datasets revealed the cell types that normally
express these different genes (Figure 7e and Supplementary Figure 7). While many of these
genes are broadly expressed across multiple cell types, some are preferentially expressed in AT2
cells (such as PRTG, ACACA, ACSS2, AGR2, AP1M2, and MMAB). Collectively, these analyses
highlight the surprising parallels between the aging transcriptome of the human lung and the
transcriptional changes caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Discussion
Here we systematically analyzed the transcriptome of the aging human lung and its relationship to
SARS-CoV-2. We found that the aging lung is characterized by a wide array of changes that could
contribute to the worse outcomes of older patients with COVID-19. On the transcriptional level,
we first identified 1,285 genes that exhibit age-associated expression patterns. We subsequently
demonstrated that the aging lung is characterized by several gene signatures, including increased
vascular smooth muscle contraction, reduced mitochondrial activity, and decreased lipid
metabolism. By integrating these data with single cell transcriptomes of human lung tissue, we

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

further pinpointed the specific cell types that normally express the age-associated genes. We
showed that lung epithelial cells, macrophages, and Th1 cells decrease in abundance with age,
whereas fibroblasts and pericytes increase in abundance with age. These systematic changes in
tissue composition and cell interactions can potentially propagate positive feedback loops that
predispose the airways to pathological contraction

69

. We find that some of the age-associated

genes have been previously identified as host factors with a functional role in SARS-CoV
replication 63, and a fraction of the age-associated factors have been shown to directly interact with
the SARS-CoV-2 proteome

64

. Furthermore, age-associated genes are significantly enriched

among genes directly regulated by SARS-CoV-2 infection 68, suggesting transcriptional parallels
between the aging lung and SARS-CoV-2 infection. Moreover, it is intriguing that the genes
induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection tend to increase in expression with aging, and vice versa.
Whether any of these age-associated changes causally contribute to the heightened susceptibility
of COVID-19 in older populations remains to be experimentally tested.
It is also important to note that the datasets analyzed here were not from patients with COVID-19.
Given the limited data that is currently publicly available, we emphasize that the analyses
presented here at this stage should not be used to guide clinical practice. These analyses resulted
in a number of previously unnoted observations and phenomena that illuminate new directions for
subsequent research efforts on SARS-CoV-2, generating genetically-tractable hypotheses for why
advanced age is one of the strongest risk factors for COVID-19 morbidity and mortality.
Ultimately, we hope such knowledge can help the field to sooner develop rational therapies for
COVID-19 that are rooted in concrete biological mechanisms.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgments
We thank Akiko Iwasaki, Craig Wilen, Hongyu Zhao, Wei Liu, Wenxuan Deng, Andre
Levchenko, Katie Zhu, Ruth Montgomery, Bram Gerriten, Steven Kleinstein and a number of
other colleagues for their critical comments and suggestions, which were incorporated into the
analyses and manuscript. We thank Antonio Giraldez, Andre Levchenko, Chris Incarvito, Mike
Crair, and Scott Strobel for their support on COVID-19 research. We thank our colleagues in the
Chen lab, the Genetics Department, the Systems Biology Institute and various Yale entities. We
also want to thank all of the healthcare workers who are risking their health on the frontlines to
treat patients with this disease.
Author contributions
RC and SC conceived and designed the study. RC developed the analysis approach, performed all
data analyses, and created the figures. RC and SC prepared the manuscript. SC supervised the
work.
Declaration of interests
No competing interests related to this study.
The authors have no competing interests as defined by Nature Research, or other interests that
might be perceived to influence the interpretation of the article. The authors are committed to
freely share all COVID-19 related data, knowledge and resources to the community to facilitate
the development of new treatment or prevention approaches against SARS-CoV-2 / COVID-19 as
soon as possible.
As a note for full disclosure, SC is a co-founder, funding recipient and scientific advisor of
EvolveImmune Therapeutics, which is not related to this study.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure Legends
Figure 1: Identification of age-associated genes in the human lung
a. Case-fatality statistics in China, Italy, and the United States. Data are from the Chinese CDC
(as of February 11, 2020), the Italian ISS (as of March 17, 2020), and the US CDC (as of March
16, 2020), respectively. Error bars for case-fatality in the United States represent lower and upper
bounds of the estimated rates, given the preliminary nature of the data.
b. Demographics of the human lung RNA-seq profiles in the GTEx dataset, detailed by sex and
age group (total n = 578).
c. Tukey boxplots detailing the expression of SARS-CoV-2 entry factors ACE2, TMPRSS2, and
CTSL in the lung. Data are shown as log2 transcripts per million (TPM). Statistical significance of
the expression variation across all age groups is shown on top of each plot (Kruskal-Wallis test).
Pairwise comparisons of each age group to the 20-29 year-old group are also shown, color-coded
by the age group (two-tailed Mann-Whitney test).
d. Dot plot of age-associated genes in human lung. Cluster 1 contains genes that increase in
expression with aging (left, n = 643), while cluster 2 contains genes that decrease in expression
with aging (right, n = 642). Statistical significance was assessed by DESeq2 likelihood ratio test
(adj. p < 0.0001). Data are shown in terms of median z-score, with lines connecting the same gene
across different age groups.
e. DAVID gene ontology and pathway analysis of Cluster 1 genes (increasing with age).
f. DAVID gene ontology and pathway analysis of Cluster 2 genes (decreasing with age).
Figure 2: Lung single-cell transcriptomics pinpoints cell type-specific expression of ageassociated genes
a. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 1 genes (increasing
with age), scaled by gene across the different cell types. Data are from the Tissue Stability Cell
Atlas.
b. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 2 genes (decreasing
with age), scaled by gene across the different cell types. Data are from the Tissue Stability Cell
Atlas.
c. DAVID gene ontology and pathway analysis of Cluster 1 age-associated genes that exhibit
enriched expression in muscle cells.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

d. DAVID gene ontology and pathway analysis of Cluster 2 age-associated genes that exhibit
enriched expression in alveolar type 2 (AT2) cells.
Figure 3: The evolving cellular landscape of the aging human lung.
a. Heatmap of cell type enrichment scores in the human lung across different age groups. Data are
expressed as median z-scores within each subpopulation.
b. Tukey boxplots detailing the enrichment scores of epithelial cells (top) and fibroblasts (bottom)
in the lung across age groups. Statistical significance of age-associated variation was assessed by
Kruskal-Wallis test.
c. Tukey boxplots detailing the enrichment scores of macrophages, M1 macrophages, and M2
macrophages in the lung across age groups. Statistical significance of age-associated variation was
assessed by Kruskal-Wallis test.
d. Tukey boxplots detailing the enrichment scores of Th1 cells, naive CD4+ T cells, and CD4+ Tcm
cells in the lung across age groups. Statistical significance of age-associated variation was assessed
by Kruskal-Wallis test.
Figure 4: Age-associated genes in human lung influence SARS-CoV replication.
a. Scatter plot of data from a published siRNA screen of host factors that influence SARS-CoV
pathogenesis (from de Wilde et al., 2015). Data are shown in terms of relative SARS-CoV
infectivity and relative cell viability upon perturbation of various host factors. Values >1.0 for
relative SARS-CoV infectivity suggest that knockdown of the target gene promotes infection.
Values >1.0 for relative cell viability suggest that knockdown of the target gene promotes cell
survival. The size of each point is scaled by the statistical strength of the association between
expression of the gene and aging. Genes identified in Cluster 1 (increasing with age) and Cluster
2 (decreasing with age) are additionally color-coded (blue and orange, respectively).
b. Tukey boxplots detailing the expression of select age-associated genes with potential roles in
SARS-CoV pathogenesis, highlighted in (d). Data are shown as log2 transcripts per million (TPM)
for CLK1, CDKL2, PDIK1L, MST1R, ADK, and AURKB. Statistical significance of the expression
variation across all age groups was assessed by Kruskal-Wallis test.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

c. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 1 genes (increasing
with age) with an effect on SARS-CoV, as highlighted in (a). Data are from the Tissue Stability
Cell Atlas.
d. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 2 genes (decreasing
with age) with an effect on SARS-CoV, as highlighted in (a). Data are from the Tissue Stability
Cell Atlas.
Figure 5: Age-associated genes in human lung interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins.
a. Venn diagram of the intersection between age-associated genes in human lung and the SARSCoV-2 : Human protein interactome (Gordon et al., 2020). Of the 20 age-associated genes that
were found to also interact with SARS-CoV-2, 4 of them increased in expression with age, while
16 decreased with age.
b. Age-associated genes in human lung and their interaction with SARS-CoV-2 proteins, where
each block contains a SARS-CoV-2 protein (underlined) and its interacting age-associated factors.
Blocks are colored by the dominant directionality of the age association (orange, decreasing with
age; blue, increasing with age). Gene targets with already approved drugs, investigational new
drugs, or preclinical molecules are additionally denoted with an asterisk.
c. Tukey boxplots detailing the expression of select age-associated genes that interact with SARSCoV-2 proteins, highlighted in (b). Data are shown as log2 transcripts per million (TPM) for
ATP1B1, HOOK1, PRIM1, AGPS, NARS2, CRTC3, ALG5, NPC2, NDUFB9, and PPT1. The
SARS-CoV-2 interacting protein is also annotated in parentheses. Statistical significance of the
expression variation across all age groups was assessed by Kruskal-Wallis test.
d. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 1 genes (increasing
with age) that interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins, as highlighted in (b). Data are from the Tissue
Stability Cell Atlas.
e. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 2 genes (decreasing
with age) that interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins, as highlighted in (b). Data are from the Tissue
Stability Cell Atlas.
Figure 6: SARS-CoV-2 infection alters the expression of lung age-associated genes

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a-c. Volcano plots of differentially expressed genes in A549 cells (a), A549 cells transduced with
an ACE2 vector (A549-ACE2) (b), or Calu-3 cells (c). Data are from GSE147507 (Blanco-Melo
et al., 2020). Age-associated genes are color-coded.
d-f. Venn diagrams highlighting the intersections between lung age-associated genes and SARSCoV-2 regulated genes in A549 cells (d), A549-ACE2 cells (e), or Calu-3 cells (f). Statistical
significance of the overlap was assessed by hypergeometric test.
g-i. Characteristics of age-associated genes that are affected by SARS-CoV-2 infection in A549
cells (g), A549-ACE2 cells (h), or Calu-3 cells (i), from d-f. Statistical significance of the
interaction between the directionality of SARS-CoV-2 regulation (induced or repressed) and the
directionality of age-association (increase or decrease with age) was assessed by two-tailed
Fischer’s exact test.
Figure 7: Transcriptional parallels between SARS-CoV-2 infection and the aging human
lung
a-b. Venn diagram of shared SARS-CoV-2 induced genes (a) or SARS-CoV-2 repressed genes
(b) in A549 cells, A549-ACE2 cells, and Calu-3 cells. Age-associated genes lying at the
intersection of all 3 datasets are detailed, classified by their age-associated cluster. Data are from
GSE147507 (Blanco-Melo et al., 2020).
c. DAVID gene ontology and pathway analysis of Cluster 2 age-associated genes that are repressed
upon SARS-CoV-2 infection.
d. Characteristics of age-associated genes that are concordantly regulated by SARS-CoV-2
infection across all 3 cell lines, from a-b. Statistical significance of the interaction between the
directionality of SARS-CoV-2 regulation (induced or repressed) and the directionality of ageassociation (increase or decrease with age) was assessed by two-tailed Fischer’s exact test.
e. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the genes highlighted in a-b. Genes
are annotated by whether they are induced or repressed by SARS-CoV-2 infection, and whether
they increase or decrease in expression with age. Data are from the Tissue Stability Cell Atlas.
Supplementary Figure 1: Severe outcomes of COVID-19 in the United States

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Rates of hospitalization, ICU admission, and case-fatality from COVID-19 in the United States,
stratified by age group. Data from the US CDC (as of March 16, 2020). Error bars represent lower
and upper bounds of the estimated rates, given the preliminary nature of the data.
Supplementary Figure 2: Sex-specific analysis of SARS-CoV-2 host entry factor expression
a. Expression of ACE2 in lungs from female or male donors, stratified by age. Statistical
significance was assessed by two-tailed Mann-Whitney test.
b. Expression of TMPRSS2 in lungs from female or male donors, stratified by age. Statistical
significance was assessed by two-tailed Mann-Whitney test.
c. Expression of CTSL in lungs from female or male donors, stratified by age. Statistical
significance was assessed by two-tailed Mann-Whitney test.
Supplementary Figure 3: Expression of SARS-CoV-2 host factors across lung cell types
a. Left, normalized expression of ACE2 across different lung cell types. Right, bar plot showing
the percentage of ACE2-expressing cells, grouped by cell type.
b. Left, normalized expression of TMPRSS2 across different lung cell types. Right, bar plot
showing the percentage of TMPRSS2-expressing cells, grouped by cell type.
c. Left, normalized expression of CTSL across different lung cell types. Right, bar plot showing
the percentage of CTSL-expressing cells, grouped by cell type.
Supplementary Figure 4: Additional cell type-specific analysis of age-associated genes
a. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 1 genes (increasing
with age), scaled by gene across the different cell types. Data are from the Human Lung Cell Atlas.
b. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 2 genes (decreasing
with age), scaled by gene across the different cell types. Data are from the Human Lung Cell Atlas.
Supplementary Figure 5: Additional cell type-specific analysis of age-associated genes that
influence SARS-CoV replication
a. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 1 genes (increasing
with age) with an effect on SARS-CoV, as highlighted in Figure 4a. Data are from the Human
Lung Cell Atlas.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

b. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 2 genes (decreasing
with age) with an effect on SARS-CoV, as highlighted in Figure 4a. Data are from the Human
Lung Cell Atlas.
Supplementary Figure 6: Additional cell type-specific analysis of age-associated factors that
interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins
a. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 1 genes (increasing
with age) that interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins, as highlighted in Figure 5b. Data are from the
Human Lung Cell Atlas.
b. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the Cluster 2 genes (decreasing
with age) that interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins, as highlighted in Figure 5b. Data are from the
Human Lung Cell Atlas.
Supplementary Figure 7: Additional cell type-specific analysis of age-associated factors that
are differentially expressed upon SARS-CoV-2 infection
a. Heatmap showing the percentage of cells expressing each of the genes highlighted in Figure
7a-b. Genes are annotated by whether they are induced or repressed by SARS-CoV-2 infection,
and whether they increase (Cluster 1) or decrease (Cluster 2) in expression with age. Data are from
the Human Lung Cell Atlas.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Methods
Data accession
The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) Project was supported by the Common Fund of
the Office of the Director of the National Institutes of Health, and by NCI, NHGRI, NHLBI, NIDA,
NIMH, and NINDS

10,11

. RNA-seq raw counts and normalized TPM matrices were downloaded

from the GTEx Portal (https://gtexportal.org/home/index.html) on March 18, 2020, release v8. All
accessed data used in this study are publicly available on the web portal and have been deidentified, except for patient age range and gender.
Case-fatality rates in China and Italy were from the Chinese CDC and Italian ISS,
respectively, as described in a recent publication3,4. Statistics on COVID-19 cases in the United
States from February 12 – March 16, 2020 were compiled from the CDC Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report dated March 18, 2020 5. Given the preliminary nature of the data, only estimated
lower and upper bounds were reported.
Single cell transcriptomes of human lungs were obtained from the Tissue Stability Cell
Atlas (https://www.tissuestabilitycellatlas.org/)

19

and from the Human Lung Cell Atlas

(https://github.com/krasnowlab/HLCA and https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn21041850/)
42

.

RNA-seq gene expression visualization and statistical analysis
For visualization of RNA-seq expression data, the TPM values were log2 transformed and
plotted in R (v3.6.1). All boxplots are Tukey boxplots, with interquartile range (IQR) boxes and
1.5 × IQR whiskers. Pairwise statistical comparisons in the plots were assessed by two-tailed
Mann-Whitney test, while statistical comparisons across all age groups were performed by
Kruskal-Wallis test.
Identification of age-associated genes in human lung
To identify age-associated genes, the raw counts values were analyzed by DESeq2
(v1.24.0)

22

, using the likelihood ratio test (LRT). Age-associated genes were determined at a

significance threshold of adjusted p < 0.0001. Genes passing the significance threshold were then
scaled to z-scores and clustered using the degPatterns function from the R package DEGreport

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(v1.20.0). Gene clusters with progressive and consistent trends with age were retained for
downstream analysis.
Gene ontology and pathway analysis of lung age-associated genes
Gene ontology and pathway enrichment analysis was performed using DAVID (v6.8)

70

(https://david.ncifcrf.gov/), separating the age-associated genes into the two clusters (increasing
or decreasing with age), as described above.
scRNA-seq data analysis
scRNA-seq data were analyzed in R (v3.6.1) using Seurat71,72 and custom scripts. Of the
1285 age-associated genes identified from GTEx bulk transcriptomes, 1049 genes were matched
in the Tissue Stability Cell Atlas dataset and 1021 genes were matched in the Human Lung Cell
Atlas dataset. To determine the percentage of cells expressing a given gene, the expression
matrices were converted to binary matrices by setting a threshold of expression > 0. Cell typespecific expression frequencies for each gene were then calculated using the provided cell type
annotations. To identify genes preferentially expressed in a specific cell type, we further scaled
the expression frequencies in R to obtain z-scores. Data were visualized in R using the NMF
package 73. Where applicable, gene ontology analysis was performed with DAVID (v6.8) 70, using
genes with z-score > 2 in the cell type of interest for analysis.
Inferring the cellular compositions of the human lung
To infer the cellular composition of each lung sample, we analyzed the TPM expression
matrices using the xCell algorithm45. The resultant cell type enrichment tables were analyzed in
R. For data visualization, cell type enrichment scores were scaled to z-scores, and the median zscore for each age group was expressed as a heatmap, using the superheat package

74

. Age-

association was assessed across all age groups by Kruskal-Wallis test.
Assessing functional roles of lung age-associated genes in SARS-CoV
To assess whether any age-associated genes affect host responses to SARS-CoV (a
coronavirus related to SARS-CoV-2), we analyzed the data from a published siRNA screen of host
factors influencing SARS-CoV 63 (Data Set S1 in the publication; accessed on March 20, 2020).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

For data visualization, each point corresponding to a target gene was size-scaled and color-coded
according to the age-association statistical analyses described above.
Age-associated genes that interact with the SARS-CoV-2 proteome
To assess whether any lung age-associated genes encode proteins that interact with the
SARS-CoV-2 proteome, we compiled the data from a preprint manuscript detailing the human
host factors that interact with 27 different proteins in the SARS-CoV-2 proteome 64 (accessed on
March 23, 2020).
Age-associated genes that are transcriptionally regulated upon SARS-CoV-2 infection
To assess whether the expression of lung age-associated genes is influenced by SARSCoV-2 infection, we utilized the data from a preprint manuscript detailing the transcriptional
response

to

SARS-CoV-2

infection

68

,

from

the

Gene

Expression

Omnibus

(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE147507) (accessed on April 13, 2020).
Differentially expressed genes were determined using the Wald test in DESeq2 (v1.24.0)

22

comparing SARS-CoV-2 infected cells to batch-matched mock controls, with a significance
threshold of adjusted p < 0.05.
Of the 1285 age-associated genes, 988 genes were matched to the RNA-seq dataset.
Statistical significance of overlaps between the gene sets was assessed by hypergeometric test,
assuming 21,797 total genes as annotated in the RNA-seq dataset and 988 age-associated genes.
Statistical significance of the association between the directionality of SARS-CoV-2 regulation
and the directionality of age-association was assessed by two-tailed Fischer’s exact test. Gene
ontology and pathway enrichment analysis was performed using DAVID (v6.8)

70

(https://david.ncifcrf.gov/).
Statistical information summary
Comprehensive information on the statistical analyses used are included in various places,
including the figures, figure legends and results, where the methods, significance, p-values and/or
tails are described. All error bars have been defined in the figure legends or methods.
Code availability

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Codes used for data analysis or generation of the figures related to this study are available
upon request to the corresponding author and will be deposited to GitHub upon publication for
free public access.
Data and resource availability
All relevant processed data generated during this study are included in this article and its
supplementary information files. Raw data are from various sources as described above. All data
and resources related to this study are freely available upon request to the corresponding author.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Tables
Table S1: Demographics of donors for GTEx lung samples.
Table S2: Normalized expression matrix for SARS-CoV-2 host entry factors in human lung.
Table S3: Cell type-specific expression frequencies for SARS-CoV-2 host entry factors in human
lung (Tissue Stability Cell Atlas).
Table S4: Likelihood-ratio test table for evaluating age-associated genes.
Table S5: Final set of age-associated genes.
Table S6: DAVID analysis table for genes that increase in expression with age.
Table S7: DAVID analysis table for genes that decrease in expression with age.
Table S8: Cell type-specific expression frequencies for genes that increase in expression with age
(Tissue Stability Cell Atlas).
Table S9: Cell type-specific expression frequencies for genes that increase in expression with age,
transformed to z-scores (Tissue Stability Cell Atlas).
Table S10: Cell type-specific expression frequencies for genes that decrease in expression with
age (Tissue Stability Cell Atlas).
Table S11: Cell type-specific expression frequencies for genes that decrease in expression with
age, transformed to z-scores (Tissue Stability Cell Atlas).
Table S12: Cell type-specific expression frequencies for genes that increase in expression with
age (Human Lung Cell Atlas).
Table S13: Cell type-specific expression frequencies for genes that increase in expression with
age, transformed to z-scores (Human Lung Cell Atlas).
Table S14: Cell type-specific expression frequencies for genes that decrease in expression with
age (Human Lung Cell Atlas).
Table S15: Cell type-specific expression frequencies for genes that decrease in expression with
age, transformed to z-scores (Human Lung Cell Atlas).
Table S16: DAVID analysis table for muscle-enriched genes that increase in expression with age.
Table S17: DAVID analysis table for AT2-enriched genes that decrease in expression with age.
Table S18: Table of scaled cell enrichment scores, median value of each age group.
Table S19: Age-association statistics for cell enrichment scores.
Table S20: Annotation of a prior SARS-CoV siRNA screen (de Wilde et al., 2015) with ageassociation statistics from this study.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table S21: Annotation of the SARS-CoV-2 : Human protein interactome (Gordon et al., 2020)
with age-association statistics from this study.
Table S22: Differential expression analysis in A549 cells, infected with SARS-CoV-2 vs mock
control, with age-association annotations.
Table S23: Differential expression analysis in A549-ACE2 cells, infected with SARS-CoV-2 vs
mock control, with age-association annotations.
Table S24: Differential expression analysis in Calu-3 cells, infected with SARS-CoV-2 vs mock
control, with age-association annotations.
Table S25: Consensus differentially expressed genes upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, intersected
with age-associated genes.
Table S26: Characteristics of age-associated genes that are regulated by SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Table S27: DAVID analysis table for SARS-CoV-2 repressed genes that decrease in expression
with age.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1. Wu, J. T. et al. Estimating clinical severity of COVID-19 from the transmission dynamics in
Wuhan, China. Nat Med 1–5 (2020) doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0822-7.
2. Riou, J., Hauser, A., Counotte, M. J. & Althaus, C. L. Adjusted age-specific case fatality ratio
during the COVID-19 epidemic in Hubei, China, January and February 2020. medRxiv
2020.03.04.20031104 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.03.04.20031104.
3. Onder, G., Rezza, G. & Brusaferro, S. Case-Fatality Rate and Characteristics of Patients Dying
in Relation to COVID-19 in Italy. JAMA (2020) doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4683.
4. Livingston, E. & Bucher, K. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Italy. JAMA (2020)
doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4344.
5. CDCMMWR. Severe Outcomes Among Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID19) — United States, February 12–March 16, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 69, (2020).
6. Zhu, N. et al. A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019. N. Engl. J.
Med. 382, 727–733 (2020).
7. Lu, R. et al. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus:
implications for virus origins and receptor binding. Lancet 395, 565–574 (2020).
8. Zhou, P. et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin.
Nature 579, 270–273 (2020).
9. Dong, Y. et al. Epidemiological Characteristics of 2143 Pediatric Patients With 2019
Coronavirus Disease in China. Pediatrics e20200702 (2020) doi:10.1542/peds.2020-0702.
10. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project. Nat Genet 45, 580–585 (2013).
11. Carithers, L. J. et al. A Novel Approach to High-Quality Postmortem Tissue Procurement: The
GTEx Project. Biopreserv Biobank 13, 311–319 (2015).
12. Wrapp, D. et al. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation.
Science 367, 1260–1263 (2020).
13. Wan, Y., Shang, J., Graham, R., Baric, R. S. & Li, F. Receptor Recognition by the Novel
Coronavirus from Wuhan: an Analysis Based on Decade-Long Structural Studies of SARS
Coronavirus. Journal of Virology 94, (2020).
14. Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is
Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell (2020) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

15. Walls, A. C. et al. Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike
Glycoprotein. Cell (2020) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.058.
16. Remuzzi, A. & Remuzzi, G. COVID-19 and Italy: what next? The Lancet 0, (2020).
17. Wu, C. et al. Risk Factors Associated With Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome and Death
in Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA Intern Med
(2020) doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.0994.
18. Team, T. N. C. P. E. R. E. The Epidemiological Characteristics of an Outbreak of 2019 Novel
Coronavirus Diseases (COVID-19) — China, 2020. CCDCW 2, 113–122 (2020).
19. Madissoon, E. et al. scRNA-seq assessment of the human lung, spleen, and esophagus tissue
stability after cold preservation. Genome Biology 21, 1 (2019).
20. Zhao, Y. et al. Single-cell RNA expression profiling of ACE2, the putative receptor of Wuhan
2019-nCov. bioRxiv 2020.01.26.919985 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.01.26.919985.
21. Qi, F., Qian, S., Zhang, S. & Zhang, Z. Single cell RNA sequencing of 13 human tissues
identify cell types and receptors of human coronaviruses. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications (2020) doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.03.044.
22. Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for
RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biology 15, 550 (2014).
23. Sharma, G. & Goodwin, J. Effect of aging on respiratory system physiology and immunology.
Clin Interv Aging 1, 253–260 (2006).
24. Mohebali, D., Kaplan, D., Carlisle, M., Supiano, M. A. & Rondina, M. T. Alterations in
Platelet Functions During Aging: Clinical Correlations with Thrombo-Inflammatory Disease
in Older Adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 62, 529–535 (2014).
25. Kuba, K. et al. A crucial role of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in SARS
coronavirus–induced lung injury. Nat Med 11, 875–879 (2005).
26. Imai, Y. et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 protects from severe acute lung failure.
Nature 436, 112–116 (2005).
27. Drosten, C. et al. Identification of a Novel Coronavirus in Patients with Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome. New England Journal of Medicine 348, 1967–1976 (2003).
28. Donoghue Mary et al. A Novel Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme–Related Carboxypeptidase
(ACE2) Converts Angiotensin I to Angiotensin 1-9. Circulation Research 87, e1–e9 (2000).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

29. Tipnis, S. R. et al. A Human Homolog of Angiotensin-converting Enzyme CLONING AND
FUNCTIONAL

EXPRESSION

AS

A

CAPTOPRIL-INSENSITIVE

CARBOXYPEPTIDASE. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 33238–33243 (2000).
30. Crackower, M. A. et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is an essential regulator of heart
function. Nature 417, 822–828 (2002).
31. Wang, D. et al. Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel
Coronavirus–Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA 323, 1061–1069 (2020).
32. Grasselli, G. et al. Baseline Characteristics and Outcomes of 1591 Patients Infected With
SARS-CoV-2 Admitted to ICUs of the Lombardy Region, Italy. JAMA (2020)
doi:10.1001/jama.2020.5394.
33. Srivastava, S. The Mitochondrial Basis of Aging and Age-Related Disorders. Genes (Basel)
8, (2017).
34. Sun, N., Youle, R. J. & Finkel, T. The Mitochondrial Basis of Aging. Mol Cell 61, 654–666
(2016).
35. Petersen, K. F. et al. Mitochondrial dysfunction in the elderly: possible role in insulin
resistance. Science 300, 1140–1142 (2003).
36. Lu, Y., Liu, D. X. & Tam, J. P. Lipid rafts are involved in SARS-CoV entry into Vero E6 cells.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 369, 344–349 (2008).
37. Wang, H. et al. SARS coronavirus entry into host cells through a novel clathrin- and caveolaeindependent endocytic pathway. Cell Res. 18, 290–301 (2008).
38. Li, G.-M., Li, Y.-G., Yamate, M., Li, S.-M. & Ikuta, K. Lipid rafts play an important role in
the early stage of severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus life cycle. Microbes Infect.
9, 96–102 (2007).
39. Pike, L. J. Lipid rafts: heterogeneity on the high seas. Biochem. J. 378, 281–292 (2004).
40. Huang, I.-C. et al. SARS coronavirus, but not human coronavirus NL63, utilizes cathepsin L
to infect ACE2-expressing cells. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 3198–3203 (2006).
41. Simmons, G. et al. Inhibitors of cathepsin L prevent severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus entry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 11876–11881 (2005).
42. Travaglini, K. J. et al. A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single cell RNA
sequencing. bioRxiv 742320 (2020) doi:10.1101/742320.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

43. Gralinski, L. E. & Baric, R. S. Molecular pathology of emerging coronavirus infections. J
Pathol 235, 185–195 (2015).
44. Peiris, J. S. M. et al. Clinical progression and viral load in a community outbreak of
coronavirus-associated SARS pneumonia: a prospective study. Lancet 361, 1767–1772
(2003).
45. Aran, D., Hu, Z. & Butte, A. J. xCell: digitally portraying the tissue cellular heterogeneity
landscape. Genome Biol 18, (2017).
46. Navarro, S. & Driscoll, B. Regeneration of the Aging Lung: A Mini-Review. Gerontology 63,
270–280 (2017).
47. Lowery, E. M., Brubaker, A. L., Kuhlmann, E. & Kovacs, E. J. The aging lung. Clin Interv
Aging 8, 1489–1496 (2013).
48. Byrne, A. J., Mathie, S. A., Gregory, L. G. & Lloyd, C. M. Pulmonary macrophages: key
players in the innate defence of the airways. Thorax 70, 1189–1196 (2015).
49. Ding, Y. et al. The clinical pathology of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS): a report
from China. J. Pathol. 200, 282–289 (2003).
50. Hsiao, C. H. et al. Evolution of pulmonary pathology in severe acute respiratory syndrome. J.
Formos. Med. Assoc. 104, 75–81 (2005).
51. Braciale, T. J., Sun, J. & Kim, T. S. Regulating the adaptive immune response to respiratory
virus infection. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12, 295–305 (2012).
52. Holt, P. G., Strickland, D. H., Wikström, M. E. & Jahnsen, F. L. Regulation of immunological
homeostasis in the respiratory tract. Nat Rev Immunol 8, 142–152 (2008).
53. Allard, B., Panariti, A. & Martin, J. G. Alveolar Macrophages in the Resolution of
Inflammation, Tissue Repair, and Tolerance to Infection. Front Immunol 9, (2018).
54. Yip, M. S. et al. Antibody-dependent infection of human macrophages by severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus. Virol. J. 11, 82 (2014).
55. Cheung, C. Y. et al. Cytokine Responses in Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome CoronavirusInfected Macrophages In Vitro: Possible Relevance to Pathogenesis. J Virol 79, 7819–7826
(2005).
56. Thepen, T., Van Rooijen, N. & Kraal, G. Alveolar macrophage elimination in vivo is
associated with an increase in pulmonary immune response in mice. J Exp Med 170, 499–509
(1989).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

57. Zhao, J., Zhao, J., Van Rooijen, N. & Perlman, S. Evasion by stealth: inefficient immune
activation underlies poor T cell response and severe disease in SARS-CoV-infected mice.
PLoS Pathog. 5, e1000636 (2009).
58. Shapouri-Moghaddam, A. et al. Macrophage plasticity, polarization, and function in health
and disease. J. Cell. Physiol. 233, 6425–6440 (2018).
59. Zhao, J., Zhao, J. & Perlman, S. T cell responses are required for protection from clinical
disease and for virus clearance in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-infected
mice. J. Virol. 84, 9318–9325 (2010).
60. Chen, J. et al. Cellular immune responses to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) infection in senescent BALB/c mice: CD4+ T cells are important in control of
SARS-CoV infection. J. Virol. 84, 1289–1301 (2010).
61. Jin, H. et al. Induction of Th1 type response by DNA vaccinations with N, M, and E genes
against SARS-CoV in mice. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 328, 979–986 (2005).
62. Swain, S. L., McKinstry, K. K. & Strutt, T. M. Expanding roles for CD4+ T cells in immunity
to viruses. Nat Rev Immunol 12, 136–148 (2012).
63. Wilde, A. H. de et al. A Kinome-Wide Small Interfering RNA Screen Identifies Proviral and
Antiviral Host Factors in Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Replication,
Including Double-Stranded RNA-Activated Protein Kinase and Early Secretory Pathway
Proteins. Journal of Virology 89, 8318–8333 (2015).
64. Gordon, D. E. et al. A SARS-CoV-2-Human Protein-Protein Interaction Map Reveals Drug
Targets

and

Potential

Drug-Repurposing.

bioRxiv

2020.03.22.002386

(2020)

doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.002386.
65. Scholich, K., Pierre, S. & Patel, T. B. Protein associated with Myc (PAM) is a potent inhibitor
of adenylyl cyclases. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 47583–47589 (2001).
66. Pierre, S. C., Häusler, J., Birod, K., Geisslinger, G. & Scholich, K. PAM mediates sustained
inhibition of cAMP signaling by sphingosine-1-phosphate. EMBO J 23, 3031–3040 (2004).
67. Billington, C. K., Ojo, O. O., Penn, R. B. & Ito, S. cAMP Regulation of Airway Smooth
Muscle Function. Pulm Pharmacol Ther 26, 112–120 (2013).
68. Blanco-Melo, D. et al. SARS-CoV-2 launches a unique transcriptional signature from in vitro,
ex

vivo,

and

in

vivo

doi:10.1101/2020.03.24.004655.

systems.

bioRxiv

2020.03.24.004655

(2020)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

69. Kilic, O. et al. A microphysiological model of the bronchial airways reveals the interplay of
mechanical and biochemical signals in bronchospasm. Nat Biomed Eng 3, 532–544 (2019).
70. Huang, D. W., Sherman, B. T. & Lempicki, R. A. Systematic and integrative analysis of large
gene lists using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc 4, 44–57 (2009).
71. Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Integrating single-cell
transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat Biotechnol 36,
411–420 (2018).
72. Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data. Cell 177, 1888-1902.e21
(2019).
73. Gaujoux, R. & Seoighe, C. A flexible R package for nonnegative matrix factorization. BMC
Bioinformatics 11, 367 (2010).
74. Barter, R. L. & Yu, B. Superheat: An R Package for Creating Beautiful and Extendable
Heatmaps for Visualizing Complex Data. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics
27, 910–922 (2018).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1
a

b
30

20

10

Age

c

20

13

20-29

30

10

30-39

60

33

40-49

145

55

50-59

122

68

60-69

18

4

70-79

M

F

≥8
5

-8
4
75

65

-7
4

-6
4

-5
4

Age

55

45

≥

# of samples

0-

≥

80

0

09
10
-1
20 9
-2
30 9
-3
40 9
-4
50 9
-5
60 9
-6
70 9
-7
9

80

010 9
-1
20 9
-2
30 9
-3
40 9
-4
50 9
-5
60 9
-6
70 9
-7
9

0

10

19

0

Age
GTEx: Human lung
RNA-seq profiles

20

-4
4

10

United States as of Mar 16, 2020
(US CDC; MMWR)

20

20

Italy as of Mar 17, 2020
(Italian ISS; Onder et al., 2020)
Case-fatality rate (%)

30
Case-fatality rate (%)

Case-fatality rate (%)

30

China as of Feb 11, 2020
(Chinese CDC; Onder et al., 2020)

50

Age

100

Expression of SARS-CoV-2 entry factors in lung
ACE2
p = 0.92

TMPRSS2
p = 0.0039

CTSL
p = 0.026

expression (log2 TPM)

4
p = 0.95

p = 0.34

p = 0.59

p = 0.55

p = 0.55

Age
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79

10

8

9

6

3

8
4

2

7

Male
Female

2

1

6
p = 0.45

p = 0.12

p = 0.062 p = 0.0027 p = 0.0038

30-39

40-49
50-59
Age

p = 0.081 p = 0.0096 p = 0.02 p = 0.002

0

0
20-29

30-39

40-49
50-59
Age

60-69

20-29

70-79

d

60-69

70-79

20-29

30-39

40-49 50-59
Age

60-69

p = 0.3

70-79

Identification of age-associated genes in human lung
Cluster 1 (n = 643 genes)

Cluster 2 (n = 642 genes)

2

z-score of gene expression

adj. p < 0.0001

adj. p < 0.0001

1

0

-1

20-29

30-39

40-49

50-59

60-69

20-29

70-79

30-39

40-49

Age

50-59

60-69

70-79

Age

e

f
DAVID analysis: Cluster 1
(increasing with age)

DAVID analysis: Cluster 2
(decreasing with age)

cell adhesion
vascular smooth muscle contraction
alternative splicing
oxytocin signaling
adrenergic signaling in cardiomyocytes
platelet activation
cGMP-PKG signaling
regulation of actin cytoskeleton
Rap signaling
PI3K-Akt signaling

0

mitochondrion
mitochondrial translation
metabolic pathways
Mitosis
DNA repair
lipid metabolism
tRNA aminoacylation
fatty acid metabolism
peroxisome
lysosomal membrane

6
2
4
-log10 (adj. p-value)

8

0

10
20
30
-log10 (adj. p-value)

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2
a

b
Cluster 2 genes (decreasing with age)
Fibroblasts

4

z-score (% expressing cells)

z-score (% expressing cells)

Cluster 1 genes (increasing with age)
Muscle cells

3

Lymph vessel

2

Blood vessel

1

Ciliated cell

0

Alveolar Type 1
Alveolar Type 2

-1

Macrophage (dividing)

-2

DC/Monocyte (dividing)

Macrophage (dividing)

4

DC/Monocyte (dividing)
3

Alveolar Type 1

2

Ciliated cell

1

Fibroblast
Lymph vessel

0

Macrophage (MARCO+)

-1

Alveolar Type 2

-2

T cell (dividing)

T cell (dividing)

NK (dividing)

NK cell (dividing)

Plasma cell

DC (activated)

Muscle cell

Plasmacytoid DC

Blood vessel

Plasma cell

Plasmacytoid DC

DC1

DC (activated)

DC2

DC1

Macrophage (MARCO+)

DC2

T regulatory cell

Macrophage (MARCO-)

NK cell

Monocyte

CD4+ T cell

Mast cell

CD8+ T cell

NK cell

Macrophage (MARCO-)

T regulatory cell

Monocyte

B cell

B cell

CD8+ T cell

Mast cell

CD4+ T cell

c

d
Muscle-enriched Cluster 1 genes
(increasing with age)

AT2-enriched Cluster 2 genes
(decreasing with age)

vascular smooth muscle contraction

metabolic pathways

cGMP-PKG signaling

biosynthesis of antibiotics

Z-disc

amino-acid biosynthesis

actin cytoskeleton

ATP-binding

oxytocin signaling

lipid metabolism

developmental protein

fatty acid metabolism

focal adhesion

extracellular exosome

calcium

peroxisomal matrix

MAPK signaling

mitochondrial matrix

0

2

4

6

-log10 (adj. p-value)

8

0

1

2

3

-log10 (adj. p-value)

4

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3
b
Th1 cells
Macrophages M1
Macrophages
iDC
Epithelial cells
CLP
CD4+ naive T cells
Fibroblasts
Pericytes
Endothelial cells
CD4+ Tcm
Tregs
Plasma cells
pDC
Neutrophils
Eosinophils
CMP
CD8+ Tem
CD8+ Tcm
CD8+ T cells
CD8+ naive T cells
CD4+ Tem
Th2 cells
Tgd cells
NKT
NK cells
Naive B cells
Memory B cells
Macrophages M2
DC
cDC
CD4+ T cells
CD4+ memory T cells
B cells
aDC

0.5
0.0
-0.5

0.4

0.2

p = 1.0*10-8

0.0
20-29

Macrophages

0.20

enrichment score

0.09

0.10

0.06

0.05

0.03

60-69

70-79

60-69

70-79

0.4

0.2
p = 2.7*10-13
30-39

40-49
50-59
Age

M1 macrophages

M2 macrophages
p = 0.034

p = 3.4*10-9

0.15

50-59
40-49
Age

0.6

20-29

0.12

p = 1.1*10-7

30-39

Fibroblasts

20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 70-79
Age

c

Epithelial cells

0.6

enrichment score

median z-score

Cell type enrichment scores

enrichment score

a

0.20
0.15
0.10

0.00

0.05

0.00
20-29

30-39

40-49 50-59
Age

60-69

0.00
20-29

70-79

30-39

40-49 50-59
Age

60-69

20-29

70-79

30-39

40-49 50-59
Age

60-69

70-79

d
Naive CD4+ T cells

Th1 cells

0.12

p = 9.2*10-6

enrichment score

CD4+ Tcm cells

p = 0.011

0.09

0.15

p = 1.7*10-7

0.2
0.10

0.06
0.1

0.05

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.0
20-29

30-39

40-49 50-59
Age

60-69

70-79

20-29

30-39

40-49 50-59
Age

60-69

70-79

20-29

30-39

40-49 50-59
Age

60-69

70-79

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4

a

b

siRNA screen of host factors influencing
SARS-CoV (de Wilde et al., 2015)

CLK1

1.1

1

CDKN3

6

ADK

AURKB
CDKL2

MST1R

AKAP6
ALPK2

PDIK1L

0.9

expression (log2 TPM)

1.0

ITK
Age-associated
gene cluster
1
2

0.8

p = 1.9*10-7

-11
0 p = 4.3*10

PDIK1L

MST1R
5

3

4
3

2

2
1

p = 2.3*10

1 p = 2.7*10-6

-8

ADK

Age-association
-log10 adj. p-value
0
2
4
6

0.5

2

7

CLK1

4

4

1.0
1.5
Relative SARS infectivity

c

2.0

AURKB

6

5

2
p = 4.8*10-10

3

Age

20-29

-6
0 p = 3.7*10

30-39

40-49

50-59

60-69

70-79

d
Cluster 1 genes with effect on SARS-CoV
(increasing with age)
Lymph vessel
B cell
Macrophage (MARCO+)
Macrophage (MARCO-)
Blood vessel
Mast cell
Alveolar Type 1
Alveolar Type 2
Ciliated cell
Muscle cell
CD8+ T cell
T regulatory cell
NK cell
CD4+ T cell
Plasma cell
Monocyte
Macrophage
Fibroblast
DC (activated)
NK (dividing)
DC2
DC1
DC/Monocyte (dividing)
Plasmacytoid DC
T cell (dividing)

% expressing cells

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

ALPK2

AKAP6

ITK

CLK1

Cluster 2 genes with effect on SARS-CoV
(decreasing with age)
Macrophage (MARCO+)
B cell
DC (activated)
DC2
Muscle cell
Lymph vessel
Fibroblast
Plasmacytoid DC
Plasma cell
Ciliated cell
Blood vessel
DC1
Macrophage (MARCO-)
Monocyte
NK cell
CD8+ T cell
Mast cell
T regulatory cell
CD4+ T cell
Alveolar Type 2
Alveolar Type 1
Macrophage (dividing)
DC/Monocyte (dividing)
T cell (dividing)
NK (dividing)

60
% expressing cells

Relative cell viability

3

8

PSKH1

CDKL2

4

9

50
40
30
20
10
0

AURKB CDKN3 CDKL2 MST1R PDIK1L PSKH1

ADK

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5
a

b

Age-associated genes
in human lung (this study)

1265

20

312

Membrane

Helicase/
triphosphatase

Gene regulation

M

Nsp13

Nsp1

AAR2
AKAP8L
ATP1B1
ATP6V1A

CENPF
CEP68
GCC1
HOOK1

PRIM1

RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase

Primase complex

Increase with age (n = 4)
Decrease with age (n = 16)

c

SARS-CoV-2 : Human
protein interactome
(Gordon et al., 2020)

expression (log2 TPM)

ATP1B1 (M)
p = 3.1*10-10

HOOK1 (Nsp13)
p = 6.2*10-10

8

AGPS

NARS2

Orf3a

Orf8

ALG5

NEU1
NPC2

PRIM1 (Nsp1)
p = 8.2*10-8

CRTC3
MYCBP2

Orf9c
Orf10
NDUFAF1*
NDUFB9*
PIGO

PPT1

AGPS (Nsp7)
p = 2.4*10-5

NARS2 (Nsp8)
p = 2.1*10-7

4.5
4
4.0

7

3

3

3.5

6
2

5
4

ALG5 (Orf3a)
p = 2.6*10-6

6

10

NDUFB9 (Orf9c)
p = 1.8*10-9

NPC2 (Orf8)
p = 2.2*10-13

PPT1 (Orf10)
p = 8.1*10-8
8

6.0
9

5

7

7

6

6

8

5.0

2

2.5
1

3

5.5

3

3.0

2

1

CRTC3 (Nsp12)
p = 2.1*10-9
expression (log2 TPM)

Nsp8

4

4

Nsp12

Nsp7

4
7

4.5
3

4.0

6
5

Age

20-29

30-39

40-49

50-59

60-69

d

70-79

e
Cluster 1 genes interacting with SARS-CoV-2
(increasing with age)

25
20
15
10
5

MYCBP2

CEP68

AKAP8L

CRTC3

80
60
40
20
0

AT
P1
B
AL 1
G
N 5
E
PR U1
C IM
EN 1
H PF
O
O
G K1
C
C
P 1
N IGO
AR
S
AT AA 2
P R
N 6V 2
D 1
U A
FA
AG F1
P
N S
PC
2
N PP
D T
U 1
FB
9

% expressing cells

30

100
% expressing cells

Alveolar Type 1
Macrophage (MARCO+)
NK (dividing)
Alveolar Type 2
Plasma cell
Muscle cell
DC2
Blood vessel
DC (activated)
Plasmacytoid DC
Ciliated cell
DC1
CD4+ T cell
Monocyte
T regulatory cell
Macrophage (MARCO-)
B cell
NK cell
CD8+ T cell
Mast cell
DC/Monocyte (dividing)
Fibroblast
T cell (dividing)
Macrophage (dividing)
Lymph vessel

35

Cluster 2 genes interacting with SARS-CoV-2
(decreasing with age)
Fibroblast
Lymph vessel
Plasma cell
Muscle cell
Blood vessel
T cell (dividing)
NK (dividing)
DC (activated)
Monocyte
Macrophage (MARCO-)
Plasmacytoid DC
CD4+ T cell
CD8+ T cell
NK cell
B cell
T regulatory cell
Mast cell
DC1
DC2
Macrophage (MARCO+)
Alveolar Type 1
Ciliated cell
Alveolar Type 2
Macrophage (dividing)
DC/Monocyte (dividing)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6
b

A549: SARS-CoV-2 vs. Mock
Cluster 1 (age up)
Cluster 2 (age down)

TM4SF4
PHB

TRIB3
OPTN
PCK2
PSAT1
H1F0

KIF20A
AGR2

200

100

CLK1
TM4SF4
AGR2
PHB

-4

0
4
log2 fold-change

Age-associated genes
in human lung

451

537

e

Age-associated genes
in human lung

785

A549: SARS-CoV-2
regulated genes

h

203

Cluster 1 (age up)

Cluster 1 (age up)

Cluster 2 (age down)

Cluster 2 (age down)

p = 1.50*10-18

100

-5

10

f

CSF2

OPTN
PCK2
PSAT1

PHB

100

p = 4.15*10-6

50

5
0
log2 fold-change

Age-associated genes
in human lung

555

3356

A549-ACE2: intersection genes
150

# of genes

# of genes

KIF20A

433

6054

Calu-3: SARS-CoV-2
regulated genes

Overlap: p = 2.08*10-4

300

200

TM4SF4

A549-ACE2: SARS-CoV-2
regulated genes

Overlap: p = 8.24*10-32

A549: intersection genes

LAMP3

IDO1

100

CDKN1B
C1S

0
5
log2 fold-change

7409

g

CYP1A1

200

0
-5

8

Cluster 1 (age up)
Cluster 2 (age down)

ARID4B
PNRC1
H1F0

0

0

d

300

Overlap: p = 7.11*10-22

i

Calu-3: intersection genes

250
Cluster 1 (age up)

# of genes

TK1

C1S

100

(GSE147507; Blanco-Melo et al., 2020)

Cluster 1 (age up)
Cluster 2 (age down)

200
PEG10

Calu-3: SARS-CoV-2 vs. Mock

(GSE147507; Blanco-Melo et al., 2020)

-log10 adj. p-value

-log10 adj. p-value

300

c

A549-ACE2: SARS-CoV-2 vs. Mock

(GSE147507; Blanco-Melo et al., 2020)

-log10 adj. p-value

a

200

Cluster 2 (age down)

150

p = 1.59*10-29

100
50

0

0
induced
repressed
SARS-CoV-2 vs Mock

0
induced
repressed
SARS-CoV-2 vs Mock

induced
repressed
SARS-CoV-2 vs Mock

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 7
a
SARS-CoV-2 induced genes
(GSE147507; Blanco-Melo et al., 2020)

A549

b

c

SARS-CoV-2 repressed genes

SARS-CoV-2 repressed, Cluster 2 genes

(GSE147507; Blanco-Melo et al., 2020)

A549-ACE2

A549

acetylation

A549-ACE2

mitochondrion
oxidoreductase
organelle envelope

669

203

1975

603
1176

606

212

1654

oxidative phosphorylation
pyruvate metabolism

641
1482

381

lysosome

244

0
1126

834

Calu-3

d

Calu-3

5
10
-log10 (adj. p-value)

15

60
Cluster 1 (age up)

ARID4B
ATRX
BRWD1
C1S
CAMSAP2
CDKN1B
CLK1
CNOT6L
GATAD2B
GEM

GNA13
MXI1
N4BP3
PHC3
PNISR
PNRC1
RAB8B
RASA2
RASGRP1
RBM33

Cluster 2 genes
(decrease w/ age)

Cluster 1 genes
(increase w/ age)

H1F0
PRTG

CFD
POLR2F
CNN3
PTOV1
GNAI2
RHOC
NCKIPSD
AACS
ACACA
ACAT1
ACSS2
AGR2
AHCY

AIFM1
AKR1A1
AP1M2
AP1S1
APEH
APRT

Cluster 2 genes (decrease w/ age)
ARPC1B
ASNA1
ATIC
ATP6V0D1
ATP6V0E2
C1QBP
CBR1
CLN3
GBA
GIPC1
HADH
MMAB
MRPL27

MRPS28
MSH2
MTCH2
MVK
NDUFA7
NDUFA9
NDUFS3
NIPSNAP1
NSDHL
NUP93
ORMDL2
PARP1
PDHB

PGAM5
PHB
POLDIP2
PPP1CA
PRDX3
PRPF19
PSKH1
QPDR
SAMM50
TK1
TM4SF4

Cluster 2 (age down)

# of genes

Cluster 1 genes
(increase w/ age)

40

20

p = 8.10*10-11

0
induced
repressed
SARS-CoV-2 vs Mock

e
SARS-CoV-2 induced, Cluster 2

SARS-CoV-2 repressed, Cluster 1

SARS-CoV-2 repressed, Cluster 2
Muscle cells
Blood vessel
Lymph vessel
Alveolar Type 1
Ciliated cell
Plasma cell
Alveolar Type 2
Fibroblast
DC/Monocyte (dividing)
Macrophage (MARCO+)
T cell (dividing)
NK cell (dividing)
Macrophage (dividing)
DC2
DC1
DC (activated)
Plasmacytoid DC
Macrophage (MARCO-)
Monocyte
CD4+ T cell
CD8+ T cell
T regulatory cell
B cell
NK cell
Mast cell

80
60
40
20
0

CNOT6L
CDKN1B
GNA13
RAB8B
N4BP3
RASGRP1
CAMSAP2
MXI1
GEM
C1S
RBM33
RASA2
BRWD1
PHC3
GATAD2B
PNRC1
ARID4B
ATRX
CLK1
PNISR
PRTG
H1F0
NCKIPSD
CNN3
PTOV1
CFD
RHOC
POLR2F
GNAI2
TK1
TM4SF4
PSKH1
AP1M2
MSH2
ATP6V0E2
PGAM5
MVK
AACS
ACACA
ACSS2
NIPSNAP1
NSDHL
AIFM1
AGR2
GIPC1
MMAB
HADH
QDPR
AP1S1
NDUFA7
POLDIP2
AHCY
MRPS28
SAMM50
PRPF19
NUP93
GBA
CLN3
APEH
ATIC
ARPC1B
PPP1CA
APRT
ATP6V0D1
AKR1A1
PHB
C1QBP
PARP1
CBR1
ACAT1
PDHB
NDUFA9
MRPL27
PRDX3
MTCH2
ORMDL2
NDUFS3
ASNA1

% expressing cells

SARS-CoV-2 induced, Cluster 1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 1

COVID-19 cases in United States
February 12 - March 16, 2020
Case-fatality
ICU admission

60

Hospitalization
40
20

≥8
5

-8
4

75

-7
4

65

-6
4

55

-5
4

45

-4
4

20

19

0

0-

% of patients

80

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 2

a

ACE2

p = 0.97

p = 0.2

p = 0.073
expression (log2 TPM)

20
p = 0.5

15

p = 0.87

p = 0.77

F

F

10
5
0
F

M
20-29

M
30-39

M
40-49

b

F

M
50-59

F

M
60-69

F

M
70-79

TMPRSS2
p = 0.23

p = 0.82

p = 0.93

F

F

F

p = 0.73

p = 0.13

p = 0.77

F

F

F

expression (log2 TPM)

250
200
150
100
50
0
M
20-29

M
30-39

c

M
40-49

M
50-59

M
60-69

M
70-79

CTSL
p = 0.28

p = 0.49

p = 0.21

p = 0.26

F

F

F

p = 0.41

expression (log2 TPM)

p = 0.47
750

500

250

0
F

M
20-29

F

M
30-39

F

M
40-49

M
50-59

M
60-69

M
70-79

normalized expression

b

1.5

1.0

0.5
% expressing cells

2

0

Al
ve
o
Al lar
ve _T
ol yp
ar
_T e1
yp
Bl B_ e2
oo c
d_ ells
ve
s
C se l
ilia
te
D d
D
C
C
_1
_M D
on C_ DC
oc ac _2
D yte tiva
C
_p _D ted
l a i vi d
sm i n
ac g
F yt
M
M ac Ly ibr oid
a c ro m o b
l
r
p p
M o p h h a h _ v a st
ac a ge e
ro g e _ D ss
ph _M iv el
ag A id
e_ RC ing
M O
AR ne
C g
M Op
as os
t_
M ce
M ono lls
us c
cl yte
e_
ce
lls
N
K_
N
Pl Div K
as id
m ing
a_
ce
T_ T_ lls
T_ CD CD
ce 8 4
lls _C
_
y
T_ Div tT
re i d i n
gu g
la
to
ry

Al
v
Al eola
ve r_
ol Ty
ar p
_T e1
Bl B yp
oo _ e2
d _ ce
ve l l s
C sse
ilia l
D
C
t
_M
D ed
D
C
on C
_
o _ D 1
D cy a c C _
C te tiv 2
_p _ a
la Div ted
sm i d
M Ma
a in
a c c L F cy g
y
r
r
M op op m ibro toid
ac h h ph b
ro a g a g _ v l a s
ph e_ e_ e t
a g M D i sse
e_ AR vid l
M C ing
AR O
n
M CO eg
as p
os
t
_
M Mo ce l
us no ls
cl cy
e_ te
ce
N
lls
K_
Pl D N
as iv K
i
m di
a_ ng
c
T_ T_C T_ ells
ce D C
lls 8_ D4
T_ _D Cyt
re i vi d T
gu in
la g
to
ry
normalized expression

% expressing cells

0.3

Al
ve
o
Al lar
ve _T
ol yp
ar
_T e1
yp
Bl B_ e2
oo c
d_ ells
ve
s
C se l
ilia
te
D d
D
C
C
_1
_M D
on C_ DC
oc ac _2
D yte tiva
C
_p _D ted
l a i vi d
sm i n
ac g
F yt
M
M ac Ly ibr oid
a c ro m o b
l
r
p p
M o p h h a h _ v a st
ac a ge e
ro g e _ D ss
ph _M iv el
ag A id
e_ RC ing
M O
AR ne
C g
M Op
as os
t_
M ce
M ono lls
us c
cl yte
e_
ce
lls
N
K_
N
Pl Div K
as id
m ing
a_
ce
T_ T_ lls
T_ CD CD
ce 8 4
lls _C
_
y
T_ Div tT
re i d i n
gu g
la
to
ry

normalized expression
0.6

% expressing cells

Al
v
Al eola
ve r_
ol Ty
ar p
_T e1
Bl B yp
oo _ e2
d _ ce
ve l l s
C sse
ilia l
D
C
t
_M
D ed
D
C
on C
_
o _ D 1
D cy a c C _
C te tiv 2
_p _ a
la Div ted
sm i d
M Ma
a in
a c c L F cy g
y
r
r
M op op m ibro toid
ac h h ph b
ro a g a g _ v l a s
ph e_ e_ e t
a g M D i sse
e_ AR vid l
M C ing
AR O
n
M CO eg
as p
os
t
_
M Mo ce l
us no ls
cl cy
e_ te
ce
N
lls
K_
Pl D N
as iv K
i
m di
a_ ng
c
T_ T_C T_ ells
ce D C
lls 8_ D4
T_ _D Cyt
re i vi d T
gu in
la g
to
ry

a

Al
ve
o
Al lar
ve _T
ol yp
ar
_T e1
yp
Bl B_ e2
oo c
d_ ells
ve
s
C se l
ilia
te
D d
D
C
C
_1
_M D
on C_ DC
oc ac _2
D yte tiva
C
_p _D ted
l a i vi d
sm i n
ac g
F yt
M
M ac Ly ibr oid
a c ro m o b
l
r
p p
M o p h h a h _ v a st
ac a ge e
ro g e _ D ss
ph _M iv el
ag A id
e_ RC ing
M O
AR ne
C g
M Op
as os
t_
M ce
M ono lls
us c
cl yte
e_
ce
lls
N
K_
N
Pl Div K
as id
m ing
a_
ce
T_ T_ lls
T_ CD CD
ce 8 4
lls _C
_
y
T_ Div tT
re i d i n
gu g
la
to
ry

Al
v
Al eola
ve r_
ol Ty
ar p
_T e1
Bl B yp
oo _ e2
d _ ce
ve l l s
C sse
ilia l
D
C
t
_M
D ed
D
C
on C
_
oc _a DC 1
D y c _
C te tiv 2
_p _ a
la Div ted
sm i d
M Ma
a in
a c c L F cy g
y
r
M rop op m ibro toid
ac h h ph b
ro a g a g _ v l a s
ph e_ e_ e t
a g M D i sse
e_ AR vid l
M C ing
AR O
n
M CO eg
as p
os
t
_
M Mo ce l
us no ls
cl cy
e_ te
ce
N
lls
K_
Pl D N
as iv K
m idi
a_ ng
c
T_ T_C T_ ells
ce D C
lls 8_ D4
T_ _D Cyt
re i vi d T
gu in
la g
to
ry

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 3

ACE2
ACE2

0.9
1.5

0.0

0.0
1.0

0.5

0.0

TMPRSS2
TMPRSS2

2.0

40

30

20

10

0

c
CTSL
CTSL

4
75

50

25

0

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 4
a

b
4

Cluster 2 genes (decreasing with age)
Goblet
Mucous
Differentiating Basal
Basal
Ionocyte
Proximal Ciliated
Ciliated
Proliferating Basal
Proximal Basal
Mesothelial
Neuroendocrine
Proliferating Macrophage
TREM2+ Dendritic
Macrophage
Fibromyocyte
Myofibroblast
Adventitial Fibroblast
Alveolar Fibroblast
Lipofibroblast
Airway Smooth Muscle
Vascular Smooth Muscle
Pericyte
Capillary Intermediate 1
Lymphatic
Artery
Vein
Bronchial Vessel 1
Bronchial Vessel 2
Capillary Aerocyte
Capillary
B
CD4+ Memory/Effector T
CD4+ Naive T
Natural Killer
Natural Killer T
CD8+ Memory/Effector T
CD8+ Naive T
Serous
Platelet/Megakaryocyte
Club
Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Capillary Intermediate 2
Alveolar Epithelial Type 1
Signaling Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Proliferating NK/T
Plasma
Myeloid Dendritic Type 2
Myeloid Dendritic Type 1
Plasmacytoid Dendritic
Basophil/Mast 2
Basophil/Mast 1
EREG+ Dendritic
Intermediate Monocyte
Nonclassical Monocyte
OLR1+ Classical Monocyte
IGSF21+ Dendritic
Classical Monocyte
z-score (% expressing cells)

z-score (% expressing cells)

Cluster 1 genes (increasing with age)
3
2
1
0
-1
-2

Travaglini et al., 2020

5

Proliferating Basal
Proliferating Macrophage
Goblet
Proximal Basal
Mucous
Differentiating Basal
Basal
Serous
Ionocyte
Proximal Ciliated
Ciliated
Neuroendocrine
TREM2+ Dendritic
Macrophage
Mesothelial
Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Platelet/Megakaryocyte
Signaling Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Club
Alveolar Epithelial Type 1
Proliferating NK/T
Myeloid Dendritic Type 2
Myeloid Dendritic Type 1
Plasma
Plasmacytoid Dendritic
EREG+ Dendritic
Nonclassical Monocyte
Intermediate Monocyte
Lipofibroblast
Capillary Intermediate 1
Artery
Lymphatic
Bronchial Vessel 1
Fibrobmyocyte
Myofibroblast
Adventitial Fibroblast
Airway Smooth Muscle
Vascular Smooth Muscle
Basophil/Mast 1
Basophil/Mast 2
IGSF21+ Dendritic
OLR1+ Classical Monocyte
Classical Monocyte
B
CD4+ Memory/Effector T
CD4+ Naive T
Natural Killer T
Natural Killer
CD8+ Naive T
CD8+ Memory/Effector T
Capillary Intermediate 2
Pericyte
Alveolar Fibroblast
Vein
Bronchial Vessel 2
Capillary Aerocyte
Capillary

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2

Travaglini et al., 2020

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 5
a

b
Cluster 1 genes with effect on SARS-CoV
(increasing with age)

% expressing cells

50
40
30
20
10
0

ALPK2

AKAP6

ITK

CLK1

Travaglini et al., 2020

% expressing cells

Myeloid Dendritic Type 1
Proliferating Macrophage
Plasma
Basal
Mucous
TREM2+ Dendritic
Adventitial Fibroblast
Neuroendocrine
Differentiating Basal
Goblet
Myeloid Dendritic Type 2
Macrophage
Bronchial Vessel 1
Lipofibroblast
Myofibroblast
Mesothelial
Intermediate Monocyte
Artery
Club
Plasmacytoid Dendritic
EREG+ Dendritic
Ciliated
Proximal Ciliated
Fibromyocyte
Proximal Basal
Proliferating Basal
Capillary Intermediate 1
Nonclassical Monocyte
OLR1+ Classical Monocyte
Vein
Capillary Aerocyte
Bronchial Vessel 2
Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Vascular Smooth Muscle
Ionocyte
Airway Smooth Muscle
Alveolar Fibroblast
B
Lymphatic
IGSF21+ Dendritic
Pericyte
Capillary
Serous
Basophil/Mast 2
Natural Killer T
Natural Killer
Basophil/Mast 1
CD8+ Memory/Effector T
CD8+ Naive T
Alveolar Type 1
Classical Monocyte
Platelet/Megakaryocyte
Signaling Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Capillary Intermediate 2
CD4+ Memory/Effector T
CD4+ Naive T
Proliferating NK/T

60

Cluster 2 genes with effect on SARS-CoV
(decreasing with age)
Mucous
Differentiating Basal
Basal
Ionocyte
Club
TREM2+ Dendritic
Macrophage
Myeloid Dendritic Type 2
Nonclassical Monocyte
B
Plasmacytoid Dendritic
Plasma
Alveolar Epithelial Type 1
Serous
Goblet
Proximal Basal
Ciliated
Signaling Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Proximal Ciliated
Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Fibromyocyte
EREG+ Dendritic
Myofibroblast
Vascular Smooth Muscle
Basophil/Mast 2
Adventitial Fibroblast
Classical Monocyte
Airway Smooth Muscle
Pericyte
Intermediate Monocyte
Myeloid Dendritic Type 1
Platelet/Megakaryocyte
Alveolar Fibroblast
Artery
CD4+ Memory/Effector T
CD4+ Naive T
Capillary Intermediate 1
Bronchial Vessel 1
Lymphatic
CD8+ Naive T
CD8+ Memory/Effector T
Bronchial Vessel 2
OLR1+ Classical Monocyte
Natural Killer T
Basophil/Mast 1
IGSF21+ Dendritic
Capillary Aerocyte
Capillary
Natural Killer
Capillary Intermediate 2
Vein
Lipofibroblast
Mesothelial
Neuroendocrine
Proliferating Basal
Proliferating Macrophage
Proliferating NK/T

60
40
20
0

ADK

AURKB CDKN3 CDKL2 PSKH1 MST1R PDIK1L

Travaglini et al., 2020

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 6
b
Cluster 1 genes interacting with SARS-CoV-2
(increasing with age)
TREM2+ Dendritic
Myeloid Dendritic Type 2
Mucous
Differentiating Basal
Myeloid Dendritic Type 1
Proliferating Macrophage
Macrophage
Basal
Ciliated
Capillary Intermediate 1
Serous
IGSF21+ Dendritic
Vein
Plasma
EREG+ Dendritic
Proliferating NK/T
Plasmacytoid Dendritic
Intermediate Monocyte
Nonclassical Monocyte
B
Classical Monocyte
Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Lipofibroblast
Club
Adventitial Fibroblast
CD4+ Memory/Effector T
CD4+ Naive T
Platelet/Megakaryocyte
Natural Killer T
CD8+ Memory/Effector T
CD8+ Naive T
OLR1+ Classical Monocyte
Basophil/Mast 2
Alveolar Fibroblast
Natural Killer
Basophil/MAst 1
Myofibroblast
Bronchial Vessel 2
Vascular Smooth Muscle
Airway Smooth Muscle
Fibromyocyte
Pericyte
Capillary
Capillary Aerocyte
Alveolar Epithelial Type 1
Signaling Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Capillary Intermediate 2
Artery
Bronchial Vessel 1
Ionocyte
Lymphatic
Neuroendocrine
Goblet
Proximal Ciliated
Mesothelial
Proliferating Basal
Proximal Basal

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

CRTC3

60
40
20
0

CEP68

D

AKAP8L

Travaglini et al., 2020

Differentiating Basal
Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Basal
Club
Mucous
Serous
Mesothelial
Proximal Ciliated
Ciliated
Neuroendocrine
Goblet
Proximal Basal
Ionocyte
Macrophage
TREM2+ Dendritic
Proliferating Basal
Proliferating Macrophage
Bronchial Vessel 1
Lymphatic
Adventitial Fibroblast
Basophil/Mast 2
Basophil/Mast 1
Artery
Capillary Aerocyte
Vein
Alveolar Fibroblast
Vascular Smooth Muscle
Pericyte
Platelet/Megakaryocyte
Airway Smooth Muscle
CD8+ Naive T
CD8+ Memory/Effector T
Natural Killer
Capillary Intermediate 2
CD4+ Memory/Effector T
Natural Killer T
Bronchial Vessel 2
Capillary
B
CD4+ Naive T
Myofibroblast
Lipofibroblast
Signaling Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Fibromyocyte
Alveolar Epithelial Type 1
Proliferating NK/T
Nonclassical Monocyte
IGSF21+ Dendritic
OLR1+ Classical Monocyte
Classical Monocyte
Intermediate Monocyte
EREG+ Dendritic
Myeloid Dendritic Type 2
Myeloid Dendritic Type 1
Capillary Intermediate 1
Plasmacytoid Dendritic
Plasma

80

N

MYCBP2

100
% expressing cells

% expressing cells

70

Cluster 2 genes interacting with SARS-CoV-2
(decreasing with age)

U
FB
N 9
PC
PP 2
A T1
AT LG
P 5
C 1B
EN 1
PR PF
I
G M1
C
AA C1
R
PI 2
N GO
A
H RS
O 2
O
K
N AG 1
D P
U
AT FA S
P6 F1
V1
N A
EU
1

a

Travaglini et al., 2020

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.030684; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 7
a
SARS-CoV-2 induced, Cluster 1

SARS-CoV-2 induced, Cluster 2

SARS-CoV-2 repressed, Cluster 1

SARS-CoV-2 repressed, Cluster 2

100

Myeloid Dendritic Type 2
Myeloid Dendritic Type 1
Proliferating NK/T
Plasma
Plasmacytoid Dendritic
Lymphatic
Bronchial Vessel 1
Artery
Capillary Intermediate 1
Intermediate Monocyte
Nonclassical Monocyte
EREG+ Dendritic
OLR1+ Classical Monocyte
Classical Monocyte
IGSF21+ Dendritic
Club
Signaling Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Alveolar Epithelial Type 1
Platelet/Megakaryocyte
CD8+ Naive T
CD8+ Memory/Effector T
Natural Killer T
CD4+ Memory/Effector T
Natural Killer
CD4+ Naive T
B
Basophil/Mast 2
Basophil/Mast 1
Vein
Bronchial Vessel 2
Capillary Aerocyte
Capillary
Pericyte
Capillary Intermediate 2
Myofibroblast
Vascular Smooth Muscle
Fibromyocyte
Airway Smooth Muscle
Lipofibroblast
Adventitial Fibroblast
Alveolar Fibroblast
Mucous
Differentiating Basal
Proximal Ciliated
Ciliated
Ionocyte
Mesothelial
Alveolar Epithelial Type 2
Basal
Serous
Neuroendocrine
Goblet
Proximal Basal
Proliferating Basal
TREM2+ Dendritic
Macrophage
Proliferating Macrophage

60

40

20

0

N4BP3
RASGRP1
GEM
C1S
GNA13
RAB8B
BRWD1
CNOT6L
CDKN1B
CAMSAP2
MXI1
RASA2
RBM33
GATAD2B
PHC3
CLK1
ARID4B
ATRX
PNISR
PNRC1
PRTG
H1F0
NCKIPSD
CNN3
GNAI2
RHOC
CFD
PTOV1
POLR2F
AP1M2
AGR2
TK1
TM4SF4
GBA
PGAM5
PSKH1
ACSS2
ACACA
AACS
MVK
MSH2
ATP6V0E2
NUP93
NIPSNAP1
NSDHL
AIFM1
ACAT1
CBR1
GIPC1
MMAB
HADH
MRPS28
AP1S1
POLDIP2
QDPR
AHCY
ATIC
APEH
CLN3
PRPF19
SAMM50
ARPC1B
PPP1CA
APRT
PARP1
PDHB
MTCH2
NDUFA9
MRPL27
ASNA1
NDUFS3
C1QBP
NDUFA7
PHB
ORMDL2
ATP6V0D1
AKR1A1
PRDX3

% expressing cells

80

Travaglini et al., 2020

