bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mRNA-1273 efficacy in a severe COVID-19 model: attenuated activation of pulmonary
immune cells after challenge

Michelle Meyer1,2*, Yuan Wang3,4*, Darin Edwards5*, Gregory R. Smith6*, Aliza B. Rubenstein6*,
Palaniappan Ramanathan1,2*, Chad E. Mire2,7, Colette Pietzsch1,2, Xi Chen4,8, Yongchao Ge6,
Wan Sze Cheng6, Carole Henry5, Angela Woods5, LingZhi Ma5, Guillaume B. E. Stewart-Jones5,
Kevin W. Bock9, Mahnaz Minai9, Bianca M. Nagata9, Sivakumar Periasamy1,2, Pei-Yong Shi10,
Barney S. Graham11, Ian N. Moore9, Irene Ramos6, Olga G. Troyanskaya3,4,8, Elena Zaslavsky6,
Andrea Carfi5#, Stuart C. Sealfon6#, Alexander Bukreyev1,2,7#

1

Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555

2

Galveston National Laboratory, Galveston, TX 77555

3

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08540

4

Lewis-Sigler Institute of Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08540

5

Moderna Inc, Cambridge, MA, 02139

6

Department of Neurology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029

7

Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston,

TX 77555
8

Center for Computational Biology, Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation, New York, NY 10010

9

Infectious Disease Pathogenesis Section, Comparative Medicine Branch, National Institute of

Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852
10

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch,

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Galveston, TX 77555
11

Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National

Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892

* These authors contributed equally

#

Address correspondence to:

Andrea

Carfi,

Moderna

Inc,

Cambridge,

MA

02139;

Phone:

617-335-7307;

Email:

andrea.carfi@modernatx.com

Stuart C. Sealfon, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. Phone:
212-241-7327; E-mail: stuart.sealfon@mssm.edu.

Alexander Bukreyev, Departments of Pathology and Microbiology & Immunology, Galveston
National Laboratory, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555-0609, USA.
Phone: 409-772-2829; E-mail: alexander.bukreyev@utmb.edu.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ABSTRACT
The mRNA-1273 vaccine was recently determined to be effective against severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) from interim Phase 3 results. Human
studies, however, cannot provide the controlled response to infection and complex
immunological insight that are only possible with preclinical studies. Hamsters are the only
model that reliably exhibit more severe SARS-CoV-2 disease similar to hospitalized patients,
making them pertinent for vaccine evaluation. We demonstrate that prime or prime-boost
administration of mRNA-1273 in hamsters elicited robust neutralizing antibodies, ameliorated
weight loss, suppressed SARS-CoV-2 replication in the airways, and better protected against
disease at the highest prime-boost dose. Unlike in mice and non-human primates, mRNA-1273mediated immunity was non-sterilizing and coincided with an anamnestic response. Single-cell
RNA sequencing of lung tissue permitted high resolution analysis which is not possible in
vaccinated humans. mRNA-1273 prevented inflammatory cell infiltration and the reduction of
lymphocyte proportions, but enabled antiviral responses conducive to lung homeostasis.
Surprisingly, infection triggered transcriptome programs in some types of immune cells from
vaccinated hamsters that were shared, albeit attenuated, with mock-vaccinated hamsters. Our
results support the use of mRNA-1273 in a two-dose schedule and provides insight into the
potential responses within the lungs of vaccinated humans who are exposed to SARS-CoV-2.

INTRODUCTION
When the World Health Organization declared SARS-CoV-2 a global pandemic in March 2020,
Phase 1 clinical trials on the most promising vaccine candidates had already commenced.
Nucleoside modified mRNA, a relatively new addition to the arsenal of vaccine platforms, has
shown promise against numerous viral infectious diseases in preclinical trials (1, 2), and phase
1 and 2 trials that are completed (3, 4) or currently underway (5-7). Previous preclinical work on

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

a related betacoronavirus enabled the rapid development of mRNA-1273, a vaccine composed
of a modified mRNA encoding for a stabilized prefusion form of the SARS-CoV-2 spike (S)
protein encapsulated in lipid nanoparticles (1). Vaccination with mRNA-1273 prevented infection
in the lungs and upper airways of mice (1) and rhesus macaques (8). In phase 1 (9, 10) and
phase 2 studies the vaccine was found to be safe and to elicit robust neutralizing antibody
responses. More recently, interim analysis of Phase 3 data indicated mRNA-1273 was 94.1%
efficacious in prevention of COVID-19 disease and highly efficacious in protecting against
severe disease (11). On December 18, 2020, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration authorized
the emergency use of mRNA-1273.
Nonhuman primate (12-14), ferret (15-17) and mouse (18) models that have been developed to
understand SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis and test vaccine and therapeutics efficacies display a
mild course of disease. The lack of overt symptoms in NHPs and ethical constraints due to the
sheer numbers required to recapitulate low frequency human cases with severe clinical
manifestations limits the ability to understand all aspects of the disease and vaccine
effectiveness. Hamsters are highly susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 and develop a severe
pneumonia similar to COVID-19 patients (19-22). Hamster angiotensin converting enzyme – 2
(ACE2) receptors, that enable SARS-CoV-2 binding and entry, are analogous to the human
receptor(20) and therefore, virus adaptation (18) or transgenic modifications (23) are not
required for permissiveness. Additionally, hamsters can support high levels of virus replication
and transmission, and develop severe clinical symptoms, weight loss and lethality with high
SARS-CoV-2 infectious doses (21), making them an ideal model for evaluating vaccines.
Here, we tested the efficacy of the mRNA-1273 vaccine with prime only and three dose levels of
prime-boost regimens using the stringent golden Syrian hamster model. Serological, virological,
clinico-pathological and single cell (sc) RNA-seq analyses were conducted to characterize
vaccine-mediated immunity before and after challenge. We show that vaccination induced

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

robust virus neutralizing antibody responses, attenuated virus replication, and mitigated against
the influx of inflammatory innate immune cells and the relative reduction of lymphocytes in the
lungs after challenge, although activated immune cell populations were observed. Our data
illustrates the viral, cellular, and immune dynamics within the lungs of vaccinated hamsters
which may offer a unique perspective into the events which occur within the lungs of vaccinated
humans who are exposed to SARS-CoV-2.

RESULTS
Vaccination induces potent antibody responses
Three groups of outbred hamsters (n = 15) were vaccinated with 25 µg, 5 µg and 1 µg of
mRNA-1273 via the intramuscular (IM) route in a prime (week 0)-boost (week 3) regimen
(Figure 1A). One group of hamsters (n =15) received a prime-only dose of 25 µg at week 0 and
another group (n =15) were mock vaccinated as the study’s control. The humoral responses to
vaccination were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) specific for the
SARS-CoV-2 S protein (Figure 1B) and its receptor binding domain (RBD; Figure 1C). Three
weeks after the prime dose, higher S-specific IgG titers were detected in hamsters vaccinated
with 25 µg and 5 µg doses compared to the 1 µg dose (Figure 1B). S-specific IgG titers were
significantly augmented in all groups following the booster, but continued to be significantly
higher in the 25 µg and 5 µg dose groups compared to 1 µg dose group. RBD-specific IgG titers
were comparable among hamsters in the prime-boost regimen groups after receipt of their first
dose (Figure 1C). After a boost dose, RBD titers had increased significantly (P<0.0001) and
remained comparable among the prime-boost groups. RBD titers in the prime-boost vaccine
groups were also significantly higher after the second dose when compared to the 25 µg primeonly group (P<0.0001), while titers remained unchanged for the 25 µg prime-only group
between weeks 3 and 6 post-vaccination. The ability of serum to neutralize live SARS-CoV-2

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

reporter virus was also determined (Figure 1D). Most vaccinated hamsters produced
neutralizing titers after the prime dose. As with RBD-binding titers, neutralizing titers significantly
increased in all groups which received a booster dose, and the levels remained comparable
among these hamster groups, but higher versus the prime-only vaccine group. The magnitude
of neutralizing antibody titers in all booster-vaccinated groups was higher than in convalescent
COVID-19 patients, while titers in the prime-only group were comparable to those seen in these
subjects. Neutralizing titers significantly correlated with S-specific IgG titers (Supplemental
Figure 1A) and RBD-specific titers (Supplemental Figure 1B), albeit the correlation was greater
with RBD-specific IgG titers at both weeks 3 and 6 post-vaccination

Prime-boost vaccination effectively protects against SARS-CoV-2 replication in the lungs
Six weeks after prime vaccination (3 weeks after the boost vaccination), all treatment group
hamsters were challenged intranasally with 105 plaque forming units (PFU) of SARS-CoV-2.
Hamsters were monitored daily for changes in body weight. At 2 and 4 days post infection (dpi),
5 animals from each group were serially euthanized, and the viral load in the right lung and
nasal turbinates was determined. The remaining hamsters were observed until the study’s
endpoint at day 14. Mock vaccinated hamsters lost an average maximum body weight of 12%
by day 6 (Figure 2A and Supplemental Figure 2, A and B). The prime-boost regimen prevented
significant weight loss for all but one hamster in the 5 µg prime-boost group; excluding animals
necropsied at 2 and 4 dpi, the average maximum weight loss for the combined prime-boost
dose vaccine groups was 2.25% over the 14 day infection period (Supplemental Figure 2B). The
prime-only vaccinated group lost a maximal mean weight of 6.2%. Moderate inverse
correlations were observed between maximum percent weight loss and S-binding IgG and
neutralizing antibody titers at week 6 (Supplemental Figure 3A).
At 2 dpi, high viral loads were detected by plaque assay in the lungs and nasal turbinates of the

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mock vaccinated group with a peak mean of 6.8 log10 PFU/g and 6.9 log10 PFU/g, respectively
(Figure 2B). Markedly lower levels of virus were detected in the lungs of all vaccinated groups,
while the 1 µg prime-boost dose group had no detectable virus in the lungs. The mean peak
virus load in the nasal turbinates were similar among the prime-boost groups and 4.3 log10 lower
compared to the mock (P<0.0001). At 4 dpi, there was no detectable virus in the lungs and
nasal turbinates of all prime-boost recipients. Hamsters that received the prime-only vaccine
dose had 4.8 log10 and 3.0 log10 reductions of peak virus load means, respectively, in the lungs
and nasal turbinates compared to the control group.
We measured viral subgenomic RNA (sgRNA) in these tissues by qRT-PCR as a potential
gauge for replicating virus. Peak sgRNA were detected in the mock group at 2 dpi, with
geometric means of 7.4 log10 (95% CI range 7.0 log10 - 7.9 log10) copies/g in the lungs and 7.3
log10 (95% CI range 7.1 log10 – 7.5 log10) copies/g in nasal turbinates (Supplemental Figure 2C).
All prime-boost groups showed similar lower sgRNA levels compared to the mock vaccine group
with peak geometric means of 2.1 log10 (95% CI range 0.86 log10 – 3.3 log10) sgRNA copies/g in
lungs and 6.3 log10 (95% CI range 6.4 log10 – 6.1 log10) sgRNA copies/g in nasal turbinates. In
the prime-only vaccine group, sgRNA levels were not significantly reduced in either of these
tissues. In close agreement with viral load, no sgRNA was detected in the lungs of prime-boost
groups by 4 dpi, except for one hamster in the 1 µg dose group. While viral load was not
detected in the nasal turbinates of prime-boost recipients, sgRNA was detected, albeit at
markedly reduced levels compared to the mock-vaccinated group. SARS-CoV-2 transmission
has been shown to correlate with levels of infectious virus and not sgRNA (22). Therefore, the
likelihood of onward transmission was highly reduced by mRNA-1273. The prime-only dose
afforded a less robust protection according to sgRNA levels, particularly in the nasal turbinates.
Neutralizing antibody titers at week 6 inversely correlated with viral load and sgRNA in both the
lungs and nasal turbinates at 2 and 4 dpi (Supplemental Figure 3B and C).

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fourteen days post challenge, the mock vaccinated hamsters had measurable serum S(Supplemental Figure 4A) and nucleocapsid (NP)-specific (Supplemental Figure 4B) IgG titers
and neutralizing titers (Supplemental Figure 4C). An anamnestic response was observed as
soon as 4 dpi with the S-specific IgG increasing in recipients of the prime only vaccine regimen.
At 14 dpi, all vaccinated hamsters displayed an anamnestic S-specific IgG antibody response.
This result contrasts with the unwavering virus-specific IgG levels observed post challenge in
vaccinated NHPs (8). Furthermore, NP-specific IgG titers were detected in all groups at 14 dpi
(Supplemental Figure 4B) confirming, together with the detection of sgRNA in the upper and
lower respiratory tract (Supplemental Figure 2C), replication of the challenge virus before
clearance.

High dose prime-boost vaccination protects against severe pathological changes in the
lungs
The lungs of hamsters were evaluated histologically following challenge with SARS-CoV-2 at 2-,
4- and 14-day timepoints (Figure 2C, Supplemental Figure 5 and Supplemental Figure 6). A
naïve group of hamsters (n = 4), intranasally administered media to mimic virus inoculum and
euthanized 4 days later, was included as a control and presented with a moderately prominent
alveolar interstitial hypercellularity. While these hypercellular areas may represent regions of
atelectasis, the presence of Pasteurella multocida, a common respiratory commensal, was also
detected by metagenomics analysis of all lung samples used in scRNA-seq (Supplemental
Table 1). At 2 dpi, SARS-CoV-2 infection in mock vaccinated animals caused mild interstitial
inflammation in the lungs with some animals exhibiting a largely polymorphonuclear cellular
infiltrate, comprised predominantly of neutrophils/heterophils, in and around the lung airways
(Supplemental Figure 6 and Supplemental Table 2). By 4 dpi, inflammation was largely
associated with perivascular and peribronchiolar regions in both a focally diffuse or multifocal

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

distribution affecting, on average, 30-50% of the lung that persisted until the study’s endpoint
(Figure 2C, Supplemental Figure 5, Supplemental Table 2). Over the 14-day infection course,
prime-boost vaccinated animals displayed mild to moderate inflammation mostly involving the
pulmonary interstitium, characterized by expanded alveolar capillary profiles, diminished
alveolar spaces and influx of predominantly mononuclear cells (Figure 2C, Supplemental Figure
5, Supplemental Figure 6 and Supplemental Table 2). In the 1 µg prime-boost group, the
predominant inflammatory phenotype was mild to moderate interstitial and rarely perivascularperibronchiolar (4 dpi) inflammation. However, one animal exhibited a more severe pulmonary
inflammatory response at 2 dpi, characterized by mild to moderate edema and rare foci of
hemorrhage and vascular congestion that was previously described in SARS-CoV-2 infected
hamsters (19). Prime-only vaccinated animals generally exhibited reduced inflammation
compared to mock-vaccinated animals at 4 dpi; one outlier hamster presented mild pulmonary
edema and scant fibrin deposition which was not observed in the rest of the group. Irrespective
of vaccination schedule and dose, the airway lumen remained clear of inflammatory cells and
cellular debris.
Lung sections were also examined for SARS-CoV-2 antigen at 4 dpi by immunohistochemistry
(Figure 2C, Supplemental Figure 5 and Supplemental Table 2). Large amounts of viral antigen
were found throughout the lungs of mock-vaccinated hamsters. Prime-boost vaccination limited
the amount of detectable total viral antigen more so than prime-only vaccination; SARS-CoV-2
antigen was minimal to absent in the 25 µg and 5 µg prime-boost groups.
Notably, the three outlier hamsters with more severe histopathological phenotypes identified in
the 25 µg prime-only group at 4 dpi and in the 1 µg prime-boost group at 2 and 4 dpi, did not
exhibit drastic weight loss. Their levels of infectious virus or sgRNA in the lungs or nasal
turbinates were also comparable with other group members, with the exception of the single 1
µg recipient at 4 dpi that had detectable sgRNA in the lungs that were not detected in other

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

prime-boost recipients at the same time point. Both 4 dpi outliers had the highest level of viral
antigen among all vaccinated hamster samples. Interestingly, all three outliers did not produce
neutralizing titers after prime vaccination, a finding that suggests the importance of vaccine
dose level and regimen, and the evolving immune response following administration of a second
dose.

Integrated single cell analysis and cell type identification
We performed scRNA-seq on the cranial lung lobe tissue samples from three of the study’s
hamster groups that were euthanized at 4 dpi: the naive hamsters mock-infected with media
(Naive, N, n = 4) and the 5 µg prime-boost vaccinated (Vaccinated + Infected, VI, n = 5) and
mock-vaccinated (Mock-Vaccinated + Infected, MI, n = 5) groups infected with SARS-CoV-2.
Lung samples from the N group served as a baseline control for analysis. The scRNA-seq data
were aligned against the hamster and SARS-CoV-2 genomes and integrated using the Seurat
scRNA-seq analysis pipeline (24). The expression profile of one VI animal that showed
excessive weight loss at 4 dpi (Supplemental Figure 2A and Supplemental Figure 7A) was very
distinct, so it was analyzed separately and not included in the integrated analysis. Integration of
the data from the remaining 13 samples identified 15 cell types, including multiple T cell,
dendritic cell (DC) and macrophage subtypes (Figure 3A). The main markers that distinguish the
cell types are shown in Supplemental Figure 8.
Visualizing these 13 datasets by group on the integrated UMAP coordinates showed an overall
change in cell type proportion across MI and VI groups when compared to the N group. Most
noticeably, there was a more than 30% increase in the presence of interstitial macrophages in
the MI hamsters compared to a negligible fraction in N hamsters (Figure 3, B and C).
Importantly, this increase in macrophages was not seen in VI hamsters. Significant increases in
proportion of alveolar macrophages, DC subtypes (plasmacytoid DC (pDC), conventional DC

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(cDC) and activated DC (DCα)), and granulocytes were also found in MI hamsters and not VI
hamsters. We also detected decreases in proportion of CD4+, CD8+ and CD8+ activated T cells
in MI hamsters and not VI hamsters. The MI and VI hamsters both showed increases in the
proportion of the dividing immune cells and monocytes when compared to N hamsters. The
moderate changes in the lung cell composition of VI hamsters and infiltration of inflammatory
cells in lungs of MI hamsters are consistent with histology results described in the previous
section.
Overlaying the data from the outlying VI hamster onto the UMAP coordinates, together with the
other 4 VI samples, showed different cell type composition in this sample (Figure 3B lower
right). Granulocytes represented over 75% of the cells in this outlier sample but were less than
5% of cells in the other VI samples. The gene expression pattern in the granulocytes from the
outlier VI sample also differed from the granulocytes in the other VI samples (Supplemental
Figure 7, B and C). Pathway analysis of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in
granulocytes from the outlier showed upregulation of classical neutrophil processes associated
with degranulation, activation and proliferation, and downregulation of immune suppressive
interleukins (Supplemental Figure 7D). The abnormal cellular composition in the VI outlier was
likely due to sampling of heterophilic cellular lesions constrained to the cranial lobe given
histopathological analysis on the remaining left lung showed drastic reduction of inflammation.
The activity of heterophils concentrated at a lesion is expected to be different to those patrolling
the lung parenchyma, adopting a functional state at the site of a foreign antigen.

Vaccination attenuates infection of immune cells and their activation
The scRNA-seq reads were mapped to the SARS-CoV-2 genome to identify which cell types
contained viral RNA. Viral gene reads were detected only in MI hamsters (Figure 4, A-C),
consistent with the clearance of infection in the lungs of the VI hamsters that was observed by

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

qRT-PCR (Supplemental Figure 2C). Several MI samples with higher overall viral reads had
virus gene expression detected in a broad selection of cell types in the lungs, including lymphoid
and myeloid cells (Figure 4A). Macrophages and granulocytes had the highest average viral
read counts. Viral ORF1ab was the highest expressed viral gene (Supplemental Figure 9).
Expression of CCL8, the chemoattractant for monocytes and macrophages reported to be
significantly induced in response to SARS-CoV-2 infection in ferret upper respiratory tract (17),
was minimal in the lungs of N animals but most up-regulated in the MI hamsters (Figure 4, D
and E). The upregulation of CCL8 is consistent with macrophage infiltration of the lung observed
in the MI group and in COVID-19 patients (25). The cellular distribution of CCL8 expression in
MI lung mirrored that of the virus RNA, being highest in the interstitial and alveolar macrophage
populations. In the VI group, increases in CCL8 expression was only observed in the
macrophage populations in some of the samples studied, despite the absence of SARS-CoV-2
mRNA (Figure 4, D and F). Overall, these data suggest that vaccination impedes SARS-CoV-2
infection of lymphoid and myeloid cells and reduces their activation.

Following SARS-CoV-2 infection, similar transcriptional programs are regulated in lung
immune cells from vaccinated and mock-vaccinated hamsters
To determine whether immune cells in the lungs showed differences in their transcriptional
states in the three groups studied, we focused on two lymphoid cell types critical for viral
clearance during respiratory infections, CD8+ T cells and NK cells, which were relatively
abundant across all samples. We also examined myeloid cells, including pDCs, cDCs, and
monocytes, which bridge innate sensing with adaptive responses. We performed differential
expression analysis for each cell type (see Methods), comparing the MI to N samples and the VI
to N samples. This analysis in CD8+ T cells showed that less transcripts were differentially
expressed in the CD8+ T cells from VI lungs compared to N than CD8+ T cells from MI lungs

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

compared to N, with the DEGs in VI lungs being predominantly a subset of those regulated in
the cells from MI samples (Figure 5A). A scatter plot comparing the log fold-changes of the set
of transcripts significantly regulated (FDR <0.05) in either MI or VI comparisons to N showed
that changes of these transcripts were highly correlated (p<2.2e^-16). The slope of the linear
regression fit was less than 1, indicating that the gene expression changes were relatively lower
in the VI samples. These results suggested that similar transcriptional programs were
modulated in these immune cells in the MI and VI hamsters, although the regulation was to a
lesser extent in the VI hamsters. Similar analyses of the NK cells, pDC, cDC, and monocytes
revealed that the expression of DEGs for both MI and VI conditions compared to N was also
highly significantly correlated (Figure 5B, Figure 6, A and B and Supplemental Figure 12A). The
slopes of the regression lines showed that the changes were also of lower magnitude in the VIderived cells. Overall, these results indicated that across all cell types analyzed, the
transcriptome regulation in the VI group was similar to that of MI group, but the changes were of
a lower magnitude in the VI group.
To elucidate the common pathways regulated in the MI and VI groups, we performed a modulebased functional enrichment analysis. Among the modules within the set of upregulated DEGs,
immune activation and viral response were noted across CD8+ T cells, NK cells, cDC, and
monocytes (Figure 5, C and D, Figure 6C and Supplemental Figure 12B). Common pathway
enrichment analysis could not be performed for the pDCs due to limited DEGs identified in the
VI group.
Since we generally saw a lower degree of gene activation in the VI group, less genes passed
the statistical threshold for differential expression in that group as compared to the MI group.
Given the general conservation of the transcriptional programs between the MI and VI groups, a
substantial number of DEGs were common to the two comparisons while another large number
of DEGs were specific to the MI group, and relatively few DEGs were specific to the VI group

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(see Venn diagrams in Figure 5, A and B, Figure 6A and Supplemental Figure 12A). We
performed module-based functional enrichment analysis on the DEGs that were specific to
either MI or VI groups for each cell type analyzed.
Similar pathways were modulated in MI-specific NK DEGs and CD8+ T cell DEGs; viral
response, migration, regulation of apoptotic signaling, and cellular responses to interferon-γ and
oxidative stress were upregulated, while homeostasis and cellular maintenance were
downregulated (Supplemental Figure 10A and Supplemental Figure 11A). However, the
proliferation process was upregulated in CD8+ T cells and negatively regulated in NK cells. Type
I interferon production and viral response pathways were upregulated, and cellular maintenance
pathways were downregulated in MI-specific cDC DEGs and monocyte DEGs (Supplemental
Figure 12C and Supplemental Figure 13A). Adaptive immune response, including T-cell
activation, was modulated in both MI-specific pDC DEGs and MI-specific cDC DEGs (Figure 6D
and Supplemental Figure 13A). Finally, additional viral response pathways were upregulated in
MI-specific pDC DEGs (Figure 6D). Since fewer DEGs were identified as VI-specific, there were
few regulated pathway modules detected (Supplemental Figure 10B, Supplemental Figure 11B
and Supplemental Figure 13B).
Overall, these data show that SARS-CoV-2 infection induced largely similar transcriptional
programs in immune cells for both VI and MI animals, including many viral response and
immune activation pathways. In MI-specific transcriptional programs, positive regulation of
cytokine signaling stood out as enriched across all cell types studied, while cellular maintenance
functions were typically downregulated. On the other hand, in the VI animals, the magnitude of
gene expression was lower and fewer differential genes were detected, resulting in few
regulated pathway modules.

DISCUSSION

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In humans, COVID-19 can progress to severe clinical disease which manifests as pneumonia.
mRNA-1273 was previously shown to be efficacious in NHPs (8), mice (1) and recently, in a
large Phase 3 trial (11). Hamsters consistently exhibit the hallmarks of severe COVID-19
disease and are therefore an important model for preclinical vaccine efficacy studies. We show
that two doses of mRNA-1273 reduced viral load in the upper and lower airways of hamsters
and protected against weight loss while a prime-only vaccination provided partial protection.
Two doses of mRNA-1273 were required to induce neutralizing titers comparable with the
higher titers seen in convalescent COVID-19 patients. Although neutralizing titers were not
dependent on dosage in a prime-boost schedule, the highest prime-boost dose of 25 µg
provided better protection against lung injury and weight loss. Two hamsters which experienced
more severe weight loss were identified in the low prime-boost dose or prime-only vaccine
groups despite having a high binding and neutralizing antibody titers. Moreover, despite a
strong inverse correlation between neutralizing antibody titers and virus load in the respiratory
tract, the inverse correlation between neutralizing or binding antibody titers and weight loss was
only moderate. Other antibody- and cell-mediated mechanisms may therefore be required for
complete protection against SARS-CoV-2 disease in this model. This emphasizes the
importance of a qualitative, not just quantitative, immune response, which may depend on the
vaccine dose and regimen. The efficacy of mRNA-1273 in hamsters is distinguished from
efficacy studies with NHP and mouse models, as protection was afforded against more severe
pathological phenotypes and clinical disease, and the immunity was non-sterilizing.
Cellular responses in vaccinated hamsters appeared to promote pulmonary homeostasis and a
less proliferative and migratory response following infection while supporting virus clearance.
While enriched gene expression pathways associated with immune effector functions were
shared by both VI and MI hamsters, pathways regulating cell migration were generally unique to
MI hamsters. Granulocytes and inflammatory macrophages were abundant in the lungs of MI

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

hamsters, features that are also observed in patients with severe COVID-19 (25, 26). High viral
RNA reads within these cells suggests acquisition of infected cells by phagocytosis or a
susceptibility to infection. Vaccination averted pro-inflammatory responses and the influx of
these innate immune cells. The dominant CCL8 response across all immune cells in MI
hamsters was restricted to macrophages in VI hamsters and may represent a signal for
regulated cellular trafficking as opposed to inflammation. Similar levels of monocytes infiltrated
the lungs of both MI and VI hamsters. While monocytes from both MI and VI hamsters
possessed DEGs compared to N samples that modulated their responses to external stimulus,
the monocytes from MI, but not VI, hamsters exhibited upregulated inflammatory characteristics
that are observed in severe COVID-19 cases (27). The controlled responses in VI monocytes
suggest a supportive role in immune regulation. Upregulated adaptation to oxidative stress in
monocytes, NK cells and CD8+ T cells was unique to MI hamsters, indicating that vaccination
controlled exacerbated responses to infection which promotes tissue damage and hypoxic
respiratory failure in severe patients (28). Certain NK cell phenotypes were associated with
COVID-19 related hyperinflammation and similar to the populations in the bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid (BALF) from patients with severe disease (29); the cytotoxic functions of NK cells in
MI hamsters were enriched while their proliferation processes were negatively regulated. NK
cells in VI hamsters were functioning in a similar albeit attenuated capacity, to those in MI
hamsters, which suggests a reduced ability to clear virus-infected cells. NK cells maintained
immune homeostasis in the lungs upon infection of mice vaccinated against influenza, rather
than realizing their killing capacity, to enable virus clearance by the adaptive immune system
with minimal pathology (30). Thus mRNA-1273 vaccination prevented the hyperactivation of the
innate immune system following infection but permitted a controlled cellular antiviral response
conducive to preserving the lung milieu.
Patients with severe COVID-19 display aberrant T cell activation and differentiation,

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

lymphopenia (31, 32), and generally have more proliferative T cells but less CD8+ T cell
proportions with limited clonal diversity in BALF (25). Conversely, non-hospitalized, recovered
individuals have virus-specific T cell memory (33, 34). In the lungs of MI hamsters, T cell
proportions declined indicating that extravasation to affected tissues, one of the suggested
causes of lymphopenia in severe patients, was not occurring. Instead, macroautophagy, a
process which supports cell survival against environmental stresses or upon the activation of
naïve T cells (35, 36), was downregulated in CD8+ T cells of MI hamsters despite their
responsiveness to oxidative stress and cytokine stimulus. Together with an extended lifespan,
reduced telomerase maintenance and upregulated proapoptotic pathways, activated CD8+ T
cells in MI hamsters may develop an effector phenotype but are replicative senescent,
susceptible to depletion or unable to form functional memory T cells (37, 38). CD8+ T cell
exhaustion from hyperactivation or augmented expression of pro-apoptotic molecules has been
linked to their depletion in severe COVID-19 cases (39, 40). Vaccination prevented a reduction
in T-cell frequencies in the lungs. Moreover, CD8+ T cells in VI hamsters were less enriched for
activation and proliferative pathways compared to MI hamsters, but sustained effector functions.
This suggests the CD8+ T cell response in VI hamsters was either from memory effectors
established after vaccination, to facilitate viral clearance, or from clonally diverse, tissueresident cells with an effector phenotype after SARS-CoV-2 challenge, as seen in the BALF
from moderate but not severe COVID-19 patients (25).
Aberrant T cell responses or their depletion in severe COVID-19 may be indirectly attributed to
DCs that are impaired in maturation and T cell activation (41). DC subsets infiltrated the lungs of
MI hamsters but remained unaltered in VI hamsters. Similar to acute phase coronavirus
infections (42), infiltrating pDCs may provide rapid antiviral responses through the upregulation
of cytokine production pathways. However, pDCs were not necessary for influenza A virus
clearance and were shown to have a deleterious role on CD8+ T cells during lethal infection of

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mice (43, 44). In MI hamsters, the lymphoid organ development pathway of pDCs was
downregulated suggesting their role in T cell differentiation was compromised. The low numbers
of pDCs in VI hamsters and their limited DEGs suggests they were not involved in vaccinemediated responses to infection. Dysfunctional T cell activation in COVID-19 patients has been
associated with the downregulation of MHC and costimulatory molecules on antigen presenting
cells (41, 45, 46). While immune effector pathways and chemotactic cues from IL-1 to migrate to
the lung-draining lymph nodes were upregulated in cDCs from both MI and VI hamsters, DEGs
involved in the activation of T cells via MHC molecules were paradoxically downregulated.
Despite this remarkable similarity in MI and VI-induced cDC pathways, disparities in DEG
expression magnitude, cDC numbers and external stimulus from the lung milieu may account
for different cDC-mediated outcomes. Diminished MHC-dependent T cell activation by cDCs
from MI hamsters likely impaired the adaptive immune response, while in VI hamsters, the
controlled cell contact dependent activation by cDCs may be sufficient for recall responses or
sustaining the effector functions of CD8+ T cells (47). mRNA-1273 promoted a controlled
response to SARS-CoV-2 infection that prevented desynchrony between the innate and
adaptive immune arms which can exacerbate inflammation and disease severity.
The incomplete annotation of the hamster genome prevented identification of highly specific
subtypes within immune cell populations. Cell type identification partially based on mouse data
and the pathway analysis based on human gene ontology terms did permit detailed profiling of
cellular responses. While this study examined the response to infection directly in the lungs of
VI and MI hamsters rather than BALF, scRNA-seq analysis was limited by the fact that one
region of lung was studied whereas responses to an infection within the lungs may be spatially
distinct. As a result, we captured a unique perspective on a potentially focal inflammatory lesion
comprised of activated neutrophils/heterophils formed after infection of a low vaccine-dose VI
hamster. Nevertheless, we excluded this scRNA-seq outlier to effectively illustrate the cellular

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

response dynamics at the site of infection in vaccinated and mock-vaccinated hamsters
exposed to SARS-CoV-2.
mRNA-1273 provided hamsters with infection-permissive immunity that following SARS-CoV-2
infection reduced virus load and severe disease by promoting humoral responses in the
periphery and antiviral cellular responses in the lung. mRNA-1273 demonstrated protection is
predominately achieved through the induction of antibodies, and cellular responses may act to
support complete clearance of the virus. Importantly, the safety of mRNA-1273 was indicated by
the absence of aberrant cellular pathways in VI hamsters after challenge. Transient, low level
virus replication in VI hamsters did trigger the regulation of cellular programs in some immune
cells that were strikingly similar to MI hamsters. However, the responses were attenuated and
lacked the atypical manifestations which contribute to inflammation and lung injury in critical
COVID-19 cases. The surprising commonalities in transcriptional pathway regulation between
vaccinated and mock vaccinated recipients during acute infection warrants investigation into
how immunity induced by other vaccines is regulated following infection to provide the
foundation for successful vaccination.

METHODS
Pre-clinical mRNA-1273 mRNA and LNP production process
Pre-clinical mRNA-1273 is a purified mRNA transcript encoding the prefusion-stabilized SARSCoV-2 S-2P protein and encapsulated by a lipid nanoparticle. The process for mRNA synthesis,
purification, and encapsulation was described previously (1).

Human convalescent-phase serum
Human convalescent sera (n = 6) were obtained from adults between 18 and 55 years old with

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mild (n = 2), medium (n = 2), and severe (n = 2) COVID-19 and a history of laboratory-confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 infection 1 to 2 months before providing specimens. In addition, SARS-CoV-2
naïve sera samples (n = 3) were also included in analyses. These specimens were obtained
from Aalto Bio Reagents Ltd.

ELISA
S, RBD or nucleocapsid proteins (1µg/mL, Sino Biological) were coated onto 96-well plates for
16 h. Plates were then blocked with SuperBlock (Pierce). Five-fold serial dilutions of hamster
serum were then added to the plates (assay diluent – PBS + 0.05% Tween-20 + 5% goat
serum) and incubated for 2 hours at 37°C. Bound antibodies were detected with HRPconjugated goat anti-hamster IgG (1:10,000 Abcam AB7146). Following the addition of TMB
substrate (SeraCare #5120-0077) and TMB stop solution (SeraCare #5150-0021), the
absorbance was measured at OD 450 nm. Titers were determined using a four-parameter
logistic curve fit in GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, Inc.) and defined as the reciprocal
dilution at approximately OD450nm = 1.5 (normalized to a hamster standard on each plate).

SARS-CoV-2 neutralization assay
Two-fold serial dilutions of heat-inactivated serum at an initial dilution of 1:10 were prepared in
serum-free MEM media and incubated with SARS-CoV-2-mNG for 1 hour at 37°C at a final
concentration of 100 PFU. Virus-serum mixtures then were absorbed onto Vero-E6 monolayers
in black optical 96 well plates for 1 hour at 37°C and replaced with MEM/Methylcellulose/2%
FBS overlay. After 2 days of incubation at 37°C in humidified 5% CO2, neon green plaques
were visualized and counted. Neutralization titers at an end point of 60% plaque reduction were
determined.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Hamster study
Three groups of 6-7 week female golden Syrian hamsters (Envigo) (n = 15 per group) were
vaccinated with mRNA-1273 diluted to 25 µg, 5 µg and 1 µg in PBS for prime-boost vaccine
regimens. An additional group (n = 15) was prime vaccinated only with 25 µg of mRNA-1273. A
mock vaccinated control group (n = 15) received PBS only. Formulations were administered by
IM injection to each hind leg (50 µL per dose site). At week 3, prime-boost groups received their
second vaccine dose. At week 6 (day 42), all animals were infected via the intranasal route with
100 µL of 2019-nCoV/USA-WA01/2020 (GenBank: MN985325.1, courtesy World Reference
Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses, the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB))
at 105 PFU (approximately 50 µL per nostril). Over the course of the study, hamsters were
monitored daily for clinically for weight changes. On each serial endpoint day (days 2, 4 and 14
post-challenge), lungs, nasal turbinates and serum were collected from 5 hamsters per group.
All animal protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at
UTMB.

Analysis of viral load by plaque assay
The right lung and nasal turbinates were homogenized in Leibovitz L-15 medium (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Cat No. 11415064)/10% FBS/1X Antibiotic-Antimycotic (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Cat No.15240062) using the TissueLyser II bead mill (Qiagen) and 5 mm stainless
steel beads (Qiagen, Cat No. 69989) and briefly centrifuged. Ten-fold serial dilutions of
homogenates were prepared in serum free MEM media and absorbed on Vero-E6 monolayers
in 48 well plate for 1 hour at 37°C. The virus inoculum was removed replaced with an overlay of
MEM/methylcellulose/2% FBS. After 3 days, plaques were immunostained with a human

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

monoclonal antibody cocktail specific for the S protein (Distributed Bio) and an anti-human IgG
HRP conjugated secondary antibody (Sera Care Cat No.5220-0456). Plaques were counted
and virus load per gram tissue was determined.

Analysis of viral load by qRT-PCR
Replicating viral RNA was determined in the lungs and nasal turbinates by measuring
subgenomic SARS-CoV-2 E gene RNA by qRT-PCR using previously described primers, probe
and cycle conditions (48). Briefly, RNA was extracted from lung and nasal turbinates
homogenates using TRIZOL LS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Direct-zol RNA Microprep kit
(Zymo Research). RNA (500 ng) was reverse transcribed using Superscript IV (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Quantitative real-time PCR was
perform using the TaqMan Fast Advanced Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and primers
and a FAM-ZEN/Iowa Black FQ labeled probe sequence (IDT) on the QuantStudio 6 system
(Applied Biosystems). An Ultramer DNA oligo (IDT) spanning the amplicon was used to
generate standard curves to calculate the sgRNA copies per gram of tissue.

Histopathology
Lung samples were processed per a standard protocol for histological analysis. Briefly, the
lower left lung lobe was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned
at 5 μm and stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) for routine histopathology. Samples
were evaluated by a board-certified veterinary pathologist in a blinded manner. Sections were
examined under light microscopy using an Olympus BX51 microscope and photographs were
taken using an Olympus DP73 camera. Representative sections were displayed.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Immunohistochemistry
Staining of hamster lung sections was done using the Bond RX automated system with the
Polymer Define Detection System (Leica) as per manufacturer’s protocol. Tissue sections were
dewaxed with Bond Dewaxing Solution (Leica) at 72oC for 30 min then subsequently rehydrated
with graded alcohol washes and 1x Immuno Wash (StatLab). Heat-induced epitope retrieval
(HIER) was performed using Epitope Retrieval Solution 1 (Leica), heated to 100oC for 20 min. A
peroxide block (Leica) was applied for 5 min to quench endogenous peroxidase activity prior to
applying the SARS-CoV-2 antibody (1:2000, GeneTex, GTX135357). Antibodies were diluted in
Background Reducing Antibody Diluent (Agilent). The tissue was subsequently incubated with
an anti-rabbit HRP polymer (Leica) and colorized with 3,3’-Diaminobenzidine (DAB) chromogen
for 10 min. Slides were counterstained with hematoxylin and representative sections were
shown.

Single cell isolation and RNA sequencing
The cranial left lung sections taken at the time of necropsy at 4 dpi from the 5 µg prime-boost
group (VI, n = 5), mock vaccinated group (MI, n = 5) and a naïve group (N, n = 4) of hamsters
that were mock infected via the IN route with 100 µL of media inoculum. Lung samples were
enzymatically digested and homogenized using the Lung Dissociation kit, mouse (Miltenyi
Biotec Cat No. 130-095-927) and GentleMACS Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. After 30 min of digestion, the samples were filtered through a 70 µM
filter, and RBC lysis was performed (ThermoFisher, Cat #00-4333-57). After two washes in PBS
containing 0.05 mM EDTA and 0.04% BSA, the cell pellet was re-suspended in 1ml of buffer
and filtered through a 40 µM Flowmi Cell strainer (Bel-Art # H13680-0040). The cell viability and
concentration were determined on a TC20 cell counter (Bio-Rad, CA). Dead cell removal was
performed if the viability was lower than 80% using Dead Cell Removal Kit (Miltenyi Biotec,

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cat#130-090-101) as per manufacturer’s recommendations.
Seven thousand cells were targeted for generation of barcoded gel bead emulsions using the
Chromium Single Cell 3’ version 3.0 chemistry (10x Genomics, Cat# 1000077). After reverse
transcription, the cDNA was amplified and purified using SPRISelect magnetic beads (Beckman
Coulter, CA, Cat#B23317). The purified cDNA was precipitated in 80% ethanol, removed from
BSL-4 containment, tested for quality on Bioanalyzer, and 3’ gene expression libraries were
prepared as per manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries were quantified, and pooled libraries were
submitted for sequencing (~140,000 reads per sample) on Novaseq S1 Flow cell (New York
Genome Center).

Processing of scRNA-seq data
scRNA-seq data were processed using the Cell Ranger pipeline (v4.0.0). Alignment was done
against the Mesocricetus auratus Ensembl genome (MesAur1.0). STARsolo was used to
quantify reads associated with the viral genome by aligning against the SARS-CoV-2 genome
(ASM985889v3). The 5’ leader sequence and 3’ UTR of the SARS-CoV-2 genome were
included as reference gtf entries. Resulting count tables were then analyzed using Seurat
(V3.1.5) (49). Cells with abnormally high mitochondrial gene content (greater than 20% of UMIs
per cell) and/or cells containing less than 300 unique genes were removed. A single sample in
the VI group was a clear outlier (see Supplemental Figure 7) and was removed from all further
analysis. For each group (MI: n = 5, VI: n = 4, and N: n = 4), all samples were merged in an
unbiased manner. The three resulting datasets (one per group) were then integrated using the
“IntegrateData()” function of Seurat, to account for potential batch effects. Finally, the PCA and
UMAP (50) projections were calculated for the integrated sample set using the top 2000 highly
variable genes, as determined by Seurat, and significant cell clusters were identified.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cell type identification for scRNA-seq data
Integration of the data from 13 samples comprising 50,694 cells identified 17 cell types. Singlecell Mouse Cell Atlas (scMCA) (51) was used to guide cell type identification. Reference gene
markers were initially determined from the MCA adult lung dataset. For each cell-type, marker
genes were defined as genes satisfying two conditions. Then, the average logFC of each
marker gene was greater than 1.0 as compared to the other cell types. Second, the fraction of
cells expressing the marker gene in the cell type was higher than the fraction of cells expressing
the marker gene in all other cell types by at least 0.4. Using the defined marker gene lists, the
correlation of the average gene expression in each cell type in the MCA adult lung was
computed with each cell in our dataset, annotating each cell with the most highly correlated cell
type. Additional marker sets and prior knowledge (52) was used for some cell-types that were
ambiguous or missing from the reference data (granulocytes, activated CD8+T cells, dendritic
cell subtypes). Cell subtypes in some instances were aggregated (pneumocytes, bronchiolar
epithelial cells, dendritic cell subtype). Activated CD8+ T cells were identified by the coexpression of CD8+ T cell markers and NK cell markers, along with too low read count to be
considered doublets. To identify clusters consisting of cells undergoing rapid cell division,
scMCA’s labeling of dividing cells was used. These clusters were combined into a single
population named “Dividing Immune Cells”, as cells within this population expressed markers for
both lymphocytes and myeloid cells. This cluster annotation was also corroborated with the
CellCycleScoring() function in Seurat, where 97.7% of the cells in the dividing immune cell
cluster were predicted to be in G2M (59.4%) or S (38.3%) phase. To account for invading cell
types that were only present in MI samples, the interstitial macrophage and alveolar
macrophage cells were removed from the cell type proportion calculations of the remaining cell
types.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cell type-specific comparisons of MI to N and VI to N
DEGs were identified in scRNA-seq data for MI and VI comparisons to N in CD8+ T cells, NK
cells, monocytes and DC subtypes, including pDCs and cDCs, using the non-parametric
Wilcoxon rank sum test. The groups of DCα cells were incorporated into cDCs during DEG
identification. Differential expression p-values were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing
using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure (53). DEGs with FDR < 0.05 and absolute logFC > 0.1
for MI vs. N and VI vs. N comparisons were selected as significant. To study gene function and
pathway enrichment among DEGs, golden hamster genes were mapped to homolog genes in
the homo sapiens species using Biomart (http://www.ensembl.org/biomart). Significant genes
were clustered into functional modules using Louvain community clustering based on the
functional similarity between genes in the lung tissue, as predicted by HumanBase
(https://hb.flatironinstitute.org) (53). Gene ontology (GO) term enrichment was performed for
genes in each module. Significantly enriched terms with q-value < 0.05 were selected. Each
module was annotated with distinct and representative GO terms. For CD8+ T cells, NK cells,
and cDCs, gene functional clustering and enrichment analysis was performed for DEGs that
were common to the MI and VI comparisons to N (Figure 5,C and D and Figure 6,C and D) and
DEGs that are specific to either the MI or VI comparisons to N only (Supplemental Figure 10).
For pDCs, however, functional clustering and enrichment analysis was only performed on MI vs.
N given the insufficient number of DEGs in VI vs. N.

Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism software, version 6. Two-way ANOVA

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

with Tukey’s or Sidak’s corrections were respectively performed for multiple comparisons
between vaccine groups or between time points. Significance between pre- and post- infection
antibody titers was measured by multiple t tests with Holm Sidak’s correction for multiple
comparisons (Supplemental Figure 4). ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey’s test pairwise comparisons
were employed to determine the significance of scRNA-seq-based cell type proportion changes
(Figure 3). Correlations were determined by two-sided Spearmans rank tests. *P < 0.05, **P <
0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001.

Data availability
RNA sequencing data have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus and are
accessible through the GEO Series accession number GSE163838.

REFERENCES
1.

Corbett KS, Edwards DK, Leist SR, Abiona OM, Boyoglu-Barnum S, Gillespie RA,
Himansu S, Schafer A, Ziwawo CT, DiPiazza AT, et al. SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine
design enabled by prototype pathogen preparedness. Nature. 2020.

2.

Meyer M, Huang E, Yuzhakov O, Ramanathan P, Ciaramella G, and Bukreyev A.
Modified mRNA-Based Vaccines Elicit Robust Immune Responses and Protect Guinea
Pigs From Ebola Virus Disease. J Infect Dis. 2018;217(3):451-5.

3.

Feldman RA, Fuhr R, Smolenov I, Mick Ribeiro A, Panther L, Watson M, Senn JJ, Smith
M, Almarsson, Pujar HS, et al. mRNA vaccines against H10N8 and H7N9 influenza
viruses of pandemic potential are immunogenic and well tolerated in healthy adults in
phase 1 randomized clinical trials. Vaccine. 2019;37(25):3326-34.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

4.

Aliprantis AO, Shaw CA, Griffin P, Farinola N, Railkar RA, Cao X, Liu W, Sachs JR,
Swenson CJ, Lee H, et al. A phase 1, randomized, placebo-controlled study to evaluate
the safety and immunogenicity of an mRNA-based RSV prefusion F protein vaccine in
healthy younger and older adults. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2020:1-14.

5.

ClinicalTrials.gov. A Phase 1, Randomized, Observer-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, DoseRanging Study to Evaluate the Safety, Reactogenicity, and Immunogenicity of
Cytomegalovirus Vaccines mRNA-1647 and mRNA-1443 When Administered to Healthy
Adults. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03382405.

6.

ClinicalTrials.gov. A Phase 1, Randomized, Observer-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, DoseRanging Study to Evaluate the Safety, Reactogenicity, and Immunogenicity of mRNA1653, a Combined Human Metapneumovirus and Human Parainfluenza Virus Type 3
Vaccine, When Administered to Healthy Adults.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03392389.

7.

ClinicalTrials.gov. A Phase 1, Randomized, Observer-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, DoseRanging Study to Evaluate the Safety, Tolerability, and Immunogenicity of Zika Vaccine
mRNA-1893 in Healthy Flavivirus Seropositive and Seronegative Adults.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04064905.

8.

Corbett KS, Flynn B, Foulds KE, Francica JR, Boyoglu-Barnum S, Werner AP, Flach B,
O'Connell S, Bock KW, Minai M, et al. Evaluation of the mRNA-1273 Vaccine against
SARS-CoV-2 in Nonhuman Primates. N Engl J Med. 2020.

9.

Jackson LA, Anderson EJ, Rouphael NG, Roberts PC, Makhene M, Coler RN,
McCullough MP, Chappell JD, Denison MR, Stevens LJ, et al. An mRNA Vaccine
against SARS-CoV-2 - Preliminary Report. N Engl J Med. 2020.

10.

Anderson EJ, Rouphael NG, Widge AT, Jackson LA, Roberts PC, Makhene M, Chappell
JD, Denison MR, Stevens LJ, Pruijssers AJ, et al. Safety and Immunogenicity of SARSCoV-2 mRNA-1273 Vaccine in Older Adults. N Engl J Med. 2020.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

11.

Baden LR, El Sahly HM, Essink B, Kotloff K, Frey S, Novak R, Diemert D, Spector SA,
Rouphael N, Creech CB, et al. Efficacy and Safety of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2
Vaccine. N Engl J Med. 2020.

12.

Munster VJ, Feldmann F, Williamson BN, van Doremalen N, Perez-Perez L, Schulz J,
Meade-White K, Okumura A, Callison J, Brumbaugh B, et al. Respiratory disease in
rhesus macaques inoculated with SARS-CoV-2. Nature. 2020;585(7824):268-72.

13.

Woolsey C, Borisevich V, Prasad AN, Agans KN, Deer DJ, Dobias NS, Heymann JC,
Foster SL, Levine CB, Medina L, et al. Establishment of an African green monkey model
for COVID-19. bioRxiv. 2020.

14.

Rockx B, Kuiken T, Herfst S, Bestebroer T, Lamers MM, Oude Munnink BB, de Meulder
D, van Amerongen G, van den Brand J, Okba NMA, et al. Comparative pathogenesis of
COVID-19, MERS, and SARS in a nonhuman primate model. Science.
2020;368(6494):1012-5.

15.

Shi J, Wen Z, Zhong G, Yang H, Wang C, Huang B, Liu R, He X, Shuai L, Sun Z, et al.
Susceptibility of ferrets, cats, dogs, and other domesticated animals to SARScoronavirus 2. Science. 2020;368(6494):1016-20.

16.

Kim YI, Kim SG, Kim SM, Kim EH, Park SJ, Yu KM, Chang JH, Kim EJ, Lee S, Casel
MAB, et al. Infection and Rapid Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Ferrets. Cell Host
Microbe. 2020;27(5):704-9 e2.

17.

Blanco-Melo D, Nilsson-Payant BE, Liu WC, Uhl S, Hoagland D, Moller R, Jordan TX,
Oishi K, Panis M, Sachs D, et al. Imbalanced Host Response to SARS-CoV-2 Drives
Development of COVID-19. Cell. 2020;181(5):1036-45 e9.

18.

Dinnon KH, 3rd, Leist SR, Schafer A, Edwards CE, Martinez DR, Montgomery SA, West
A, Yount BL, Jr., Hou YJ, Adams LE, et al. A mouse-adapted model of SARS-CoV-2 to
test COVID-19 countermeasures. Nature. 2020.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

19.

Imai M, Iwatsuki-Horimoto K, Hatta M, Loeber S, Halfmann PJ, Nakajima N, Watanabe
T, Ujie M, Takahashi K, Ito M, et al. Syrian hamsters as a small animal model for SARSCoV-2 infection and countermeasure development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2020;117(28):16587-95.

20.

Chan JF, Zhang AJ, Yuan S, Poon VK, Chan CC, Lee AC, Chan WM, Fan Z, Tsoi HW,
Wen L, et al. Simulation of the clinical and pathological manifestations of Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in golden Syrian hamster model: implications for disease
pathogenesis and transmissibility. Clin Infect Dis. 2020.

21.

Tostanoski LH, Wegmann F, Martinot AJ, Loos C, McMahan K, Mercado NB, Yu J, Chan
CN, Bondoc S, Starke CE, et al. Ad26 vaccine protects against SARS-CoV-2 severe
clinical disease in hamsters. Nat Med. 2020.

22.

Sia SF, Yan LM, Chin AWH, Fung K, Choy KT, Wong AYL, Kaewpreedee P, Perera R,
Poon LLM, Nicholls JM, et al. Pathogenesis and transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in golden
hamsters. Nature. 2020;583(7818):834-8.

23.

Winkler ES, Bailey AL, Kafai NM, Nair S, McCune BT, Yu J, Fox JM, Chen RE, Earnest
JT, Keeler SP, et al. SARS-CoV-2 infection of human ACE2-transgenic mice causes
severe lung inflammation and impaired function. Nat Immunol. 2020.

24.

Butler A, Hoffman P, Smibert P, Papalexi E, and Satija R. Integrating single-cell
transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat
Biotechnol. 2018;36(5):411-20.

25.

Liao M, Liu Y, Yuan J, Wen Y, Xu G, Zhao J, Cheng L, Li J, Wang X, Wang F, et al.
Single-cell landscape of bronchoalveolar immune cells in patients with COVID-19. Nat
Med. 2020;26(6):842-4.

26.

Chua RL, Lukassen S, Trump S, Hennig BP, Wendisch D, Pott F, Debnath O, Thurmann
L, Kurth F, Volker MT, et al. COVID-19 severity correlates with airway epithelium-

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

immune cell interactions identified by single-cell analysis. Nat Biotechnol.
2020;38(8):970-9.
27.

Zhang JY, Wang XM, Xing X, Xu Z, Zhang C, Song JW, Fan X, Xia P, Fu JL, Wang SY,
et al. Single-cell landscape of immunological responses in patients with COVID-19. Nat
Immunol. 2020;21(9):1107-18.

28.

Berlin DA, Gulick RM, and Martinez FJ. Severe Covid-19. N Engl J Med. 2020.

29.

Maucourant C, Filipovic I, Ponzetta A, Aleman S, Cornillet M, Hertwig L, Strunz B,
Lentini A, Reinius B, Brownlie D, et al. Natural killer cell immunotypes related to COVID19 disease severity. Sci Immunol. 2020;5(50).

30.

Mooney JP, Qendro T, Keith M, Philbey AW, Groves HT, Tregoning JS, Goodier MR,
and Riley EM. Natural Killer Cells Dampen the Pathogenic Features of Recall
Responses to Influenza Infection. Front Immunol. 2020;11(135.

31.

Chen G, Wu D, Guo W, Cao Y, Huang D, Wang H, Wang T, Zhang X, Chen H, Yu H, et
al. Clinical and immunological features of severe and moderate coronavirus disease
2019. J Clin Invest. 2020;130(5):2620-9.

32.

Tan L, Wang Q, Zhang D, Ding J, Huang Q, Tang YQ, Wang Q, and Miao H.
Lymphopenia predicts disease severity of COVID-19: a descriptive and predictive study.
Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2020;5(1):33.

33.

Grifoni A, Weiskopf D, Ramirez SI, Mateus J, Dan JM, Moderbacher CR, Rawlings SA,
Sutherland A, Premkumar L, Jadi RS, et al. Targets of T Cell Responses to SARS-CoV2 Coronavirus in Humans with COVID-19 Disease and Unexposed Individuals. Cell.
2020;181(7):1489-501 e15.

34.

Braun J, Loyal L, Frentsch M, Wendisch D, Georg P, Kurth F, Hippenstiel S, Dingeldey
M, Kruse B, Fauchere F, et al. SARS-CoV-2-reactive T cells in healthy donors and
patients with COVID-19. Nature. 2020.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

35.

Lum JJ, DeBerardinis RJ, and Thompson CB. Autophagy in metazoans: cell survival in
the land of plenty. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2005;6(6):439-48.

36.

Pua HH, Guo J, Komatsu M, and He YW. Autophagy is essential for mitochondrial
clearance in mature T lymphocytes. J Immunol. 2009;182(7):4046-55.

37.

Xu X, Araki K, Li S, Han JH, Ye L, Tan WG, Konieczny BT, Bruinsma MW, Martinez J,
Pearce EL, et al. Autophagy is essential for effector CD8(+) T cell survival and memory
formation. Nat Immunol. 2014;15(12):1152-61.

38.

Akbar AN, and Vukmanovic-Stejic M. Telomerase in T lymphocytes: use it and lose it? J
Immunol. 2007;178(11):6689-94.

39.

Mathew D, Giles JR, Baxter AE, Oldridge DA, Greenplate AR, Wu JE, Alanio C, KuriCervantes L, Pampena MB, D'Andrea K, et al. Deep immune profiling of COVID-19
patients reveals distinct immunotypes with therapeutic implications. Science.
2020;369(6508).

40.

Laing AG, Lorenc A, Del Molino Del Barrio I, Das A, Fish M, Monin L, Munoz-Ruiz M,
McKenzie DR, Hayday TS, Francos-Quijorna I, et al. A dynamic COVID-19 immune
signature includes associations with poor prognosis. Nat Med. 2020;26(10):1623-35.

41.

Zhou R, To KK, Wong YC, Liu L, Zhou B, Li X, Huang H, Mo Y, Luk TY, Lau TT, et al.
Acute SARS-CoV-2 Infection Impairs Dendritic Cell and T Cell Responses. Immunity.
2020;53(4):864-77 e5.

42.

Cervantes-Barragan L, Zust R, Weber F, Spiegel M, Lang KS, Akira S, Thiel V, and
Ludewig B. Control of coronavirus infection through plasmacytoid dendritic-cell-derived
type I interferon. Blood. 2007;109(3):1131-7.

43.

Langlois RA, and Legge KL. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells enhance mortality during lethal
influenza infections by eliminating virus-specific CD8 T cells. J Immunol.
2010;184(8):4440-6.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

44.

Wolf AI, Buehler D, Hensley SE, Cavanagh LL, Wherry EJ, Kastner P, Chan S, and
Weninger W. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells are dispensable during primary influenza virus
infection. J Immunol. 2009;182(2):871-9.

45.

Unterman A, Sumida TS, Nouri N, Yan X, Zhao AY, Gasque V, Schupp JC, Asashima H,
Liu Y, Cosme C, et al. Single-Cell Omics Reveals Dyssynchrony of the Innate and
Adaptive Immune System in Progressive COVID-19. medRxiv.
2020:2020.07.16.20153437.

46.

Wilk AJ, Rustagi A, Zhao NQ, Roque J, Martinez-Colon GJ, McKechnie JL, Ivison GT,
Ranganath T, Vergara R, Hollis T, et al. A single-cell atlas of the peripheral immune
response in patients with severe COVID-19. Nat Med. 2020;26(7):1070-6.

47.

McGill J, Van Rooijen N, and Legge KL. IL-15 trans-presentation by pulmonary dendritic
cells promotes effector CD8 T cell survival during influenza virus infection. J Exp Med.
2010;207(3):521-34.

48.

Wolfel R, Corman VM, Guggemos W, Seilmaier M, Zange S, Muller MA, Niemeyer D,
Jones TC, Vollmar P, Rothe C, et al. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with
COVID-2019. Nature. 2020;581(7809):465-9.

49.

Stuart T, Butler A, Hoffman P, Hafemeister C, Papalexi E, Mauck WM, 3rd, Hao Y,
Stoeckius M, Smibert P, and Satija R. Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data.
Cell. 2019;177(7):1888-902 e21.

50.

Becht E, McInnes L, Healy J, Dutertre CA, Kwok IWH, Ng LG, Ginhoux F, and Newell
EW. Dimensionality reduction for visualizing single-cell data using UMAP. Nat
Biotechnol. 2018.

51.

Sun H, Zhou Y, Fei L, Chen H, and Guo G. scMCA: A Tool to Define Mouse Cell Types
Based on Single-Cell Digital Expression. Methods Mol Biol. 2019;1935(91-6.

52.

Zilionis R, Engblom C, Pfirschke C, Savova V, Zemmour D, Saatcioglu HD, Krishnan I,
Maroni G, Meyerovitz CV, Kerwin CM, et al. Single-Cell Transcriptomics of Human and

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Mouse Lung Cancers Reveals Conserved Myeloid Populations across Individuals and
Species. Immunity. 2019;50(5):1317-34 e10.
53.

Greene CS, Krishnan A, Wong AK, Ricciotti E, Zelaya RA, Himmelstein DS, Zhang R,
Hartmann BM, Zaslavsky E, Sealfon SC, et al. Understanding multicellular function and
disease with human tissue-specific networks. Nat Genet. 2015;47(6):569-76.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CONTRIBUTIONS
M.M., D.E., A.C. and A.B, conceived and designed the study.
G.S-J. designed the vaccine construct.
C.E.M. performed the SARS-CoV-2 challenge experiment and animal procedures.
M.M. and C.P. processed hamster samples.
C.H., A.W. and L.M. performed ELISAs.
M.M. performed and analyzed SARS-CoV-2-based virology and serology assays.
P.R. performed single-cell RNA sequencing.
Y.W., G.R.S., A.B.R., X.C., W.C. analyzed single-cell RNA sequencing data.
K.W.B., M. Minai and B.M.N. performed histopathology and immunohistochemistry.
I.N.M. and S.P. analyzed the histopathology data.
I.N.M. analyzed the immunohistochemistry data.
P-Y.S. contributed a new reagent.
M.M., Y.W., G.R.S., A.B.R., X.C. and I.N.M. prepared manuscript figures and tables.
M.M., Y.W., G.R.S., A.B.R., X.C., W.C., I.N.M., I.R., O.G.T., E.Z., S.C.S. and A.B. wrote the
manuscript.
D.E., E.Z., O.G.T., A.C., S.C.S. and A.B. supervised the research.
All authors reviewed, edited, and approved the final version of the manuscript.

COMPETING INTERESTS
D.E., C.H., A.W., L.M, G.S-J. and A.C. are employees of Moderna, Inc. The other authors

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

declare no competing interests.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank members of the UTMB Animal Resource Center for technical assistance with the
hamster experiment in ABSL-2 and ABSL-4 and husbandry support. We thank Steve Widen and
the UTMB Next Generation Sequencing Core for quantification and pooling of scRNA-seq
libraries for submission to the New York Genome Center. We thank the Anatomic Pathology
Core facility at UTMB for embedding, sectioning and staining lung tissues for histopathology.
The challenge virus used in this publication was generously provided by World Reference
Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses at UTMB. This work was supported by Moderna,
Inc.

36

A

B
5

**

****

****

***
***

*

4
Log10 S IgG titer

****
**

*

**

3
2
1
0
3

6

Weeks post prime vaccination

C

****

4

****

****
****
****
****

Log10 RBD IgG titer

*

3
2
1
0
3

D

Log10 Neutralizing titer

4
3

6

Weeks post prime vaccination
****
****
***
**** ***
**
****
****
****
**

2
1
0
6
PBS 3
PBS
P B SWeeks post prime vaccination
2B
5 S g 1 d o s e
P
Mock
P2
B
5 S g 1 d o s e
2
5
g 1 dose
252225µg
soes e
5 Prime
ggg11 2dd od
55
2
Prime-boost
g 2 doos se e
252µg
5

g
2
d
o
255
d oo ssseseee
5 
gg
g 222 d
5 2µg
5 Prime-boost
g 2 dose
5 gg 22 ddoos se e
5
51 

gg 22d d
oo
s es e
1 µg
Prime-boost
1 g 2 dose

Conv.

Figure 1. Serum antibody responses in vaccinated
hamsters. (A) Study design. Hamsters were prime
vaccinated via the IM route at week 0 and boosted at
week 3, with 25 µg (n=15), 5 µg (n=15) and 1 µg
(n=15) of mRNA-1273. A group of hamsters (n=15)
received a prime dose only of 25 µg mRNA-1273 and
a mock group received PBS (n=15) at week 0. At week
6, animals were IN challenged with 105 PFU of SARSCoV-2. On days 2, 4 and 14 post infection, hamsters
(n=5 per group) were euthanized for tissue collection.
Total serum SARS-CoV-2 S- (B) and RBD-specific (C)
IgG titers in serum and (D) neutralizing titers in
hamster groups prior to SARS-CoV-2 infection
measured by ELISA and plaque reduction assays,
respectively. Neutralizing titers were compared to a
panel of human convalescent serum samples (Conv.).
Bars denote group means ± SE. Significance
measured by ANOVA with (B-D) Tukey’s or Sidak’s
correction for multiple comparisons between vaccine
groups or between time points, respectively (*P ≤ 0.05,
**P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001).

A

C

H&E

IHC

Mock vaccinated

% mean weight change

20

10

0

*
*

8

7
Days post infection

****
****
****
****
****
****
***

****
****
****
****

4

2

LOD

0
2

8

Log10 PFU/g

6

****
****
****
**
****
****
****

*

Lung

5 µg Prime-boost

Log10 PFU/g

6

14

25 µg Prime-boost

B

0

4

14

Nasal Turbinates
****
****
****
****

4

LOD

2

1 µg Prime-boost

-20

25 µg Prime

-10

P2B S
4
P B S Days post infection
P
2 5B S
g 1 dose
P2 B
S g 1 d o s e
5
PBS
Mock
25
5 
 gg 12 dd oo ssee
25225µg
Prime

gg 12d d
ose
2
5
5 Prime-boost
g 1 d oos se e
2522
µg
5

g
2
d
se
55 gg 22 d
oo
do
ssee
5 225
µg
5 Prime-boost
gg 22 ddoossee
5
1 5µg
1 
Prime-boost
g 222d dd
gg
oo
soess ee
51 gg 22 ddoos see
11 gg 22d do o
s es e

Figure 2. See legend on next page

1 g 2 dose

14

Naïve Mock infected

0

*

Figure 2. Characteristics of clinical disease following SARS-CoV-2 challenge of vaccinated hamsters. A. Following
infection with SARS-CoV-2 six weeks after prime vaccination, hamsters were monitored for mean percent weight change
over 14 days after challenge. (B) Viral load expressed in PFU per gram of tissue in the lungs and nasal turbinates at serial
endpoint days (2, 4 and 14 dpi). Dotted line indicates limit of detection (LOD). Significance measured by ANOVA with
Tukey’s correction for multiple comparisons (*P ≤ 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001). Error bars
represent ± SE. (C) Lung sections from mock vaccinated, prime-only and prime-boost vaccinated groups infected with
SARS-CoV-2 and naive mock infected groups at 4 dpi were stained with H&E, and representative photomicrographs
(original magnification ×4 (scale bars, 200 µm) as indicated) from each group with virus antigen (arrowhead) in lungs,
stained by IHC. * = areas of pv/pbr inflammation (mostly mononuclear).

A

B

Naive

Mock-Vaccinated + Infected

Vaccinated + Infected

Vaccinated + Infected (including outlier)

C

N

MI

VI

N

MI

VI

N

MI

VI

N

MI

VI

Figure 3. See legend on next page

N

N

MI

VI

N

MI

VI

MI

VI

N

MI

VI

N

N

MI

MI

VI

VI

Figure 3. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis identifies cell population differences among Naive (N), Mock-vaccinated
Infected (MI) and Vaccinated Infected (VI) pulmonary tissue. (A) Integrated UMAP of all N, MI and VI samples excluding
one VI outlier sample. (B) UMAP of the N, MI and VI groups and VI outlier. N, MI and VI plots were each randomly
downsampled to 8,000 cells to facilitate comparison. Cell identities correspond to panel A. The VI outlier sample is red and
the other VI samples are shown in grey for reference. (C) Box plots comparing cell-type proportions observed in each
group. ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey test pairwise comparisons are shown.
* p<.05, ** p<.01, ***p<.001, **** p<.0001.

A

D

Viral reads

N

MI

VI

CCL8

N

MI

B

MI Viral reads

E

MI CCL8

C

VI Viral reads

F

VI CCL8

VI

Figure 4. Viral reads and CCL8 expression from lung tissue single cell RNA-seq. (A) Dot plot showing expression of all viral
reads in each cell-type in each sample. (B-C) Per-cell expression levels of all viral reads in (B) Mock-Vaccinated + Infected and (C)
Vaccinated + Infected visualized in UMAP plot. (D) Dot plot showing expression of CCL8 in each cell-type in each sample. (E-F)
Per-cell expression levels of CCL8 in (E) Mock-Vaccinated + Infected and (F) Vaccinated + Infected visualized in UMAP plot.

A

CD8+ T cells

B

NK cells

Slope: 0.4872
P-value < 2.2e-16

Slope: 0.5015
P-value < 2.2e-16

C

CD8+ T, common DEGs

M1
Positive regulation of interferon-gamma secretion
Positive regulation of cytokine secretion

M2
Regulation of gene silencing
Regulation of mRNA metabolic process
mRNA splicing, via spliceosome

M3
Cytoplasmic translation
Negative regulation of cellular protein
catabolic process

D

M4
Regulation of viral life cycle
Regulation of viral entry into host cell
Leukocyte aggregation
I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB signaling
Positive regulation of leukocyte migration

M5
Mitochondrion organization
NADH dehydrogenase complex assembly

M6
Positive regulation of fibroblast apoptotic process
Positive regulation of intrinsic apoptotic signaling
Leukocyte tethering or rolling
Establishment of endothelial barrier
Establishment of cell polarity

NK, common DEGs
M1
NADH dehydrogenase complex
Mitochondrion organization
Cytoplasmic translation

M2
Positive regulation of viral life cycle
Regulation of endocytosis
Regulation of T cell activation
Regulation of extrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway

Figure 5. See legend on next page.

M3
RNA splicing
mRNA metabolic process

M4
Positive regulation of mRNA catabolic process
Epithelial cell apoptotic process
Response to hypoxia
M5
Positive regulation of I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB
signaling
Positive regulation of p38MAPK cascade
Immune system development

Figure 5. Functional pathway analysis of MI vs. N and VI vs. N comparisons in CD8 + T cells and NK cells. (A) Venn
diagram of the union of DEGs of the two comparisons in CD8 + T cells. Scatter plot of the logFC of the union of DEGs of the
two comparisons in CD8+ T cells, i.e. the same group of genes as in the Venn diagram. For each comparison, DEGs were
selected with thresholds FDR < 0.05 and absolute logFC > 0.1. Linear regression model was fitted to the scatter plot
(adjusted R^2 = 0.6687). (B) Venn diagram of the union of DEGs of the two comparisons in NK cells. Scatter plot of the
logFC of the union of DEGs of the two comparisons in NK cells, i.e. the same group of genes as in the Venn diagram. For
each comparison, DEGs were selected with thresholds FDR < 0.05 and absolute logFC > 0.1. Linear regression model was
fitted to the scatter plot (adjusted R^2 = 0.5147). (C,D) Functional network showing modules of enriched pathways using
DEGs shared between two comparisons in (C) CD8+ T cells and (D) NK cells. Each gene is represented by a circle and
color coded according to module. The size of each circle reflects its connectivity in the network. Edges are not shown,
allowing for easy viewing. The module label is shown with the functional processes and pathways identified in each module.
Up or down regulation of pathway is indicated by arrow direction.

A Conventional DC

B Plasmacytoid DC

Slope: 0.3271
P-value < 2.2e-16

C

cDC, common DEGs

M1
Arp2/3 complex-mediated actin nucleation
Positive regulation of actin filament
polymerization
M2
Cellular response to dsRNA
Regulation of gene silencing by miRNA
M3
Immune effector process
Cellular response to interleukin-1

D

Slope: 0.3251
P-value < 2.2e-16

M4
Positive regulation of angiogenesis
Negative regulation of cytokine production
Muscle cell proliferation
Response to hypoxia
Negative regulation of I-kappaB kinase/NFkappaB signaling
M5
Leukocyte activation involved in immune response
Leukocyte degranulation
T cell activation via T cell receptor contact with antigen
bound to MHC molecule on antigen presenting cell
Regulation of lymphocyte proliferation
M6
Translation
mRNA splicing, via spliceosome
Peptide biosynthetic process

pDC, MI DEGs
M1
Negative regulation of vascular
associated smooth muscle cell migration

M2
Osteoblast differentiation
Hematopoietic or lymphoid organ development

M3
Histone H4 acetylation
Bone cell development

Figure 6. See legend on next page

M4
Ribosomal large subunit biogenesis
Cytoplasmic translation
M5
Negative regulation of cell-cell adhesion
Leukocyte migration
Integrin mediates signaling
Negative regulation of T cell activation
M6
Positive regulation of cytokine production
Adaptive immune response
Defense response to virus
Regulation of endopeptidase activity

Figure 6. Functional pathway analysis of MI vs. N and VI vs. N comparisons in conventional DC (cDC) and
plasmacytoid DC (pDC). (A) Venn diagram of the union of DEGs of the two comparisons in cDC. Scatter plot of the logFC of
the union of DEGs of the two comparisons in cDC, i.e. the same group of genes as in the Venn diagram. For each
comparison, DEGs were selected with thresholds FDR < 0.05 and absolute logFC > 0.1. Linear regression model was fitted
to the scatter plot (adjusted R^2 = 0.4042). (B) Venn diagram of the union of DEGs of the two comparisons in pDC. Scatter
plot of the logFC of the union of DEGs of the two comparisons in pDC cells, i.e. the same group of genes as in the Venn
diagram. For each comparison, DEGs were selected with thresholds FDR < 0.05 and absolute logFC > 0.1. Linear regression
model was fitted to the scatter plot (adjusted R^2 = 0.5098). (C,D) Functional network showing modules of enriched
pathways using (C) DEGs shared between two comparisons in cDC or (D) DEGs unique to MI pDC. Each gene is
represented by a circle and color coded according to module. The size of each circle reflects its connectivity in the network.
Edges are not shown, allowing for easy viewing. The module label is shown with the functional processes and pathways
identified in each module. Up or down regulation of pathway is indicated by arrow direction.

Week 3

A

r = 0.5319
P<0.0001

Log10 S IgG titer

5

4

3

3

2

2

1

1
0

2

3

4

r = 0.7329
P<0.0001

5
Log10 RBD IgG titer

1

0

4

3

3

2

2

1

1
0

1
2
3
Log10 Neutralizing titer

0

4

0

1

2

3

4

r = 0.8588
P<0.0001

5

4

0

r = 0.6578
P<0.0001

5

4

0

B

Week 6

0

1
2
3
Log10 Neutralizing titer

4

Supplemental Figure 1. Correlation of antibody titers and neutralizing titers. (A,B) Correlations of S- (A) and RBD- (B) binding
titers and neutralizing titers at weeks 3 and 6 post vaccination. Red line denote linear regression fit. P and r values determined by
two-sided Spearman rank test.

A

20

10

10
0

0

20

% weight change

20

7

10
0

14

7

14

-10

-10

-20

-20

20

20

10

10

7

14

7

14

-10
-20
0

0
7

14
-10

-10

-20

-20

Days post infection

B

% weight loss

20

**

**

**

PBS
PBS
P
2 5B S
g 1 dose
P2 B
S g 1 d o s e
5
P
B
S
Mock
25
5 
 gg 12 dd oo ssee
25225µg
Prime
s es e
255 ggg 112dddooo
2
se
252
µg
Prime-boost
5

g
2
d
o
55 gg 22 d
o ssese e
2
d
o
5 25
µg
5 Prime-boost
gg 22 ddoossee
5
1 5µg
1 
Prime-boost
g 222d dd
gg
oo
soess ee
51 gg 22 ddoos see
11 gg 22d do o
s es e

15

10

5

1 g 2 dose

0

C

Lung

6

Nasal Turbinates

****
****
****
*
***
****
****

8
Log10 sgRNA copies/g

Log10 sgRNA copies/g

8

****
****
****
***
***
****

4

2

***
****
****
*

7

****
***
****
****
*
***

6
5
4
0

0
2

4
Days post infection

14

2

4
Days post infection

14

Supplemental Figure 2. Characteristics of clinical disease following SARS-CoV-2 challenge of vaccinated hamsters. (A)
Percent weight change in individual animals over 14 days post infection. Mean weight highlighted by line with color symbols. A
weight measure for one hamster in the 25 ug prime-boost group at 2 dpi, the time of euthanasia, was excluded due to a
measurement error. (B) Maximum weight loss in vaccinated groups, excluding animals serially euthanized on days 2 and 4 post
challenge. (C) Viral sgRNA was measured by qRT-PCR in the lungs and nasal turbinates at serial endpoint days (2, 4 and 14 dpi).
(B,C) Significance measured by ANOVA with Tukey’s correction for multiple comparisons (*P ≤ 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P
≤ 0.0001). Error bars represent ± SE.

10
5
1
2
3
Log10 Neutralizing titer
Week 6

4

r = -0.8436
P<0.0001

8
6
4
2
0

0

1

2

8

3

4

r = -0.8577
P<0.0001

6
4
2
0

0

1
2
3
Log10 Neutralizing titer
Week 6

4

r = -0.7940
P<0.0001

8

6
4
2
0

0

1

2

3

6
4
2
0

0

1

2

10
5
0

3

Log10 Neutralizing titer
Week 6

4

0

1

2
3
4
Log10 S IgG titer
Week 6

5

r = -0.7110
P<0.0001

8
6
4
2
0

0

1

2

6

3

4

r = -0.8213
P<0.0001

4
2
0

0

1
2
3
Log10 Neutralizing titer
Week 6

4

r = -0.8736
P<0.0001

8
6
4
2
0

4
r = -0.7567
P<0.0001

8

Log10 Lung viral load 4 dpi

0

15

Log10 NT viral load 4 dpi

0

Max % weight loss

15

r = -0.4669
P = 0.0186

20

Log10 Lung sgRNA 4 dpi

Max % weight loss
Log10 Lung viral load 2 dpi
Log10 NT sgRNA 2 dpi

C

Log10 Lung sgRNA 2 dpi

Log10 NT viral load 2 dpi

B

r = -0.4528
P = 0.0230

20

0
Log10 NT sgRNA 4 dpi

A

1

2

3

4

r = -0.5127
P = 0.0088

8
6

4
2
0
0

1

2

3

Log10 Neutralizing titer
Week 6

4

Supplemental Figure 3.
Correlation of antibody and
neutralizing titers with
disease parameters. (A)
Correlations of S- binding titers
and neutralizing titers at week
6 post vaccination with
maximum percentage weight
loss excluding hamsters
euthanized at 2 and 4 dpi.
Correlations between
neutralizing titers at week 6
post vaccination and (B) virus
load titers or (C) sgRNA in
lungs and nasal turbinates at 2
and 4 dpi.
Red line denote linear
regression fit. P and r values
determined by two-sided
Spearman rank test

A

4 dpi

2 dpi
5

Log10 S IgG titer

14 dpi
****

****

****

****

*

*

4
3
2
1
0
Mock 25 µg 25 µg 5 µg 1 µg
Prime
Prime-boost

Mock 25 µg 25 µg 5 µg 1 µg
Prime
Prime-boost

Mock 25 µg 25 µg 5 µg 1 µg
Prime
Prime-boost

B
Log10 NP IgG titer

4

****

****

****

****

****

Infection
Pre Post
PB
BS
S
P
C
tro
PPBBSS Mock
Coooonnnntro
tro
C
ll ll
C
tro
g2 511uddgooPssee
2255
55 
ggg
g
d
sePPe
221151
ggo
25
µg
u
gsPePrime
22
oo
s
5ddu
u
2 55 25
g
2µg
d
o
sP
e
P
B
2
5
u
g
P
B
2
g
2
d
o
sP
u
gsePrime-boost
5ddu
2255 ggg2222
oogo
s
d
se
eeBB
P
B
5
u
g
P
B
seeBB
g
52ddµg
u
55 
gg
gg2252
2
dod
o
55
ssoePrime-boost
og
d
o
ssePPe
PB
B
1 ug P
1
u
g
P
Prime-boost
PeeB
B
11
ssoe
oo
11 
gg
gg2212
22ddµg
dod
o
d
ssese

3
2
1

0
Mock 25 µg 25 µg 5 µg 1 µg
Prime
Prime-boost

Log10 Neutralizing titer

C
5

2 dpi

4 dpi

14 dpi
****

4

***

***

**

3
2
1
0
Mock 25 µg 25 µg 5 µg 1 µg
Prime
Prime-boost

Mock 25 µg 25 µg 5 µg 1 µg
Prime
Prime-boost

Mock 25 µg 25 µg 5 µg 1 µg
Prime
Prime-boost

Supplemental Figure 4. Serum antibody responses post SARS-CoV-2. challenge. (A) S-specific serum IgG titers in serum
collected pre- (day 41 post-vaccination; shaded symbol) and post-infection (2, 4 and 14 days post-infection (dpi) open symbol),
determined by ELISA. (A) S-specific serum IgG titers pre- (day 41 post-vaccination; shaded symbol) and post-infection (2, 4 and 14
days post-infection (dpi) open symbol) determined by ELISA. (B) NP-specific IgG titers in serum collected a day before challenge
(day 41) and 14 dpi determined by ELISA. (C) Neutralizing titers in serum collected pre- (day 41 post-vaccination; shaded symbol)
and post-infection (2, 4 and 14 days post-infection (dpi) open symbol), determined by plaque reduction assay. Bars denote group
means. Significance between pre- and post- infection antibody titers measured by multiple t tests with Holm-Sidak’s correction for
multiple comparisons (*P ≤ 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001).

Naïve mock infected

1 µg Prime-boost

5 µg Prime-boost

25 µg Prime-boost

25 µg Prime

Mock vaccinated

H&E

IHC
Supplemental Figure 5. Disease
following challenge of vaccinated
hamsters with SARS-CoV-2
(continued from Fig. 2). Lung sections
from mock vaccinated, prime-only and
prime-boost vaccinated and naïve
mock-infected groups at 4 dpi were
stained with H&E, and representative
photomicrographs (original
magnification ×20 (scale bars, 50 µm)
as indicated) from each group with virus
antigen (arrowhead) in lungs, stained
by IHC.

2 dpi

14 dpi
20X

4X

20X

1 µg Prime-boost

5 µg Prime-boost

25 µg Prime-boost

25 µg Prime

Mock vaccinated

4X

Supplemental Figure 6. Disease following challenge of vaccinated hamsters with SARS-CoV-2 (continued from Fig 2). Lung
sections from mock vaccinated, prime-only and prime-boost vaccinated animals at 2 and 14 dpi were stained with H&E, and
representative photomicrographs (original magnification ×4 (scale bars, 200 µm) and ×20 (scale bars, 50 µm) as indicated) from
each group with virus antigen (arrowhead) in lungs, stained by IHC, are shown.

A

C

B

D

Upregulated Pathways

Downregulated Pathways

Supplemental Figure 7. Gene regulation in the vaccinated infected outlier sample. (A,B) PCA of pseudo-bulk RNA-seq data
including all cell types (A) and just granulocytes (B) Colors indicate groups. Outlier shown in red. (C) Volcano plot of genes that are
differentially expressed (DE) between the outlier sample and the other VI samples. 270 differentially expressed genes satisfying a
logFC threshold of 0.25 and an FDR adjusted p-value of 0.05 were identified: 158 up-regulated, 112 down-regulated. Only DE
genes are shown. (D) Upregulated and downregulated Reactome pathways for the outlier vs. the other VI samples.

Supplemental Figure 8. Cell type-specific markers differentiate single cell clusters. Each plot displays the expression pattern
of a representative cell type-specific marker on the integrated UMAP plot. Feature plots are labeled by cell-type marker and
corresponding cell type. Dividing immune cells are marked by the G2M score derived in Seurat.

A

Viral Sequence Segment
Expression Per Sample

B

% Expressed

Avg. Expression

Viral Sequence Segment
Expression Per Cell-type

% Expressed

Avg. Expression

Supplemental Figure 9. Expression of SARS-CoV-2 genes. (A) Dot plot showing expression of each viral sequence segment in
each sample. PRIME5 and PRIME3 represent the 5’ and 3’ ends, respectively, of the viral genome. (B) Dot plot showing
expression of each viral sequence segment in each cell type (including MI cells only).

A CD8+ T, MI unique DEGs
M1
Negative regulation of T cell activation
Negative regulation of leukocyte migration
Cell aging
Positive regulation of telomere maintenance

M4
Mitochondrial ATP synthesis coupled
electron transport
Protein dephosphorylation
Positive regulation of response to oxidative
stress
M5
Response to virus
Cellular response to cytokine stimulus
Cellular response to interferon-gamma
I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB signaling
Lymphocyte proliferation
Positive regulation of viral entry into host cell
Regulation of apoptotic signaling pathway

M2
Negative regulation of proteasomal
protein catabolic process
Histone monoubiquitylation
Positive regulation of macroautophagy

M3
RNA localization
Regulation of chromosome organization

M6
Calcium-mediated signaling
Second-messenger-mediated signaling

B CD8+ T, VI unique DEGs
M1
Positive regulation of leukocyte activation
Innate system development
Regulation of actin cytoskeleton organization

Supplemental Figure 10. Functional pathway analysis of unique MI vs. N and VI vs. N comparisons in CD8+ T cells. (A,B)
Functional network showing modules of enriched pathways using DEGs specific to the (A) MI vs. N or (B) VI vs. N comparison in
CD8+ T cells, i.e. fall outside the Venn diagram overlap in Fig. 5A. Each gene is represented by a circle and color coded according
to module. The size of each circle reflects its connectivity in the network. Edges are not shown, allowing for easy viewing. The
module label is shown with the functional processes and pathways identified in each module. Up or down regulation of pathway is
indicated by arrow direction.

A NK, MI unique DEGs

M1
Actin filament depolymerization
Regulation of cell morphogenesis

M2
Cohesin loading
Positive regulation of NIK/NF-kappaB signaling
T cell receptor signaling pathway
Positive regulation of apoptotic process
M3
Golgi vesicle transport
Endomembrane system organization
Macroautophagy
Response to hypoxia

M4
Defense response to virus
Cellular response to interferon-gamma
Positive regulation of cell migration
Positive regulation of apoptotic signaling pathway
I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB signaling
Negative regulation of cell proliferation
M5
Mitochondrion organization
Mitochondrial respiratory chain complex
assembly
response to oxidative stress
M6
Integrin-mediated signaling pathway
Regulation of cell size
T cell differentiation
M7
RNA splicing
Negative regulation of mRNA metabolic process

B NK, VI unique DEGs
M1
Positive regulation of protein complex assembly
Positive regulation of catabolic process
Actin filament organization

M2
Negative regulation of hydrolase activity
Positive regulation of immune response

M3
Response to toxic substance
Small molecule biosynthetic process

M4
Translation
Peptide biosynthetic process

Supplemental Figure 11. Functional pathway analysis of unique MI vs. N and VI vs. N comparisons in NK cells. (A,B)
Functional network showing modules of enriched pathways using DEGs specific to the (A) MI vs. N or (B) VI vs. N comparison in
NK cells, i.e. fall outside the Venn diagram overlap in Fig. 5B. Each gene is represented by a circle and color coded according to
module. The size of each circle reflects its connectivity in the network. Edges are not shown, allowing for easy viewing. The
module label is shown with the functional processes and pathways identified in each module. Up or down regulation of pathway is
indicated by arrow direction.

A

Monocytes

617

209

44

Slope: 0.4749
P-value < 2.2e-16

B

Monocytes, common DEGs
M1
Cellular response to extracellular stimulus
Cellular response to nutrient levels
M2
Leukocyte degranulation
Regulated exocytosis
Myeloid leukocyte mediated immunity
Positive regulation of NIK/NF-kappaB signaling
Positive regulation of I-kappaB kinase/NFkappaB signaling
M3
Cytoplasmic translation
Ribonucleoprotein complex assembly
Negative regulation of ubiquitin-dependent protein
catabolic process

C

Monocytes, MI unique DEGs

M1
Detection of biotin stimulus

M2
Peptidyl-threonine phosphorylation
Peptidyl-threonine modification

M3
Cellular response to organic cyclic compound
Intracellular receptor signaling pathway
Protein localization to membrane
Steroid hormone mediated signaling pathway
Negative regulation of oxidative stress-induced
intrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway

M4
Positive regulation of neuron death
Negative regulation of neurogenesis
Positive regulation of myoblast differentiation
Calcineurin-NFAT signaling cascade

M5
Cellular response to cytokine stimulus
Regulation of heterotypic cell-cell adhesion
Lipid storage

M4
RNA splicing
Translation
Negative regulation of mRNA metabolic process
Positive regulation of telomere maintenance
M5
Negative regulation of angiogenesis
Chemokine production
Leukocyte differentiation
Leukocyte cell-cell adhesion
M6
Response to virus
Immune system development
Negative regulation of viral process
Positive regulation of type I interferon production
Positive regulation of interleukin-1 secretionPositive
regulation of ERK1 and ERK2 cascade
Negative regulation of I-kappaB kinase/NF-kappaB signaling
Intrinsic apoptotic signaling pathway

Supplemental Figure 12. Functional pathway analysis of MI vs. N and VI vs. N comparisons in monocytes. (A) Venn diagram
of the union of DEGs of the two comparisons in monocytes. Scatter plot of the logFC of the union of DEGs of the two comparisons
in Monocytes, i.e. the same group of genes as in the Venn diagram. For each comparison, DEGs were selected with thresholds
FDR < 0.05 and absolute logFC > 0.1. Linear regression model was fitted to the scatter plot (adjusted R^2 = 0.5779). (B,C)
Functional network showing modules of enriched pathways using (B) DEGs shared between two comparisons in monocytes or (C)
DEGs unique to MI monocytes. Each gene is represented by a circle and color coded according to module. The size of each circle
reflects its connectivity in the network. Edges are not shown, allowing for easy viewing. The module label is shown with the
functional processes and pathways identified in each module. Up or down regulation of pathway is indicated by arrow direction.

A cDC, MI unique DEGs
M1
Golgi ribbon formation
Endomembrane system organization
M2
Defense response to virus
Positive regulation of type I interferon production
Negative regulation of viral genome replication

M3
Positive regulation of interleukin-8
biosynthetic process
Chemokine biosynthetic process
Chemokine metabolic process
Leukocyte migration

M7
Positive regulation of endocytosis
Positive regulation of leukocyte migration
regulation of T cell activation
T cell proliferation
Positive regulation of apoptotic

M6
RNA splicing
M5
Covalent chromatin modification
Viral release from host cell
Negative regulation of myeloid cell differentiation
M4
Cytoplasmic translation
Peptide biosynthetic process

B cDC, VI unique DEGs
M1
G-protein coupled receptor
signaling pathway

M4
Cellular response to cytokine stimulus

M2
Positive regulation of small molecule
metabolic process
M5
Cellular response to hormone stimulus
Epithelial cell differentiation
M3
Cellular response to oxidative stress
Negative regulation of cysteine-type
endopeptidase activity
Supplemental Figure 13. Functional pathway analysis of unique MI vs. N and VI vs. N comparisons in cDC. (A,B)
Functional network showing modules of enriched pathways using DEGs specific to the (A) MI vs. N or (B) VI vs. N comparison
in cDC, i.e. fall outside the Venn diagram overlap in Fig. 6A. Each gene is represented by a circle and color coded according to
module. The size of each circle reflects its connectivity in the network. Edges are not shown, allowing for easy viewing. The
module label is shown with the functional processes and pathways identified in each module. Up or down regulation of pathway
is indicated by arrow direction.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Table 1. Metagenomic Analysis of all 14 samples: selected classification
results

Group

Hamster
ID

% Mapped
to Bacteria
and Virus

NCBI
Taxon ID

Taxon Name

N1

0.04

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

N2

0.04

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

N3

0.04

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

N4

0.04

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

0.04

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

0.16

2697049

Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2

0.04

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

0.05

2697049

Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2

0.03

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

0.03

2697049

Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2

0.03

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

0.005

2697049

Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2

0.02

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

0.02

2697049

Severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2

V1

0.04

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

V2

0.03

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

V3

0.03

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

V4

0.02

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

V5

0.02

44283

Pasteurella multocida susbsp. Multocida

Naive

M1

M2
Mock
Vaccinated
+
Infected

M3

M4

M5

Vaccinated
+
Infected

Summary of selected metagenomic analysis of all 14 samples in MI, VI and N groups to identify
the presence of additional microbial infections beyond SARS-CoV-2.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Table 2. Inflammation and viral antigen in lungs of mRNA-1273 vaccinated
hamsters following SARS-CoV-2 infection

Vaccine

Mock
vaccinatedinfected

25 µg Prime

2 dpi
+/- i
+/- i
+ i, aw
++ i, aw
+ i, aw
++ i
+/- i
+/- i
+i
+i

25 µg Primeboost

5 µg Primeboost

1 µg Primeboost

Naïve
(Mock
infected)

+/- i
+/- i
+/- i
++ i
+i
+i
++ i
+/- i
+i
+i
++ i
+i
+/- i
+++ i, edema,

H&E
(inflammation)
4 dpi
+ pv/pbr F
++ pv/pbr F
++ pv/pbr F
+++ pv/pbr F
+++ pv/pbr F
+ pv/pbr F
+ pv/pbr F
+ pv/pbr F
+ pv/pbr F
++ pv/pbr F,
edema and
fibrin
+i
+i
+i
+/- i
+i
+i
+/- i
+/- i
+/- i
+i
+i
+/- i
++ pv/pbr F/i
+/- i

14 dpi
+ pv/pbr
++ pv/pbr, i
+ pv/pbr
++ pv/pbr, i
+ pv/pbr
+/- i
+/- i
+/- i
+/- i

IHC
(SARS-CoV-2 antigen)
4 dpi
+++
+++
++
++
+++
+
+/- to +
+
+

+/- i

++

++ i
+i
++ i
+i
++ i
+i
+i
+/- i
++ i
++ i
+i
++ i
+i
+i

+/+/+/+/+/+/- to +/- to ++
-

rare
hemorrhage

+/i

+i

+/- to -

na
na
na
na

+i
+++ i
++ i
++ i

na
na
na
na

-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.428136; this version posted January 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Inflammation scoring
Inflammation definitions: focal/multifocal (F), interstitial (i) or a combination of both (F/i), aw =
airway, pv/pbr = perivascular/peribronchiolar
Inflammation minimal to absent = <10% (tissue affected) = +/>10-<25% = +
>26-<50% = ++
>50%= +++

COVID-19 viral Antigen (Ag) scoring
Minimal - absent = Minimally abundant (but clearly present) = +/Mildly abundant = +
Moderately abundant =++
Abundant = +++

