bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scrutinizing the SARS-CoV-2 protein information for the designing an effective vaccine
encompassing both the T-cell and B-cell epitopes
Neha Jain¶, Uma Shankar¶, Prativa Majee¶, Amit Kumar*
Discipline of Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Indore, Simrol,
Indore, 453552, India

¶

These authors contributed equally to this work

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Amit Kumar, Discipline of Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology-Indore, Indore,
Simrol - 453 552, India, Contact - +91-732-430-6771, Email: amitk@iiti.ac.in

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

ABSTRACT
Novel SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) has caused a pandemic condition world-wide and
has been declared as public health emergency of International concern by WHO in a very
short span of time. The community transmission of this highly infectious virus has severely
affected various parts of China, Italy, Spain and USA among others. The prophylactic
solution against SARS-CoV-2 infection is challenging due to the high mutation rate of its
RNA genome. Herein, we exploited a next generation vaccinology approach to construct a
multi-epitope vaccine candidate against SARS-CoV-2 with high antigenicity, safety and
efficacy to combat this deadly infectious agent. The whole proteome was scrutinized for the
screening of highly conserved, antigenic, non-allergen and non-toxic epitopes having high
population coverage that can elicit both humoral and cellular mediated immune response
against COVID-19 infection. These epitopes along with four different adjuvants were utilized
to construct a multi-epitope vaccine candidate that can generate strong immunological
memory response having high efficacy in humans. Various physiochemical analyses revealed
the formation of a stable vaccine product having a high propensity to form a protective
solution against the detrimental SARS-CoV-2 strain with high efficacy. The vaccine
candidate interacted with immunological receptor TLR3 with high affinity depicting the
generation of innate immunity. Further, the codon optimization and in silico expression show
the plausibility of the high expression and easy purification of the vaccine product. Thus, this
present study provides an initial platform of the rapid generation of an efficacious protective
vaccine for combating COVID-19.
Keywords: Protective vaccine; COVID-19; SARS-CoV-2; multi-epitope vaccine; Next
generation vaccinology; Antigenic epitopes
INTRODUCTION:
The most disastrous outbreak of recent days which have put the world into a pandemic threat
involves the novel Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 or the SARS-CoV-2 or
the 2019-nCoV causing the COVID-19 outbreak. According to the situation report published
by World Health Organization on March 25th, 2020, 413,467 confirmed cases have been
reported globally along with 18,433 deaths affecting over 197 countries world-wide
(https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019).

Due

to

easy

and

efficient transportation and migration throughout the world, the virus has spread to 197
countries or areas from its epicenter, i.e. the city of Wuhan, China[1]. The SARS-CoV-2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

belongs to the Coronaviridae family being a close relative to the earlier reported Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) virus and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
virus. This virus majorly affects the lower respiratory tract causing pneumonia, fever, dry
cough, sore throat, dyspnea like symptoms which resolve spontaneously but certain cases
result in fatal complications like severe pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS), organ failure, septic shock or pulmonary edema often leading to death[2]. The
present situation is getting out of control as we don’t have any drug or vaccine to treat this
recently emerged virus and supportive treatment and preventive measures are the only ways
to restrict COVID-19 outcome[3].
Surfacing of SARS-CoV-2 in China was reported recently on December, 2019 and
therefore very limited and naïve information is available regarding its genomic constituency
and pathogenesis. Hence, the researchers rely on its close cousin viruses, SARS-CoV and
MERS-CoV for better understanding of its mode of infection. Phylogenetic analysis have
shown that bat-CoV-RaTG13 displays 96.3% sequence similarity while bat-SL-CoVZC45
and bat-SL-CoVZXC21 exhibit about 88% identity with the SARS-CoV-2 virus but the other
two pathogenic coronaviruses, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV have less sequence identity
being merely 79% and 50% respectively[4, 5]. Intriguingly, the basic genomic structure for
all these coronaviruses remains the same. The single-stranded positive sense RNA genome of
SARS-CoV-2 basically encodes 9860 amino acids translating into several non-structural
proteins like replicase (orf1a/b), nsp2, nsp3 and accessory proteins (orf3a,orf7a/b) along with
structural proteins including Spike (S), Envelope (E), Membrane (M), and Nucleocapsid (N)
proteins[4]. The Spike glycoprotein aids in receptor binding and thereby, helps in the entry of
the virus in the host cells, while the Envelope protein and the Membrane protein assist in the
virus assembly and packaging of the new virions. On the other hand, the Nucleocapsid
protein is essential for the genomic RNA synthesis required for the viral survival and
proliferation. The non-structural viral proteins including viral enzymes and other accessory
proteins help in the SARS-CoV-2 genome replication and infection[6].
The lessons learnt from the SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV outbreak have helped in
better understanding of the situation of the new coronavirus epidemic and pushed researchers
to develop vaccine or therapeutic solution to succumb the current situation. Previously
several animal models including mouse, Syrian hamster, ferrets as well as non-human
primate models like rhesus macaque, common marmoset have been used to study SARS-CoV
and MERS-CoV and also for the purpose of vaccine development[7-9]. An effective vaccine

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

should robustly activate both the humoral and the cell-mediated immunity to establish strong
protection against the pathogen[10]. The antibody generation by B-cell activation as well as
acute viral clearance by T-cells along with virus-specific memory generation by CD8+ Tcells are equally important to develop immunity against the coronavirus[11]. In case of
respiratory virus like coronaviruses, the mucosal immunity plays an essential role and
therefore route of administration of the vaccine is also important in the context of vaccine
development. Vaccines designed against previously reported SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV
majorly focuses on the Spike protein of virus which consists of S1 and S2 subunits bearing
the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the virus and cell fusion machinery respectively.
Mutations in the spike protein have also been reported to be responsible for the change in
host cell tropism[12]. The S protein is considered most antigenic and thereby can evoke
immune responses and generate neutralizing antibodies that can block the virus attachment to
the host cells[13]. Other viral proteins which were explored for vaccine development include
N protein, E protein and the NSP16 proteins[14-18]. Almost all the platforms for vaccine
development for SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV have been investigated including the lifeattenuated ones, recombinant viruses, sub-unit protein vaccines, DNA vaccines, Viral vectorbased vaccines, nanoparticle-based vaccines, etc. which may form the base for the vaccine
designing against the newly emerged SARS-CoV-2[10, 19]. Here we have designed a multiepitope-based vaccine for the SARS-CoV-2 using next generation vaccinology approach
where the recently available genome and proteome of the SARS-CoV-2 were maneuvered
and a potential vaccine candidate was conceived. Similar strategy was employed previously
for SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV[20-25] as well as certain findings are reported for the newly
emerged SARS-CoV-2[26-28]. While immunoinformatics techniques was utilized by groups
to predict the B-cell and cytotoxic T-cell epitopes in the SARS-CoV-2 surface glycoprotein,
N protein[27-29], others have utilized the information to design epitope-based vaccine based
on the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein[26]. Along with the structural proteins, utilizing the
non-structural and accessory proteins for the vaccine development can aid in better
development of an efficacious vaccine for long term by neutralizing the mutation rate of this
RNA virus. In this study, we explored the whole proteome of SARS-CoV-2 to scrutinize the
highly conserved antigenic epitopes for the construction of a multi-epitope vaccine candidate
that can effectively elicit both humoral and cellular mediated immune response against
COVID-19. The constructed vaccine product has high population coverage and along with
adaptive immunity, can as well lead to initiation of innate immune response further
enhancing the generation of memory immunity.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

With the continuous transmission of the virus across borders and increasing health
burden on the global scale, SARS-CoV-2 demands an urgent immunization therapy. As
depicted by Shan Lu, the Community Acquired Coronavirus Infection (CACI) caused by this
virus can shatter the socio-economic condition worldwide and the development of vaccine
against the SARS-CoV-2 should be encouraged to manage the present situation as well as it
can serve as a prototype for other coronaviruses[30, 31]. Thereby, our analysis provides a
platform for the development of a protective vaccine candidate that can be tested in-vitro and
in-vivo and may lead to faster development of an efficient vaccine against the SARS-CoV-2
infection.
MATERIAL AND METHOD
1. Retrieval of SARS-CoV-2 proteome
The complete proteome of latest reported novel Wuhan strain of SARS Coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2) was downloaded from the Nucleotide database available at National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). The database was also thoroughly
searched for the genomes of other available human infecting strains of Coronavirus
till date and was downloaded for further analysis.

2. Antigenicity prediction in the Coronavirus proteome
For the antigenic analysis of the proteome of the COVID-19 strain, VaxiJen v2.0
server available at http://www.ddg-pharmfac.net/vaxijen/VaxiJen/VaxiJen.html [32].
For antigenicity prediction of the Proteins of SARS-CoV-2 with higher accuracy,
Virus model available at the VaxiJen server with a threshold of 0.4 was utilized.
Proteins with a VaxiJen score ≥ 0.4 were taken for epitope prediction analysis.

3. Selection of MHC I and MHC II alleles
MHC class I and II alleles were selected on the basis of their occurrence worldwide.
We focused specially on the countries which are severely affected by the deadly
SARS-CoV-2 strain. For MHC class I, following 14 HLA alleles HLA-A01:01, HLAA02:01, HLA-A02:03, HLA-A02:06, HLA-A03:01, HLA-A11:01, HLA-A24:02,
HLA-A31:01, HLA-A33:01, HLA-B07:02, HLA-B35:01, HLA-B51:01, HLAB54:01, HLA-B58:01 were used that cover 89.84 % of the total world population as
predicted by The Allele frequency Net Database [33]. For MHC II, DRB1_0101,
DRB1_0301, DRB1_0401, DRB1_0405, DRB1_0701, DRB1_0802, DRB1_0901,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

DRB1_1101, DRB1_1201, DRB1_1302, DRB1_1501, HLA-DPA10103-DPB10101,
HLA-DPA10201-DPB10201,
DQB10201,

HLA-DPA10301-DPB10301,

HLA-DQA10101-

HLA-DQA10301-DQB10301, HLA-DQA10401-DQB10401, HLA-

DQA10501-DQB10501,

HLA-DQA10102-DQB10202,

HLA-DQA10402-

DQB10402 covering 99.71 % world population were used for the epitope screening.

4. Helper T cell epitope prediction
Various online servers were explored for the accurate prediction of Helper T
Lymphocytes (HTL) epitopes. Firstly, the antigenic proteins were analyzed by using
NetMHCIIPan 3.2 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHCIIpan/) [34]. The
server provides the epitope predictions for three human MHC class II isotypes that
includes HLA-DR, HLA-DP and HLA-DQ. We explored NetMHCIIPan server for
HTL epitope predictions for the selected 20 MHC class II alleles. The length for the
HTL epitopes was kept 15 mer. The server predicts the binding affinity of the
epitopes with the respective HLA allele and provides an IC50 (in nanoMolar) and
%Rank for each MHC class II allele – epitope pair which can be utilized for initial
screening of the potential HTL epitopes. The IC50 and %Rank were then utilized to
screen the probable strong HTL binders from the weak binders and non-binders.
The predicted strong binders for each HLA allele were further analyzed by
MHCII

binding

prediction

tool

available

at

IEDB

server

(http://tools.immuneepitope.org/mhcii/) [35] and only the epitopes with rank ≤1 were
taken for further analysis. Thereafter, the selected epitopes were checked for their
antigenicity

by

using

VaxiJen

server,

allergenicity

by

AlgPred

(https://webs.iiitd.edu.in/raghava/algpred/submission.html) [36] and toxicity by
ToxinPred (https://webs.iiitd.edu.in/raghava/toxinpred/motif_scan.php) [37]. Only the
epitopes with VaxiJen score ≥ 0.4 and predicted to be non-toxic and non-allergens,
were taken for further screening. The best HLA- non-allergenic epitope pair with the
highest VaxiJen score was taken for constructing the multi-epitope vaccine.

5. Cytotoxic T cell epitope prediction
For Cytotoxic T cell (CTL) epitope prediction, NetMHCPan 4.0 [38]based on
artificial neural network (ANN) was utilized for the 14 selected HLA class I
molecules. The predicted strong binders were then checked for their antigenicity by
using VaxiJen server. Further, immunogenicity of the epitopes was checked using

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

class

I

Immunogenicity

tool

available

at

IEDB

server

(http://tools.iedb.org/immunogenicity/) [39] and for the allergenicity, the AllerTop v.
2.0

was

used

(https://www.ddg-pharmfac.net/AllerTOP/method.html)

[40].

Thereafter, the non-allergenic strong binders with a positive immunogenicity score
were checked for their toxic nature by utilizing the ToxinPred server
(https://webs.iiitd.edu.in/raghava/toxinpred/motif_scan.php).

6. Epitope Conservation analysis
The presence of selected best epitopes in all the reported human infecting SARScoronavirus strain were checked by using Epitope Conservancy Analysis tool of
IEDB (http://tools.iedb.org/conservancy/) [41]. Only the epitopes having 100%
conservation were used for multi-epitope vaccine construction.

7. Molecular interaction of the HLA-epitope pair
The MHC class I ad class II molecules were downloaded from RCSB PDB database
(https://www.rcsb.org/). Those that were not available were in PDB database were
retrieved from pHLA database (https://www.phla3d.com.br/) [42]. The structures of
the

SARS-CoV-2

proteins

were

constructed

using

I-TASSER

(https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/I-TASSER/) [43]and HTL and CTL epitopes
were mapped and their structures were retrieved using PyMol tool. For the molecular
interaction analysis of the predicted best HLA-epitope pairs for both MHC class I and
class II alleles, ClusPro protein-protein docking tool (https://cluspro.org/login.php)
[44] was utilized.

8. B-Cell epitope prediction
ABCpred tool based on artificial neural network was explored for B-cell epitope
prediction (https://webs.iiitd.edu.in/raghava/abcpred/index.html) [45]. For higher
accuracy, the threshold for the prediction was kept 0.90. The predicted epitopes were
checked for their antigenicity using VaxiJen server, allergenicity by using AlgPred
and toxicity by ToxinPred server.

9. Designing of Vaccine construct
For constructing a multi-epitope vaccine construct, the selected best HTL, CTL and
B-cell epitopes were joined by using GPGPG, AAG and KK linkers respectively. For

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

the better immunogenic response, four adjuvants namely, β-defensin, universal
memory T cell helper peptide (TpD), PADRE sequence and a M cell ligand were
added by using EAAAK linker into the vaccine construct.

10. Antigenicity and allergenicity analysis of the vaccine construct:
The antigenicity of the vaccine construct, VaxiJen server was exploited. For the
allergenicity analysis of the vaccine construct, three different tools namely AlgPred,
AllerTop and AllergenFP v.1.0 (http://ddg-pharmfac.net/AllergenFP/index.html)
[46]were utilized.

11. Population coverage of the vaccine construct
To check the population coverage of the vaccine construct, Population coverage tool
available at IEDB (http://tools.iedb.org/population/) [47] server was utilized. The
HLA class I and class II alleles in the final construct were entered in the tool and the
population coverage of the alleles were calculated for the top 26 countries that are
severely affected by the SARS-COV-2 virus. The analysis was performed for HLA I
and HLA II separately as well as in combination.

12. Physiochemical property analysis of the multi-epitope vaccine construct
Expasy’s ProtParam (https://web.expasy.org/protparam/) [48] was explored for the
physiochemical properties evaluation of the vaccine construct. ProtParam evaluates
the peptide sequence and provides the molecular weight, theoretical pI, extinction
coefficient, estimated half-life, instability index, and grand average of hydropathicity
(GRAVY). Solubility of the construct was calculated using SolPro tool available at
SCRATCH protein predictor server (http://scratch.proteomics.ics.uci.edu/) [49].

13. Vaccine construct structure prediction and validation
Secondary structure of the multi-epitope vaccine construct was predicted using
SOPMA(https://npsaprabi.ibcp.fr/cgibin/npsa_automat.pl?page=/NPSA/npsa_sopma.html) [50] and PSIPRED (http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/) server [51]. For the tertiary structure
prediction of the vaccine construct Robetta server (http://robetta.bakerlab.org/) based
on ab initio and homology modelling was utilized [52]. The predicted structure was
refined by using 3D Refine (http://sysbio.rnet.missouri.edu/3Drefine/) [53]and further

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

by GalaxyRefine (http://galaxy.seoklab.org/cgi-bin/submit.cgi?type=REFINE) [54].
The structures were evaluated by constructing Ramachandran plot using RAMPAGE
(http://mordred.bioc.cam.ac.uk/~rapper/rampage.php) and the quality was assessed
using ERRAT server (https://servicesn.mbi.ucla.edu/ERRAT/).

14. Standard molecular dynamics of the vaccine construct
The refined modelled structure of the multi-epitope vaccine construct was further
evaluated for its stability in the real environment by simulating it in a water sphere
using

NAMD-standard

molecular

dynamics

tool

(https://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/namd/) by using parallel processors. The required
structure files (.psf) were generated by psfgen using Visual Molecular Dynamics
(VMD) tool v.1.9.3 by utlizing CHARMM force fields for proteins. Initially, a 10,000
steps energy minimization was performed followed by subsequent heating the system
from 0 K to 310 K. Thereafter, a 20 ns standard molecular dynamics was performed
and trajectory DCD file generated was used to evaluate RMSD. The change in kinetic,
potential and total energy was evaluated for these 20 ns simulation using VMD.

15. Interaction analysis of Vaccine construct with immune system molecules and
there MD analysis
To check the interaction of the multi-epitope vaccine construct with two immunoreceptors, TLR-3 and TLR-8, ClusPro docking server was used and the resultant best
complexes were then simulated for 20 ns in a water sphere using NAMD.

16. Codon optimization and In silico cloning
For the expression and isolation of the constructed multi-epitope vaccine in
Escherichia coli K12 satrain, the construct was first converted to cDNA using
Reverse translate tool available at Expasy server. The resultant DNA was further
optimized for enhanced protein expression by using JCAT server [55]. Finally, the
cDNA construct was inserted into the pET28a (+) vector using HindIII and BamHI
restriction sites.
RESULTS
1. Retrieval of structural and non-structural proteins of SARS-CoV-2 and their
antigenicity analysis.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

The complete proteome of the Wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus isolate Wuhan-Hu-1
(nucleotide accession number - NC_045512.2) was retrieved from the NCBI database.
SARS-CoV-2 proteome consists of a polyprotein ORF1ab and several structural proteins.
ORF1ab encodes for various non-structural proteins including Host translation inhibitor nsp1,
RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RnRp), Helicase, Guanine-N7 methyltransferase etc. that
plays a critical role in the virus multiplication and survival inside the host. Structural proteins
include Spike glycoprotein, Envelope protein, membrane protein and nucleocapsid protein.
The Fasta sequences of all these proteins were retrieved from NCBI and used for epitope
screening (Table 1). All the sequences were analyzed for their antigenic nature by using
VaxiJen server which is based upon auto cross covariance (ACC) transformation. VaxiJen
classifies the proteins into antigens and non-antigens solely based on the physiochemical
properties and is sequence alignment independent. The ACC score threshold for the virus
model is kept 0.4 that increases the prediction accuracy. All the SARS-CoV-2 proteins except
NSP16 (2'-O-ribose methyltransferase) resulted in the ACC score higher than 0.4 depicting
the antigenic nature of the viral proteome (Table 1). All the antigenic proteins were further
screened for the presence of HTL, CTL and B-cell epitopes by using various tools and
databases (Figure 1).
2. Epitope screening revealed the presence of high affinity HTL, CTL and B-cell
epitopes in the antigenic proteome of SARS-CoV-2
T- Lymphocytes play a central role in activating the cell mediated innate and adaptive
immune response against the foreign particles. As well they are the sole players in generating
immunological memory that provides long lasting immune response. Thus, the vaccinology
approach revolves around the screening of proteome for the high affinity Helper T
Lymphocytes (HTL) and Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes (CTLs) epitopes that can activate TH and
TC cells. The epitopes for the activation of HTLs and CTLs are processed and presented by
various human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I and class II molecules. The HLA-epitope
binding steps are crucial and have high specificity and are thus considered as one of the main
focus for vaccine designing. HLA shares large diversity due to the presence of several alleles
in the human genome but their occurrence is not uniform world-wide. Few of the alleles are
present throughout the world while some are restricted to only specific regions. Recent
reports and literature survey lead us to identify the massively affected regions by COVID-19 ,
namely China, Italy, Spain, Germany, USA, Iran, France, South Korea, Switzerland, UK,
Netherlands, Austria, Belgium, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Canada, Malaysia, Australia,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Portugal, and Japan. The presence of various epitopes with different HLA-binding
specificities leads to greater population coverage as the frequency of HLA allele’s expression
varies with the varying ethnicities worldwide. Henceforth, fourteen HLA class I and Twenty
class II alleles were selected on the basis of their occurrence in these countries. Individually,
HLA class I covers 89.84 % world population, while HLA class II covers 99.71 %.
HTLs act as the central mediators of immune response and coordinates with B
lymphocytes, TC cells and macrophages via signaling through interleukins and cytokines
synthesis. HTLs recognize the epitopes presented on MHCII biding cleft. Herein,
NetMHCPanII server was utilized for predicting 15 mer HTL epitopes having high binding
affinity to the selected 20 MHC II alleles. Only the strong binders for the respective HLA
alleles were selected with a percentile rank of ≤1. The selected epitopes were further
analyzed using another MHC II prediction tool available at IEDB server and filtered on the
basis of percentile rank. The resultant epitopes were checked for their antigenicity,
allergenicity and toxicity. Finally, the best HLA-epitope pairs with the highest antigenicity
and were non-allergen and non-toxic were used for multi-epitope vaccine construct. On
analysis, we received, 2 best HLA-epitope pairs each for Helicase and RdRp. Three best
HLA-epitope pairs were obtained for non-structural protein 2 (NSP2) and Spike glycoprotein
(S) and one pair each for membrane glycoprotein (M), ORF3a and ORF8 proteins. In
summary, non-toxic, non-allergenic epitopes with high binding affinity and antigenicity were
obtained for 15 MHC class II alleles and their respective epitopes were used for multi-epitope
vaccine construct. Best binding epitopes for the remaining 5 MHC II alleles were either nonantigenic, or were allergens and thus were excluded (Supplementary Table S1).
CTLs eliminate foreign particles thereby helping in pathogen clearance and are
required for maintaining the cellular integrity. MHC class I molecules represent the epitopes
to the CTLs which after activation perform cytotoxic activities. Here, we used NetMHCpan
v.4 for the mining of CTL epitopes that have high binding affinity with the 14 class I
molecules. The strong binders obtained from NetMHCpan server were then analyzed for their
immunogenicity by using class I Immunogenicity tool. Depending upon the amino acid
composition, properties and their position in the epitope, class I immunogenicity tool predicts
the immunogenicity of a MHC class I – epitope complex. Higher the score depicts higher
immunogenicity and vice-versa. Here, all the epitopes with positive score were taken and
analyzed for antigenicity, allergenicity and toxicity. Finally, the epitopes with highest
antigenicity, non-allergen and non-toxic were selected for the vaccine construction. Upon

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

analysis, 3 HLA-epitope pairs were obtained for ORF3a protein, 2 pairs for membrane
protein, nucleo-capsid protein, and spike glycoprotein each while one HLA-epitope pair each
for NSP2, NSP4, Envelope protein, and ORF8 (Supplementary Table S2). Overlapping
sequences were merged into one or both MHC class I and class II binding epitopes
Apart from cellular mediated immunity, the humoral immune response mediates
pathogen clearance in the antibody dependent manner. Hence the proteome of SARC-CoV-2
was further scanned for linear B-cell epitopes by using ABCPred server. For higher
selectivity and sensitivity, the threshold of ABCPred was kept 0.9. The predicted epitopes
were checked for their antigenicity, allergenicity and toxicity and the best epitopes were
taken for further consideration. On the basis of above criteria, we received one B-cell epitope
each for Nucleocapsid, Guanine-N7 methyltransferase (ExoN), ORF3a, ORF7a, and Surface
glycoprotein (Supplementary Table S3). The locations of the selected epitopes in the
respective protein structures are represented by Figure 2. Overall, the antigenic 13 HTL and
12 CTL epitopes having highest affinity for the respective HLA alleles and 5 B-cell epitopes
that are non-allergenic, non-toxic and can generate a potential immune response were
selected for incorporation into the multi-epitope vaccine construct.
3. The screened epitopes shared high conservancy within the Coronovirus family.
The presence of conserved epitopes in a vaccine can lead to an effective immunization
against all the strains of the pathogen. Thus, the selected HTL, CTL and BCL epitopes were
analyzed for their conservancy among the various human infecting strains of coronavirus.
Interestingly, all the selected epitopes were 100 % conserved throughout the coronavirus
family and this can lead to a robust vaccine development.
4. Molecular interaction analysis depicts the strong interaction of T-cell epitopes and
HLA molecules
MHC class I and class II alleles have a specific binding groove where the peptide binds and
are presented on the cell surface for immune system activation. The protein structures of
SAR-CoV-2 were modelled using I-Tasser (Supplementary Figure S1). To check the
molecular interaction of our selected CTL and HTL epitopes with their respective HLA
alleles, we performed protein-protein docking using ClusPro. HLA alleles were taken as
receptors and epitopes as ligands. ClusPro performs the interaction analysis by first
generating billions of conformers eventually leading to rigid target based molecular docking.
The resultant docked complexes are then clustered based on RMSD and lowest energy finally

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

leading to energy minimization. The cartoon representation of molecular interaction between
HLA alleles and epitopes are shown in Figure xx. Interaction analysis revealed favorable
interaction of both CTL and HTL epitopes with the HLA allele’s epitope binding grooves.
These epitopes will be presented to the TC and TH cells and would lead to immune response
against the vaccine. (Supplementary Figure S2)
5. Population coverage analysis shows the broad range spectrum of the constructed
vaccine
Population coverage of the vaccines depends upon the interaction of the epitopes with the
number of HLA alleles that are then represented to TC and TH cells that elicit the immune
response. Depending upon the ethnicity, the expression of HLA alleles varies throughout the
world. Thus to check the population coverage of the vaccine construct, presence of selected
HLA alleles were analyzed in the 26 severely affected countries by COVID-19 around the
world. Individually, MHC class I alleles covered on an average 91.22 % of world population
while MHC class II alleles covered 99.70 % (Figure 3A & B). As our vaccine construct
harbors HTL epitopes for 15 MHC class II and CTL epitopes for 14 MHC class I alleles, the
occurrence of these HLA alleles depicted the population coverage of >99% throughout the
world. Five countries including United States and France showed 100% population coverage
while ≥95% of population was covered in rest countries except United Kingdom depicting
the broad range spectrum of the constructed vaccine (Figure 3C).
6. Designing of SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope vaccine construct
An ideal vaccine should harbor conserved epitopes, have multi-valency and can elicit both
cellular and humoral mediated immune response in the host. A subunit vaccine contains
minimal elements that are antigenic and required for the stimulation of prolonged protective
or therapeutic immune response. In the recent times, various reports have shown the
construction of multi subunit vaccine by utilizing highly antigenic HTL, CTL and BCL
epitopes. Herein, we constructed a multi-epitope vaccine candidate by combining 13 HTL, 12
CTL and 4 BCL epitopes that were highly conserved, antigenic, non-toxic and non-allergens
(Figure 4).
In the recent times, various small peptides are been explored that acts as an adjuvant
and can potentiate the multi-epitope vaccine mediated immune response by activating
humoral immunity. Taking this into consideration, apart from the conserved epitopes, four
adjuvants were also added so as to boost the protective immune response against SARS-CoV-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

2. β-defensins are antimicrobial peptides that acts as chemoattractant for the immature
dendritic cells and T-lymphocytes and induces their maturation.[56] A 45 amino acid long
GIINTLQKYYCRVRGGRCAVLSCLPKEEQIGKCSTRGRKCCRRKK is well reported for
its anti-microbial activity and was added at the vaccine construct. CD4+ T cells are the key
regulators of humoral immunity as they assist B-cells in effective antibody class switching
and their affinity maturation. Universal memory T helper cell peptide (TpD) is a chimeric
peptide derived from tetanus and diphtheria toxoids and has a high promiscuity to interact
with wide range of MHC class II alleles. Presence of a TpD in the vaccine construct leads to
an effective Th cell activation and enhances the immunogenicity of the vaccine. Similarly, a
universal Pan DR epitope (PADRE) has been reported to enhance potency of long multiepitope by activating CD4+ T helper cells and helps in generating high titer IgG
antibodies.[57] Another small peptide CTGKSC act as an M cell ligand ad enhances the
adsorption of oral vaccines from the intestinal membrane barrier.[58] Hence for enhanced
immune response and transportation, these four adjuvants were added to the multi-epitope
vaccine construct. The adjuvants and epitopes were arranges in the following order: βdefensins – HTLs – TpD – CTLs – PADRE – BCL – CTGKSC. To preserve independent
immunogenic activities, various linkers were used for combining the adjuvants and epitopes.
EAAAK was used to join the adjuvants, HTL, CTL and BCL epitopes with each other as they
effectively separate various domains in multi-domain proteins. GPGPG linkers were used to
join HTL epitopes, while AAY linkers were used for combining CTLs. GPGPG and AAY
linkers enhances the recognition of the vaccine constructs by MHC I and MHC II
machineries. Similarly, KK linkers were utilized for combining B-cell epitopes. KK linker
acts as target for Cathepsin-B that separates the epitopes before MHC class II mediated
antigen presentation to the Th0 cells. Overall, six EAAAK, 12 GPGPG, 11 AAY and 3 KK
linkers were added to the subunit vaccine making it a 602 amino acid long vaccine construct
(Figure 4).

7. Physiochemical properties, antigenicity, allergenicity, and toxicity analysis revealed
the efficacy and safety of the predicted vaccine construct
Analysis of the physiochemical properties of a multi-subunit vaccine helps in analyzing the
optimal immune response of the vaccine and its stability inside the host. ProtParam was
utilized for accessing the molecular weight, pI, stability and grand average of hydropathy
(GRAVY) constant of the SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope vaccine construct. Molecular weight

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

of the vaccine construct was observed to be 65.3 kDa while pI value was 10.06. Instability
index of 31.93 (<40) depicted the stable nature of the vaccine construct while the estimated
half-life in mammalian reticulocytes was observed to be >30 hours. GRAVY constant of
0.213 depicted the hydrophilicity of the vaccine construct and was predicted to be soluble
with a probability of `70 % as predicted by SolPro (Table 2). Antigenicity is a preliminary
requisite of a successful vaccine candidate. A vaccine construct must possess both
immunogenicity and antigenicity to elicit the humoral and cell-mediated immune response.
Upon analyzing the vaccine construct sequence in VaxiJen server, the constructed vaccine
was found to be antigenic in nature with an overall prediction score of 0.6199. The score
signifies the antigenic potential of the vaccine construct that may have the potential to evoke
the immune response inside the host. On allergenicity analysis, all the three tools AlgPred,
AllergenFP and AllerTop supported the non-allergenic nature of the vaccine construct while
toxicity analysis revealed the non-toxic behavior of the construct (Table 2). In summary, the
constructed epitope was observed to be stable, soluble, antigenic, non-allergenic and nontoxic.
8. Structure modelling and validation results in the construction of feasible 3D structure
of the vaccine construct.
Secondary and tertiary structure helps in the functional annotation of the multi-epitope
vaccines. It also helps in analyzing the interaction of this vaccine construct with the
immunological receptors like TLRs. Secondary structure of the protein was analyzed by
using SOPMA and PSIPRED server that revealed the presence of ~40 % alpha helix, ~20 %
β-sheet, ~30 % coils and ~6 % β turns in the vaccine construct (Figure 5 and Supplementary
Figure S3). Tertiary structure of the vaccine was predicted by threading based homology
modelling using Robetta server (Figure 6A). Ramachandran plot analysis of the modelled
structure revealed the presence of 95.5 % residues in the most favoured regions and 4.5 % in
the additionally allowed regions (Figure 6B). Quality factor was analyzed by using ERRAT2
server and was obtained to be 90.47 depicting a good modelled structure (Figure 6C). To
further refine the modelled structure, 3D refine and GalaxyRefine were utilized that leads to
97.4 % residues in the most favoured region and 2.6 % residues in the additionally allowed
region. The quality factor of the refined structure was observed to be 94.29% depicting the
improvement of the modelled structure (Figure 6D-F).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

9. Structure dynamics simulation of the vaccine construct depicts the stability of the
modelled vaccine construct
Refined structure of the model construct was further check for its stability in real
environment by simulating it for 20 ns in a water sphere. 10,000 steps energy minimization
was performed to minimize the potential energy of the system. Unnecessary or false
geometry of the protein structures are repaid by performing energy minimization resulting in
a more stable stoichiometry. Before energy minimization, the potential energy was observed
to be -447451.2005 Kcal/mol. After 10,000 steps the protein was minimized with a potential
energy of -676040.4692 kcal/mol (Figure 7A). The system was subsequently heated from 0 K
to 310 K and then 10 ns molecular dynamic simulation was performed. The temperature
remained constant throughout the simulation process (Figure 7B). The DCD trajectory file
was analysed for analysing the movement of the atoms during the simulation course and
RMSD was calculated. Upon analysing the RMSD of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine construct, it was
observed that, the system gained equilibrium at ~4 ns and then remained constant till 10 ns
depicting the stability of the vaccine construct (Figure 7C). Furthermore, upon analysing the
change in kinetic, potential and total energy of the system, it was observed that after a quick
initial change in all the three, they remained constant throughout the simulation further
strengthening the stability of the vaccine construct (Figure 7D-F). Furthermore, the bond
energy, VdW energy, dihedral and improper dihedral energy analysis revealed no change
throughout the 10 ns dynamics simulation. Root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) analysis
revealed the rigidness of the atoms in vaccine construct with a slight mobility observed at ~
120 and 501 residues (Supplementary Figure S4). Thus, simulation analysis revealed the
stability of the vaccine construct in the real environment. The refined vaccine construct
structure was therefore used for interaction analysis with immunological receptor TLR3.
10. Interaction of vaccine construct with immunological receptor depicts the strong
feasible binding
Protein – protein docking of immune receptor TLR3 and the constructed vaccine was carried
out using ClusPro server. In total 30 TLR3-vaccine construct complexes were generated. The
fifth model with the lowest energy weighted score of -1427.4 was considered as best TLR3vaccine complex (Figure 8 A-B and Supplementary Table S4). The vaccine construct
interacted with the ligand binding grove of TLR-3 generating a strong TLR3-vaccine
construct complex. The stability of the complex was further analyzed by performing 10ns

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

standard molecular dynamics simulation studies using NAMD suite. The 10,000 steps energy
minimization of the complex lead to the generation of a minimized energy complex with
energy of -756791.5601 Kcal/mol (Figure 8C). After subsequent heating the system from 0 K
to 310 K, the temperature was kept constant throughout (Figure 8D). Energy plots depicted
no major changes throughout the simulation (Figure 8E-G and Supplementary Figure S5).
RMSF analysis of the complex showed a mobility region at ~740th residue and ~1100 residue
of the TLR3-vaccine complex (Figure 8H). On trajectory analysis, the RMSD plot was
constructed that revealed the major deviations during the initial 1.5 ns, thereafter the system
remained constant till 10 ns.
11. cDNA was optimized for the optimal expression of the vaccine product
For the insertion of the vaccine construct into a plasmid vector, the 602 amino acid long
protein sequence was reverse translated to cDNA of 1806 nucleotide length. The expression
system of the expression host varies with each other and the cDNA needs to be adapted as per
the host codon usage. For the optimal expression of the vaccine product in Escherichia coli
K12 host, the resultant cDNA was codon optimized according using JCAT server. Also,
during optimization, rho-independent transcription terminator and prokaryotic ribosomal
binding sites were avoided in middle of the cDNA sequence so as to generate an optimal and
complete protein expression. Further, for inserting the construct in the cloning vector, the
cleavage sites of BamHI and HindIII were also avoided. The CAI value (codon adaptation
index) of the cDNA before adaptation was observed to be 0.5379 and a GC content of 59.52
% (Figure 9A). After adaptation, the CAI score of the improved sequence was increased to
0.946 with 52.54 % GC content (Figure 9B and Supplementary data S1). The enhanced CAI
score depicts the presence of most abundant codons in Escherichia coli K12. The adapted
cDNA sequence was used for In silico cloning purpose.
12. Expression of Multi-epitope vaccine construct in Escherichia coli by In silico cloning
Escherichia coli K12 strain was selected as a host for cloning purpose as the expression and
purification of multi-epitope vaccines are easier in this bacterium. pET28a(+) expression
vector was cleaved using BamHI and HindIII restriction enzyme and the cDNA was inserted
near the ribosome binding site using Snapgene. 6X histidine tag was added at the 3’ end for
the isolation and purification of the vaccine construct (Figure 9C).
DISCUSSION

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

SARS-CoV-2 that causes COVID-19 has recently emerged as one of the deadliest pathogens
severely affecting humans worldwide. The SARS-CoV-2 is highly contagious virus with a
high mortality rate especially in immunocompromised and elderly persons. Vaccines are the
utmost need of the time to succumb the rising infections due to COVID-19 and represent the
best way to combat infectious diseases in the community. Conventional vaccine development
methods are time-consuming, laborious and expensive and in this regard, the in-silico
immuno-informatics approach have proved to a boon[59]. Moreover, the availability of large
number of efficient tools to predict the immuno-determinants, and large database of
information facilitate and accelerate this whole process of vaccine designing[60]. Multiepitope vaccines are designed by using the most antigenic conserved part of the pathogen’s
proteins that makes them more effective and can help in combating the high mutation rate in
RNA viruses. These epitope-based vaccines have added advantages of being safe, stable,
highly specific, cost-curtailing, easy to produce in bulk, and provides option to manipulate
the epitopes for designing of a better vaccine candidate[61]. This method of vaccine
development has proved to be promising enough for different microbial diseases including
both bacterial and viral[25, 62-67].
Herein, we applied reverse vaccinology approach for designing of a multi-epitope
vaccine that can efficiently elicit humoral and cellular mediated immune response against
SARS-CoV-2 viral infection. Coronaviruses are the viruses containing one of the largest
RNA genomes encoding several accessory proteins, non-structural proteins and the structural
proteins. Generation of humoral and cellular mediated memory immunity leads to fast and
long lasting immune response in case of viral infection. In our vaccine development process
against the SARS-CoV-2, the antigenic viral proteins were screened for the most
immunogenic and antigenic B-cell and T-cell epitopes that could efficiently evoke the
immune response. For the generation of most efficacies vaccine, successful recognition of
epitopes by various HLA alleles is a preliminary requisite. Therefore, 14 HLA I and 20 HLA
II alleles were selected that covers the maximum population in the severely affected countries
throughout the world. The screened epitopes were further checked for allergenicity and
toxicity inside the host. This screened epitopes covered fifteen various antigenic proteins of
SARS-CoV-2

including

various

non-structural

[nsp2,

nsp4,

nsp-6,

Guanine-N7

methyltransferase (ExoN), etc.], structural (E, M, N and S) and accessory proteins (ORF3a,
ORF7a and ORF8). Inclusion of all these proteins makes it a potent and effective vaccine
candidate against the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The protein – peptide docking of the HLA alleles

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

and selected epitopes showed the efficient binding in the epitope binding cleft of HLA
structure. The population coverage analysis of the vaccine based on the presence of epitopes
for the HLA alleles showed the broad range of the vaccine construct covering >99% of world
population. Adjuvants are the small peptides that when added along with the antigenic
vaccine enhances the immunogenic response. Considering this fact, four different adjuvants
were added to the multi-epitope vaccine construct that enhanced the innate and adaptive
immune response and helped in better transportation through the intestinal membrane barrier.
Vaccine construct was observed to be antigenic, non-allergenic and non-toxic making it a
potent vaccine candidate against SARS-CoV-2. The physiochemical analysis of the construct
revealed the stable nature of the vaccine product and is at par with the standards required for
the formulation of an effective vaccine. The solubility analysis of the multi-epitope vaccine
construct revealed ~70 % of solubility in an overexpressed state which is in admissible limits
and is required for purification and other functional analysis.
Secondary structure prediction revealed the predominance of alpha helix while the
tertiary structure obtained from threading provides the spatial arrangement of amino-acid in
space. The obtained modelled structure was further refined that increased its overall quality.
To check the interaction of the vaccine construct with the immune receptors, protein-protein
docking was performed. Various immune receptors like Toll-like receptors (TLRs) act as
sensor proteins that help in recognizing and differentiating self and non-self molecules and
cells. They help in recognizing molecular patterns on the surface of foreign particles like
viruses, bacteria and fungi and elicit immune response against these infectious agents. TLR3
acts as a nucleic acid sensor and helps in recognizing RNA and DNA viruses inside the
human body and establishes a protective role against this infectious agents[68]. In SARSCoV infection, TLR3 signaling contributes to the innate immune response against the viral
infection[69]. Thus agonist of TLR3, β-defensin that also acts as an adjuvant was added to
the vaccine construct. Also, the molecular interaction analysis of the vaccine construct with
the TLR3 resulted into a stable complex formation that was energetically favorable. RSMD
analysis of the vaccine construct and the vaccine construct-TLR3 complex depicted the stable
nature of both the systems in the real environment.
Finally, codon optimization was performed for the maximal expression of multiepitope vaccine product in Escherichia coli K12. Overall, herein, an integrated next
generation vaccinology approach was used to design a potential antigenic multi-epitope
subunit vaccine which may combat the COVID-19 with high specificity and efficacy.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

CONCLUSION
The emergence of novel strain of Corona virus, SARS-CoV-2 has become one of the most
detrimental pathogen world-wide. With its high contagious nature and no effective vaccines
and drugs, it has become a pandemic throughout. Herein, we explored next generation
vaccinology approach for designing multi-epitope vaccine construct. The proteins of SARSCoV-2 were screened for highly conserved, antigenic, non-allergen and non-toxic HTL, CTL
and BCL epitopes. Molecular interaction analysis revealed the high propensity of interaction
of the predicted epitopes with HLA alleles. Further in-silico analysis revealed the formation
of generation of both humoral and cellular mediated immune response. Various
physiochemical analyses revealed the formation of stable and efficacious vaccine candidate
with a population coverage of >99 % world-wide. Finally, in-silico analysis was performed
so as to easily express and purify the multi-epitope vaccine construct in a bacterial host.
Thus, the present study scrutinizes the antigenic proteins of SARS-CoV-2 for designing and
highly efficacious protective vaccine candidate that can elicit both humoral and cellular
mediated memory response and provides a starting platform for in-vitro and in-vivo analysis
for the development of protective and prophylactic solution against COVID-19.
Supplementary Information: Supplementary Figure S1-S5, Supplementary Table S1-S4
and Supplementary Data S1
Author Contributions
Data conceptualization and methodology was performed by AK. In silcio prediction were
performed by NJ, US and PM. Analysis was performed by NJ. NJ and PM collectively wrote
the manuscript. A.K. did the review and editing.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge Computer server facility provided by Dr. Parimal Kar at IIT,
Indore. NJ acknowledges the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, Govt. of India,
New Delhi, while US and PM acknowledges Ministry of Human Resource and Development,
Govt. of India, New Delhi and for respective Ph.D. research fellowships.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

References
[1] Wells CR, Sah P, Moghadas SM, Pandey A, Shoukat A, Wang Y, et al. Impact of international travel
and border control measures on the global spread of the novel 2019 coronavirus outbreak.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2020.
[2] Sohrabi C, Alsafi Z, O'Neill N, Khan M, Kerwan A, Al-Jabir A, et al. World Health Organization
declares global emergency: A review of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19). International journal
of surgery (London, England). 2020;76:71-6.
[3] Yang Y, Peng F, Wang R, Guan K, Jiang T, Xu G, et al. The deadly coronaviruses: The 2003 SARS
pandemic and the 2020 novel coronavirus epidemic in China. Journal of autoimmunity.
2020:102434.
[4] Han Q, Lin Q, Jin S, You L. Coronavirus 2019-nCoV: A brief perspective from the front line. Journal
of Infection. 2020.
[5] Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, Niu P, Yang B, Wu H, et al. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019
novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and receptor binding. The Lancet. 2020;395:565-74.
[6] Khan S, Siddique R, Shereen MA, Ali A, Liu J, Bai Q, et al. The emergence of a novel coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2), their biology and therapeutic options. Journal of clinical microbiology. 2020.
[7] Gretebeck LM, Subbarao K. Animal models for SARS and MERS coronaviruses. Current opinion in
virology. 2015;13:123-9.
[8] Sutton TC, Subbarao K. Development of animal models against emerging coronaviruses: From
SARS to MERS coronavirus. Virology. 2015;479-480:247-58.
[9] Li K, McCray PB, Jr. Development of a Mouse-Adapted MERS Coronavirus. Methods in molecular
biology (Clifton, NJ). 2020;2099:161-71.
[10] Du L, Tai W, Zhou Y, Jiang S. Vaccines for the prevention against the threat of MERS-CoV. Expert
review of vaccines. 2016;15:1123-34.
[11] Enjuanes L, Zuñiga S, Castaño-Rodriguez C, Gutierrez-Alvarez J, Canton J, Sola I. Chapter Eight Molecular Basis of Coronavirus Virulence and Vaccine Development. In: Ziebuhr J, editor. Advances
in Virus Research: Academic Press; 2016. p. 245-86.
[12] Lu G, Wang Q, Gao GF. Bat-to-human: spike features determining 'host jump' of coronaviruses
SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and beyond. Trends in microbiology. 2015;23:468-78.
[13] Du L, He Y, Zhou Y, Liu S, Zheng BJ, Jiang S. The spike protein of SARS-CoV--a target for vaccine
and therapeutic development. Nature reviews Microbiology. 2009;7:226-36.
[14] Regla-Nava JA, Nieto-Torres JL, Jimenez-Guardeno JM, Fernandez-Delgado R, Fett C, CastanoRodriguez C, et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronaviruses with mutations in the E protein
are attenuated and promising vaccine candidates. Journal of virology. 2015;89:3870-87.
[15] Das D, Kammila S, Suresh MR. Development, characterization, and application of monoclonal
antibodies against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nucleocapsid protein. Clinical and
vaccine immunology : CVI. 2010;17:2033-6.
[16] Liu J, Wu P, Gao F, Qi J, Kawana-Tachikawa A, Xie J, et al. Novel immunodominant peptide
presentation strategy: a featured HLA-A*2402-restricted cytotoxic T-lymphocyte epitope stabilized
by intrachain hydrogen bonds from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nucleocapsid
protein. Journal of virology. 2010;84:11849-57.
[17] Menachery VD, Gralinski LE, Mitchell HD, Dinnon KH, 3rd, Leist SR, Yount BL, Jr., et al. Middle
East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Nonstructural Protein 16 Is Necessary for Interferon
Resistance and Viral Pathogenesis. mSphere. 2017;2.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

[18] Almazan F, DeDiego ML, Sola I, Zuniga S, Nieto-Torres JL, Marquez-Jurado S, et al. Engineering a
replication-competent, propagation-defective Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus as a
vaccine candidate. mBio. 2013;4:e00650-13.
[19] Yong CY, Ong HK, Yeap SK, Ho KL, Tan WS. Recent Advances in the Vaccine Development Against
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome-Coronavirus. Frontiers in microbiology. 2019;10:1781.
[20] Chen YZ, Liu G, Senju S, Wang Q, Irie A, Haruta M, et al. Identification of SARS-COV spike
protein-derived and HLA-A2-restricted human CTL epitopes by using a new muramyl
dipeptidederivative adjuvant. International journal of immunopathology and pharmacology.
2010;23:165-77.
[21] Chan PK, Ma S, Ngai SM. Identification of T-cell epitopes of SARS-coronavirus for development
of peptide-based vaccines and cellular immunity assessment methods. Hong Kong medical journal =
Xianggang yi xue za zhi. 2011;17 Suppl 6:26-30.
[22] Ibrahim HS, Kafi SK. A Computational Vaccine Designing Approach for MERS-CoV Infections.
Methods in molecular biology (Clifton, NJ). 2020;2131:39-145.
[23] Tahir Ul Qamar M, Saleem S, Ashfaq UA, Bari A, Anwar F, Alqahtani S. Epitope-based peptide
vaccine design and target site depiction against Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus: an
immune-informatics study. Journal of translational medicine. 2019;17:362.
[24] Shi J, Zhang J, Li S, Sun J, Teng Y, Wu M, et al. Epitope-Based Vaccine Target Screening against
Highly Pathogenic MERS-CoV: An In Silico Approach Applied to Emerging Infectious Diseases. PloS
one. 2015;10:e0144475.
[25] Srivastava S, Kamthania M, Kumar Pandey R, Kumar Saxena A, Saxena V, Kumar Singh S, et al.
Design of novel multi-epitope vaccines against severe acute respiratory syndrome validated through
multistage molecular interaction and dynamics. Journal of biomolecular structure & dynamics.
2019;37:4345-60.
[26] Bhattacharya M, Sharma AR, Patra P, Ghosh P, Sharma G, Patra BC, et al. Development of
epitope-based peptide vaccine against novel coronavirus 2019 (SARS-COV-2): Immunoinformatics
approach. Journal of Medical Virology. 2020;n/a.
[27] Baruah V, Bose S. Immunoinformatics-aided identification of T cell and B cell epitopes in the
surface glycoprotein of 2019-nCoV. J Med Virol. 2020;92:495-500.
[28] Ahmed SF, Quadeer AA, McKay MR. Preliminary Identification of Potential Vaccine Targets for
the COVID-19 Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) Based on SARS-CoV Immunological Studies. Viruses.
2020;12.
[29] Grifoni A, Sidney J, Zhang Y, Scheuermann RH, Peters B, Sette A. A Sequence Homology and
Bioinformatic Approach Can Predict Candidate Targets for Immune Responses to SARS-CoV-2. Cell
host & microbe. 2020.
[30] Lu S. Timely development of vaccines against SARS-CoV-2. Emerging microbes & infections.
2020;9:542-4.
[31] Pang J, Wang MX, Ang IYH, Tan SHX, Lewis RF, Chen JI, et al. Potential Rapid Diagnostics, Vaccine
and Therapeutics for 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV): A Systematic Review. Journal of clinical
medicine. 2020;9.
[32] Doytchinova IA, Flower DR. VaxiJen: a server for prediction of protective antigens, tumour
antigens and subunit vaccines. BMC bioinformatics. 2007;8:4.
[33] González-Galarza FF, Takeshita LY, Santos EJ, Kempson F, Maia MHT, Silva ALSd, et al. Allele
frequency net 2015 update: new features for HLA epitopes, KIR and disease and HLA adverse drug
reaction associations. Nucleic acids research. 2015;43:D784-D8.
[34] Karosiene E, Rasmussen M, Blicher T, Lund O, Buus S, Nielsen M. NetMHCIIpan-3. 0, a common
pan-specific MHC class II prediction method including all three human MHC class II isotypes, HLA-DR,
HLA-DP and HLA-DQ. Immunogenetics. 2013;65:711-24.
[35] Sidney J, Assarsson E, Moore C, Ngo S, Pinilla C, Sette A, et al. Quantitative peptide binding
motifs for 19 human and mouse MHC class I molecules derived using positional scanning
combinatorial peptide libraries. Immunome research. 2008;4:2.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

[36] Saha S, Raghava G. AlgPred: prediction of allergenic proteins and mapping of IgE epitopes.
Nucleic acids research. 2006;34:W202-W9.
[37] Gupta S, Kapoor P, Chaudhary K, Gautam A, Kumar R, Raghava GP. Peptide toxicity prediction.
Computational Peptidology: Springer; 2015. p. 143-57.
[38] Jurtz V, Paul S, Andreatta M, Marcatili P, Peters B, Nielsen M. NetMHCpan-4.0: improved
peptide–MHC class I interaction predictions integrating eluted ligand and peptide binding affinity
data. The Journal of Immunology. 2017;199:3360-8.
[39] Calis JJ, Maybeno M, Greenbaum JA, Weiskopf D, De Silva AD, Sette A, et al. Properties of MHC
class I presented peptides that enhance immunogenicity. PLoS computational biology. 2013;9.
[40] Dimitrov I, Flower DR, Doytchinova I. AllerTOP-a server for in silico prediction of allergens. BMC
bioinformatics: BioMed Central; 2013. p. S4.
[41] Bui H-H, Sidney J, Li W, Fusseder N, Sette A. Development of an epitope conservancy analysis
tool to facilitate the design of epitope-based diagnostics and vaccines. BMC bioinformatics.
2007;8:361.
[42] Liu T, Pan X, Chao L, Tan W, Qu S, Yang L, et al. Subangstrom accuracy in pHLA-I modeling by
Rosetta FlexPepDock refinement protocol. Journal of chemical information and modeling.
2014;54:2233-42.
[43] Zhang Y. I-TASSER server for protein 3D structure prediction. BMC bioinformatics. 2008;9:40.
[44] Comeau SR, Gatchell DW, Vajda S, Camacho CJ. ClusPro: a fully automated algorithm for
protein–protein docking. Nucleic acids research. 2004;32:W96-W9.
[45] Saha S, Raghava GPS. Prediction of continuous B‐cell epitopes in an antigen using recurrent
neural network. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics. 2006;65:40-8.
[46] Dimitrov I, Naneva L, Doytchinova I, Bangov I. AllergenFP: allergenicity prediction by descriptor
fingerprints. Bioinformatics. 2014;30:846-51.
[47] Bui H-H, Sidney J, Dinh K, Southwood S, Newman MJ, Sette A. Predicting population coverage of
T-cell epitope-based diagnostics and vaccines. BMC bioinformatics. 2006;7:153.
[48] Gasteiger E, Hoogland C, Gattiker A, Wilkins MR, Appel RD, Bairoch A. Protein identification and
analysis tools on the ExPASy server. The proteomics protocols handbook: Springer; 2005. p. 571607.
[49] Cheng J, Randall AZ, Sweredoski MJ, Baldi P. SCRATCH: a protein structure and structural feature
prediction server. Nucleic acids research. 2005;33:W72-W6.
[50] Geourjon C, Deleage G. SOPMA: significant improvements in protein secondary structure
prediction by consensus prediction from multiple alignments. Bioinformatics. 1995;11:681-4.
[51] McGuffin LJ, Bryson K, Jones DT. The PSIPRED protein structure prediction server.
Bioinformatics. 2000;16:404-5.
[52] Kim DE, Chivian D, Baker D. Protein structure prediction and analysis using the Robetta server.
Nucleic acids research. 2004;32:W526-W31.
[53] Bhattacharya D, Nowotny J, Cao R, Cheng J. 3Drefine: an interactive web server for efficient
protein structure refinement. Nucleic acids research. 2016;44:W406-W9.
[54] Heo L, Park H, Seok C. GalaxyRefine: protein structure refinement driven by side-chain
repacking. Nucleic acids research. 2013;41:W384-W8.
[55] Grote A, Hiller K, Scheer M, Münch R, Nörtemann B, Hempel DC, et al. JCat: a novel tool to
adapt codon usage of a target gene to its potential expression host. Nucleic acids research.
2005;33:W526-W31.
[56] Ferris LK, Mburu YK, Mathers AR, Fluharty ER, Larregina AT, Ferris RL, et al. Human betadefensin 3 induces maturation of human Langerhans cell–like dendritic cells: an antimicrobial
peptide that functions as an endogenous adjuvant. Journal of Investigative Dermatology.
2013;133:460-8.
[57] Alexander J, del Guercio M-F, Maewal A, Qiao L, Fikes J, Chesnut RW, et al. Linear PADRE T
Helper Epitope and Carbohydrate B Cell Epitope Conjugates Induce Specific High Titer IgG Antibody
Responses. The Journal of Immunology. 2000;164:1625-33.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

[58] Fievez V, Plapied L, Plaideau C, Legendre D, des Rieux A, Pourcelle V, et al. In vitro identification
of targeting ligands of human M cells by phage display. International journal of pharmaceutics.
2010;394:35-42.
[59] De Groot AS, Moise L, McMurry JA, Martin W. Epitope-based Immunome-derived vaccines: a
strategy for improved design and safety. Clinical Applications of Immunomics: Springer; 2009. p. 3969.
[60] Soria-Guerra RE, Nieto-Gomez R, Govea-Alonso DO, Rosales-Mendoza S. An overview of
bioinformatics tools for epitope prediction: Implications on vaccine development. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics. 2015;53:405-14.
[61] Li X, Guo L, Kong M, Su X, Yang D, Zou M, et al. Design and evaluation of a multi-epitope peptide
of human metapneumovirus. 2015;58:403-12.
[62] Majee P, Jain N, Kumar AJJoBS, Dynamics. Designing of a multi-epitope vaccine candidate
against Nipah virus by in silico approach: A putative prophylactic solution for the deadly virus.
2020:1-39.
[63] Wei J-c, Huang Y-z, Zhong D-k, Kang L, Ishag H, Mao X, et al. Design and evaluation of a multiepitope peptide against Japanese encephalitis virus infection in BALB/c mice. 2010;396:787-92.
[64] Herd KA, Mahalingam S, Mackay IM, Nissen M, Sloots TP, Tindle RWJJov. Cytotoxic Tlymphocyte epitope vaccination protects against human metapneumovirus infection and disease in
mice. 2006;80:2034-44.
[65] Nezafat N, Eslami M, Negahdaripour M, Rahbar MR, Ghasemi YJMB. Designing an efficient
multi-epitope oral vaccine against Helicobacter pylori using immunoinformatics and structural
vaccinology approaches. 2017;13:699-713.
[66] Dorosti H, Eslami M, Negahdaripour M, Ghoshoon MB, Gholami A, Heidari R, et al. Vaccinomics
approach for developing multi-epitope peptide pneumococcal vaccine. 2019;37:3524-35.
[67] Chatterjee N, Ojha R, Khatoon N, Prajapati VKJIjobm. Scrutinizing Mycobacterium tuberculosis
membrane and secretory proteins to formulate multiepitope subunit vaccine against pulmonary
tuberculosis by utilizing immunoinformatic approaches. 2018;118:180-8.
[68] Lester SN, Li K. Toll-like receptors in antiviral innate immunity. Journal of molecular biology.
2014;426:1246-64.
[69] Totura AL, Whitmore A, Agnihothram S, Schäfer A, Katze MG, Heise MT, et al. Toll-Like Receptor
3 Signaling via TRIF Contributes to a Protective Innate Immune Response to Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Infection. mBio. 2015;6:e00638-15.

Table 1. List of SARS-CoV proteins used for antigenicity prediction using VaxiJen
server. The antigenic proteins with Antigenicity Score ≥0.4 were taken for epitope
screening
NCBI accession
number
QHD43415_1

Host translation inhibitor (nsp1)

Antigenicity
score
0.4064

Non-structural protein 2 (nsp2)

0.4034

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43415_3

Papain-like proteinase

0.5142

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43415_4

Non-structural protein 4 (nsp4)

0.4575

Probable ANTIGEN

Proteinase

0.4159

Probable ANTIGEN

Non-structural protein 6 (nsp6)

0.5813

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43415_7

Non-structural protein 7 (nsp7)

0.4167

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43415_8

Non-structural protein 8 (nsp8)

0.4008

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43415_9

Non-structural protein 9 (nsp9)

0.6476

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43415_1

Non-structural protein 10 (nsp10)

0.4039

Probable ANTIGEN

SARS-CoV-2 proteins

QHD43415_2

QHD43415_5
QHD43415_6

ORF1ab

Antigenicity prediction
Probable ANTIGEN

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

QHD43415_1

RNA-directed RNA polymerase (RdRp)

0.4064

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43415_1

Helicase (Hel)

0.448

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43415_1

Guanine-N7 methyltransferase (ExoN)
Uridylate-specific endoribonuclease
(NendoU)
2'-O-methyltransferase (2'-O-MT)

0.4138

Probable ANTIGEN

0.5554

Probable ANTIGEN

0.38

Probable NON-ANTIGEN

Surface glycoprotein

0.4646

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43417

ORF3a

0.4945

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43418

ORF4 (E Protein)

0.6025

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43419

Membrane Protein

0.5102

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43420

ORF6

0.6131

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43421

ORF7a

0.6441

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43422

ORF8

0.6502

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43423

Nucleocapsid Protein

0.5059

Probable ANTIGEN

QHI42199

ORF10

0.7185

Probable ANTIGEN

QHD43415_1
QHD43415_1
QHD43416

Table 2. The results of physiochemical properties, antigenicity, allergenicity, and
toxicity analysis of the SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope vaccine construct.

Antigenicity Prediction using VaxiJen
Allertop

Allegenicity
analysis

AllergenFP

AlgPred
prediction

Prediction by mapping of IgE
epitope
MAST RESULT

0.6199 (Probable ANTIGEN ).
PROBABLE NON-ALLERGEN
The nearest protein is: UniProtKB accession number
Q2RB59 defined as non-allergen
PROBABLE NON-ALLERGEN
The protein with the highest Tanimoto similarity
index 0.84 is: UniProtKB accession number P00846
The protein sequence does not contain
experimentally proven IgE epitope
No Hits found
NON ALLERGEN

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Prediction by SVM method
based on amino acid
composition
BLAST Results of ARPS :
Prediction by Hybrid
Approach
Toxicity Analysis Using ToxinPred

Physiochemical properties
analysis using ProtParam

No Hits found
NON ALLERGEN
NON ALLERGEN
Non-Toxin

Number of amino acids

602

Molecular weight

65323.19 Dalton

Theoretical pI

10.06
30 hours (mammalian reticulocytes, in vitro).

Estimated half-life

Instability index

Solubility analysis using
SolPro

Score=-1.0824782 [Threshold=-0.4]
NON ALLERGEN

>20 hours (yeast, in vivo).
>10 hours (Escherichia coli, in vivo).
The instability index (II) is computed to be 31.93
This classifies the protein as stable.

Grand average of
hydropathicity (GRAVY)

0.213

Predicted Solubility upon
Overexpression

SOLUBLE with probability 0.699016

Figure Captions
Figure 1. Schematic representation of next generation vaccinology approach used for the prediction
of Multi-epitope vaccine construct for SARS-CoV-2.
Figure 2. HTL, CTL and BCL epitopes in SARS-CoV-2 proteome. Location of selected Helper TLymohocytes epitopes (Blue), Cytotoxic T-Lymphcytes epitopes (Red) and B Cell Lymphocytes
epitopes in the three dimensional structures of the antigenic proteins of SARS-CoV-2.
Figure 3. Population Coverage of the SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope vaccine construct. (A & B) The
population coverage of HLA class I and class II alleles for whom the best antigenic epitopes were
screened in various countries severely affected by COVID-19 in the world. (C) Population coverages
of the multi-epitope vaccine construct based on the coverages of HLA class I and class II alleles in
combination in various countries.
Figure 4. Designing SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope vaccine construct. The Sequence of the multiepitope vaccine construct with HTLs, CTLs and BCL epitopes along with various adjuvants and
linkers. Schematic representation of the SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope vaccine construct.
Figure 5. Secondary Structure prediction of SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope vaccine construct. A.
The sequence of the vaccine construct along with the predicted secondary structure. B. The overall
percentage of various secondary structures in the vaccine construct as predicted by SOPMA server. C
Pictorial representations of various secondary structures in the multi-epitope vaccine construct. D.
Propensity of occurrence of various secondary structures according to the residues in the vaccine
construct. The secondary structure at a particular residue was predicted by the height of the peak.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. Tertiary Structure and validation of the SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope vaccine construct.
(A) Represents the modelled structure of the vaccine construct where HTL epitopes are depicted by
Salmon Pink color, CTL by Orange, BCL epitopes by Cyan, and adjuvants by Blue. (B & C)
Ramachandran plot and ERRAT plot generated for the modelled vaccine construct. (D) The modelled
(Cyan) and refined structure (Red) of the SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope vaccine construct depicting the
changes in the structure before and after refinement. (E&F) Ramachandran plot and ERRAT plot
generated for the refined structure of the vaccine construct.
Figure 7. Standard molecular Dynamics analysis of SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope vaccine
construct. (A) Representation of change in potential energy vs time steps(in ns) during energy
minimization of the vaccine construct. (B)Temperature Vs Time steps showing the constant
temperature throughout 10 ns simulation study. (C) RMSD Vs TS depicting the root mean square
deviation of the atoms of Multi-epitope vaccine construct during the 10 ns dynamic simulation. (D –
F) Energy plots representing Kinetic, potential and total energy w.r.t. TS for the Vaccine construct
system in a water sphere.
Figure 8. Molecular interaction analysis of SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope vaccine construct with a
immunological receptor Human TLR3. (A & B) Representation of TLR3-vaccine construct in
ribbon (A) and surface form (Blue Human TLR3 ad Green- multi-epitope vaccine construct). (C)
Representation of change in potential energy vs time steps (in ns) of the TLR3-vaccine construct
during energy minimization. (D)Temperature Vs Time steps showing the constant temperature
throughout 10 ns simulation study. (E – G) Energy plots representing Kinetic, potential and total
energy w.r.t. TS for the Vaccine construct system in a water sphere. (H) RMSF Vs TS for the
residues of TLR3-vaccine construct complex (I) RMSD Vs TS depicting the root mean square
deviation of the atoms of TLR3-vaccine construct during the 10 ns dynamic simulation.
Figure 9. Codon optimization and In silico cloning of the cDNA of SARS-CoV-2 multi-epitope
vaccine construct. Representation of CAI score of the cDNA construct of SARS-CoV-2 multiepitope vaccine before adaptation (A) and after adaptation (B). (C) Pictorial representation of SARSCoV-2-multi-epitope vaccine construct plasmid that can be used for the expression and purification of
the vaccine product inside Escherichia coli.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.009209; this version posted April 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

