bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Development of Tribo-Electroceutical Fabrics for Potential Application in Selfsanitizing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
Sayan Bayan1#, Aniruddha Adhikari2#, Uttam Pal3, Ria Ghosh3, Susmita Mondal2,
Soumendra Darbar4, Tanusri Saha-Dasgupta1,3*, Samit Kumar Ray1,5*, Samir Kumar Pal2,3*

1

Department of Condensed Matter Physics and Material Sciences, S. N. Bose National Centre for
Basic Sciences, Block JD, Sector 3, Salt Lake, Kolkata 700106, India
2

Department of Chemical, Biological and Macromolecular Sciences, S. N. Bose National Centre for
Basic Sciences, Block JD, Sector 3, Salt Lake, Kolkata 700106, India
3

Technical Research Centre, S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Block JD, Sector 3, Salt
Lake, Kolkata 700106, India
Research & Development Division, Dey’s Medical Stores (Mfg.) Ltd, 62, Bondel Road, Ballygunge,
Kolkata 700019, India
4

5

Deapartment of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal 721302, India

#equal contributor

*corresponding author samit@bose.res.in (physkr@phy.iitkgp.ernet.in), skpal@bose.res.in,
tanusri@bose.res.in

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract:
Attachment of microbial bodies including coronavirus on the surface of personal protective
equipment (PPE) is found to be potential threat of spreading infection. Here, we report the
development of a novel tribo-electroceutical fabric (TECF) consisting of commonly available
materials namely Nylon, and Silicone Rubber (SR) for the fabrication of protective gloves on
Nitrile platform, as a model wearable PPE. A small triboelectric device (2 cm x 2 cm)
consisting of SR and Nylon on Nitrile can generate more than 20 volt transient or 41 µW
output power, which is capable of charging a capacitor up to 65 V in only ~50 sec. The
novelty of the present work relies on the TECF led anti-microbial activity through the
generation of an electric current in saline water. The fabrication of TECF based functional
prototype gloves can generate hypochlorite ions through the formation of electrolysed water
upon rubbing them with saline water. Further a computational modelling has been employed
to reveal the optimum structure and mechanistic pathway of anti-microbial hypochlorite
generation. Detailed anti-microbial assays have been performed to establish effectiveness of
such TECF based gloves to reduce the risk from life threatening pathogen spreading. The
present work provides the rationale to consider the studied TECF, or other material with
comparable properties, as material of choice for the development of self-sanitizing PPE in the
fight against microbial infections including COVID-19.

Key Words: Triboelectric, electrolysed water, hypochlorite ions, anti-microbial

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction:
The respiratory diseases such as COVID-19 can spread from the virus-laden respiratory
droplets emerging out from the coughing or sneezing of any infected person.1 In practice,
health workers are continuously exposed to such life threatening biological agents and can
become potential carriers of the diseases. To minimize the life risk of the health workers the
use of Personal Protective Equipments (PPEs) in the form of gowns, face masks, gloves,
goggles, face shields etc. are highly recommended.2 The proper use of PPEs is considered as
a common precautionary measure to reduce the risk of contamination from blood or other
body fluids of patients. However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the whole world has
experienced an unprecedented challenge in PPE supply for active patients as well as health
workers.3-5 Consequently it has been realized that the long duration use of PPEs has led to
the adverse effect due to the negligence of hand hygiene practices and recycling following the
disease protocols in regular intervals. For disinfection and reuse of PPEs a number of routes
such as exposure to heat (autoclave), ultraviolet ray-C, alcohol, washers etc. have been
recommended.5 However, most of these methods are time consuming and face affordability
issues by economically weaker sections of the society. So, the development of self sanitizing
PPEs can be a novel and alternate solution for the all sections of the society including the
health workers.
The contact electrification process (also known as tribo-electrification) has attracted the
attention of medical research community for healthcare application.6-8 The triboelectrification

involving

the

phenomena

of

tribology

with

subsequent

charge

transfer/exchange has led to the development of energy harvesting devices called triboelectric
nanogenerators (TENG).9-13 In this context, a TENG can be exploited as a health monitoring
sensor as well as power generator, where the electrical signals in response to a stimuli
originating from human body are able to power up energy storage devices that can operate
the sensor.6,

14-18

For example, activities like muscular motion or abdominal respiration,

where the body displacement is significant, can be easily detected by TENG7, 8 and can power
the sensing systems to detect heart beat, body temperature, and lactate concentration etc.14-16
The potential applicability of TENG in antibacterial wearable systems has also been
reported.19-21 The fabrication of self-powered filter by combining TENG and photocatalysis
technique has been found to be efficient to protect from harmful organic vapour pollutants,
which are believed to be the cause of diseases like asthma and chronic bronchitis.19 On the
other hand, antibacterial composite film-based TENG has been demonstrated to be useful to
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

protect athlete’s foot from fungal infection effectively.20 Excellent antibacterial activity along
with capability of removing fine particle (PM2.5) by the virtue of cellulose fiber based TENG
has also been reported.21
Here, we first report the development of a tribo-electroceutical fabric (TECF) for the
fabrication of personal protective equipment like protective gloves, as a representative
wearable PPE against deadly viruses in a situation like COVID 19 pandemic. We
demonstrate the tribo-electroceutical fabric (TECF) based gloves deploying the virtue of
contact electrification using commonly available materials like nylon, teflon or silicone
rubber (SR). The TECF based on nylon or SR, act as contacting materials on nitrile platform,
a common material for hand gloves, and can generate electrical power. The developed TECF
based gloves when rubbed in presence of saline water produce hypochlorous acid or
hypochlorite ions, which lead to their self-sanitization while using for a longer duration. The
production of the hypochlorite ions has been characterized in vitro through a redox dye
degradation as well as colorimetric test. In addition, theoretical modelling has been
performed to establish the concept of electrolysis and the consequent formation of
hypochlorous acid. Finally, the efficacy of the TECF has been revealed by demonstrating the
sterilizing effect through killing a vast majority of Pseudomonous auregionosa bacteria,
which has similarities with SARS CoV-2 virus. The present investigation suggests that TECF
based gloves can effectively reduce the chance of contamination from microorganisms that
are spread by direct or indirect contact through a self-sanitization process, making them
attractive to prevent further spread of the diseases from an otherwise uninfected personnel.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Experimental and Computational Details:
1. Development of triboelectric materials: Nylon layer, one of the tribo-eletroceutical
surfaces in the present work, was prepared using commercially available nylon beads (~ 0.04
gm), which were mixed in ~ 10 ml acetone solution and stirred at ~ 400 rpm for 15 min by
maintaining a temperature of 50 oC. The resulting viscous solution was drop casted on
commercial nitrile gloves and was allowed to dry in a hot air oven. Silicon rubber (SR) layer,
acting as the counter tribo-material, was prepared from liquid SR and a catalyst (e.g. dibutyl
tin dilaurate), which were mixed in 13:1 ratio and casted on nitrile gloves. The desired
prototype of nylon and SR coated nitrile gloves were obtained upon curing the samples in a
hot air oven at ~ 70 oC.

2. Exploration of triboelectric properties: For investigating the triboelectric characteristics,
approximately 2 cm x 2 cm nylon and SR coated nitrile sheets were attached to the adhesive
aluminium tape. An adhesive aluminium foil was used to make the back contact of the
triboelectric layers. An indigenously developed system with two wooden slabs separated by
four springs at the corners was deployed to measure the triboelectric characteristics under
tapping conditions. The triboelectric layers were attached to the two inner faces of the system
so that the layers could come in contact with each other under pressed condition. Further for
sliding/rubbing

mode,

the

triboelectric

layers

were

fixed

to

a

polyethylene

terephthalate (PET) platform with a spacer such that the horizontal movement can be
executed.
3. Characterization: The electrical properties of the nanogenerators were studied using a
digital oscilloscope (Scientific) and Keithley 2450 source meter. Optical absorbance was
recorded using an UV-Visible spectrophotometer (Jasco) at room temperature.

For dye degradation experiment, the TECF based gloves were submerged in methylene blue
solution (4.5 M) in normal saline (0.9% NaCl) condition. The system was continuously
rubbed and the absorbance was measured from aliquots collected from the sample at 5 min
time intervals.

The bacterial strains of gram-negative Pseudomonous auregionosa used in this study was
obtained from Dey’s Medical (Kolkata, India), while Escherichia coli (E. coli) (CGMCC
1.8723) was obtained from the Department of Biochemistry, University of Calcutta, India.
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The glass wares, suction nozzles, and culture medium were sterilized in an autoclave at a
high pressure of 0.1 MPa and a temperature of 120 °C for 30 min before experiments.
Bacteria cultures were cultivated in sterilized Luria-Bertani (LB) broth and incubation at 37
°C with a shaking incubator for 24 hours.

The colony count method or the kinetic test was used to estimate antibacterial properties
through the concentration of the survival colonies bacteria in co-cultured solution. First,
original bacterial suspensions were washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS;
pH 7.4) solution to a concentration of 108 CFU/ml. At the second step, they were poured onto
nylon-nylon (TECF Control) or SR-nylon (TECF) layers and continuously rubbed for 25
mins. At third step, the rubbed bacterial solution was diluted five times to a certain
concentration. The resulting bacterial PBS suspensions (100 L) were spread on gelatinous
LB agar plates, and cultured at 37°C for 24 hours. The number of survival colonies was
counted manually. For growth curve analysis, the five times diluted bacterial solution was
added to LB and kept at 37°C. The absorbance at 660 nm was monitored at a regular interval
(1 h) to assess the growth kinetics.

The bacteria cells after treatment with TECF, were stained with DAPI and PI. The DAPI can
stain all cells while the PI can only stain the living cells, and thus the red/blue ratio was
obtained to assess the survivality of E. coli.

4. Computational study: The fabricated TECF was simulated using the electrostatic module
of the COMSOL Multiphysics simulator. The potential difference (U) was obtained by
solving the equation: U = σ∆d/ε0, where σ is the surface charges density; ε0 is the vacuum
permittivity and

∆d represents the gap distance between the two tribo-materials with

electrodes.22 In the simulations, a charge density of −10 nC/m2 was assumed on the SR layer
surface. The bottom electrode was taken as a reference in the simulation and was grounded
for the purpose.23,24

The secondary current distribution through the electrolyte is simulated using the
electrochemistry module of COMSOL. Electrolyte in between the two triboelectric materials
can be modeled as an electrolysis cell with an anode and a cathode. Chlorine/chloride
reduction (Eeq,Cl) potential of +1.23V was applied to the anode where the chlorine gas

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

evolution takes place. Water/hydrogen reduction potential (E eq,H) of -0.828V was applied to
the cathode where reduction of water to hydrogen takes place releasing also hydroxide ions.
Therefore, the thermodynamically equilibrium cell potential becomes, E eq,cell = Eeq,Cl- Eeq,H =
+2.058V. However, at this potential, reaction does not take place due to some kinetic loss.
The chloride oxidation reaction at anode is very fast (reversible reaction) and departs very
little from the equilibrium potential. On the other hand, hydrogen evolution reaction is
inherently slow (irreversible reaction and the cathode material not being a perfect catalyst
results in a kinetic limitation) and requires a potential, E pol, significantly greater in magnitude
than the equilibrium potential (Eeq,cell) to achieve a reasonable current density to make up for
the kinetic losses and drive the reaction. This potential is called the overpotential and the
electrode is said to be polarized. Here, the cell is polarized to +10V vs the cell equilibrium to
drive the reaction. Thus, the overall cell potential or the electrode to electrode potential
becomes Ecell = Eeq,cell + Epol = +12.058V. Common Butler-Volmer equation

25

was used to

parameterize the slow hydrogen evolution reaction at cathode with an exchange current
density of 1mA/m2 on the reacting surfaces. Electrolyte conductivity of the free electrolyte is
defined as 5 S/m. A stationary study was performed to describe the steady state current in the
system.

Quantum chemical study of Cl2 splitting and HOCl formation was carried out with B3LYP
exchange correlation functional

26

and 6-31g(d) basis set on all atoms as implemented in

Gaussian 16 software.27 Bond distance between two chlorine atoms was perturbed to obtain
the potential energy diagram in presence of explicit water molecules.

Structure and sequence of the cell surface adhesion lectin protein lecA of Pseudomonous
auregionosa was obtained from Protein Data Bank (PDB ID: 4YWA). Structure and sequence
of the receptor binding domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2 was also obtained from the PDB (ID:
6LZG). Sequence alignment was performed using Clustal Omega web server.28 Similar
amino acids in the binding sites of the two proteins were mapped using PyMOL molecular
graphics software.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results and Discussion:
Initially the triboelectrical output of the TECF pairs has been investigated using a
indigenously built spring based experimental arrangement. Figure 1(a) shows the schematic
representation of the experimental set-up used for measuring the electrical output of
triboelectric devices. The mechanical pressing and releasing actions of the spring based
system lead to the contact and separation states of two layers. Initially, the triboelectrification has been investigated in three TECF pairs: nitrile-nylon, teflon-nylon and SRnylon. The active materials have been chosen based on their affinity towards positive and
negative charges following triboelectric series. As shown in Figure 1 (b) for all the three
pairs, recurring negative/positive pulses of open circuit voltage are observed upon repetitive
pressing/releasing actions (an enlarged view of nitrile-nylon system presented in the inset).
The Nitrile-Nylon TECF pair exhibits the lowest output voltage, while the SR-Nylon pair
showing the highest one. The SR-nylon pair displays a maximum open circuit voltage of ~ 20 V during the pressing action. The output generation by the tribo-system has been verified
by switching the polarity of the measuring instrument (Figure S1 in supporting information).
The origin of output voltage can be explained by the well established theory based on the
triboelectric charge generation and subsequent potential development, shown schematically
in the supporting information (Figure S2). On the other hand, the variation in output voltage
for the three pairs is attributed to the varying electron accepting or donating tendency, as
predicted by the triboelectric series. The power generation has been tested by varying the
load resistance (ranging from 45 kΩ to 15 MΩ) and the SR-nylon device displays a
maximum power of ~ 41 µW/cm2 at 200 kΩ, as presented in Figure S3. The voltage
generated by the contact electrification has been used to charge a commercial capacitor (0.26
F), as shown in Figure 1(c) using a rectifier circuit (shown in the inset). The repetitive
pressing leads to the charging of the capacitor with a development of ~ 65 and 74 V,
respectively, for teflon and SR based pairs within ~ 50 s. Multiple commercial LEDs can be
powered with bright intensity using the charged capacitor, as shown in the inset of Figure
1(c).

With an aim to deploy the TECF in wearable kits, the performance of the two triboelectric
materials has been checked upon rubbing/sliding action. The output voltage under different
rubbing arrangements of the contact layers are presented in Figure S4(a,b), while

the

charging profile of a capacitor under rubbing actions with different frequencies is shown in

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S4(c). Next, to generate a short circuit current between the tribo-layers, the contactseparation experiments have been performed in sliding mode with an intermediate medium
between the layers. The results of the sliding experiments in presence of deionized (DI) water
and sodium chloride (NaCl) electrolyte solution are presented in Figure 1(d). In contrast to air
medium, the voltage developed across the capacitor is quite low when the sliding experiments
are carried out in presence of DI water and NaCl solution. In both situations, there is a
signature of saturation. It indicates that the liquid medium present within the two dielectrics,
experiences two opposite type of charges at the two liquid/dielectric interfaces and thus
allows substantial electron flow leading to a situation of internal short circuit condition.
However, owing to the finite resistance of water or electrolyte solution, the potential doesn’t
drop to zero and thus a saturated value of voltage is maintained across the capacitor.

To visualize the contact electrification process in the presence of varying medium (dielectric)
between the tribo-layers, finite element simulation has been carried out using COMSOL
Multiphysics software. Figure 2(a,b) shows the potential distribution between the two
electrodes in air medium with a varying separation of 1.00 and 10.0 mm. It is observed that a
maximum potential difference of ~ 18 V can be achieved when the electrode separation
reaches 10 mm. This is because, as the two layers are separated, mechanical work has to be
done against the electric field and thus results in the increase in potential difference between
the top and bottom electrodes. On the other hand, the potential distribution becomes
negligible, under the same condition for the two triboelectric materials when the intervening
medium is replaced from air to water or an electrolyte solution (Figure 2(c)). These
calculated results are in agreement with our observed experimental results, with the output
voltage diminishing when the contact electrification experiment is performed in presence of
water or electrolyte medium, as shown in Figure 1(d). It is expected that the internal short
circuit leads to the electrolysis of the electrolyte solution, where the oxidation of chloride to
chlorine takes place at the anode. On the other hand, the reduction of water into hydrogen gas
takes place at the cathode along with the release of hydroxide ion. The solution of the
secondary current distribution calculation (Figure 2(d)) represents the electrolyte potential in
the cell and reveals a higher electrolyte potential in the anode side of the cell. The arrow plot
indicates the direction of the current flowing from anode to cathode. Electrolyte to electrode
potential difference at the cathode is 1.72 V, which corresponds to the kinetic loss of the
potential drop. Owing to this kinetic loss in the system, a large over-potential is required to

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

drive the reaction. Nevertheless, the evolution of the circulating current in TECF is quite
attractive for achieving self-sanitation effect, which will be discussed later.

The TECF has been successfully introduced in a functional prototype of personal protective
equipment in the form of hand gloves. In this context commercial nitrile gloves have been
modified by coating nylon and SR dots, as shown in the photograph presented in Figure 3(a).
The brighter and larger dots (size ~ 0.8-2.0 cm2) represent SR, while the lighter ones
correspond to nylon (size ~ 03-0.5 cm2). With such a design, the rubbing or tapping of the
two hands generate triboelectric charges. Further the coating of the gloves in a dotted fashion
allows the triboelectric charge generation even using a single hand, when the fingers and
palm of the user come in contact with each other. Particularly the design presented in Figure
S5 is useful for single hand operation. Figure 3(b) shows the open circuit output voltage
generated out of two alternative pairs of dots of nylon and SR rubbed with fingers. Upon
rubbing of the same pair of dots, an out voltage of ~20 V across the capacitor (0.26 F) can
be realized (as shown inset) within 50 s.

To realize the existence of current flow in the liquid medium, the TECF based gloves have
been rubbed in the presence of a redox dye. The redox characteristics of methylene blue
(MB) can be a good indicator of the existence of any current loop present in the
liquid/dielectric system

29

and its degradation through electrochemical route can ensure the

presence of a short circuit current. Figure 3(c) shows the absorption spectra of the MB dye
before and after rubbing with TECF based gloves. In the absorption spectra of virgin MB
(rubbing time zero), a prominent peak at ~ 662 nm and the shoulder at ~ 621 nm indicates the
absorption due to monomer and dimer, respectively.30 It is noticed that the rubbing for a
longer duration leads to the lowering of the absorption peak of MB indicating the degrading
tendency of the dye. The degradation percentage has been extracted from the residual MB %
as calculated from the absorbance values considering the relation:
𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑀𝐵 (%) =

𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙
× 100
𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙

where Abs represents the absorption at a particular wavelength. As observed in Figure 3(d),
the TECF based gloves can degrade ~ 50% of MB dye upon 20 min of rubbing. The
transformation of the coloured dye solution to a pale coloured one has also been observed by
naked eye, as presented in the inset of the figure. The degradation of the redox dye is
attributed to the induced current flow through the electrolyte solution on rubbing of TECF
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

based gloves. Such situation are associated to the indirect electrolysis, where less harmful
products are produced as compared to direct electrolysis process.31 In this case, it is expected
that the active chlorine in the form of hypochlorous acid or hypochlorite ions act as the
oxidizing agent to degrade MB dye. The dye degradation experiment has been further
confirmed with nylon and teflon layers as presented in Figure S6 (a,b). Apart from the
gradual lowering of the MB absorption peak, the development of an absorption peak of
leucomethylene blue (at ~ 268 nm) confirms the degradation of the MB solution (Figure S6
(c)). In order to ensure the role of the short circuit current, similar experiment has been
performed with teflon-teflon contact system. In this case, the signature of leucomethylene
blue related peak is absent in the absorption spectra, as shown in Figure S6(d). This reveals
the absence of any form of hypochlorous acid since the generation of a short circuit current is
not expected among teflon-teflon (same tribo-potential) pairs.

The formation of hypochlorous acid has also been substantiated through estimation and
quantification of free chlorine ions using DPD (N, N‐diethyl‐p‐phenylenediamine)
colorimetric and titrimetric methods. In general, HOCl and hypochlorite ions (OCl-), are
commonly referred as ‘free chlorine’. After rubbing the salt solution with TECF based gloves
for ~ 5 mins, DPD has been added to the salt solution. As shown in Figure 4(a), the
colourless salt solution turns pink upon addition of DPD. It is well established that free
chlorine can oxidize DPD to form Würster dye (which is Magenta in colour), as shown in
equation presented in the Figure 4(a).

The absorbance spectrum of the obtained pinkish solution (Figure 4(b)) shows the presence
of a doublet peak with maxima at ~ 511 and 551 nm, which is in accordance of the absorption
peak of Würster dye.32 The reduction of the Würster dye using a ferrous reducing agent via
titrimetric method has led to the reappearance of the initial colourless solution. The
disappearance of the doublet peak in the absorbance spectrum (Figure 4(b)) indicates the
regaining of the initial form of DPD. Additionally, such titrimetric analysis indicates the
presence of ~ 5 ppm of HOCl in the salt solution subjected to 5 min slow rubbing with TECF
based gloves. It is worth to mention that the concentration of HOCl produced in this process
is not harmful to human being even if it comes in direct contact with the skin.33

Next, to understand the formation of HOCl with TECF based gloves, the ongoing electrolysis
process has been revisited. During the electrolysis, water takes up electrons to produce
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

hydrogen gas and hydroxyl ions (OH-) at the cathode following equation (1). The OH- or Cl-,
present in the saline water gets attracted to the anode. At the anode, Cl- releases an electron to
form chloride radicals (Cl) and the combination of two Cl forms chlorine gas (Cl2), as in
equation (2). Such Cl2 gas upon splitting from the Cl-Cl bond, can combine with water to
form HOCl following equation (3).
At Cathode: 2 H2O + 2e- → 2 OH- +H2 -------- (1)
At Anode:

Cl- → Cl + eCl + Cl → Cl2

------------ (2)

Cl2 + H2O → HCl + HOCl ------- (3)
On the contrary at a lower salt concentration, OH- can release electrons to the anode to form
hydroxyl radicals (OH) and the combination of OH with Cl radicals can also yield HOCl, as
shown in equation (4).
In dilute solution: OH- → OH + eCl + OH → HOCl ---------- (4)
The radical reaction is extremely favourable and a barrier-less process with a free energy of 4.2 x 105 J/mole, as evident by the atomistic quantum chemical calculations. The formation
of HOCl out of Cl2 gas in presence of OH- ions on the anode surface, suggests a barrier less
spontaneous process (Figure 4(d)), while the figure inset shows the scheme of formation
mechanism of HOCl.

For demonstrating the antibacterial activity P. auregionosa has been investigated owing to its
similar amino acids in the binding sites of the proteins as that of SARS-CoV-2 virus. As can
be seen in Figure 5 (a- c), there is significant similarities in the amino acid sequence in lecA
of P. aeruginosa lectin and spike RBD of SARS-CoV-2. In order to evaluate antibacterial
efficacy of the developed TECF based gloves, the plate count method has been deployed. It is
evident from the plate count assay (Figure 6(a,b)) that in TECF based gloves, the bacterial
growth is ~69% lower compared to control (p<0.001) and ~64% lower compared to control
TECF (nylon-nylon) based system

(p<0.001). Thus it is quite evident that TECF based

gloves can hinder the growth of P. auregionosa through their anti-microbial activity and
hence can also be expected to be effective for viruses like CoV-2. In a similar fashion, the
anti-microbial activity of the TECF based gloves has been examined for E. coli. The
effectiveness of TECF can be realized from the perturbed growth of the bacteria as can be
observed in the plate count assay (Figure 6(c,d)). Furthermore, in order to evaluate inhibition
kinetics of the nanobiocomposites under dynamic condition as a function of time, submerged
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

culture or growth kinetics method is adopted. Figure 6(e) clearly shows that the growth of E.
coli subjected to the TECF is significantly retarded. The growth rate is ~6 times lower in case
of TECF compared to both usual control and TECF control (Figure 6(e)-inset) samples.
Further the number of dead cells and live cells in different matrix has been evaluated by
staining with DAPI and PI (Figure 6(f)). PI generally stains dead cells, whereas, DAPI stains
all nuclear material irrespective of their viability. The stained image (Figure 6(f)) of control
fabric and cotton fabric inoculated with bacteria shows more number of live cells than dead
cells in the ratio ~1.2. However, the number of living cells are significantly reduced in case
of TECF based gloves (~0.45). As apoptosis of cells are characterized by DNA fragmentation
and consequently loss of nuclear DNA content, the ability of PI to specifically label DNA
makes it useful to stain only the dead cells. The higher density of dead cells in the matrix
further implies that TECF based gloves induce membrane damage, resulting into a loss of
membrane potential leading to DNA fragmentation and subsequent staining of PI, thus
indicating their effectiveness as an anti-microbial agent.
The origin of the microbial activity of the TECF based gloves can be summarized in the
scheme presented in Figure 7. TECF layers can be compared to a commercial battery which
in presence of saline water can produce electrolyzed water. Finally to check the repeatability
of hypochlorous acid formation, the TECF based gloves have been tested for number of
continuous cycles for degrading the MB dye. Figure 8(a) shows the dye degradation for four
continuous cycles upon rubbing the gloves. With each cycle the initial amount of dye has
been added to compensate the degraded amount. The dye degradation as a result of
hypochlorous acid formation is evident from decrement in the absorbance value (at ~664 nm)
throughout all the operative cycles. The consistent rate constant of the ongoing reaction
(Figure 8(b)) indicates the consistent performance of the TECF based gloves. It is obvious
that rubbing the gloves in presence of salt water or normal tap water (which contains
dissolved salts) can trigger the formation of hypochlorous acid, which can work as a
disinfectant to save us from bacteria or viruses including the SARS-COV-2 virus. The study
demonstrates the self-sanitization capability of proposed TECF based gloves, making them
wearable for a longer period without disposing frequently and capable of preventing the
undesirable community spread of virus from otherwise uninfected frontline workers. Though
the proof of concept has been demonstrated only for hand gloves, the novel TECF based
wearables are potentially attractive for various other PPEs used for combating the community
spread of multiple range of viral diseases.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Conclusions:
We report on the fabrication of tribo-electroceutical fabric (TECF) based hand gloves with
self sanitization ability. The triboelectric charges from Silicone Rubber (SR)-Nylon pair has
been deployed to activate the self sanitization process. The power generation ability of the
SR-Nylon pair has been understood upon investigating the contact electrification process.
The TECF pair can generate as high as 20 V under and a maximum power of ~41 W/cm2
with a capability to charge a 0.26 F capacitor up to 65 V within 50 sec. Further generation of
a short circuit current has been witnessed when the TECF pair is rubbed in presence of saline
water. In this investigation, TECF pair based functional prototype gloves have been
developed on commercially available nitrile platform. The evolution of short circuit current
and subsequent formation of hypochlorous acid through the rubbing of such prototype gloves
has been realized. Further theoretical modelling has predicted that the event of TECF led
formation of hypochlorous acid is energetically favourable and a barrier-less process. It has
been found that rubbing of such TECF based gloves for 5 min can generate ~ 5 ppm of
hypochlorous acid. The self-sanitization ability of the TECF based gloves has been
demonstrated through antibacterial activities against bacteria like P. auregionosa and E. Coli.
The demonstration of excellent antibacterial activity against P. auregionosa suggests the
potential application of the TECF based gloves against the ongoing battle against
coronavirus. In addition to the use in common PPE, the developed method is expected to find
relevance in sanitization of various surfaces (e.g. table, chairs etc.) without using any
antibacterial chemical.

Conflicts of interest: There are no conflicts to declare

Acknowledgement: SB acknowledges CSIR for financial assistance under SRA (Scientists
Pool Scheme). SKP acknowledges INAE for Abdul Kalam Technology Innovation National
Fellowship. TSD acknowledges the funding by J. C. Bose Fellowship.

Supporting Information: Polarity based electrical output generation; mechanism of contact
electrification; output power and voltage generation across different resistances; Capacitor
charging through rubbing/sliding of Teflon-Nylon; Additional design of SR and Nylon coated
Nitrile gloves; dye degradation study through rubbing of Teflon-Nylon layers.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References:
1

M. A. Shereen, S. Khan, A. Kazmi, N. Bashir and R. Siddique, COVID-19 infection:

Origin, transmission, and characteristics of human coronaviruses, J. Adv. Res., 2020, 24, 9198.
2

S.L. Lockhart, L.V. Duggan, R.S. Wax, S, Saad and H. P. Grocott, Personal protective

equipment (PPE) for both anesthesiologists and other airway managers: principles and
practice during the COVID-19 pandemic, Can J Anesth/J Can Anesth, 2020, 67, 1005-1015.
3

E. Livingston, A. Desai and M. Berkwits, Sourcing Personal Protective Equipment During

the COVID-19 Pandemic, J. Am. Med. Ass., 2020, 323, 1912–1914.
4

N. J. Rowan and J. G. Laffey, Challenges and solutions for addressing critical shortage of

supply chain for personal and protective equipment (PPE) arising from Coronavirus
disease (COVID19) pandemic - Case study from the Republic of Ireland, Sci. Tot. Env.,
2020, 725, 138532.
5

J. C. Rubio-Romero, M. C. Pardo-Ferreira, J. A. Torrecilla-García and S. Calero-Castro,

Disposable masks: Disinfection and sterilization for reuse, and non-certified
manufacturing, in the face of shortages during the COVID-19 pandemic, Safety Sci., 2020,
129, 104830.
6

F. Yi, Z. Zhang, Z. Kang, Q. Liao and Y. Zhang, Recent Advances in Triboelectric

Nanogenerator‐Based Health Monitoring, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808849.
7

F. Yi, L. Lin, S. Niu, P. K. Yang, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Zi, J. Wang, Q. Liao, Y.

Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Stretchable-rubber-based triboelectric nanogenerator and its
application as self-powered body motion sensors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3688.
8

P. Vasandani, B. Gattu, J. Wu, Z.-H. Mao, W. Jia and M. Sun, Triboelectric Nanogenerator

Using Microdome‐Patterned PDMS as a Wearable Respiratory Energy Harvester, Adv.
Mater. Technol. 2017, 2, 1700014.
9

Z. L. Wang and A. C. Wang, On the origin of contact-electrification, Mat. Today, 2019,

30, 34-51.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

10

S. Wang, Y. Zi, Y. S. Zhou, S. Li, F. Fan, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Molecular surface

functionalization to enhance the power output of triboelectric nanogenerators, J. Mater.
Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3728-3734.
11

F.R. Fan, Z.Q. Tian and Z.L. Wang, Flexible triboelectric generator, Nano Energy, 2012, 1,

328-334.
12

S. Bayan, D. Bhattacharya, R. K. Mitra and S. K. Ray, Two-dimensional graphitic

carbon nitride nanosheets: a novel platform for flexible, robust and optically active
triboelectric nanogenerators, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 21334-21343.
13

X. Shi, S. Zhang and S. Gong, A self-powered and arch-structured triboelectric

nanogenerator for portable electronics and human-machine communication, J. Mater. Chem.
A, 2020, 8, 8997-9005.
14

J. Zhong, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhong, Q. Hu, B. Hu, Z. L. Wang and J. Zhou, Fiber-Based

Generator for Wearable Electronics and Mobile Medication, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6273.
15

Z. Lin, J. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhou, K. Meng, W. Wei, J. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Triboelectric

Nanogenerator Enabled Body Sensor Network for Self-Powered Human Heart-Rate
Monitoring, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8830.
16

C.-H. Chen, P.-W. Lee, Y.-H. Tsao and Z.-H. Lin, Utilization of self-powered

electrochemical systems: Metallic nanoparticle synthesis and lactate detection, Nano Energy,
2017, 42, 241.
17

Z. Li, H. Feng, Q. Zheng, H. Li, C. Zhao, H. Ouyang, S. Noreen, M. Yu, F. Su, R. Liu, L.

Li, Z. L. Wang and Z. Li, Photothermally tunable biodegradation of implantable triboelectric
nanogenerators for tissue repairing, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 390.
18

F. Arab Hassani, R. P. Mogan, G. G. L. Gammad, H. Wang, S.-C. Yen, N. V. Thakor, C.

Lee, Toward Self-Control Systems for Neurogenic Underactive Bladder: A Triboelectric
Nanogenerator Sensor Integrated with a Bistable Micro-Actuator, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3487.
19

Y. Feng, L. Ling, J. Nie, K. Han, X. Chen, Z. Bian, H. Li and Z. L. Wang, Self-Powered

Electrostatic Filter with Enhanced Photocatalytic Degradation of Formaldehyde Based on
Built-in Triboelectric Nanogenerators, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12411-12418.
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

20

G. Q. Gu, C. B. Han, J. J. Tian, C. X. Lu, C. He, T. Jiang, Z. Li and Z. L. Wang,

Antibacterial Composite Film-Based Triboelectric Nanogenerator for Harvesting Walking
Energy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 11882−11888.
21

X. He, H. Zou, Z. Geng, X. Wang, W. Ding, F. Hu, Y. Zi, C. Xu, S. L. Zhang, H. Yu, M.

Xu, W. Zhang, C. Lu and Z. L. Wang, A Hierarchically Nanostructured Cellulose FiberBased Triboelectric Nanogenerator for Self-Powered Healthcare Products, Adv. Funct.
Mater., 2018, 28, 1805540.
22

J. Song, L. Gao, X. Tao and L. Li, Ultra-flexible and large-area textile-based triboelectric

nanogenerators with a sandpaper-induced surface microstructure, Materials, 2018, 11, 2120.
23

24

L. Dhakar, F. E. H. Tay and C. Lee, J. Microelectromechanical Sys. 2015, 24, 91.

COMSOL Multiphysics Application Library, https://www.comsol.co.in/model/current-

distribution-in-a-chlor-alkali-membrane-cell-1813 (accessed September 2020).
25

J. Newman, K. E. Thomas.-Alyea, Electrochemical Systems (3rd ed.), John Wiley & Sons,

Hoboken, NJ, 2004.
26

S. Rani, D. Bagchi, U. Pal, M. Kumari, M. Sharma, A. Bera, J. Shabir, S. K. Pal, T. S.

Dasgupta and S. Mozumdar, The Role of Imidazolium-Based Surface-Active Ionic Liquid to
Restrain the Excited-State Intramolecular H-Atom Transfer Dynamics of Medicinal Pigment
Curcumin: A Theoretical and Experimental Approach, ACS Omega 2020, 5, 5582–25592.
27

E. M. Hussein, N. El Guesmi, Z. Moussa, U. Pal, S. K. Pal, T. S. Dasgupta and Saleh A.

Ahmed,

Unprecedented

Regio-

and

Stereoselective

Synthesis

of

Pyrene-Grafted

Dispiro[indoline-3,2′-pyrrolidine-3′,3″-indolines]: Expedient Experimental and Theoretical
Insights into Polar [3 + 2] Cycloaddition, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 24081–24094.
28

F. Sievers, A. Wilm, D. G. Dineen, T. J. Gibson, K. Karplus, W. Li, R. Lopez,

H. McWilliam, M. Remmert, J. Söding, J. D. Thompson and D. Higgins, Fast, scalable
generation of high-quality protein multiple sequence alignments using Clustal Omega, Mol.
Sys. Bio., 2011,7, 539.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

29

Riyanto and M. Mawazi, Electrochemical Degradation of Methylen Blue Using Carbon

Composite Electrode (C-PVC) in Sodium Chloride, IOSR J. Appl. Chem., 2015, 8, 31-40.
30

C. An, S. Peng and Y. Sun, Facile Synthesis of Sunlight‐Driven AgCl:Ag Plasmonic

Nanophotocatalyst, Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 2570-2574.
31

M. Panizza, A. Barbucci, R. Ricotti and G. Cerisola, Electrochemical degradation of

methylene blue, Sep. Purif. Tech. 2007, 54, 382–387.
32

L. L. Smith and F. L. Hill, Detection of sterol hydroperoxides on thin-layer chromatoplates

by means of the wurster dyes, J. Chromatography A. 1972, 66, 101-109.
33

B. Peck, B. Workeneh, H. Kadikoy, S. J. Patel and A. Abdellatif, Spectrum of sodium

hypochlorite toxicity in man—also a concern for nephrologists, NDT Plus, 2011, 4, 231-235.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figures and Tables

Figure 1: (a) Scheme of the tribo-device for contact electrification measurements, (b) Output
voltage pulses upon press-release action with the inset showing the output for nitrile-nylon
pair, (c) Charging of a capacitor (0.26 µF) by press-release action of teflon-nylon and SRnylon pairs, while the inset showing the scheme of a bridge rectifier circuit and intense glow
of multiple commercial LEDs through the charged capacitor. (d) Capacitor charging by
rubbing in presence of different mediums.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2: Finite element simulation of potential distribution in SR-Nylon TECF with
electrode separation of (a) 1.0 mm and (b) 10.0 mm. (c) Potential distribution in presence of
water/saline water between dielectrics with electrode separation of 10 mm. (d) Secondary
current distribution through saline water in the above case.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3: (a) A photograph of the functional prototype TECF based gloves, (b) Open circuit
output voltage due to rubbing of the pair of dots (picture at the inset), while the capacitor
charging by rubbing process is presented as the other inset, (c) Absorption spectra showing
the degradation of methylene blue dye through rubbing of TECF based gloves, (d) The
percentage degradation of methylene blue with different rubbing time, with insets presenting
the pictures of the dye before and after degradation.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4: (a) Formation of Würster dye on addition of DPD into salt solution, (b) Absorbance
of Würster dye and initial product, (c) Variation of total energy with inter atomic distance of
Cl and O. Inset represents a scheme of HOCl formation.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5: Comparison of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein receptor binding domain (RBD)
with the P. aeruginosa lectin lecA. (a) SARS-CoV-2 spike RBD with the binding site
residues highlighted in blue. (b) P. aeruginosa lecA with binding site residues highlighted in
blue. (c) Amino acid sequence comparison between lecA (PDB ID: 4YWA; chain A) and
SARS-CoV-2 spike RBD (PDB ID: 6LZG; chain B). Binding region is highlighted in blue.
Amino acids are written in one letter code; star (*) indicates identical amino acids; very
similar and similar amino acids are marked with colon (:) and dot (.), respectively.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6: Anti-microbial activity against P. auregionosa and E. coli bacteria. (a,c) Agar-plate
colony count assay, (b,d) Quantification of colonies counted in agar-plate assay. (e) Growth
curve of P. auregionosa. Inset shows relative growth rate compared to control and TECF
control samples.(f) DAPI/PI dual stained cells (P. auregionosa) observed under a
fluorescence microscope. Blue cells are stained with DAPI, while red are stained with PI. (g)
Ratio of live:dead bacterial cells as found in the DAPI/PI dual staining experiment.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 7: Schematic representation of self sanitization of TECF based gloves and the
illustration of electrolyzed water formation by a battery.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.23.432624; this version posted February 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 8: (a) MB dye degradation at different continuous cycles, (b) rate constant of the dye
degradation reaction.

26

