bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A rapid, highly sensitive and open-access SARS-CoV-2 detection assay
for laboratory and home testing
Max J. Kellner1,2,3#*, James J. Ross2#, Jakob Schnabl2#, Marcus P.S. Dekens1, Robert
Heinen1,2, Irina Grishkovskaya1, Benedikt Bauer1, Johannes Stadlmann1,2,4, Luis
Menéndez-Arias5, Robert Fritsche-Polanz6, Marianna Traugott7, Tamara Seitz7, Alexander
Zoufaly7, Manuela Födinger6,8, Christoph Wenisch7, Johannes Zuber1,9, Vienna Covid-19
Diagnostics Initiative (VCDI), Andrea Pauli1* & Julius Brennecke2*

1
2
3
4
5

6
7
8
9

Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Campus-ViennaBiocenter 1, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna BioCenter
(VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.
Department of Chemistry, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna; Muthgasse 18,
1190 Vienna, Austria.
Centro de Biología Molecular ‘Severo Ochoa’ (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas and
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid), c/ Nicolás Cabrera 1, Campus de Cantoblanco-UAM, 28049
Madrid, Spain.
Institute of Laboratory Diagnostics, Klinik Favoriten, 1100 Vienna, Austria.
4th Medical Department with Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, Klinik Favoriten,
1100 Vienna, Austria.
Sigmund Freud Private University, 1020 Vienna, Austria.
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria.

# equal contribution
* corresponding authors
Correspondence should be addressed to:
mkellner@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk, andrea.pauli@imp.ac.at, julius.brennecke@imba.oeaw.ac.at

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

VCDI author list
Stefan Ameres2, Benedikt Bauer1, Nikolaus Beer1,2,10, Katharina Bergauer1, Wolfgang Binder11,
Claudia Blaukopf2, Boril Bochev1,2,10, Julius Brennecke2, Selina Brinnich12, Aleksandra
Bundalo1, Meinrad Busslinger1, Aleksandr Bykov1, Tim Clausen1,9, Luisa Cochella1, Geert de
Vries2, Marcus Dekens1, David Drechsel1, Zuzana Dzupinkova1,2,10, Michaela Eckmann-Mader12,
Ulrich Elling2, Michaela Fellner1, Thomas Fellner12, Laura Fin1, Bianca Valeria Gapp2, Gerlinde
Grabmann12, Irina Grishkovskaya1, Astrid Hagelkruys2, Bence Hajdusits1, David Haselbach1,
Robert Heinen1,2,10, Louisa Hill1, David Hoffmann2, Stefanie Horer1, Harald Isemann1, Robert
Kalis1, Max Kellner1,2, Juliane Kley1, Thomas Köcher12, Alwin Köhler11, Darja Kordic1,
Christian Krauditsch2, Sabina Kula1,2,10, Richard Latham1, Marie-Christin Leitner2, Thomas
Leonard11, Dominik Lindenhofer2, Raphael Arthur Manzenreither2, Karl Mechtler1, Anton
Meinhart1, Stefan Mereiter2, Thomas Micheler12, Paul Moeseneder2, Simon Nimpf1, Magnus
Nordborg10, Egon Ogris11, Michaela Pagani1, Andrea Pauli1, Jan-Michael Peters1,9, Petra
Pjevac13,14, Clemens Plaschka1, Martina Rath1, Daniel Reumann2, Sarah Rieser1, Marianne
Rocha-Hasler13, Alan Rodriguez1,2, James Julian Ross2, Harald Scheuch1,2,10, Karina Schindler1,
Clara Schmidt2, Hannes Schmidt13, Jakob Schnabl2, Stefan Schüchner11, Tanja Schwickert1,
Andreas Sommer12, Johannes Stadlmann15, Alexander Stark1,9, Peter Steinlein1,2,10, Simon
Strobl12, Qiong Sun1, Wen Tang1, Linda Trübestein11, Christian Umkehrer1, Sandor UrmosiIncze12, Kristina Uzunova1,2,10, Gijs Versteeg16, Alexander Vogt12, Vivien Vogt1, Michael
Wagner13,14, Martina Weissenboeck1, Barbara Werner12, Ramesh Yelagandula2, Johannes Zuber1,9
1
2
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1, 1030
Vienna, Austria.
Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna Biocenter (VBC),
Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria.
Gregor Mendel Institute (GMI), Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3,
1030 Vienna, Austria.
Max Perutz Labs, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9/3, 1030 Vienna,
Austria.
Vienna Biocenter Core Facilities GmbH (VBCF), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
Centre for Microbiology and Environmental Systems Science, University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, 1090
Vienna, Austria.
Joint Microbiome Facility of the University of Vienna and Medical University of Vienna, Althanstrasse 14, 1090
Vienna, Austria.
Institute of Biochemistry, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences (BOKU), Muthgasse 18, 1190
Vienna, Austria.
Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology, and Genetics, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna
Biocenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9, 1030 Vienna, Austria.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract

Global efforts to combat the Covid-19 pandemic caused by the beta coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 are
currently based on RT-qPCR-based diagnostic tests. However, their high cost, moderate throughput
and reliance on sophisticated equipment limit widespread implementation. Loop-mediated
isothermal amplification after reverse transcription (RT-LAMP) is an alternative detection method
that has the potential to overcome these limitations. Here we present a rapid, robust, highly
sensitive and versatile RT-LAMP based SARS-CoV-2 detection assay. Our forty-minute procedure
bypasses a dedicated RNA isolation step, is insensitive to carry-over contamination, and uses a
hydroxynaphthol blue (HNB)-based colorimetric readout, which allows robust SARS-CoV-2
detection from various sample types. Based on this assay we have substantially increased sensitivity
and scalability by a simple nucleic acid enrichment step (bead-LAMP), established a pipette-free
version for home testing (HomeDip-LAMP), and developed a version with open source enzymes
that could be produced in any molecular biology setting. Our advanced, universally applicable RTLAMP assay is a major step towards population-scale SARS-CoV-2 testing.
Keywords: Covid-19 diagnostics, RT-LAMP, Coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, isothermal amplification, open-source

Introduction
The Covid-19 pandemic poses unprecedented
global health and economic challenges. The underlying
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (Covid-19) is caused by
infection with the single-stranded, positive-sense RNA
beta-coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 (Gorbalenya et al.,
2020). In the absence of effective treatment or vaccines,
efforts to contain the spread of SARS-CoV-2 rely on
systematic viral testing, contact tracing and isolation of
infected individuals (Ferretti et al., 2020). Since SARSCoV-2 carriers can be asymptomatic despite being
infectious, a key challenge is to develop affordable and
scalable technologies that enable population-wide
testing (L. Zou et al., 2020). The gold-standard
technique to detect an acute SARS-CoV-2 infection
relies on nucleic acid diagnostics by RT-qPCR, which
has been the method of choice due to its large dynamic
range and high specificity (Corman et al., 2020).
However, the need for specialized equipment and
associated high cost make this technology unsuitable for
population-scale testing, low resource settings and home
testing. Moreover, slow turn-around times of several
hours limit the applicability of RT-qPCR-based testing
for situations where rapid screening is needed (CDC,
2020).
Isothermal nucleic acid amplification techniques,
such as RPA (Recombinase-based Polymerase
Amplification) (Piepenburg, Williams, Stemple, &
Armes, 2006) or LAMP (Loop mediated isothermal
amplification) (Notomi et al., 2000), have great
potential to fill the technological gap required for large
scale testing strategies as they enable rapid nucleic acid
diagnostics with minimal equipment requirement
(Niemz, Ferguson, & Boyle, 2011). Coupled to a reverse
transcriptase step that converts viral RNA into single
stranded DNA, several LAMP protocols for SARSCoV-2 detection have been developed and applied to
patient testing (Anahtar et al., 2020; Butler et al., 2020;
Rabe & Cepko, 2020). Innovations such as a
colorimetric read-out or the combination of RT-LAMP

with specific CRISPR-Cas enzymatic detection has
further simplified the assay and enhanced specificity,
respectively (Zhang, Ren, et al., 2020; Broughton et al.,
2020). However, several challenges remain, especially
in terms of assay robustness, compatibility with crude
patient samples, limitations in sensitivity, compatibility
with home testing setups, and access to the patentprotected gold-standard RT-LAMP enzymes, which
poses a central bottleneck for low-income countries.
Here, we present a highly versatile RT-LAMP assay
that overcomes the afore mentioned limitations of
current isothermal SARS-CoV-2 detection methods. We
adopted an approach to greatly reduce the risk of carryover contamination for SARS-CoV-2 testing, increased
the robustness of the assay across all tested sample types
and buffer conditions by using hydroxynaphthol blue
(HNB) as colorimetric readout, boosted sensitivity by at
least ten-fold by combining RT-LAMP with a simple
RNA enrichment procedure, benchmarked a pipette-free
method that enables sensitive and specific detection of
SARS-CoV-2 in home settings, and finally present a
powerful RT-LAMP assay that builds exclusively on
open-source enzymes.

Results
A rapid, sensitive and specific RT-LAMP setup for
SARS-CoV-2 detection
SARS-CoV-2 diagnostics relies on detection of
viral RNA through reverse transcription and subsequent
amplification of small parts of the 30 kilobase viral
genome. Considering that in SARS-CoV-2 infected
human cells the various subgenomic viral RNAs are
expressed at different levels (Kim et al., 2020), we
benchmarked six published SARS-CoV-2 specific
primer sets (see Materials and Methods) based on their
reported high sensitivities targeting different regions of
the viral genome: the 5'-located ORF1ab gene, the
envelope E gene and the most 3'-located N gene
encoding the nucleocapsid protein (Figure 1A)
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1: A sensitive, robust RT-LAMP assay compatible with crude patient samples.
A) Schematic illustrating loop-mediated amplification (LAMP) of SARS-CoV-2 RNA and the regions targeted in this study
(Orf1ab, E and N genes; depicted above). Each target region is recognized by a defined set of primers (B3, LB, BIP, LF, FIP,
F3). The RNA template (red) is reverse transcribed and displaced after first-strand synthesis; the outer primer binding sites are
added in the subsequent amplification step. The resulting dumbbell DNA structure acts as template for further rounds of
amplification, ultimately leading to high molecular weight amplicons. B) Readout of a real-time fluorescence RT-LAMP
reaction using 500 copies of synthetic SARS-CoV-2 (red) or water as non-targeting control (NTC, black) as input. ‘Time to
threshold’ indicates the time at which the fluorescence value reaches threshold level (equivalent to Cq value in RT-qPCR
assays), ‘end-point RFU’ indicates the fluorescence value (FAM filter set, absorption/emission at 494 nm/518 nm) after 35
minutes reaction time (used throughout this study unless indicated otherwise); RFU: relative fluorescence units. C)
Performance of the three top primer sets for RT-LAMP-based SARS-CoV-2 detection. End-point relative fluorescence units
(RFUs) of RT-LAMP reactions (in duplicates) using the indicated primer sets and serially diluted synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA
standard as input. Water was used as no-target control (NTC). D) Cartoon indicating the workflow for SARS-CoV-2 detection
by either RT-LAMP or 1-step RT-qPCR from patient samples (nasopharyngeal swab or gargle) with prior RNA isolation. E)
Comparison of RT-LAMP and RT-qPCR performance. Plotted are RT-LAMP end-point fluorescence values after 35 minutes
versus the respective RT-qPCR Cq values. RNA was derived from gargle (green) or nasopharyngeal swabs (black); two notarget controls were included (black cross). Reactions in which no amplification was recorded are labelled as qPCR negative.
F) Predictive agreement between RT-LAMP and 1-step RT-qPCR assays. Shown are percentages of positive (detected in RTLAMP and RT-qPCR, black bars) and negative (not detected in either RT-LAMP or RT-qPCR, purple bars) predictive
agreement for sample groups (defined by RT-qPCR-derived Cq values) between RT-LAMP (using E- and/or N-gene primers)
and 1-step RT-qPCR. G) Performance of different crude sample preparation methods in RT-LAMP. Shown are end-point
relative fluorescence units (RFUs) for RT-LAMP reactions targeting human RNAseP on sample inputs derived from defined
numbers of HEK293 cells mixed 1:1 with indicated 2x buffers (extracted RNsA served as a positive control). H) Cartoon
indicating the workflow for RT-LAMP using QuickExtract crude lysate as sample input. I) Comparison of QuickExtract crude
sample input versus extracted RNA as input using 1-step RT-qPCR. Covid-19 patient nasopharyngeal swabs or gargle samples
(color coded according to the indicated collection medium) were either processed with the QuickExtract workflow (crude
sample input) or RNA was extracted using an automated King Fisher RNA bead purification protocol. Reactions in which no
amplification was recorded are labelled as qPCR negative. J) Performance of RT-LAMP with QuickExtract treated crude
Covid-19 patient sample input (same samples as in I). Depicted is the correlation of Cq values from RT-qPCR performed on
QuickExtract treated samples versus corresponding end-point relative fluorescence units (RFUs) from RT-LAMP reactions.

(Broughton et al., 2020; Rabe & Cepko, 2020; Zhang,
Odiwuor, et al., 2020; Zhang, Ren, et al., 2020). We
used RNA extracted from nasopharyngeal swabs
obtained from Covid-19 patients or confirmed SARSCoV-2 negative individuals (negative controls) and a
SARS-CoV-2 RNA standard to determine primer
specificity and sensitivity in RT-LAMP reactions with
fluorometric real-time readout. None of the six primer
sets resulted in non-specific amplification within the
first 50 minutes in negative controls. In contrast, when
using patient RNA or synthetic SARS-CoV-2 standard
as input, robust target amplification occurred after 10-20
minutes (Figure 1B, S1A, B). We conclude that RTLAMP alone, without additional detection steps, is
highly specific in complex human RNA samples.
Throughout this study, we therefore recorded
fluorescent real-time measurements or performed endpoint analyses after 30-35 minutes reaction time.
Three primer sets enabled SARS-CoV-2 detection
down to ~16 copies per reaction (~8 copies/µl sample
input): As1, E1 (NEB) and N2 (DETECTR) targeting
the Orf1ab, E- and N-gene, respectively (Figure 1C,
S1B) (Broughton et al., 2020; Rabe & Cepko, 2020;
Zhang, Ren, et al., 2020). As previously reported
(Anahtar et al., 2020; Rabe & Cepko, 2020; Zhang,
Odiwuor, et al., 2020), RT-LAMP reactions with less
than ~100 target molecules exhibited stochastic on-off
outcomes. We therefore defined 100 copies per reaction
as our robust limit of detection. When tested with a
diluted patient sample, the E1 (NEB) and N2
(DETECTR) primers performed best with robust
detection of SARS-CoV-2 up to Cq values of ~33
(sporadic detection up to Cq 35) (Figure S1B).

We next compared our RT-LAMP setup with onestep RT-qPCR, using RNA isolated from nasopharyngeal swabs or gargle lavage from Covid-19
patients as input (Figure 1D-F). Using E1 or N2 primer
sets for RT-LAMP, we achieved sensitive and specific
detection of SARS-CoV-2 in patient samples with RTqPCR measured Cq values of up to ~35 (~25 copies per
reaction), independent of the patient sample type
(Figure 1E). We obtained 100% positive predictive
agreement rates between RT-LAMP and RT-qPCR up to
Cq 33 (~100 copies per reaction) and 100% negative
predictive agreement rates for qPCR negative samples
(Figure 1F). E1 and N2 primer sets performed equally
well, with a robust limit of detection of Cq 33-34
(Figure 1F). As shown recently (Zhang, Ren, et al.,
2020), different primer sets can be combined in RTLAMP reactions in order to reduce the false negative
rate caused by suboptimal sample quality or by
mutations in the viral genome coinciding with primer
binding sites (Artesi et al., 2020).
A major bottleneck of certified RT-qPCR-based
SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid detection assays is their
dependence on time-consuming and expensive RNA
purification from patient samples. Inspired by recent
findings (Ladha, Joung, Abudayyeh, Gootenberg, &
Zhang, 2020; Rabe & Cepko, 2020), we assessed
whether direct sample input/lysis conditions are
compatible with sensitive RT-LAMP. Besides simple
heat inactivation, we tested two previously published
lysis and sample inactivation buffers, namely DNA
QuickExtract (Lucigen) (Ladha et al., 2020) and the
‘Cells-to-Ct’ lysis buffer (Joung et al., 2017). To assess
different lysis conditions, we compared crude lysates
from serially diluted HEK293 cells to isolated RNA
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

from equivalent numbers of cells as input for RT-LAMP
reactions targeting the human reference gene RNaseP
POP7 (Figure 1G). A five-minute incubation of patient
samples with QuickExtract at 95°C performed equally
well compared to a standard Trizol RNA extraction step
(Ladha et al., 2020) (Figure 1G). Follow-up experiments
substantiated that QuickExtract, in combination with
heat treatment, preserves RNA integrity even under
conditions where exogenous RNase A was added
(Figure S2).
To benchmark QuickExtract solution on Covid-19
patient samples, we performed RT-qPCR on either
purified patient RNA or crude QuickExtract lysate
(Figure 1H). Irrespective of the sample type (swab or
gargle), we observed a strong agreement between the
corresponding RT-qPCR measurements (Figure 1I).
Only samples with very low viral titers (high Cq values)
became undetectable in the QuickExtract samples,
presumably as ~20-fold less patient material equivalent
was used compared to reactions using isolated RNA as
input (Figure 1I). Importantly, RT-LAMP performed
equally well to extracted RNA when using QuickExtract
crude sample input across different transport media and
different sample types (swabs in viral transport medium
(VTM), swabs in 0.9% NaCl, swabs or gargle in HBSS
buffer), with a limit of RT-qPCR-measured Cq values of
33 (~100 copies) and identical predictive performance
rates (Figure 1J). No false positives were observed,
demonstrating the high specificity and sensitivity of RTLAMP on crude samples lysed and inactivated with
QuickExtract solution. Heat inactivation with

QuickExtract, in combination with fluorescent detection
of the RT-LAMP reaction, is therefore a rapid method to
detect SARS-CoV-2 in diverse patient samples.
An efficient cross-contamination prevention system
LAMP results in the billion-fold amplification of
target molecules. This poses a serious yet rarely
mentioned risk, as only minor work-place or reagent
contaminations with LAMP reactions will translate into
large numbers of false positive assays (Kwok &
Higuchi, 1989). Inspired by previous studies, we tested
whether RT-LAMP based SARS-CoV-2 detection can be
combined with a contamination prevention system that
utilizes dUTP and thermolabile Uracil DNA
Glycosylase (UDG) (Hsieh, Mage, Csordas, Eisenstein,
& Tom Soh, 2014; Tang, Chen, & Diao, 2016). In this
system, dUTP is incorporated into LAMP amplicons
making them susceptible for Uracil-base cleavage in
subsequent LAMP reactions containing the UDG
enzyme (Figure 2A). To mimic carry-over contaminations from amplicons of prior LAMP reactions, we
supplemented pre-RT-LAMP reactions (based on the
key enzymes RTx and Bst 2.0) with dUTP, followed by
dilution and addition to reactions in the presence versus
absence of thermolabile UDG (Figure 2A).
Thermolabile UDG is active at room temperature yet
completely inactivated at temperatures above 50°C. In
the absence of UDG, addition of a one billion-fold
diluted pre-LAMP product resulted in indistinguishable
signal in target vs. non-target conditions, illustrating the
danger of cross-contamination. In contrast, in the

Figure 2: The dUTP/UDG system prevents carry-over cross-contamination in RT-LAMP.
A) Schematic depicting the principle of the dUTP/UDG system in preventing carry-over contamination. dUTP is
incorporated into LAMP amplicons in a primary reaction (pre-RT-LAMP). dUTP containing LAMP products carried over
into a subsequent reaction (RT-LAMP) are cleaved by UDG prior to LAMP-based amplification, making them unavailable as
amplification templates. This allows robust discrimination between target and no-target control (left), which is challenged by
cross-over contamination in the absence of UDG-mediated cleavage (right). B) The dUTP/UDG system minimizes cross-over
contamination. Shown are performances (time to threshold) of RT-LAMP reactions in the absence (left) or presence (right) of
thermolabile UDG when using synthetic SARS-CoV-2 (filled circles) or water (open circles) as input. Reactions were
supplemented with the indicated dilution of a dUTP-containing pre-LAMP reaction. All reactions were performed in
duplicates.
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

presence of UDG, a 5-minute pre-incubation step at
room temperature reduced the amplifiable carry-over
product by more than 1,000-fold, enabling specific
detection in the presence of considerable cross-over
contamination product (Figure 2B). We conclude that
the dUTP/UDG system is compatible with RT-LAMP
reactions based on Bst 2.0 and RTx and profoundly
lowers the risk of false positives.
A robust colorimetric RT-LAMP readout compatible
with various input samples
So far, we used real-time fluorescence (based on an
intercalating DNA dye) to assess RT-LAMP-based
target amplification. Given its dependency on
specialized equipment, this detection method is
prohibitive for low-resource settings or home-testing.
Colorimetric detection resulting in a visual color change
upon target DNA amplification provides an attractive,
low-cost alternative (Goto, Honda, Ogura, Nomoto, &
Hanaki, 2009; Tanner, Zhang, & Evans, 2015). Two
colorimetric concepts are compatible with RT-LAMP:
First, pH dependent dye indicators such as Phenol Red
induce a color change from pink to yellow when the pH
value of the reaction decreases upon DNA amplification
(Tanner et al., 2015). Due to its pronounced color
change, this is the most commonly used readout for RTLAMP assays. However, the pH-change dependent
readout requires a weakly buffered reaction solution,
which poses a great challenge when using crude sample
inputs with variable pH. A second colorimetric assay
utilizes metal ion indicators such as hydroxynaphthol
blue (HNB), which changes color from purple to blue
upon a drop in free Mg2+ ions, which form a Mgpyrophosphate precipitate upon DNA amplification
(Figure 3A) (Goto et al., 2009).
Colorimetric readout, either via Phenol Red or the
HNB dye, can be performed simultaneously with the
fluorescent readout in the same RT-LAMP reactions.
When using synthetic SARS-CoV-2 standard in water as
input, both colorimetric readouts mirrored the
fluorescent results (Figure 3B, S3). However, when
using crude QuickExtract lysate as input, the pHdependent readout failed or was inconclusive despite
successful LAMP-mediated target amplification as
evidenced by the fluorescent readout (Figure 3C, S3). In
contrast, the HNB-dependent color change was not
affected by QuickExtract solution, even when mixed
with various sample buffers such as VTM, NaCl or
HBSS (Figure 3C). We suspect that the QuickExtract
solution is strongly buffered thereby preventing the
required pH change that is typically generated during
LAMP.
When tested in a clinical setting, RT-LAMP
coupled to the HNB readout enabled robust detection of
SARS-CoV-2 in patient samples with RT-qPCR values
of up to ~34 (corresponding to ~50 copies per reaction
of reference standard) with no false positives and 100%
positive predictive agreement up to Cq 33 (~100 copies
per reaction) (Figure 3D, E, S3A). The detection
outcome was independent of the sample type, and we
successfully used QuickExtract lysate from
nasopharyngeal swabs, gargle solution or sputum
samples (Figure 3D, S3B). We conclude that pHindependent dye formats, such as HNB, are superior in

colorimetric RT-LAMP detection assays where strongly
buffered or slightly acidic crude sample preparations are
used as inputs.
To accurately determine the sensitivity threshold of
HNB RT-LAMP, we generated a systematic dilution
series of a positive Covid-19 patient sample in
QuickExtract and used absorbance at 650 nm in a
microplate reader to unambiguously determine the color
change (Goto et al., 2009). We tested all dilutions by
RT-qPCR and HNB RT-LAMP in parallel (Figure 3F,
G). When considering samples with 650 nm absorbance
values higher than for any co-measured negative
control, HNB RT-LAMP allowed specific detection of
samples up to Cq 34.9 with no false positives (Figure
3F, G). We conclude that, while read-out by
fluorescence is the method of choice for highthroughput settings due to the higher dynamic range,
direct absorbance measurement of the HNB-induced
color change offers an attractive, alternative readout for
large numbers of RT-LAMP reactions performed in
parallel.
An RT-LAMP assay with drastically increased
sensitivity
SARS-CoV-2 RT-LAMP assays are roughly tenfold less sensitive than conventional RT-qPCR assays.
When using crude samples as input (i.e. eliminating the
RNA concentration step by a dedicated extraction),
sensitivity is further lowered, resulting in a substantial
false negative rate. To increase the sensitivity of our RTLAMP assay, we set out to establish a simple and rapid
nucleic acid enrichment step. We used carboxylated
magnetic beads to concentrate RNA from QuickExtract
lysates on the bead surface in the presence of crowding
agents and salt (Hawkins, O'Connor-Morin, Roy, &
Santillan, 1994). We further reasoned that, instead of
eluting RNA from the beads, adding the RT-LAMP mix
directly to the dry beads should increase the number of
viral RNA molecules per reaction by orders of
magnitude, depending on the sample input volume
(Figure 4A). We tested this approach, termed beadLAMP, by using either bead-enriched or non-enriched
synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA in HeLa cell QuickExtract
lysate as RT-LAMP input. Indeed, bead-LAMP using 50
µl QuickExtract lysate as input displayed an at least tenfold increase in sensitivity, corresponding to a robust
limit of detection of ~5 copies per reaction (4/4
replicates; Cq value of 37-38) (Figure 4B-D). In three
out of four replicates, bead-LAMP enabled detection of
as few as 2 copies/µl, and in one replicate even a single
copy/µl of sample input could be detected (Figure 4B,
C). Overall, bead-LAMP drastically improved
performance for samples with low viral titers that were
non-detectable with regular RT-LAMP (Figure 4B, C, E)
and reached RT-qPCR-like sensitivity (Figure 4E). The
fluorescence readout of the bead-LAMP reaction
exhibited overall lower values yet similar kinetics as
regular RT-LAMP (Figure S6B), indicating that beadLAMP is compatible with real-time kinetic analysis
alongside colorimetric end-point detection (Figure 4B,
C). After bead enrichment the recovery rates of
synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA determined by RT-qPCR
ranged from 68-98%, showing the high efficiency of the
approach (Figure S4).
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3: HNB RT-LAMP enables colorimetric SARS-CoV-2 detection from crude patient samples.
A) Schematic illustrating the properties of pH-sensitive (Phenol Red, top) and Mg2+ concentration sensitive (hydroxynaphthol
blue, HNB, bottom) colorimetric readouts for LAMP. Phenol Red interacts with protons (H+) generated during DNA amplification,
which causes a color change from pink/red to yellow (right: the color range of the Phenol Red-containing colorimetric RT-LAMP
mastermix (NEB) at relevant pH values). Magnesium pyrophosphate precipitate produced during DNA amplification lowers the
free Mg2+ concentration, causing a color change of the HNB dye from purple to sky-blue (right: the color range of solutions with
HNB at relevant Mg2+ concentrations). B) Influence of QuickExtract on HNB RT-LAMP performance. Shown is the colorimetric
HNB readout of RT-LAMP reactions (after 35 minutes; in duplicates) using indicated copy numbers of SARS-CoV-2 RNA
standard in water or QuickExtract and the corresponding co-measured end-point fluorescence values (heatmaps are shown below).
C) QuickExtract lysis buffer is compatible with HNB colorimetric readout but incompatible with Phenol Red colorimetric readout
of RT-LAMP reactions. Shown are RT-LAMP reaction outcomes (upper panel: colorimetric readout after 35 minutes, lower panel:
fluorescent end-point values) when using 500 copies of synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA standard in indicated sample media diluted
1:1 with water or 2x QuickExtract solution as input. D) HNB RT-LAMP performance on Covid-19 patient samples lysed in
QuickExtract solution. Shown is the binary colorimetric HNB readout of RT-LAMP reactions (N gene) using indicated patient
samples (sputum (orange), swab (black), gargle (green)) plotted against the corresponding Cq values from RT-qPCR. E) Predictive
agreement between HNB RT-LAMP and RT-qPCR assays using patient samples lysed in QuickExtract solution. Samples were
grouped according to their RT-qPCR Cq values, and the percentage of detected (black) and not detected (purple) samples (based on
HNB RT-LAMP) of the total number of samples per group was plotted. F) Schematic illustrating the serial dilution grid of a
Covid-19 positive patient sample (Cq of 28) in QuickExtract. The heatmap (left) indicates Cq values determined by 1-step RTqPCR (values above Cq 40 are indicated by black crosses). The grid (right) indicates the binary read-out (black: detected; white:
not detected) of HNB RT-LAMP as measured by 650 nm absorbance). G) Scatter plot showing HNB RT-LAMP performance
(measured by 650 nm absorbance) versus qPCR-determined Cq values on the serial dilution grid shown in F, including no-target
controls (NTC) and a Covid-19-negative patient sample (qPCR negative). Horizontal dashed line indicates the maximum
absorbance obtained for any negative control (y = 0.602).

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We next tested bead-LAMP on a dilution series of a
Covid-19 patient sample in QuickExtract (Cq of ~30)
and observed a similar ten-fold increased sensitivity,
corresponding to a limit of detection of ~Cq 37 in
patient samples (Figure S5A). When performing beadLAMP on individual Covid-19 patient samples, we
found a dramatic improvement in the diagnostic
performance. With the exception of one Covid-19
positive patient that we were not able to detect via RTLAMP for unknown reasons, all qPCR positive samples

(with Cq values up to ~38) were identified while no
qPCR negative sample was detected (Figure 4F, G).
The boost in sensitivity opened the door for
establishing a pooled RT-LAMP testing strategy. We
mixed one crude Covid-19 positive patient gargle
sample in QuickExtract (Cq ~28) with different volumes
of a pool of 95 crude SARS-CoV-2 negative gargle
samples in QuickExtract (Figure 4H, S5B). Each pool
was tested by standard RT-LAMP and bead-LAMP.
Without bead enrichment, pools with at least 12.5% (1

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4: bead-LAMP increases sensitivity of RT-LAMP assays.
A) Schematic illustrating the bead-LAMP workflow in comparison to the regular RT-LAMP workflow. AMPure XP RNA capture
beads were used at 0.6x of the volume of the sample lysate (0.6x beads). B) Performance of bead-LAMP (+ bead enrichment) vs
regular RT-LAMP (- bead enrichment) using a synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA standard spiked-in at the indicated concentration in
the original sample into HeLa cell QuickExtract (QE) lysate. 50 µl of crude sample in QE, adjusted to 100 µl final volume with
1x HBSS was used for bead-enrichment. The image shows HNB end-point colorimetric readout of bead-LAMP and RT-LAMP
reactions; a magnified view of four wells with beads (top: 5 copies/µl is sky-blue; 2 copies/µl is purple) and without beads
(bottom: both are purple) is shown on the right. All reactions were performed in technical quadruplicates. C) End-point relative
fluorescence units (RFUs), with or without prior bead enrichment for reactions shown in B. D) Performance of 1-step RT-qPCR
using 2 µl of the same crude sample preparations as used in B and C. E) Positive detection rates of 1-step RT-qPCR, RT-LAMP
and bead-LAMP for reactions shown in B, C and D. F) Performance of bead-LAMP on a Covid-19 positive panel of patient
samples in QuickExtract. The images depict the HNB colorimetric end-point readout, and the heatmaps underneath show comeasured end-point relative fluorescence units (RFUs) of RT-LAMP reactions, with or without prior bead enrichment, using eight
Covid-19-positive and five negative samples as input (P1-P11, Covid-19 patient sample; CS42 and CS46, healthy controls). 100
µl of crude sample in QE was used for bead-enrichment. Corresponding Cq values were obtained by measuring 2 µl of the same
QuickExtract (QE) patient samples by 1-step RT-qPCR prior to bead enrichment. G) Bead enrichment increases the sensitivity of
RT-LAMP. Patient samples from F) were classified as detected or not detected based on the HNB RT-LAMP assay before (left,
open circles) and after (right, filled circles) bead enrichment and plotted against their respective Cq values obtained from
QuickExtract (QE) RT-qPCR (Cq values for qPCR negative samples are labelled as not detected, ND). H) Schematic illustrating
the pooled testing strategy using bead-LAMP. A single Covid-19 positive patient gargle sample in QuickExtract (Cq ~28; black)
was mixed with different amounts of 95 pooled SARS-CoV-2 negative samples (all in QuickExtract; white) yielding seven
sample pools with indicated ratios of positive to negative samples. 40 to 100 µl of crude sample in QE was used for beadenrichment depending on the pool sizes. For lysate volumes smaller than 100 µl, 1x HBSS was added to obtain a final volume of
100 µl for bead-LAMP. I) Shown is the performance (measured as time to threshold) of bead-LAMP (filled circles) compared to
regular RT-LAMP (open circles) on the patient pools defined in H. ND = not detected within 60 minutes of RT-LAMP incubation.
J) Images showing the endpoint HNB colorimetric readout (left) and fluorescent readout (endpoint RFU; right) of samples
measured in I) with or without prior bead enrichment.

out of 8) of Covid-19 positive sample were identified. In
contrast, bead-LAMP enabled detection of all pools
containing SARS-CoV-2, even the pool containing just
1% (1 out of 96) of Covid-19 positive sample (Figure
4I, J, S5C). An independent experiment, in which we
tested bead-LAMP on a dilution series of a Covid-19
positive patient of Cq ~30 in QuickExtract HeLa cell
lysate, led to a similar conclusion: again, the pool
containing only ~1% of the Covid-19 positive sample
was detectable only with prior bead enrichment (Figure
S5D-F). With merely 21 reactions (one entire 96-well
plate pool, eight column pools, twelve row pools), a
single positive patient of Cq ~30 can thus be detected
amongst hundred individuals. We conclude that a cheap,
fast (~5-10 minutes) and simple pre-enrichment step
boosts the sensitivity of RT-LAMP ten- to fifty-fold,
making this approach highly attractive for pooled testing
strategies. Of note, the bead-based RNA enrichment step
resulted in RT-LAMP reactions being fully compatible
with the Phenol Red based colorimetric readout, even
when QuickExtract lysates were used as input. While
reactions without bead-enrichment failed to convert to
yellow, the same input samples showed the
characteristic color change when pre-purified via the
bead-enrichment step (Figure S5G).
A pipette-free RT-LAMP assay for home settings
The advancements presented so far provide a
drastically improved SARS-CoV-2 detection assay
regarding simplicity, robustness and sensitivity.
However, our assay still required specialized laboratory
equipment, such as precision pipettes or temperaturecontrolled incubators. We therefore explored approaches
to adapt the HNB RT-LAMP protocol to home settings.
In order to make RT-LAMP independent of precision
pipettes, we adopted a previously reported strategy for
sample clean-up and transfer using filter paper (Y. Zou

et al., 2017). Using simple Whatman filter paper
dipsticks (Figure 5A), we reliably detected SARSCoV-2 RNA from Covid-19 patients with medium viral
titers (Cq ~27) (Figure 5B). In addition, introducing a
wash step with 130 mM sodium chloride solution
increased the sensitivity and enabled SARS-CoV-2
detection in patient samples with Cq values ~32,
mimicking the sensitivity of standard RT-LAMP assays
(Figure 5B).
Due to their isothermal nature, RT-LAMP reactions
require stable incubation temperatures of ~62-63°C.
This can be provided using equipment ranging from
high-end instruments to the most basal setup where
boiling and room temperature water are mixed at a
defined ratio and then kept insulated. We tested a
commercially available sous-vide heater to create a
temperature-controlled reaction environment (water
bath) for home-based testing (Figure 5C). When
combined with the filter paper-based sample clean-up
and transfer method, this setup, termed HomeDipLAMP, was able to accurately detect, within 35 minutes,
two out of two viral genes in a Covid-19-positive patient
gargle sample without false positives among Covid-19
negative gargle samples (Figure 5D). Detection
accuracy and reaction speed matched HNB RT-LAMP
reactions with pipetted sample input and laboratory
equipment (Figure 5D). Moreover, a simple image
manipulation (color rotation in RGB space) can convert
the purple versus sky-blue color difference into more
easily distinguishable outcomes, especially for an
untrained user (Figure 5D). Taken together, our findings
provide a basis for the development of a simple SARSCoV-2 detection platform, which can be implemented in
any low-tech environment.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5: HomeDip-LAMP enables SARS-CoV-2 detection in low-resource and home settings.
A) Schematic depicting the HomeDip-LAMP workflow. Samples are mixed 1:1 with QuickExtract lysis buffer and inactivated
at 95°C for 5 minutes. Cellulose paper dipsticks are loaded by dipping into the crude sample for 30 seconds. After a brief
washing step (3x dipping into wash buffer), RNA is released into pre-distributed RT-LAMP reaction mixes by 3x dipping. RTLAMP reactions are performed in a water bath at 63°C and read out after 35 minutes. B) Influence of different wash
conditions on SARS-CoV-2 detection using RT-LAMP with paper dipstick sample transfer. Heatmap showing end-point
relative fluorescence units (RFUs) at 30 minutes of RT-LAMP reactions after transferring 2 µl of high titer (++, Cq ~27),
medium-to-low titer (+, Cq ~32) or negative Covid-19 patient samples in QuickExtract into 8 µl of RT-LAMP reaction mix
using cellulose paper dipsticks. Dipsticks were washed in between in indicated solutions or transferred without washing. A
sample series where 2 µl were transferred by pipetting (‘pipette’) is shown alongside (NTC = no target control). C) Image
showing the water bath setup with a Sous Vide heater (black) for HomeDip-LAMP. Reaction tubes were kept upright and
submerged using floating plastic pipette tip racks (orange). D) Detection of SARS-CoV-2 using HomeDip-LAMP. Left image
shows true color readout (HNB dye) of HomeDip-LAMP (left 2 tubes) and pipetted LAMP (right 2 tubes) reactions using a
Covid-19-positive (+) and -negative (-) patient sample in QuickExtract as input (35 minute end-point; water bath incubation at
63°C). Amplicons are indicated to the left; the human RNAseP amplicon served as positive control. The image to the right
shows a color-rotated (180° in RGB space) version of the left images for easier readout.

A robust RT-LAMP assay using open source enzymes
for SARS-CoV-2 detection
A critical bottleneck in population-scale testing
efforts using RT-LAMP assays, especially in lowincome countries, is the dependence on an existing and
robust supply chain for the two enzymes, namely the
reverse transcriptase (RT) and the Bst DNA Polymerase.

All our assays so far relied on the patent-protected
enzymes RTx, a thermostable RT, and Bst 2.0, an
engineered variant of Bst LF, the Large Fragment of
DNA polymerase I from Geobacillus stearothermophilis
used in original LAMP assays (Notomi et al., 2000).
Given that the sequences of neither enzyme are known,
we set out to identify open-source enzymes that support
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6: A sensitive RT-LAMP assay based on open-access enzymes.
A) RT-LAMP performance (measured as ‘time to threshold’) of different Bst DNA polymerase variants in combination with
NEB’s RTx reverse transcriptase on synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA standard. For reactions in which no amplification was
recorded, ‘time to threshold’ is reported as ‘not detected’ (ND). Reactions were performed in duplicates; water was used as notarget control (NTC). B) RT-LAMP performance (measured as ‘time to threshold’) of different patent-protected (RTx,
SuperScript III (SS-III)) and non-patent protected (AMV, HIV-1) reverse transcriptase enzymes in combination with Bst LF
DNA polymerase on 500 copies/reaction of synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA standard. Reactions were performed in technical
quadruplicates; water was used as no-target control (NTC). For reactions in which no amplification was recorded, ‘time to
threshold’ is reported as ‘not detected’ (ND). C) RT-LAMP sensitivity performance (measured as ‘time to threshold’) of
reactions containing NEB RTx or home-made HIV-1 RT, in combination with Bst LF DNA polymerase. Reactions contained
different amounts of synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA standard. Reactions were performed in technical duplicates; water was used
as no-target control (NTC). For reactions in which no amplification was recorded, ‘time to threshold’ is reported as ‘not
detected’ (ND). D) Performance of RT-LAMP (measured as ‘time to threshold’) with different enzymatic compositions and
QuickExtract patient sample as input. A pool of Covid-19 positive patient crude lysates (Pool N1-CDC, Cq 25) and a pool of
Covid-19 negative crude lysates were tested in technical duplicates. For reactions in which no amplification was recorded,
‘time to threshold’ is reported as ‘not detected’ (ND).

RT-LAMP-based SARS-CoV-2 detection without
compromising assay performance.
We first focused on the Bst DNA Polymerase and
compared the engineered Bst 2.0 enzyme with the
wildtype Bst LF counterpart. Bst LF exhibited similar
overall reaction kinetics and sensitivity compared to Bst
2.0 (Figure 6A). Although reported to be more salt
sensitive, Bst LF also allowed robust detection of
SARS-CoV-2 from crude patient lysate in QuickExtract
(Figure S6A). An important limitation of Bst LF is its
incompatibility with the dUTP/UDG system due to its
apparent inability to efficiently incorporate dUTP
(Figure S6B). Nevertheless, considering the known
protein sequence of wildtype Bst LF (GeneBank ID:

AAB52611.1) and its open-source status, Bst LF is the
enzyme of choice for settings where engineered Bst
variants are not available or unaffordable (Bhadra,
Riedel, Lakhotia, Tran, & Ellington, 2020; Phang, Teo,
Lo, & Wong, 1995).
We next examined the reverse transcription step
that is required for the robust detection of RNA targets
in RT-LAMP reactions. Bst polymerases are reported to
exhibit intrinsic RT activity (Shi, Shen, Niu, & Ma,
2015). In particular, Bst 3.0 was engineered further from
Bst 2.0 in order to display elevated intrinsic reverse
transcriptase (RT) activity and increased amplification
yield (patent US8993298B1). We thus tested Bst LF, Bst
2.0 and Bst 3.0 in LAMP reactions lacking the dedicated
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

reverse transcriptase RTx. Bst LF showed no RT activity
under our assay conditions (Figure S6C), and weak RT
activity was observed for Bst 2.0 and Bst 3.0 when using
universal Isothermal Amplification Buffer I (Figure
S6C). In its optimized, higher-salt buffer (Isothermal
Amplification Buffer II) Bst 3.0 yielded strong yet nonspecific amplification irrespective of the presence of a
dedicated RT (Figure 6A, S6C). A CRISPR-Cas12
collateral cleavage assay (Broughton et al., 2020) on the
Bst 3.0 LAMP products revealed that Bst 3.0, in the
absence of a dedicated RT enzyme, led to robust
amplification of the synthetic standard down to 200
copies per reaction (Figure S6D-F). However,
considering the patent-protection and the need for an
additional detection step for amplicon-specific readout,
we excluded Bst 3.0 as a possible entry point into an
open-source RT-LAMP reaction. Instead, we concluded
that a dedicated RT enzyme is required for efficient and
specific target amplification.
To identify a thermostable, open-source RT that is
active under the reaction conditions of LAMP, we first
compared several RTs with the engineered RTx enzyme
using synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA as template. We
limited our test to RTs known to be active at elevated
temperatures, namely AMV, Superscript III (SS-III) and
a wildtype version of HIV-1 RT (Martín-Alonso, FrutosBeltrán, & Menéndez-Arias, 2020). We found that
wildtype HIV-1 RT worked equally well in terms of
efficiency, speed and sensitivity as commercial RTx
(Figure 6B, C), while AMV and SuperScript-III showed
only limited RT activity (Figure 6B, S7A). Moreover,
wildtype HIV-1 RT in combination with Bst LF was
fully compatible with SARS-CoV-2 detection in crude
patient samples (Figure 6D). As such, RT-LAMP with
HIV-1 RT and Bst LF was able to detect SARS-CoV-2
RNA in a pool of Covid-19 positive patients but not in a
pool of Covid-19 negative lysates (Figure 6D, S7B).
Reaction speed in crude patient lysates was slightly
reduced compared to the gold-standard RT-LAMP
reaction using RTx and Bst 2.0, yet initiated still within
20 minutes (Figure 6D, S7B). We conclude that the
combination of wildtype HIV-1 RT and Bst LF are fully
able to perform RT-LAMP under our optimized reaction
conditions with crude patient samples as input. These
findings open the door for any laboratory to establish
their own, home-made RT-LAMP reaction mix to enable
SARS-CoV-2 and other pathogen testing.
Discussion
RT-LAMP is an inexpensive and specific nucleic
acid detection assay that provides test results in about
thirty minutes. Its independence from specialized
laboratory equipment and its compatibility with crude
patient samples as well as colorimetric visual readout
make it highly attractive for settings with limited
resources or for population-scale testing. In this study,
we systematically optimized every step of the RTLAMP assay for crude sample input to make it more
sensitive, more robust and simpler. Our improved assay
holds the promise to contribute towards effective
containment of the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.

Certified SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic workflows
include an expensive and lengthy RNA isolation step.
To circumvent this problem, several crude sample
inactivation protocols have been developed that are
compatible with direct downstream reverse transcription
and amplification steps (Ladha et al., 2020; Myhrvold et
al., 2018; Rabe & Cepko, 2020). While these
advancements have simplified SARS-CoV-2 detection
considerably, the required buffered solutions or reducing
agents present a challenge for the commonly used pH
indicator-based colorimetric LAMP readout. For
example, strongly buffered lysis solutions such as
QuickExtract are not compatible with Phenol Red dye
detection, resulting in substantial false negative rates.
Similarly, false positives have been reported for patient
sample types with acidic pH such as saliva (Lalli et al.,
2020). We employed the known metal indicator
hydroxynaphthol blue (HNB) as a robust alternative for
colorimetric detection of SARS-CoV-2 with no false
positives and detection rates identical to highly sensitive
fluorescent LAMP assays for any tested sample buffer
(Figure 3, S3). HNB RT-LAMP, particularly when
employed in combination with the dUTP/UDG crosscontamination prevention system (Figure 2), is therefore
a highly robust and stream-lined assay suited for SARSCoV-2 testing in home settings.
A major drawback of using patient samples directly
for nucleic acid detection is the resulting drop in
sensitivity. While an upstream RNA isolation step
allows the concentration of viral template molecules,
this is not the case for crude extraction methods. With a
robust limit of detection of ~50-100 copies per reaction,
RT-LAMP with crude patient sample input can only
detect medium to high viral titers. Our development of
bead-LAMP, a simple RNA enrichment protocol with
magnetic beads, sets the stage for highly sensitive
SARS-CoV-2 detection in samples from individual
patients or patient pools (Figure 4). While similar to a
recently reported protocol based on silica particles
(Rabe & Cepko, 2020), our approach requires only a
magnet and adds just 5-10 minutes to the standard
protocol. Bead-LAMP does not require centrifugation
and can be performed manually with a simple magnet,
an automated magnetic particle processor like the
KingFisher or on fully automated liquid handling
platforms. It is especially suited for mass-scale pathogen
surveillance via sample pooling strategies. Combined
with the HNB colorimetric read-out, bead-LAMP allows
for screening hundreds of individuals in pooled
reactions in simple PCR strips. Bead-LAMP is also an
attractive alternative to ultra-sensitive RT-qPCR when
used on single patient samples (Figure 4F, G).
To illustrate the practical implications of assay
sensitivity, we used our RT-qPCR data from
nasopharyngeal swabs to calculate viral copies per
entire clinical sample as done in (Wölfel et al., 2020).
Figure S8A shows that the viral titer per sample ranges
from ~650 to 2x108 viral RNA copies. Grouping patient
samples according to their ability to infect cells in
culture (>106 viral copies per swab) (Wölfel et al., 2020)
further allows to separate them roughly into infectious
and non-infectious groups. RT-qPCR coupled to RNA
isolation is able to detect this enormous range of viral
titers (down to 5 copies per reaction) (Corman et al.,
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

2020). Without distinguishing between infectious or
non-infectious individuals, RT-LAMP on purified RNA
(limit of detection: 100 copies per RT-LAMP reaction)
would detect ~ 80% of all infected individuals (Figure
S8B). RT-LAMP on QuickExtract lysate directly
prepared from crude sample lowers the number of
detectable individuals to 64% or 50% when swab
volumes of 0.5 ml or 3 ml are used, respectively. In
contrast, the theoretical detection rate of bead-LAMP is
~92% relative to RT-qPCR on extracted RNA, when
considering 100% RNA recovery on beads, and up to
86% when taking the average 77% recovery measured
with our protocol (Figure S4) into account. Of note,
bead-LAMP is more sensitive than RT-qPCR performed
on crude QuickExtract lysate, which detects ~80% of
infected individuals in our experiments. It is important
to note that infectious patients are identified at 100%
detection rate in all RT-LAMP detection formats,
highlighting the relevance of RT-LAMP for population
screening. Taken together, in combination with
minimizing sample volumes of nasopharyngeal swabs,
bead-LAMP, without a dedicated RNA purification step,
reaches the sensitivity that is currently defined by goldstandard certified RT-qPCR assays. At the same time,
bead-LAMP outperforms RT-qPCR in terms of speed,
cost (~1.5 USD for commercial QuickExtract & RTLAMP reagents plus 0.1 – 0.25 USD for commercial
magnetic beads per reaction), and low equipment needs.
While bead-LAMP enables pooled testing, reliable
and sensitive home-tests provide important alternative
strategies in combating the Covid-19 pandemic (Taipale,
Romer, & Linnarsson, 2020). Towards this end, we
present a simple strategy for sample RNA binding and
transfer using cellulose paper strips. With HomeDipLAMP, SARS-CoV-2 detection can be performed in
home settings without the use of pipettes (Figure 5).
Only sample inactivation buffer, paper-strips, wash and
reaction solution together with a stable heat-source such
as a water bath are required. We envision that a
combination of bead-LAMP with HomeDip-LAMP
could be adapted for sensitive home testing. In such a
combined approach, beads could be added to the
inactivated sample, followed by binding to a magnetic
rod and dipping as described for cellulose paper strips.
Establishing RT-LAMP based SARS-CoV-2 testing
in developing countries is severely hampered by
unreliable or non-existing supply chains. The goldstandard RT-LAMP enzymes Bst 2.0 and RTx are
engineered and proprietary enzymes, making their onsite production impossible. In our tests, the wildtype Bst
LF enzyme performed equally well to Bst 2.0, with the
exception of dUTP incorporation. One of our most
significant findings was the identification of a wildtype
HIV-1 RT enzyme as an eye-level alternative to the RTx
enzyme. Bst LF and HIV-1 RT can be recombinantly
produced at high yields using simple molecular biology
equipment (Boretto et al., 2001; Matamoros et al.,
2005). The implications of our identification of openaccess enzymes that support rapid and sensitive RTLAMP are profound: in principle, any molecular
biology lab in the world will be able to generate a robust
and sensitive in-house RT-LAMP reaction mix.
In summary, our improvements over existing RTLAMP workflows enable the robust, in-expensive and

ultra-sensitive detection of SARS-CoV-2. Our findings
provide the basis for future clinical performance studies
with the ultimate goal to make ‘testing for everyone’ a
reality. Combating the Covid-19 pandemic will require
access to diagnostic tests in all countries ("The
COVID-19 testing debacle," 2020). Our establishment
of an RT-LAMP assay using only open-access enzymes
is a major step forward to meet precisely this need.

Acknowledgements
This work would not have been possible without the
enthusiastic support of the IMBA and IMP research
institutes, as well as the many volunteers and partners of
the VCDI, who came together to help and collaborate
under the exceptional circumstances of the Covid-19
pandemic. We thank the Pauli and Brennecke groups as
well as Peter Duchek and Arabella Meixner for bearing
with us and sharing lab space, and M. Voichek, V.
Deneke and D. Handler for support and discussions. We
thank Nathan Tanner (NEB) for valuable discussions,
sharing important information on LAMP technology and
feedback on the manuscript, and Stuart Le Grice and
Jennifer Miller (NIH/NCI) for helpful advice and
reagents for expression of HIV-RTs. We are grateful to
the Covid Testing Scaleup SLACK channel for openly
sharing and exchanging information and the Covid-19
diagnostics team in Feng Zhang’s lab for discussions.
Author contributions
MJK, JJR and JS designed, performed and analyzed all
experiments; MPSD, RFP and RH processed patient
samples; IG, BB, JS and LMA performed protein
expression studies; MT, TS, AZ, MF and CW provided
patient samples; JZ, MF and CW coordinated clinical
validation studies; JZ acquired project funding; the
VCDI enabled and supported Covid-19 testing
initiatives at the Vienna BioCenter; MJK, AP and JB
conceived the project; AP and JB coordinated and
supervised the project; MJK, AP and JB, with the help
of JJR and JS, wrote the paper with input from all
authors.
Funding
MJK was supported by the Vienna Science and
Technology Fund (WWTF) through project COV20-031
(to JZ) and a Cambridge Trust LMB Cambridge
Scholarship. Research in the Pauli lab is supported by
the Austrian Science Fund (START Projekt Y 1031-B28,
SFB ‘RNA-Deco’ F 80) and EMBO-YIP; research in the
Brennecke lab is supported by the European Research
Council (ERC-2015-CoG - 682181). The IMP receives
generous institutional funding from Boehringer
Ingelheim and the Austrian Research Promotion Agency
(Headquarter grant FFG-852936); IMBA is generously
supported by the Austrian Academy of Sciences. Work
in the Menéndez-Arias laboratory is supported by grant
PID2019-104176RB-I00 of the Spanish Ministry of
Science and Innovation, and an institutional grant of the
Fundación Ramón Areces.
Competing interests
All authors declare no conflict of interest.
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References

naphthol blue. BioTechniques, 46(3), 167-172. doi:
10.2144/000113072

Anahtar, M. N., McGrath, G. E. G., Rabe, B. A., Tanner,
N. A., White, B. A., Lennerz, J. K. M., . . . Rosenberg, E.
S. (2020). Clinical assessment and validation of a rapid
and sensitive SARS-CoV-2 test using reversetranscription loop-mediated isothermal amplification.
m e d R x i v, 2 0 2 0 . 2 0 0 5 . 2 0 1 2 . 2 0 0 9 5 6 3 8 . d o i :
10.1101/2020.05.12.20095638

Hawkins, T. L., O'Connor-Morin, T., Roy, A., & Santillan,
C. (1994). DNA purification and isolation using a solidphase. Nucleic acids research, 22(21), 4543-4544. doi:
10.1093/nar/22.21.4543

Artesi, M., Bontems, S., Gobbels, P., Franckh, M.,
Boreux, R., Meex, C., . . . Durkin, K. (2020). Failure of
the cobas® SARS-CoV-2 (Roche) E-gene assay is
associated with a C-to-T transition at position 26340 of
t h e S A R S - C o V- 2 g e n o m e . m e d R x i v,
2020.2004.2028.20083337.
doi:
10.1101/2020.04.28.20083337
Bhadra, S., Riedel, T. E., Lakhotia, S., Tran, N. D., &
Ellington, A. D. (2020). High-surety isothermal
amplification and detection of SARS-CoV-2, including
with crude enzymes. bioRxiv, 2020.2004.2013.039941.
doi:10.1101/2020.04.13.039941
Boretto, J., Longhi, S., Navarro, J. M., Selmi, B., Sire, J.,
& Canard, B. (2001). An integrated system to study
multiply substituted human immunodeficiency virus type
1 reverse transcriptase. Analytical biochemistry, 292(1),
139-147. doi:10.1006/abio.2001.5045
Broughton, J. P., Deng, X., Yu, G., Fasching, C. L.,
Servellita, V., Singh, J., . . . Chiu, C. Y. (2020). CRISPR–
Cas12-based detection of SARS-CoV-2. Nat Biotechnol.
doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0513-4
Butler, D. J., Mozsary, C., Meydan, C., Danko, D., Foox,
J., Rosiene, J., . . . Mason, C. E. (2020). Shotgun
Transcriptome and Isothermal Profiling of SARS-CoV-2
Infection Reveals Unique Host Responses, Viral
Diversification, and Drug Interactions. bioRxiv,
2020.2004.2020.048066. doi:10.1101/2020.04.20.048066
CDC, U. (2020). Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Real-time RT–PCR Panel for Detection 2019nCoV. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/
2019-ncov/lab/rt-pcr-detection-instructions.html
Corman, V. M., Landt, O., Kaiser, M., Molenkamp, R.,
Meijer, A., Chu, D. K., . . . Drosten, C. (2020). Detection
of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time RTPCR. Euro surveillance : bulletin Europeen sur les
maladies transmissibles = European communicable
disease bulletin, 25(3), 2000045. doi:
10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.3.2000045
The COVID-19 testing debacle. (2020). Nat Biotechnol,
38(6), 653-653. doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0575-3
Ferretti, L., Wymant, C., Kendall, M., Zhao, L., Nurtay,
A., Abeler-Dörner, L., . . . Fraser, C. (2020). Quantifying
SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control
with digital contact tracing. Science, 368(6491),
eabb6936. doi:10.1126/science.abb6936
Gorbalenya, A. E., Baker, S. C., Baric, R. S., de Groot, R.
J., Drosten, C., Gulyaeva, A. A., . . . Coronaviridae Study
Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of, V.
(2020). The species Severe acute respiratory syndromerelated coronavirus: classifying 2019-nCoV and naming it
SARS-CoV-2. Nature Microbiology. doi:10.1038/
s41564-020-0695-z
Goto, M., Honda, E., Ogura, A., Nomoto, A., & Hanaki,
K.-I. (2009). Colorimetric detection of loop-mediated
isothermal amplification reaction by using hydroxy

Hsieh, K., Mage, P. L., Csordas, A. T., Eisenstein, M., &
Tom Soh, H. (2014). Simultaneous elimination of
carryover contamination and detection of DNA with
uracil-DNA-glycosylase-supplemented loop-mediated
isothermal amplification (UDG-LAMP). Chemical
Communications, 50(28), 3747-3749. doi:10.1039/
C4CC00540F
Joung, J., Konermann, S., Gootenberg, J. S., Abudayyeh,
O. O., Platt, R. J., Brigham, M. D., . . . Zhang, F. (2017).
Genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 knockout and
transcriptional activation screening. Nature Protocols,
12(4), 828-863. doi:10.1038/nprot.2017.016
Kati, W. M., Johnson, K. A., Jerva, L. F., & Anderson, K.
S. (1992). Mechanism and fidelity of HIV reverse
transcriptase. J Biol Chem, 267(36), 25988-25997.
Kellner, M. J., Koob, J. G., Gootenberg, J. S., Abudayyeh,
O. O., & Zhang, F. (2019). SHERLOCK: nucleic acid
detection with CRISPR nucleases. Nature Protocols,
14(10), 2986-3012. doi:10.1038/s41596-019-0210-2
Kim, D., Lee, J. Y., Yang, J. S., Kim, J. W., Kim, V. N., &
Chang, H. (2020). The Architecture of SARS-CoV-2
Transcriptome. Cell, 181(4), 914-921.e910. doi:10.1016/
j.cell.2020.04.011
Kwok, S., & Higuchi, R. (1989). Avoiding false positives
with PCR. Nature, 339(6221), 237-238. doi:
10.1038/339237a0
Ladha, A., Joung, J., Abudayyeh, O., Gootenberg, J., &
Zhang, F. (2020). A 5-min RNA preparation method for
COVID-19 detection with RT-qPCR. medRxiv,
2020.2005.2007.20055947.
doi:
10.1101/2020.05.07.20055947
Lalli, M. A., Chen, X., Langmade, S. J., Fronick, C. C.,
Sawyer, C. S., Burcea, L. C., . . . Milbrandt, J. (2020).
Rapid and extraction-free detection of SARS-CoV-2 from
s a l i v a w i t h c o l o r i m e t r i c L A M P. m e d R x i v,
2020.2005.2007.20093542.
doi:
10.1101/2020.05.07.20093542
Martín-Alonso, S., Frutos-Beltrán, E., & MenéndezArias, L. (2020). Reverse Transcriptase: From
Transcriptomics to Genome Editing. Trends Biotechnol.
doi:10.1016/j.tibtech.2020.06.008
Matamoros, T., Deval, J., Guerreiro, C., Mulard, L.,
Canard, B., & Menéndez-Arias, L. (2005). Suppression of
multidrug-resistant HIV-1 reverse transcriptase primer
unblocking activity by alpha-phosphate-modified
thymidine analogues. J Mol Biol, 349(3), 451-463. doi:
10.1016/j.jmb.2005.04.004
Menéndez-Arias, L. (1998). Studies on the effects of
truncating alpha-helix E' of p66 human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase on
template-primer binding and fidelity of DNA synthesis.
Biochemistry, 37(47), 16636-16644. doi:10.1021/
bi981830g
Myhrvold, C., Freije, C. A., Gootenberg, J. S.,
Abudayyeh, O. O., Metsky, H. C., Durbin, A. F., . . .
Sabeti, P. C. (2018). Field-deployable viral diagnostics
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

using CRISPR-Cas13. Science, 360(6387), 444. doi:
10.1126/science.aas8836
Niemz, A., Ferguson, T. M., & Boyle, D. S. (2011). Pointof-care nucleic acid testing for infectious diseases. Trends
in Biotechnology, 29(5), 240-250. doi:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tibtech.2011.01.007

Zou, Y., Mason, M. G., Wang, Y., Wee, E., Turni, C.,
Blackall, P. J., . . . Botella, J. R. (2017). Nucleic acid
purification from plants, animals and microbes in under
30 seconds. PLOS Biology, 15(11), e2003916. doi:
10.1371/journal.pbio.2003916

Notomi, T., Okayama, H., Masubuchi, H., Yonekawa, T.,
Watanabe, K., Amino, N., & Hase, T. (2000). Loopmediated isothermal amplification of DNA. Nucleic acids
research, 28(12), e63-e63. doi:10.1093/nar/28.12.e63
Phang, S. M., Teo, C. Y., Lo, E., & Wong, V. W. (1995).
Cloning and complete sequence of the DNA polymeraseencoding gene (BstpolI) and characterisation of the
Klenow-like fragment from Bacillus stearothermophilus.
Gene, 163(1), 65-68. doi:10.1016/0378-1119(95)00387-l
Piepenburg, O., Williams, C. H., Stemple, D. L., &
Armes, N. A. (2006). DNA Detection Using
Recombination Proteins. PLOS Biology, 4(7), e204. doi:
10.1371/journal.pbio.0040204
Rabe, B. A., & Cepko, C. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 Detection
Using an Isothermal Amplification Reaction and a Rapid,
Inexpensive Protocol for Sample Inactivation and
Purification. medRxiv, 2020.2004.2023.20076877. doi:
10.1101/2020.04.23.20076877
Shi, C., Shen, X., Niu, S., & Ma, C. (2015). Innate
Reverse Transcriptase Activity of DNA Polymerase for
Isothermal RNA Direct Detection. J Am Chem Soc,
137(43), 13804-13806. doi:10.1021/jacs.5b08144
Taipale, J., Romer, P., & Linnarsson, S. (2020).
Population-scale testing can suppress the spread of
COVID-19. medRxiv, 2020.2004.2027.20078329. doi:
10.1101/2020.04.27.20078329
Tang, Y., Chen, H., & Diao, Y. (2016). Advanced uracil
DNA glycosylase-supplemented real-time reverse
transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification
(UDG-rRT-LAMP) method for universal and specific
detection of Tembusu virus. Scientific reports, 6(1),
27605. doi:10.1038/srep27605
Tanner, N. A., Zhang, Y., & Evans, T. C. (2015). Visual
detection of isothermal nucleic acid amplification using
pH-sensitive dyes. BioTechniques, 58(2), 59-68. doi:
10.2144/000114253
Wölfel, R., Corman, V. M., Guggemos, W., Seilmaier, M.,
Zange, S., Müller, M. A., . . . Wendtner, C. (2020).
Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with
COVID-2019. Nature, 581(7809), 465-469. doi:10.1038/
s41586-020-2196-x
Zhang, Y., Odiwuor, N., Xiong, J., Sun, L., Nyaruaba, R.
O., Wei, H., & Tanner, N. A. (2020). Rapid Molecular
Detection of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) Virus RNA
U s i n g C o l o r i m e t r i c L A M P. m e d R x i v ,
2020.2002.2026.20028373.
doi:
10.1101/2020.02.26.20028373
Zhang, Y., Ren, G., Buss, J., Barry, A. J., Patton, G. C., &
Tanner, N. A. (2020). Enhancing Colorimetric LAMP
Amplification Speed and Sensitivity with Guanidine
Chloride. bioRxiv, 2020.2006.2003.132894. doi:
10.1101/2020.06.03.132894
Zou, L., Ruan, F., Huang, M., Liang, L., Huang, H.,
Hong, Z., . . . Wu, J. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 Viral Load in
Upper Respiratory Specimens of Infected Patients. New
England Journal of Medicine, 382(12), 1177-1179. doi:
10.1056/NEJMc2001737
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Materials and Methods
Clinical sample collection
Nasopharyngeal swabs were collected in 1.5-3 ml VTM,
0.9% NaCl solution or 1x HBSS (Gibco: 140 mM NaCl,
5 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.4 mM MgSO4-7H2O, 0.5
mM MgCl2-6H2O, 0.3 mM Na2HPO4-2H2O, 0.4 mM
KH2PO4, 6 mM D-Glucose, 4 mM NaHCO3). Gargle
samples were collected from swab-matched patients by
letting individuals gargle for 1 minute with 10 ml of
HBSS or 0.9% Saline solution. Sputum samples were
prepared by mixing sputum material 1:1 with 2x
Sputolysin solution (6.5 mM DTT in HBSS) and
incubation at room temperature for 15 minutes.
Informed consent was obtained from all patients.
RNA extraction from patient material
Total RNA was isolated from 100 µl of nasopharyngeal
swabs or cell-enriched gargling solution using a lysis
step based on guanidine thiocyanate (adapted from
Boom et al. 1990) and 20 µl of carboxylated magnetic
beads (GE Healthcare, CAT:65152105050450) applied
in 400 µl of Ethanol on the magnetic particle processor
KingFisher (Thermo). After a 5-minute incubation at
room temperature, DNA was digested with DNaseI for
15 mins at 37°C, followed by a series of wash steps.
RNA was eluted from the beads in 50 µl RNase free
H2O for 5 minutes at 60°C.
Crude sample inactivation using QuickExtract DNA
solution
50 µl of nasopharyngeal swabs, gargle solution or
sputum sample were mixed 1:1 with 2x QuickExtract
DNA extraction solution (Lucigen) and heat inactivated
for 5 minutes at 95°C. Samples were then stored on ice
until further use or frozen at -80°C.
RT-qPCR
For detecting the viral N-gene via RT-qPCR, 1-step RTqPCR was performed using the SuperScript III Platinum
One-Step qRT-PCR Kit (Thermofisher) or Luna
Universal One-Step RT-qPCR Kit (NEB) and 1.5 µl of
reference primer/probe sets CDC-N1 (IDT 10006713) or
CDC-N2 (IDT 10006713) per 20 µl reaction. Reactions
were run at 55°C for 15 minutes, 95°C for 2 minutes,
followed by 45 cycles of 95°C for 10 seconds and 55°C
for 45 seconds in a BioRad CFX qPCR cycler. Each RTqPCR reaction contained either 5 µl (N-gene, extracted
RNA) or 2 µl (N-gene, QuickExtract lysate) of sample
input per 20 µl reaction.
Fluorescent RT-LAMP
Fluorescent RT-LAMP reactions were set up using the
NEB Warmstart RT-LAMP kit or individual enzymes.

For reactions using the RT-LAMP kit, Warmstart RTLAMP master mix (1x final, 2x stock) was mixed with
primer solution (1x final, 10x stock) containing all six
LAMP primers (B3, F3, LB, LB, FIP, BIP), LAMP dye
(1x final, 50x stock) or Syto9 (1 µM final, 50 µM
stock), sample and nuclease-free water. Primers were
used at final concentrations of 0.2 µM for F3/B3, 0.4
µM for LB/LF (except for N2 DETECTR, LB/LF 0.8
µM) and 1.6 µM FIP and BIP. Typical final reaction
volumes were 10 µl or 20 µl containing 2 µl of sample.
For LAMP reactions using individual polymerases, RTLAMP reactions were set up using NEB 1x Isothermal
Amplification Buffer (Bst LF, Bst 2.0, Bst 3.0) or NEB
1x Isothermal Amplification Buffer II (Bst 3.0), 6 mM
MgSO4 (8 mM final; 2 mM MgSO4 are present in
Isothermal Buffer I), 0.3 U/µl NEB Warmstart RTx,
0.32 U/µl NEB Bst DNA polymerase (LF, 2.0 or 3.0),
1.4 mM of each dNTP (Larova, 25 mM of each dNTP
stock solution), 1x fluorescent dye or 1 µM Syto9,
sample and nuclease-free water.
For LAMP reactions testing individual RT-enzymes, RTLAMP reactions were set up using NEB 1x Isothermal
Amplification Buffer (Bst LF, Bst 2.0, Bst 3.0) or NEB
1x Isothermal Amplification Buffer II (Bst 3.0), 6 mM
MgSO4 (8 mM final; 2 mM MgSO4 are present in
Isothermal Buffer I), 1.4 mM of each dNTP (Larova, 25
mM of each dNTP stock solution), 0.32 U/µl NEB Bst
DNA polymerase (LF, 2.0 or 3.0), 0.3 U/µl, Warmstart
RTx (NEB), 0.2 U/µl AMV RT (NEB), 4 U/µl
SuperScript III (Thermofisher), 50 nM of home-made
HIV-1 RT (BH10) diluted in 1x dilution buffer (TrisHCl
pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP) and 1x
fluorescent dye or 1 µM Syto9, sample and nucleasefree water.
Reactions were run at 63°C (62°C for N2 DETECTR
and primer comparison) for 30-60 minutes in a BioRad
CFX Connect qPCR cycler with SYBR readings every
minute.
Direct sample lysis buffer test
HEK293 cells were trypsinized and counted to make the
appropriate dilutions in HBSS. The dilutions were
mixed 1:1 with respective lysis buffers and treated as
follows: Cells for no extraction were incubated for 5
min at room temperature. QuickExtract samples were
incubated at 95˚C for 5 min. Cells lysed in the homemade buffer (19.2 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.8), 1 mM
MgCl2, 0.88 mM CaCl2, 20 μM DTT, 2% (wt/vol)
Triton X-100) were incubated for 5 min at room
temperature before incubation at 95˚C for 5 min. For
extracted RNA, RNA was purified from 1e5 HEK293
cells using standard Trizol RNA extraction and diluted
to cell/reaction equivalents.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

dUTP/UDG contamination prevention system
Reactions were set up to contain NEB 1x Isothermal
Amplification Buffer, 1.4 mM of each dATP, dCTP,
dGTP, 0.7 mM dUTP, 0.7 mM dTTP, 6 mM MgSO4
(100 mM stock, NEB), 0.32 U/µl NEB Bst 2.0
polymerase, 0.3 U/µl NEB Warmstart RTx Reverse
Transcriptase, 0.2 U/µl NEB Antarctic thermolabile
UDG, sample and nuclease-free water. Reactions were
set up on ice and incubated at room temperature for 5
minutes before being transferred to 63°C to start RTLAMP reactions under standard conditions described
above. For demonstrating carry-over contamination,
reactions either contained UDG (+UDG) or water (UDG) and different amounts of pre-amplified RT-LAMP
product (pre-RT-LAMP). Pre-RT-LAMP reactions were
performed with dUTP, E-gene primer and 500 copies of
Twist synthetic RNA standard for 60 minutes at 63°C.
Serial dilutions were made by mixing 1 µl of dUTPcontaining pre-RT-LAMP product with 999 µl of
nuclease-free water to get 1e3-, 1e6-, 1e9- and 1e12fold dilutions of pre-RT-LAMP, followed by addition of
2 µl diluted pre-RT-LAMP product to dUTP/UDG RTLAMP reactions.
Colorimetric LAMP
For HNB colorimetric RT-LAMP detection, reactions
were set up as in fluorescent RT-LAMP with the
addition of 120 µM HNB dye solution (20 mM stock in
nuclease-free water). Phenol Red colorimetric reactions
were performed using the NEB WarmStart colorimetric
LAMP 2x master mix and the same final primer
concentrations as in fluorescent RT-LAMP reactions.
HNB and Phenol colorimetric reactions further
contained 1x fluorescent LAMP dye (50x stock from
LAMP kit) or 1 µM Syto9 dye (50 µM Stock) to
measure fluorescence in parallel.
Bead-LAMP
For bead enrichment, variable volumes of sample in
QuickExtract (40 µl up to 100 µl) were adjusted to a
final volume of 100 µl with HBSS, mixed with 0.6x of
beads (1:5 dilution of Agencourt RNAClean XP in 2.5
M NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 20% (w/v) PEG
8000, 0.05% Tween 20, 5 mM NaN3) and incubated for
5 minutes at room temperature. Beads were captured
with a magnet for 5 minutes and then washed twice with
85% ethanol for 30 seconds. The beads were air dried
for 5 minutes and then eluted directly in 20 µl
colorimetric HNB LAMP reaction mix containing 1x
NEB WarmStart LAMP kit, 1x Fluorescent LAMP dye,
120 µM HNB dye solution and 1x primer mix. No
additional volume for dry beads was factored into the
RT-LAMP reaction mix such that reactions were

completed with nuclease free water to have final
reaction volumes of 20 µl.
As sample input for pooled bead-LAMP (Figure 4H-J,
S5B-D), sample pools were prepared by mixing 10 µl of
a Covid-19 positive patient gargle sample in
QuickExtract with different amounts of a Covid-19
negative gargle sample pool (n=95) in QuickExtract (10
µl per sample). For pool volumes <100 µl, the volume
was filled up to 100 µl with HBSS:QuickExtract (1:1);
for pool volumes >100 µl, an aliquot of 100 µl were
taken out after pooling for subsequent RT-LAMP or
bead-LAMP. 40 µl (matching the smallest pooled
sample volume) of a Covid-19 positive or negative
patient gargle sample were used as positive (qPCR
positive) or negative (qPCR negative) controls, and also
filled up to 100 µl with HBSS:QuickExtract (1:1) before
LAMP.
As sample input for the proof-of-concept experiment
shown in Figure S5D-F, sample pools containing
different numbers of Covid-19 positive patient gargle
sample in QuickExtract were mixed with HeLa cell
lysate in QuickExtract. The HeLa cell lysate was
prepared by adding 500 µl of HBSS and 500 µl of 2x
QuickExtract solution to a HeLa cell pellet containing
one million cells, followed by cell lysis for 5 minutes at
95°C. The stock lysate of 1000 cells/µl was then diluted
in 1x heat inactivated QuickExtract buffer (diluted to 1x
in HBSS) to a final concentration of 20 cells/µl. This
concentration was chosen as QuickExtract lysate from
gargle or swabs roughly yields 200 pg/µl of RNA or 20
cells/µl. This Covid-19 negative QuickExtract lysate
was used to spike-in various amounts of Covid-19
positive patient QuickExtract lysate.
Bead-LAMP using Phenol Red as colorimetric read-out
(Figure S5G) was performed with WarmStart
colorimetric LAMP 2x master mix (NEB) instead of the
HNB containing RT-LAMP mix.
Assessment of bead enrichment
For evaluation of the recovery rate after bead
enrichment different dilutions of Twist synthetic SARSCoV-2 RNA standard were made in HeLa cell lysate. 40
µl of sample was adjusted to 100 µl with QuickExtract
diluted 1:1 with HBSS. Bead enrichment was performed
as described for bead-LAMP. Nucleic acids were eluted
with 20 µl nuclease-free water for 5 minutes at 63˚C.
SARS-CoV-2 RNA concentrations were determined in
the input (before enrichment) and eluate (after bead
enrichment) by RT-qPCR.
HomeDip-LAMP
Reactions for HomeDip-LAMP were set up as for HNB
colorimetric LAMP, with final reaction volumes
(excluding sample volume) being 25 µl. Filter paper
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

dipsticks (dimensions: 2x10 mm) were cut from filter
paper (Fisher Scientific, cat. number 09-790-14D).
Using forceps, dipsticks were dipped into 2 µl of patient
sample for 30 seconds, allowing the liquid to be drawn
entirely onto the paper. The paper strips were then
washed by rapidly submerging (‘dipping’) three times
into wash solution, typically 130 mM NaCl. Sample
strips were then dipped three times into the PCR tubes
containing 25 µl of pre-distributed HNB RT-LAMP
reaction mixes. The RT-LAMP reaction was performed
for 35 minutes in a water bath that was temperaturecontrolled by a sous-vide heater (Allpax) set to 63°C.
PCR tubes were kept upright and submerged during
incubation by floating pipette tip racks.
Preparation of crRNAs for Cas12 detection
LbaCas12a guide RNAs were ordered as reverse
complementary Ultramers from IDT. A T7-3G minimal
promoter sequence was added for T7 in vitro
transcription. 1 µM Ultramer was annealed with 1 µM
T7-3G oligonucleotide in 1x Taq Buffer (NEB) in a final
volume of 10 µl by heating the reaction up to 95°C for 5
minutes, followed by slowly cooling down to 4°C with a
0.8°C/seconds ramp rate. One microliter of 1:10-diluted
annealing reaction was used for T7 in vitro transcription
using the Invitrogen MEGAScript T7 Transcription kit
following the manufacturer instruction. RNA was
transcribed for 16 hours at 37°C and purified using
AmpureXP RNA beads following instructions described
in (Kellner, Koob, Gootenberg, Abudayyeh, & Zhang,
2019).
Cas12-detection of RT-LAMP product
RT-LAMP was set-up as described above and run at
62°C for 60 minutes. Meanwhile, 50 nM purified
crRNA was mixed with 62.5 nM EnGen LbCas12
(NEB) in 1x NEB Buffer 2.1 and a final volume of 20
µl. The RNP complex was then incubated for 30
minutes in a heat-block and kept on ice until use. For
detection, 2 µl of the RT-LAMP product and 125 nM
ssDNA sensor (Invitrogen, DNaseAlert HEX
fluorophor) were added to 20 µl of the Cas12-RNP
complex on ice. Reporter cleavage was monitored in
real-time using a BioRad QFX qPCR cycler with
measurements taken every 5 minutes for a total of 60
minutes.

expressed with the HIV-1 protease using the
Escherichia coli XL1 Blue strain. The resulting p66/p51
heterodimers were purified to homogeneity by ionic
exchange on cellulose phosphate P11 (Whatman),
followed by affinity chromatography on Ni2+–
nitriloacetic–agarose (ProBond™ resin, Invitrogen).
HIV-1 RT-containing fractions were pooled and dialyzed
against 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0 buffer, containing 25
mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% (w/v) glycerol, and 1 mM
DTT. After dialysis, enzymes were concentrated by
centrifugation in Centriprep® 30K and Amicon®
Ultra-4 Ultracel®-10K devices (Merck Millipore Ltd).
Purity of enzymes was assessed by SDS–
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. RT concentrations
were determined spectrophotometrically by assuming a
molar extinction coefficient of 2.6×105 M−1 cm−1 at 280
nm. RT active-site titration was carried out as previously
described (Kati, Johnson, Jerva, & Anderson, 1992;
Menéndez-Arias, 1998).
Assessment of SARS-CoV-2 detection rates (related
to Discussion)
Measured RT-qPCR Cq values from clinical samples
presented in Figure 1E and 1I were transformed to
copies per reaction using Cq 30 = 1000 copies/reaction
(determined in Figure S4B) as reference. For
calculations, entire swab volumes were set to 3 ml, from
which 100 µl were used for RNA extractions (eluted in
50 µl; 5 µl of RNA per RT-qPCR) and bead-LAMP.
QuickExtract lysates were prepared with 2x buffer, and
2 µl were used for RT-qPCR or RT-LAMP. Copies per
reaction were then transformed to equivalent copies per
original sample volume used for reactions (20 µl for
extracted RNA, 1 µl of QuickExtract crude lysate), and
projected to 3 ml total swab volumes. Detection rates
were calculated by dividing the number of detected
samples for each procedure by the total number of
detected individuals measured by RT-qPCR on extracted
RNA (most sensitive method). A robust detection limit
of 100 copies/reaction was used for RT-LAMP, and 5
copies/reaction for RT-qPCR. Depending on the
respective purification strategy, up to 100x fold
enrichment can be achieved (bead-LAMP) from 100 µl
original sample.

Expression and purification of HIV-1 RT
Recombinant heterodimeric HIV-1 RT (strain BH10,
GenBank accession number AH002345) was expressed
and purified using a modified version of plasmid
p66RTB, as previously described (Boretto et al., 2001;
Matamoros et al., 2005). HIV-1 RT p66 subunits
carrying a His6 tag at their C-terminus were co19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Primer sequences for RT-LAMP
name

sequence

reference

DETECTR N-gene F3
DETECTR N-gene B3
DETECTR N-gene FIP
DETECTR N-gene BIP
DETECTR N-gene LF
DETECTR N-gene LB

AACACAAGCTTTCGGCAG
GAAATTTGGATCTTTGTCATCC
TGCGGCCAATGTTTGTAATCAGCCAAGGAAATTTTGGGGAC
CGCATTGGCATGGAAGTCACTTTGATGGCACCTGTGTAG
TTCCTTGTCTGATTAGTTC
ACCTTCGGGAACGTGGTT

(Broughton et al., 2020)

NEB E1-F3
NEB E1-B3
NEB E1-FIP
NEB E1-BIP
NEB E1-LB
NEB E1-LF

TGAGTACGAACTTATGTACTCAT
TTCAGATTTTTAACACGAGAGT
ACCACGAAAGCAAGAAAAAGAAGTTCGTTTCGGAAGAGACAG
TTGCTAGTTACACTAGCCATCCTTAGGTTTTACAAGACTCACGT
GCGCTTCGATTGTGTGCGT
CGCTATTAACTATTAACG

(Zhang, Ren, et al., 2020)

As1_F3
As1_B3
As1_LF
As1_LB

(Rabe & Cepko, 2020)

As1e_BIP

CGGTGGACAAATTGTCAC
CTTCTCTGGATTTAACACACTT
TTACAAGCTTAAAGAATGTCTGAACACT
TTGAATTTAGGTGAAACATTTGTCACG
TCAGCACACAAAGCCAAAAATTTATCTGTGCAAAGGAAATTAAG
GAG
TATTGGTGGAGCTAAACTTAAAGCCCTGTACAATCCCTTTGAGTG
TCAGCACACAAAGCCAAAAATTTATTTTTCTGTGCAAAGGAAATT
AAGGAG
TATTGGTGGAGCTAAACTTAAAGCCTTTTCTGTACAATCCCTTTGA
GTG

NEB N-gene-A-F3
NEB N-gene-A-B3
NEB N-gene-A-FIP
NEB N-gene-A-BIP
NEB N-gene-A-LF
NEB N-gene-A-LB

TGGCTACTACCGAAGAGCT
TGCAGCATTGTTAGCAGGAT
TCTGGCCCAGTTCCTAGGTAGTCCAGACGAATTCGTGGTGG
AGACGGCATCATATGGGTTGCACGGGTGCCAATGTGATCT
GGACTGAGATCTTTCATTTTACCGT
ACTGAGGGAGCCTTGAATACA

NEB N2-F3
NEB N2-B3
NEB N2-FIP
NEB N2-BIP
NEB N2-LF
NEB N2-LB

ACCAGGAACTAATCAGACAAG
GACTTGATCTTTGAAATTTGGATCT
TTCCGAAGAACGCTGAAGCGGAACTGATTACAAACATTGGCC
CGCATTGGCATGGAAGTCACAATTTGATGGCACCTGTGTA
GGGGGCAAATTGTGCAATTTG
CTTCGGGAACGTGGTTGACC

(Zhang, Ren, et al., 2020)

DETECTR RNaseP POP7 F3
DETECTR RNaseP POP7 B3
DETECTR RNaseP POP7 FIP
DETECTR RNaseP POP7 BIP
DETECTR RNaseP POP7 LF
DETECTR RNaseP POP7 LB

TTGATGAGCTGGAGCCA
CACCCTCAATGCAGAGTC
GTGTGACCCTGAAGACTCGGTTTTAGCCACTGACTCGGATC
CCTCCGTGATATGGCTCTTCGTTTTTTTCTTACATGGCTCTGGTC
ATGTGGATGGCTGAGTTGTT
CATGCTGAGTACTGGACCTC

(Broughton et al., 2020)

ACTB-F3
ACTB-B3
ACTB-FIP
ACTB-BIP
ACTB-LoopF
ACTB-LoopB

AGTACCCCATCGAGCACG
AGCCTGGATAGCAACGTACA
GAGCCACACGCAGCTCATTGTATCACCAACTGGGACGACA
CTGAACCCCAAGGCCAACCGGCTGGGGTGTTGAAGGTC
TGTGGTGCCAGATTTTCTCCA
CGAGAAGATGACCCAGATCATGT

(Zhang, Ren, et al., 2020)

As1_FIP
As1_BIP
As1e_FIP

(Zhang, Odiwuor, et al.,
2020)

RT-qPCR primers and probes
name

sequence

reference

CDC-N1-F
CDC-N1-R
CDC-N1-P
CDC-N2-F
CDC-N2-R
CDC-N2-P

GACCCCAAAATCAGCGAAAT
TCTGGTTACTGCCAGTTGAATCTG
FAM-ACCCCGCATTACGTTTGGTGGACC-BHQ1
TTACAAACATTGGCCGCA AA
GCGCGACATTCCGAAGAA
FAM-ACAATTTGCCCCCAGCGCTTCAG-BHQ1

CDC
CDC
CDC
CDC
CDC
CDC

Oligos for crRNAs for LbaCas12a
name

sequence

reference

DETECTR N-gene LbaCas12a
guide
T7-3G IVT primer

GAACGCTGAAGCGCTGGGGGATCTACACTTAGTAGAAATTAccctat
agtgagtcgtattaatttc
GAAATTAATACGACTCACTATAGGG

(Broughton et al., 2020)
(Kellner et al., 2019)

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplemental Figures

Figure S1: Primer performance for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 by RT-LAMP.
A) Amplification curves (real-time fluorescent measurements; in duplicates) from RT-LAMP reactions shown in
Figure 1C. Curves using synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA standard dilutions as input are in color (color-code
indicates different primer sets; yellow: As1 Orf1ab; red: E-gene E1 NEB; blue: N-gene N2 DETECTR). Curves
using non-targeting controls (NTC) as input are shown in black. B) Heatmap showing end-point relative
fluorescence values (after 35 minutes) of RT-LAMP reactions (in duplicates; respective primers indicated to the
left) using Covid-19 patient samples with indicated Cq values (determined via RT-qPCR and the N1-CDC
amplicon) as input. Reactions with primers targeting the human ACTB gene served as sample quality control. All
reactions were performed in duplicates.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S2: QuickExtract buffer combined with heat inhibits RNase activity.
Shown are relative fluorescence values over time (upper graph) and end-point fluorescence values (lower
graph) of RNaseAlert reactions in HBSS buffer or 1x QuickExtract, in the presence or absence of RNase A
and with or without incubation at 95°C. All reactions were performed in duplicates.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S3: HNB RT-LAMP shows robust performance on QuickExtract-treated patient sample material.
A) Comparison between Phenol Red and HNB colorimetric readout of RT-LAMP reactions (in duplicates) on serially
diluted synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA in water (left) or 1x QuickExtract (right). End-point fluorescence values measured
in parallel are shown in heatmaps below. While fluorescent detection indicates successful LAMP in both sample
matrices, Phenol Red but not HNB colorimetric readout is inconclusive in QuickExtract buffer (right panel, top rows).
B) HNB RT-LAMP performance across a wide range of Covid-19 patients and sample types. Images showing the HNB
end-point outcome of RT-LAMP reactions on multiple Covid-19 patient samples (gargle, swab or sputum; samples
indicate swabs if not otherwise stated). The respective Cq values of the individual samples (CDC-N1; QuickExtract RTqPCR or extracted RNA RT-qPCR as indicated) are shown above or below each sample. Colorimetric RT-LAMP using
Phenol Red is shown for one sample set (first from top), again with inconclusive outcome. All reactions were performed
in duplicates. The HNB color-reaction was read-out at 35 minutes unless indicated otherwise. Summary dotplots for
every sample set are shown to the right; samples were classified as detected or not detected based on RT-LAMP
outcome and plotted against their respective RT-qPCR determined Cq values.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S4: Assessment of the bead enrichment procedure.
A) Schematic depicting the workflow to asses bead recovery performance. Synthetic SARS-CoV-2 standard was diluted
in HBSS:QuickExtract lysis buffer (1:1). 40 µl were subjected to magnetic bead enrichment, followed by elution of
nucleic acids in 20 µl of RNase-free water by incubation at 63˚C for 5 min. 2 µl of the input (before enrichment) and
the eluate (after bead enrichment) were analysed by 1-step RT-qPCR. B) RT-qPCR Cq values of different dilutions of
synthetic SARS-CoV-2 standard before (black) and after bead enrichment (red). Duplicate experiments are shown.
qPCR efficiency was calculated as 10^(-1/slope of the linear regression of datapoints). C) Calculated recovery (in %)
after bead enrichment for the dilution series of synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA standard measured in B) per enrichment
reaction. Replicate experiments are shown in black and green.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S5: Pooled Covid-19 testing strategy using bead-LAMP.
A) Performance of bead-LAMP on crude patient samples. The image (top) shows HNB end-point colorimetric readout
and the heatmap (bottom) shows co-measured end-point relative fluorescence units (RFUs) of RT-LAMP on serially
diluted patient samples in QuickExtract-prepared HeLa cell lysate, with or without prior bead enrichment. Cq values are
estimated based on RT-qPCR measurement of the Cq value of the undiluted parental Covid-19 patient sample prior to
bead enrichment. All reactions were performed in duplicates. B) RT-qPCR Cq values (CDC-N1) of gargle sample pools
used in Fig 4H-J with the indicated fraction of Covid-19 positive gargle sample per pool. For the two large sample
pools (pool of 1 in 96 and pool of 1 in 48), the 100 µl aliquot used for subsequent RT-LAMP and bead-LAMP was
measured in addition. C) Readout of a real-time fluorescence RT-LAMP reaction of sample pools with indicated
fraction of positive lysate without (left) and with (right) bead enrichment. RFU: relative fluorescent units. D) Schematic
illustrating the pooled testing strategy. Eight pools mimicking different total patient sample numbers and different ratios
of Covid-19-positive patient samples (0-100%) were generated from one Covid-19-positive QuickExtract patient
sample (N1 RT-qPCR with Cq ~30) mixed at the indicated ratios with QuickExtract HeLa cell lysate at 20 cells/µl. E)
Shown is the performance (measured as end-point relative fluorescence units (RFU)) of bead-LAMP (filled circles)
compared to regular RT-LAMP (open circles) on the patient pools defined in D. ND = not detected within 60 minutes of
RT-LAMP incubation. F) Images showing the endpoint HNB colorimetric readout of samples measured in E with or
without prior bead enrichment. G) Bead-enrichment makes crude QuickExtract samples compatible with the pHsensitive Phenol Red based colorimetric readout of RT-LAMP. Images showing the endpoint Phenol Red colorimetric
readout (top) and the fluorescent readout (bottom) of two Covid-19 positive pools and one Covid-19 negative pool
(qPCR negative) defined in D with (+) or without (-) prior bead enrichment.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S6: Comparison of different Bst polymerases for RT-LAMP.
A) Performance of Bst LF (blue curves) or Bst 2.0 (black curves) on crude Covid-19 patient sample (prepared in
QuickExtract). Amplification curves indicate real-time fluorescence measurements of RT-LAMP reactions (E1 primer
set; in duplicates) using SARS-CoV-2 positive (filled circles) or SARS-CoV-2 negative (open circles) patient samples
as input. B) Comparison of the ability of wildtype (Bst LF, blue) and engineered Bst polymerase (Bst 2.0, black) to
incorporate dUTP during RT-LAMP on synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA standard. Reactions were either run under
standard RT-LAMP conditions (-dUTP, filled circles), or supplemented with 0.7 mM dUTP, 0.7 mM dTTP and 1.4 mM
of each dATP, dCTP, dGTP (open circles). Plotted is the ‘time to threshold’ as a measure of performance. C) LAMP
performance (given as time to threshold in minutes) of indicated Bst DNA polymerase variants in the absence of a
dedicated reverse transcriptase (-RTx) using diluted synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA (copies per reaction indicated) as
template (related to Figure 6A). D) RT-LAMP real-time fluorescence measurements using RTx and Bst 2.0 in IsoAmp
buffer I (left) versus Bst 3.0 alone in IsoAmp buffer II (right). N2 DETECTR was used as primer set for amplifying
synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA standard (copy number per reaction is indicated; no target control (NTC): water). E)
Shown is the collateral cleavage activity (measured as real-time fluorescent signal) by Cas12, with a crRNA targeting
the N2 LAMP amplicon, upon addition of 2 µl of LAMP reactions from D) to 20 µl of Cas12 cleavage mix. F) (Left)
End-point fluorescence values (after 60 minutes) of RT-LAMP reactions from D). (Right) Cas12-based detection of
LAMP products from D) is indicated.
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S7: Comparison of different reverse transcriptases and Bst polymerases for RT-LAMP.
A) Amplification curves (real-time fluorescent measurements; in triplicates) from RT-LAMP reactions shown in Figure
6B. B) Amplification curves (real-time fluorescent measurements; in duplicates) from RT-LAMP reactions shown in
Figure 6D.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.166397; this version posted July 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S8: Potential of RT-LAMP-based assays for clinical SARS-CoV-2 diagnostics.
A) Hypothetical performance of RT-LAMP-based assays based on copy numbers of SARS-CoV-2 RNA (measured by
RT-qPCR) in patient samples derived from nasopharyngeal swabs in 3 ml transport medium. Copy numbers per 3 ml
swab were calculated from estimated copies per reaction measured by 1-step RT-qPCR using Cq 30 = 1000 copies/
reaction as reference (Figure S4 process control). Dashed lines indicate threshold detection levels for each procedure
when considering 20 µl of original sample for RT-qPCR and RT-LAMP on extracted RNA (from 100 µl original sample
eluted in 50 µl), 100 µl of original sample for bead-LAMP, and 1 µl of original sample for RT-LAMP and RT-qPCR on
crude lysate. Patients were classified as infectious (red) if copies per swab were >1e6 (Wölfel et al., 2020).
B) Hypothetical detection rates of RT-qPCR and various RT-LAMP-based assays with regards to infectivity based on
the data shown in A). For bead-LAMP, detection rates considering maximal nucleic acid recovery rates (100%) and
measured average nucleic acid recovery rates (77%) are shown.

28

