bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.026435; this version posted April 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Validation of a Lysis Buffer Containing 4 M Guanidinium Thiocyanate (GITC)/ Triton
X-100 for Extraction of SARS-CoV-2 RNA for COVID-19 Testing: Comparison of
Formulated Lysis Buffers Containing 4 to 6 M GITC, Roche External Lysis Buffer and
Qiagen RTL Lysis Buffer
Martina F. Scallan*^1, Catherine Dempsey*^2, John MacSharry1,3,4, Isabelle O’Callaghan2, Paula M.
O’Connor4,5, Conor P. Horgan6, Edel Durack7, Paul D. Cotter4,5, Sarah Hudson8, Humphrey A. Moynihan6 &
Brigid Lucey,9,10
*Joint first and corresponding authors: ^m.scallan@ucc.ie; ^Catherine.dempsey@hse.ie
Date: 5 April 2020
1School

of Microbiology, University College Cork, College Road, Cork, Ireland; 2Department of Clinical Microbiology, Cork University
Hospital, Wilton, Cork; 3School of Medicine, UCC; 4APC Microbiome Ireland, UCC; 5Teagasc Food Research Centre, Moorepark, Co.
Cork; 6Eli Lilly Kinsale Ltd, Kinsale, Co. Cork; 7Bernal Institute, University of Limerick, Limerick; 8Department of Chemical Sciences,
University of Limerick; 9Department of Biological Sciences, Cork Institute of Technology, Bishopstown, Cork; 10Academy of Clinical
Science & Laboratory Medicine, Old Kilmainham, Dublin 8. Ireland

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in increased
need for diagnostic testing using reverse
transcriptase real-time PCR (RT-PCR). An
exponential increase in demand has resulted in a
shortage of numerous reagents in particular those
associated with the lysis buffer required to extract
the viral RNA. Herein, we describe a rapid collective
effort by hospital laboratory scientists, academic
researchers and the biopharma industry to
generate a validated lysis buffer. We have
formulated a 4M Guanidinium thiocyanate (GITC)/
Triton X-100 Lysis buffer which provides
comparable results with the recommended
reagents. This buffer will ease the burden on
hospital labs in their heroic efforts to diagnose a
large population of patients.
Introduction
The global demand for reagents for real-time
reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) diagnostic tests
for COVID-19 has caused a bottle neck across
Ireland and the UK in efforts to follow the World
Health Organisation’s advice to “Test, Test, Test”.
Expansion of PCR testing is critical to gain control
over the pandemic spread of COVID-19 and the
world-wide shortage of lysis buffer is a rate limiting
step. Here we disseminate details of a lysis buffer
formulation that came into existence as a
consequence of a rapidly formed multi-centre
collaboration. A replacement lysis buffer for

extraction of viral nucleic acids from respiratory
samples was desperately needed by diagnostic
laboratories. A panel of new lysis buffer
formulations was generated and validated for use
in COVID-19 testing by virus-specific RT-PCR and
are being distributed throughout Ireland. It is
hoped that by sharing the formulation and
validation, we can make it useful to others in the
national and international scientific community.
The key chemical constituent of the lysis buffer
(guanidinium thiocyanate) has become scarce,
scientists from the School of Microbiology,
University College Cork, combined their long-held
knowledge of lysis buffers for RNA extraction, with
insights from published work relating to extraction
of RNA using magnetic glass beads (Chomczynski &
Sacchi, 1987; Hui He et al., 2017). Ultimately, they
formulated a lysis buffer, which uses much less
guanidinium
thiocyanate
than
standard
formulations appear to use (4 M compared to 6 M).
Simultaneously, scientists at Teagasc, Fermoy were
working on a different experimental formulation
for lysis buffer (Boom et al., 1990). Four laboratory
preparations in total were tested for efficacy by
medical scientists based in the Clinical
Microbiology Department at Cork University
Hospital (CUH), who conducted validation
experiments using positive and negative samples.
After validation, pharma-based scientists,
generously prepared a large volume of the much
needed 4 M GITC lysis buffer for distribution by
CUH.
Page 1 of 6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.026435; this version posted April 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Virology and RNA biology expertise: Dr Martina
Scallan & Dr John Mac Sharry
Buffer preparation: Dr John Mac Sharry & Dr
Martina Scallan; Prof Paul Cotter & Paula O’Connor
Evaluation of buffer preparations and validation
for use for in-vitro diagnosis of patients tested for
Covid-19: Senior medical scientists Catherine
Dempsey & Isabelle O’Callaghan
Risk Assessment for buffer preparation: Dr Edel
Durack & Dr Sarah Hudson
Co-ordination of preparation of 4.5 L of the 4 M
formulation for distribution by CUH: Dr Humphrey
Moynihan & Dr Conor Horgan
Co-ordination/preparation of paper: Dr Brigid
Lucey
It should be noted that the following chemical
preparation, after validation was selected for use
with named commercial platforms and testing
kits. We recommend that each centre adopting it
in their laboratories should first validate it for use
with their own systems. It is also advisable to
provide a lot number with each batch prepared
for traceability.
The 4 M GITC lysis buffer was developed based on
knowledge of the role of GITC in RNA extraction
and protection (Chomczynski & Sacchi, 1987;
Boom et al., 1990), adapted for magnetic glass
bead extraction (Hui He et al., 2017), and validated
against recognised standards using positive and
negative controls. Details of the composition of 4
M GITC lysis buffer and for the preparation of 1 litre
are given below.
The lysis procedure used in the diagnostic
laboratory mixes lysis buffer and sample 1:1, this
generates a working concentration of 2 M GITC
during the lysis step as reported to be optimal by
Hui He et al., 2017.
Buffer Composition:
4 M guanidinium thiocyanate (GITC)
55 mM* Tris-HCl
25 mM EDTA (Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid)
3 % (v/v) Triton X-100
0.01 % (w/v) Bromophenol blue

(*NOTE: calculated from the total amount of 0.1 M
Tris pH 7.6 added, diluted by the degree of volume
expansion observed when the GITC goes into
solution).
Preparation of one litre of 4M Guanidinium
thiocyanate (GITC)/ Triton X-100 Lysis buffer
(please also read risk assessment):
1. 472.75 g of GITC is brought into solution
initially by adding 400 ml of 0.1 M Tris HCl pH
7.6. This will require heating in a 65°C water
bath and some shaking of the vessel (but with
lid well secured). In our hands, once fully
dissolved the volume of the solution was 600
ml.
2. Make up to 750 ml with 0.1 M Tris HCl pH 7.6.
3. Add 50 ml of 0.5 M EDTA, mix.
4. Add 30 ml Triton-X-100, mix
5. Volume made up to 1 L with 0.04 % (w/v)
bromophenol blue (DEPC-treated water can be
used instead)
Notes:
• See Appendix 1 for chemical agent risk
assessment sheet
• Use laboratory coat, safety goggles, gloves,
chemical respirator dust mask (N95 mask)
• Open containers of guanidinium thiocyanate
powder should be handled in a fume cabinet
• The balance for weighing should be positioned
outside the fume cabinet (but close by).
Receiving vessel must have a lid that can be
sealed for weighing
• Significant chemical or physical hazards notable
when preparing buffer: poisoning and
environmental hazards
• Buffers made up with DEPC-treated molecular
biology grade water
• A significant increase in volume is observed
upon GITC dissolution and the degree of volume
expansion was found to vary between
preparations performed at different sites. This
may reflect variations related to the
manufacture of GITC and/or storage conditions
of the chemical and accentuates the need for
individual site validation before use
diagnostically.

Page 2 of 6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.026435; this version posted April 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Validation of the preparation was conducted using
two different automated extraction instruments
and two different detection instruments.

Results
Detection of targets was compared for crossing
point values (Cp) for the four prepared buffers and
the Roche external lysis buffer as shown in Table 1.
Automated extraction was conducted using the
Roche MagNa pure LC and the PCR was performed
on the Roche z480 RT PCR instrument. On a second
day, the 4 M GITC buffer was tested in comparison
with Roche and Qiagen buffers, using the
IndiMag48 extraction system and RT PCR was
conducted on a Roche LightCycler II 480 (Table 2).
On the basis of these combined data, the buffer
containing 4 M GITC was confirmed as suitable for
use with the diagnostic systems in CUH. Figure 1
shows the relative performance of all buffers
tested, measured using Cp values

The validation consisted of a comparison of the
efficacy of extraction with four laboratoryprepared buffers and both a Qiagen (RLT lysis
buffer from an RNeasy kit Cat. No./ID: 79216) and
a Roche external lysis buffer when testing positive
(amplifying two Covid-19 specific targets) and
negative controls. (In each case the extraction
volumes were 200 µl of buffer:200 µl transport
medium.) Both positive and negative controls
incorporated an internal control. Detection of
targets was compared for crossing point values
during real time Polymerase Chain Reactions (RT
PCR).

Table 1. Comparison of the efficacy of four formulations of lysis buffer intended for the extraction of viral
RNA from respiratory samples for Covid-19 testing when compared with the Roche external lysis buffer
Sample type

SARS CoV2 Cp^

Positive sample
Negative sample
Positive sample
Negative sample
Positive sample
Negative sample
Positive sample
Negative sample
Positive sample
Negative sample

22.37
Not Detected
22.36
Not Detected
22.29
Not Detected
22.57
Not Detected
20.85
Not Detected

B beta CoV
Cp^
22.96
Not Detected
23.36
Not Detected
23.25
Not Detected
21.69
Not Detected
21.62
Not Detected

Internal
Cp^
29.46
31.42
29.62
31.18
29.44
32.98
28.82
30.76
27.32
28.59

Control

Lysis Buffer
4 M GITC (pH7.6) with Triton
4 M GITC (pH7.6) with Triton
5.4 M GITC (pH6.4) with Triton
5.4 M GITC (pH6.4) with Triton
6 M GITC (pH7.6) with Triton
6 M GITC (pH7.6) with Triton
4.75 M GITC (pH 7.6) without Triton
4.75 M GITC (pH 7.6) without Triton
Roche Lysis buffer
Roche Lysis buffer

^Cp = Crossing point during the test reaction cycles at which test is denoted positive; The complete
formulations for the 5.4 M, 6 M GITC preparations with Triton X-100 and the 4.75 M GITC formulation without
Triton are not currently listed. pH values refer to the pH of 0.1 M Tris-HCl used in buffer preparation.
Table 2. Comparison of the efficacy of 4 M GITC (with 3% Triton X-100) with Qiagen and Roche lysis buffers
Sample type
Positive sample
Negative sample
Positive sample
Negative sample
Positive sample
Negative sample

SARS CoV2 Cp^
22.40
Not Detected
21.98
Not Detected
22.79
Not Detected

B beta CoV Cp^
22.36
Not Detected
22.50
Not Detected
21.78
Not Detected

Internal Control Cp^
27.48
29.55
27.61
31.53
28.32
31.56

Lysis buffer
Roche
Roche
Qiagen
Qiagen
4 M GITC 3% Triton
UCC

^Cp = Crossing point during the test reaction cycles at which test is denoted positive

Page 3 of 6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.026435; this version posted April 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. Comparison of the performance of commercial and non-commercial buffers as indicated by Cp
values (y-axis) when tested against positive and negative sample controls during real-time RT-PCR
diagnostic test for Covid-19.
Based on these data, the 4 M GITC lysis buffer was
selected for future preparation and use when
extracting respiratory samples for Covid-19.

Discussion
A 4 M GITC lysis buffer with 3 % (v/v) Triton X-100
has been shown to work very well in COVID-19 RTPCR, it includes a detergent which helps to
disintegrate the virus during extraction,
bromophenol blue as a visual aid for addition of
lysis buffer to clinical samples and has the
advantage of using less of a scarce ingredient. The

knowledge that 4 M guanidinium thiocyanate
(GITC) is sufficient in this lysis buffer means the
straitened global supply of this chemical can be
shared more effectively to make more lysis buffer
to perform more tests around the world and help
the world to take back control against this
pandemic virus.
Heeding Dr Michael J. Ryan’s advice “Perfection is
the enemy of the good when it comes to
emergency management”, we do not want to delay
in communicating our findings to the wider world.
Further variations of the 4 M GITC lysis buffer
Page 4 of 6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.026435; this version posted April 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

formulation can be tested further, in particular
formulations with graded increases in % w/v of
Triton X-100 could be compared. Work is ongoing
to test if variations in the molarity of Tris-HCl affect
lysis buffer performance. Of highest priority is to
get the message out that this 4 M GITC lysis buffer
works well. In addition we observed that Qiagen’s
RLT lysis buffer from RNeasy kits worked very well
with the systems and processes in place in the
diagnostic laboratory at Cork University Hospital.

expertise, technical know-how, chemicals from
their research laboratories, their facilities, time, coordination and communication skills along with
determination, to develop a suitable replacement
lysis buffer in less than two weeks. Like hospital
laboratories, third level research laboratories rely
on buying ready-to-go kits and reagents to speed
up their research. Fortunately, retention of the
knowedge regarding the chemical composition of
the buffers among the scientists allowed them to
make up their own reagents from raw materials.

When Covid-19 testing began, the individual
diagnostic microbiology hospital laboratories in
Ireland agreed not to stockpile any of their
resources from any of the other Irish hospital
laboratories. Through their professional body, the
Academy of Clinical Science and Laboratory
Medicine, they had daily meetings (using
WhatsApp) to problem solve as a group where
necessary.

Acknowledgements

Normally, hospital laboratories buy in reagents
that allow them to concentrate on the business of
diagnosis of patients and the preparation of their
own reagents is rare. However, a matter of
particular concern was the unexpected short
supply of one reagent (lysis buffer) needed to lyse
the virus causing COVID-19, to facilitate RNA
extractions and subsequent detection. In
straitened times, society needs to pool its
resources and expertise to best impact and this
case study and validation represents a generous
and rapid response from the scientific community,
when called upon by the Academy of Clinical and
Laboratory Medicine, at a time when large
international commercial companies were unable
to supply this vital reagent.
In the midst of this combined effort, research and
medical scientists in other parts of Ireland are
communicating their validation results in turn.
Part of the group effort in the case being described
here is that of the two scientists in the University
of Limerick, who prepared the risk assessment
documentation
for
the
report,
while
simultaneously making up buffer and supplying
their nearest hospital laboratory at University
Hospital Limerick.

The authors wish to acknowledge colleagues in
Sligo Institute of Technology and at University
College Hospital, Limerick in the Departments of
Serology and Microbiology for their valuable
assistance during consideration of lysis buffer
formulations. Also, Dr John O’Callaghan, Senior
Technical Officer, School of Microbiology, UCC for
technical assistance during the UCC stages of
development and preparation (and for providing
the Qiagen buffer), Dr Ewen Mullins of Teagasc for
sourcing and sharing reagents, and Dr Darren
Crowley and Dr Eoghan Casey who were involved
in the 4.5 L buffer preparation at Eli Lilly.

References
Boom R, Sol CJ, Salimans MM, Jansen CL,
Wertheim-van Dillen PM, van der Noordaa J. Rapid
and simple method for purification of nucleic acids.
Journal of Clinical Microbiology. 1990;28(3): 495–
503.
Chomczynski P & Sacchi N. Single-step method of
RNA isolation by acid guanidinium thiocyanatephenol-chloroform
extraction.
Analytical
Biochemistry 1987;162,(1):156-159.
Hui He, Rongqun Li, Yi Chen et al., Integrated DNA
and RNA extraction using magnetic beads from
viral pathogens causing acute respiratory
infections. Scientific Reports 2017; 7:45199.

In an urgent situation, Irish scientists, academics
and biopharma have worked collectively to pool
Page 5 of 6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.026435; this version posted April 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Appendix 1. Risk Assessment of agents used in the preparation of lysis buffer containing Guanidine
Thiocyanate, Trizma Base, EDTA disodium salt, Triton-X and Bromophenol Blue.

Page 6 of 6

