bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Prediction of residue-specific contributions to binding and thermal stability using yeast surface
display

Shahbaz Ahmed1, Kavyashree Manjunath2, Raghavan Varadarajan1*

1

Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore-560012, India

2

Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine, Bangalore 560065, India

*Author for correspondence
Telephone: +91-80-2293-. 2612
Fax: +91-80-23600535
Email: varadar@iisc.ac.in

This file includes:
Main Text
Figures 1 to 7
Supplementary information

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Quantitative prediction of residue-specific contributions to protein stability and activity is
challenging, especially in the absence of experimental structural information. This is important
for prediction and understanding of disease causing mutations, and for protein stabilization and
design. Using yeast surface display of a saturation mutagenesis library of the bacterial toxin
CcdB, we probe the relationship between ligand binding and expression level of displayed
protein, with in vivo solubility in E.coli and in vitro thermal stability. We find that both the
stability and solubility correlate well with the total amount of active protein on the yeast cell
surface but not with total amount of expressed protein. We coupled FACS and deep sequencing
to reconstruct the binding and expression mean fluorescent intensity of each mutant. The
reconstructed mean fluorescence intensity (MFIseq) was used to differentiate between buried
site, exposed non active-site and exposed active-site positions with high accuracy. The MFIseq
was also used as a criterion to identify destabilized as well as stabilized mutants in the library,
and to predict the melting temperatures of destabilized mutants. These predictions were
experimentally validated and were more accurate than those of various computational
predictors. The approach was extended to successfully identify buried and active-site residues
in the receptor binding domain of the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2, suggesting it has general
applicability.

Keywords: Protein stability, mutational scanning, residue burial, free energy, saturation
mutagenesis.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abbreviations:
YSD, Yeast surface display; SSM, Site saturation mutagenesis;

FACS,

Fluorescence-

activated cell sorting; DFE, Distribution of fitness effects; RBD, Receptor binding domain;
SARS-CoV-2, Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2;

ACE-2,

Angiotensin-

converting enzyme 2.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Mutagenesis is often used to generate variants of proteins with improved biophysical properties
such as solubility and activity and to understand protein function. The advancement of highthroughput mutagenesis techniques has enabled the generation of a large number of variants of
a protein in a short span of time, in a massively parallelizable manner [1–3]. If an appropriate
functional assay to score protein activity in vivo exist, it is possible to infer the relative activity
of each variant in the library, through library screening coupled to next generation sequencing
[4–6]. However, there is a dearth of efficient, high-throughput methods to measure the
solubility and stability of multiple protein variants in parallel, and to discriminate between
buried and active-site residues solely using mutational data [7].
Yeast surface display (YSD) is commonly used as a tool to identify protein variants with
improved biophysical properties [8,9]. YSD is preferable to bacterial expression for disulfide
containing or glycosylated proteins. Agglutinin based Aga2p is the most widely used system
to display proteins on the yeast cell surface [10]. Aga2p is a small protein (7.5 kDa), covalently
linked via disulphide linkages to the yeast cell surface protein Aga1p [11]. Previous studies
have shown that the amount of protein displayed on the yeast cell surface is directly correlated
to the amount of protein secreted by the cells, as well as the thermal stability of the protein
[12]. However, in other studies where the secretion efficiency [13] or yeast cell surface
expression of proteins was measured, no such correlation was observed [14,15]. Proteolysis of
yeast surface displayed proteins has also been used to differentiate properly folded, stable
variants from unstructured variants or molten globules, as a proxy for stabilization [16–18].
However, this has primarily been applied to relatively small proteins [16–19]
A previous study which showed correlation between stability and expression levels was carried
out on a limited number of mutants, that were studied individually. In addition, the WT protein
itself had a very low Tm [12]. It has also been suggested that if the stability of a protein crosses

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a certain threshold, its expression does not increase linearly with increase in stability and it is
therefore difficult to distinguish stable mutants from less stable ones, using only expression as
the criterion [20]. With a very high level of yeast surface expression for unstable variants, the
yeast quality control system may not be able to differentiate between properly folded, unfolded
or molten globule like proteins. However, once displayed on the yeast cell surface such mutants
may unfold or aggregate and hence will not bind to a tertiary structure specific ligand or cognate
partner.
To verify the above hypothesis, we used Escherichia.coli (E.coli) CcdB as a model protein.
CcdB is the toxin component of the CcdAB toxin-antitoxin (TA) module which binds both free
DNA Gyrase and the DNA Gyrase-DNA complex, these are referred to as inhibition and
poisoning respectively. Formation of the poisoned CcdB:DNA Gyrase:DNA ternary complex
stalls replication and causes cell death [21]. The other component of this TA module codes for
an antitoxin CcdA, which neutralizes the toxicity of the CcdB toxin upon binding to CcdB. A
mutation of Arginine to Cysteine in the DNA Gyrase subunit A (GyrA) at residue 462 can
abolish the binding of Gyrase to CcdB [21]. The CSH501 E.coli strain carries this mutation in
the gene of the gyrA subunit which makes it insensitive to CcdB [22]. In a previous study, a
single-site saturation mutagenesis library of CcdB was generated and the mutants were scored
based on their in vivo growth phenotype (MSseq score) [4]. In E.coli, a good correlation was
found between the MSseq score of ~70 mutants with either ΔTm of purified protein (r =0.65) or
in vivo solubility in E.coli (r =0.69) [23]. In contrast to plate based phenotypes, YSD provides
greater flexibility and improved quantitation. We therefore wished to explore the correlation
between the amount of surface expression or ligand binding seen with YSD, with thermal
stability and E.coli in vivo solubility using this large set of characterized mutants, which had a
range of in vitro thermal stability and in vivo solubility.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We initially examined 30 different variants of CcdB, which have varying solubility (when
expressed in E.coli), in vitro thermal stability, accessibility and residue depth. The in vivo
solubility of these mutants ranged from completely soluble to insoluble. We did not find a good
correlation between total expressed protein amount on the yeast cell surface and either in vivo
solubility in E.coli, or in vitro determined thermal stability. However, a better correlation was
observed between the amount of active protein on the yeast cell surface (i.e., the amount of
bound ligand) with in vivo solubility/thermal stability. In the yeast cell surface display system
[24], activity was monitored by measuring the extent of binding of yeast cell surface displayed
CcdB to a FLAG tagged fragment of GyrA14 as described previously [25].
Multiple rounds of sorting enrich mutants which have the highest expression and binding on
the yeast cell surface. Sorting in such a way may lead to the identification of mutants with
better biophysical properties, however, it does not give any information about the relative
activity of all the mutants in a library. We coupled FACS and deep sequencing to reconstruct
the MFI (MFIseq) of each mutant in the Site Saturation Mutagenesis (SSM) library of CcdB,
using single round FACS sorting methodology. We use this parameter MFIseq, to rank all the
mutants based on their activity to generate the mutational landscape or distribution of fitness
effects (DFE). We found that the DFE generated using binding was more accurate than the
DFE generated using expression. Overall, our MFIseq scoring parameter could readily
discriminate between stable and destabilized mutants of CcdB in a highly multiplexed manner.
It is well known that mutations that affect activity occur primarily at either surface exposed
residues directly involved in binding or catalysis or at buried residues important for folding
and stability. It has been difficult to distinguish between these two classes of residues, solely
from mutational data [7]. We show here that by examining the effects of charged substitution
on surface expression we can discriminate between the two classes of residues. To further
validate the approach described above, we analyzed previously published saturation
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

mutagenesis YSD expression and binding data for the receptor binding domain (RBD) of
SARS-CoV-2 to its ligand ACE-2 [26]. We could successfully predict both binding-site and
buried residues solely from the mutational data in this system as well.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results
YSD of CcdB mutants
Yeast surface display (YSD) has become an increasingly popular tool for protein engineering
and library screening applications [27]. Aga2p mating adhesion receptor of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is used as a fusion protein for yeast surface display. For surface expression, we used
a vector in which CcdB is fused at the C-terminus of Aga2 [25]. We generated (Supplementary
Figure S1) and individually characterized 30 CcdB variants on the yeast cell surface. Most
CcdB mutants had similar levels of expression to the WT protein (Figure 1A). However, the
mutants showed different amounts of active protein as assayed by binding to the FLAG tagged
GyrA14 compared to the WT protein (Figure 1B). Previously, we have characterized the in
vitro thermal stability and in vivo solubility of several CcdB mutants [23]. The correlation
coefficient (r) between amount of total protein on the yeast cell surface with in vivo solubility
or Tm of the corresponding purified protein were 0.44 and 0.29 respectively (Figure 2A-B). It
is unclear why mutants which have very low solubility in E.coli are highly expressed on the
yeast cell surface. It was previously hypothesized that the protein folding quality control system
in yeast is not as effective as in mammalian systems, therefore partially folded/molten
globule/aggregated protein may exist on the surface of yeast [14]. A correlation of r=0.81 was
found between the amount of active protein on the yeast cell surface with its in vivo solubility
determined in E.coli (Figure 2C). We also found a better correlation (r=0.69) between amount
of active CcdB protein on the yeast cell surface and its in vitro thermal stability (Figure 2D),
compared to that between total CcdB protein on the yeast cell surface and thermal stability.
Deep sequencing analysis of CcdB library and MFI calculation for CcdB mutants
To extend these results, an SSM library of ccdB was expressed on the yeast cell surface.
Different populations based on extent of binding to gyrase or cell surface expression were
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

sorted. A total of 32 different populations were sorted at two different concentrations of
GyrA14 (100 nM, 5 nM) as a function of either surface expression level or the extent of binding
to GyrA14 (Supplementary Figure S2). MFI was calculated for each mutant as explained in the
Methods section. The MFI was calculated at different stringencies (where the stringency refers
to the sum of reads for a given mutant over each gate of the histogram), namely 25, 50, 100,
150 and 200 reads. All mutants with a total read number less than the stringency value were
removed from the analysis. As the stringency increased, the pairwise correlation between the
biological replicates increased (Supplementary Table 1). The data was analysed with a
stringency of 50 reads, since at higher stringencies, correlation did not improve significantly,
but the number of mutants reduced. Reconstructed Binding and Expression MFI from deep
sequencing data are hereafter referred to as MFIseq (bind) and MFIseq (expr) respectively.
MFI reconstruction and its correlation with stability, solubility and residue burial.
A few published studies have described estimation of MFI values using deep sequencing of
sorted populations and are therefore similar to our experimental strategy. However, the
procedure for MFI reconstruction in these reports was relatively complicated compared to that
used here. [28–31]. In the present study, we calculated an absolute mean MFI instead of a
relative MFI. A good correlation was found between the MFI of individually analysed mutants
and their corresponding MFIseq values, validating our approach of MFI reconstruction
(Supplementary Figure S3A, 3B). Individually analysed mutants showed a good correlation
between the amount of active protein on the cell surface and in vitro measured thermal stability
of the purified protein. Similarly, we also found a good correlation between MFIseq (bind) of
mutants inferred from deep sequencing, and thermal stability as well as in vivo solubility for
the selected mutants (Supplementary Figure S3C, 3D).

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

For the exposed (>10% accessibility) and active-site residues (from PDB ID:1X75), mutations
did not affect the degree of surface expression (Figure 3A). However, many buried site mutants
showed very low expression, possibly because of aggregation and degradation inside cells or
during export (Figure 3C). In the case of binding, a very high mutational sensitivity was found
both at buried and active-site residues (Figure 3D) similar to the previous report of CcdB
mutants in E.coli [23]. We also found a very high mutational sensitivity of binding for a few
non-interacting residues in the loop connecting beta strands S2 and S3 at both 5 nM and 100
nM GyrA14 concentration (Supplementary Figure S4). The residues I24, I25 and D26 in this
loop are directly involved in interacting with Gyrase and mutation at non-interacting residues
(22, 23 and 27) in the loop might restrict or alter the conformation of the loop, thus reducing
the affinity of CcdB mutants to GyrA14. However, there was no effect on the expression of the
mutants in this loop, indicating that the mutant proteins are not destabilized (Supplementary
Figure S4). We did not find a high correlation between MFIseq (bind) and either accessibility
or depth, because many mutations at both buried and active-site residues have high mutational
sensitivity (Supplementary Table 2). The previously described parameter RankScore, is a
measure of mutant activity in E.coli [4] with high RankScore denoting lower activity. We found
a poor correlation between the MFIseq (bind) values of CcdB mutants at both exposed non
active-sites as well as active-site residues, and RankScore. In E.coli, most of the exposed non
active-site residues do not show any mutational sensitivity, i.e. they have the same RankScore
values as WT. However, in the present case many such CcdB mutants show lower binding to
GyrA14 compared to WT. The loss of binding could be attributed to the decrease in the affinity
between CcdB and Gyrase, or destabilization due to mutation. We defined a new parameter
MrMFI (mean residue MFI) which is the mean of the MFI values of all the mutants at a certain
position. MrMFI (expr) and MrMFI (bind) at 100 nM GyrA14, show a good correlation with
RankScore. (Supplementary Table 2). MrMFI (expr) also showed good correlation with Depth

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

which is a structural measure of residue burial [32]. However, in the case of binding at 5 nM,
a weaker correlation of MrMFI (bind) with the aforementioned parameters was observed
(Supplementary Table 2). In previous studies, identification of the active-site residues solely
from the deep sequencing data was not very efficient [4,7], this is presumably because in vivo
activity is often governed by threshold effects, and because mutations at buried residues also
affect activity. The current methodology removes such drawbacks. We could distinguish
between buried and active-site resides by comparing the MFIseq (bind) and MFIseq (expr). Most
buried site residues showed low values of both MFIseq (bind) and MFIseq (expr) compared to
WT. However, the active-site residues showed low MFIseq (bind) but similar MFIseq (expr)
compared to WT. We found that the average MFIseq values of charged residues are a good
predictor to discriminate between buried and active-site residues. For calculating MrMFIcharged
of charged WT residues, we only consider mutants with opposite charge. For some mutants at
buried positions, we found a very low MrMFIcharged (expr) but the mutants were absent in
MrMFIcharged (bind). We found that such mutants had very high reads, suggesting that the values
of MrMFIcharged (expr) are correct. We anticipated that such mutants lack binding and are
therefore present only in the bin which had a background level of binding signal, the presence
of mutant in only that gate led to the removal of such mutants due to the stringency set for the
analysis. Hence, such mutants were assigned a MrMFIcharged (bind) similar to other buried
positions. MrMFIcharged had a bimodal distribution (Supplementary Figure S5), so k-means
clustering was performed to identify the mean (µ) and standard deviation (σ) of each
distribution. The distributions were named D1 (higher MrMFIcharged) and D2 (lower MrMFI
charged).

Buried site residues were assigned to be those which have MrMFIcharged (bind)) and

MFIseq (expr) less than the set threshold (µ+0.5*σ) for distribution D2. Active-site residues
were assigned as those which had MrMFIcharged (bind)) less than (µ+σ) of the D2 distribution
and MFIseq (expr) higher than (µ-2*σ) of distribution D1 (Figure 4). The accuracy, specificity

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and sensitivity of prediction of exposed non active-site, buried and exposed active-site residues
are mentioned in Supplementary Table 3.
Selection and characterization of putative stabilized mutants from deep sequencing data.
In the previous section, we discussed the correlation between protein biophysical properties
like thermal stability and in vivo solubility with either the amount of active protein or the ratio
of active protein to total protein on the yeast cell surface for a few (30) mutants. However, most
of these mutants were destabilized with respect to the WT protein. To confirm whether this
correlation also holds for mutants that have stability similar or greater than WT, we selected a
few CcdB mutants based on either the MFIseq (bind) or MFIseq (ratio) (MFIseq (bind)/ MFIseq
(expr)) for in vitro characterization of thermal stability. We examined the average and standard
deviation of expression for all mutants and selected only those mutants which cross a minimum
cut-off (µ+σ) for MFIseq (expr) to remove the bias created by mutants which have very low
expression. No threshold for expression was set for selection of mutants based on their MFIseq
(bind). No selection of the mutants was performed based solely on the MFIseq (expr).
Seven mutants were characterized using the criteria MFIseq (bind) at 5 nM GyrA14, none of
them showed a higher Tm than WT (Figure 5A); whereas only one of the mutant selected on
the basis of MFIseq (ratio) showed a significantly higher Tm than WT (Figure 5B). A subset of
seven mutants was selected based on MFIseq (bind) at 100 nM GyrA14. Two of the mutants
were more stable, two were similar to WT and the remaining three showed a lower Tm than
WT CcdB (Figure 5C). Seven mutants were selected based on MFIseq (ratio) and characterized,
two showed higher stability, three mutants were similar to WT and the remaining three were
less stable than WT CcdB (Figure, 5D). We therefore hypothesize that if the stability of a
mutant crosses a threshold then its expression will not increase further. To confirm this
hypothesis, we measured the amount of active protein on the yeast cell surface for seven

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

individual mutants which had Tm’s ranging from 60 ᴼC to 70 ᴼC, and found that the expression
and binding for these mutants are similar to each other and to WT (Supplementary Figure S6).
Prediction of thermal stabilities of putative destabilized mutants.
For destabilized mutants we observed a good correlation between MFIseq (bind) and Tm of
individual mutants (Supplementary Figure S3D). Using this correlation, we next predicted the
Tm of each mutant for an additional set of (n=28) previously described CcdB mutants [23]
based on their MFIseq (bind). We found a good correlation (r=0.83) between predicted and in
vitro measured Tm for this set of CcdB mutants as well (Supplementary Figure S7A). This now
allows us to identify putative destabilized mutants and accurately predict the extent of
destabilization for all such mutants in the CcdB YSD library. We also predicted the thermal
stability of CcdB mutants using the in silico tool HoTMuSiCv1.0 [33], however, we did not
find a good correlation between measured and predicted Tm (Supplementary Figure S7B). It
has been shown that in vitro protein thermal stability and free energy of unfolding are correlated
[23,34,35]. We therefore predicted the free energy of unfolding for CcdB mutants using SDM
[36], mCSM [37], PoPMuSiC [38], DynaMut [39], DUET [40], MAESTROweb [41],
DeepDDG [42], CUPSAT [43], PremPS [44] and INPS-MD [45]. We found moderate
correlations, with DeepDDG performing the best (r=0.59), but still poorer compared to our
prediction from YSD data (r=0.83). For a more detailed comparison we analysed the
predictions of stability by DeepDDG since this showed the highest correlation with measured
stability of individual mutants at non active-site residues. We excluded residues 21, 22, 23 and
27 as these positions behaved like active-site residues. We found that trends for ΔΔG predicted
by DeepDDG for exposed non active-site residues are similar to those obtained from MFIseq
(bind) (Figure 6A, 6B). However, we observed some mutant specific differences at residues 8,
16, 50, 53 and 96. Mutations at residues 50 and 96 have highly deleterious effects which
reduced GyrA14 binding to yeast surface displayed protein, these are only partially predicted
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

by DeepDDG. In the case of charged and polar mutations at residue 8, 16 and 53 we did not
observe a reduction in binding, but the software predicted them to be destabilizing. In the case
of buried positions, we found mutation specific effects at 35, 52 and 94 where DeepDDG
predicted changes were significantly smaller than the experimentally observed ones. We also
found that most of the phenylalanine, tryptophan and arginine mutations were highly
destabilizing and the mutants did not bind to GyrA14, however the software gave a lower
stability penalty for these substitutions (Figure 6C, 6D). Our MFI based measurements
suggested greater destabilization for several mutants relative to DeepDDG prediction. While
the overall trends were similar, as discussed above, there are several differences between MFI
based and DeepDDG based stability predictions.
Deep mutational scanning of SARS COV-2 receptor binding domain (RBD)
To examine the generality of our approach, we also analyzed recently reported deep mutational
scanning data of the SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain [26]. In this study two separate
libraries were generated and individually sorted based on expression and binding to ACE-2.
The binding (Sortseq (bind)) or expression ((Sortseq (expr)) MFIs relative to WT for barcoded
mutants were calculated from the deposited NGS data as explained in the Methods section.
Additionally, we analyzed binding at only one concentration of ACE-2 (100 pM, TiteSeq_09)
at which the binding started to saturate. Buried residues were those with <10% side chain
accessibility in chain C of PDB ID 7KMH [46]. ACE-2 binding (active-site) residues were
assigned as those contacting ACE-2 [47]. To identify the active-site and buried residues from
Sortseq data, we calculated the MrMFIcharged for each position. Similar to CcdB, we observed
a bimodal distribution for both MrMFIcharged (bind) and MrMFIcharged (expr) (Supplementary
Figure S8) and k-means and standard deviation were calculated for both the distribution D1
(higher MrMFIcharged) and D2 (lower MrMFIcharged). As described above for CcdB, buried
residues were identified as those which had MrMFIcharged (bind) and MrMFIcharged (expr) less
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

than the set threshold (µ+0.5*σ) for distribution D2. The active-site positions were identified
as those which had MrMFIcharged (bind) lower than the set threshold (µ+σ) for population D2
and MrMFIcharged (expr) values higher then (µ-2*σ) for population D1. We accurately identified
most of the buried residues, however there were some false positive and false negative
predictions relative to the crystal structure information (Figure 7). We found 21 positions to be
false negative buried positions. We categorized these false negatives into two categories,
namely, glycine and the side chains which are pointing towards the surface. The accessibility
calculated by DEPTH server for glycine was zero and we therefore expected glycine to fall into
the false negative buried category. Thirteen positions out of twenty-one false negative were
glycine. Another six positions, 336, 348, 361, 443 and 480 had their side chains pointing
towards the protein surface. We also found similar false negative buried residues in CcdB
where the side chain hydrophilic group was pointing towards the protein surface. Position 363
and 365 had accessibility <10% and were pointing towards the core of the protein in the PDB
(7KMH) used to calculate accessibility. However, we found that these positions have high
accessibility (>30%) in another structure (PDB ID 7D2Z). All the available RBD structures are
in complex with other molecules this might be responsible for variation in the accessibility of
residues in different RBD structures. We found 17 false positive buried residue predictions,
seven of them were aromatic, seven are charged or polar, two are prolines and one is an
aliphatic residue. The specificity, sensitivity and accuracy of prediction is mentioned in
Supplementary Table 3. Active site residues were identified with very high accuracy
(Supplementary Table 3), though there were a few false negative and false positive predictions.
Additionally, we found several positions which had Sortseq (expr) like WT, however, they had
very low Sortseq (bind) (Supplementary Figure S9A, S9D). We hypothesize that these
positions are also assisting in the maintenance of proper RBM conformation and enabling its
binding to ACE-2.Residues 447, 448, 473 and 476 which gave false positive results, 447 and

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

476 are part of the receptor binding motif (RBM) and contain glycine in a conformation which
is available only for glycine. Hence mutation to a non-Gly residue will likely disrupt the
conformation of the RBM thus decreasing binding to ACE-2. Mutations at positions 446, 453,
493 and 498 gave false negative results. Of these false negative positions, 446 is again glycine.
We found that the Arg mutants at N493 and N498 positions have very little effect on binding
(supplementary Figure S9F). We hypothesized that these positions may not have the most
optimal WT residue, or they may show no mutational penalty for binding to ACE-2. A recent
report showed that the affinity of Q498R to ACE-2 is higher than WT RBD [48] and was
enriched as double mutant Q498R/N501Y when selected for RBD mutants having high affinity
towards ACE-2 [49]. It has also been reported that when chimeric virus evolved in the presence
of neutralizing antibodies C121 and C141, this enriched for the Q493R mutation. The mutant
virus grows to high PFU titers similar to WT, and infectivity is also inhibited by a chimeric
ACE-2 analog, similar to WT [50]. The specificity, sensitivity and accuracy of prediction is
mentioned in Supplementary Table 3.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Discussion
With the advancement of mutagenesis and directed evolution methodologies, proteins with
modified traits and function can be developed in a relatively short duration of time [51–53].
E.coli remains an expression host of choice for many proteins and high level, soluble E.coli
expression is a desirable attribute. When eukaryotic or unstable prokaryotic proteins are
overexpressed in bacteria, they often tend to form insoluble aggregates called inclusion bodies
(IB). Formation of IBs often results in low yields of purified soluble protein. Designing
improved variants of a protein by increasing half-life, stability and activity is an ongoing
requirement of most pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries. However, a reliable, highthroughput, efficient and rapid method is required for solubility and stability analysis of
engineered proteins. Previously, several high-throughput methods to select for soluble
expression have been developed based on fusion to a reporter protein. These rely on the reporter
activity, which is perturbed if an aggregation prone protein is fused [54–57]. These methods
can be used to isolate protein variants with enhanced solubility but cannot reveal if the fused
protein is properly folded. In some cases, such unstable proteins may also form soluble
aggregates [23]. Since many of these reporter screens employ cytoplasmic expression and use
bacterial hosts, disulphide rich or glycosylated proteins, or those binding to complex ligands
cannot be studied. Yeast surface display coupled to FACS, has been widely used to evolve such
targets. Typically, populations are sorted for multiple rounds to enrich for stable binders to a
target of interest [58–61]. While this approach readily selects for high affinity binders, selecting
for stable proteins is more difficult. In some cases, this methodology has also been used to
isolate stable variants of proteins [27] and a good correlation was observed between surface
expression and improved biophysical parameters. However, other studies in different systems
did not find such a correlation [14,15].

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

In the present work we utilize YSD to measure the amount of total protein as well as total active
protein displayed on the yeast cell surface. A good correlation was found between the amount
of active CcdB mutant on the yeast surface and corresponding in vivo solubility in E.coli
(r=0.82) or Tm (r=0.70). A recent report also suggests that the amount of active protein on the
yeast cell surface can be used as a criterion to isolate stable mutants [20]. In the present study,
no correlation was found between the amount of total protein on the yeast cell surface and the
biophysical properties of mutants. A few mutants which have very low solubility in E.coli
showed very high expression, but there was a negligible amount of active protein on the yeast
surface. It has been previously suggested that the quality control system in yeast is not able to
discriminate these mutants from properly folded ones or alternatively that the folded
conformation is maintained by chaperones in the ER [62]. Once these mutants are exported to
the cell surface they may start to unfold. This could be one reason why some groups including
ours did not find a good correlation of surface expression with the stability or solubility of these
proteins. In previous studies [12], a very limited number of proteins were used for surface
expression studies, it is possible that in this small number, mutants which had high surface
expression or secretion but lower stability than WT were not observed.
Yeast surface display coupled to FACS typically requires multiple rounds of sorting to enrich
variants with desired activity and phenotype. Here, we have performed a single round of sorting
and developed a rapid, uncomplicated procedure of estimating MFI’s of individual mutants of
CcdB combining FACS and deep sequencing. This MFIseq was shown to correlate well with
the corresponding experimentally measured MFIs for several individual mutants. The MFIseq
was used to generate the mutational landscape of expression and binding of a mutant library.
We showed that such data can be used to accurately discriminate between buried, exposed non
active-site and exposed active-site residues both for CcdB and an unrelated protein, RBD of
the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. Highly destabilizing charged mutations in the core of the
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

protein decreased both expression and binding, while the active-site residues showed reduction
in binding alone for charged mutations. Relative to an earlier study which assayed in vivo
activity in E.coli [4], the present methodology is better able to identify and distinguish between
the two categories of mutationally sensitive residues, namely buried and exposed active-site
residues. In general, mutations that affect total activity in vivo can do so by affecting specific
activity without changing the amount of folded protein, decrease the amount of folded protein
without affecting specific activity or a combination of the above. The present analysis
distinguishes between the above possibilities, and is therefore able to distinguish buried from
exposed, active-site positions. This is useful for applications that attempt to use saturation
mutagenesis data for protein model discrimination and structure prediction [63,64] as well as
interpreting clinical data on disease causing mutations [65,66]
MFIseq (bind) was also used to predict the Tm of CcdB mutants. We found a good correlation
between predicted and measured ΔTm for a subset of CcdB mutants. We also compared the
accuracy of in silico tools used to predict the stability of mutants and found that these tools had
lower accuracy relative to our approach. We used experimental stability measurements for a
small number of destabilized mutations, combined with MFIseq measurement to predict
stabilities of all destabilized mutants in the saturation mutagenesis library. We could readily
identify destabilized mutants of CcdB, however, the recovery of mutants more stable than WT
was lower, but still significant, considering the rarity of such mutations. This is likely due to
the possibility that if the stability of the protein crosses a threshold, additional increments in
stability do not result in enhanced expression or binding.
A limitation of the present approach is that it requires an epitope tagged or fluorescently
labelled conformation specific binding partner. Another limitation could be differential relative
stability of proteins upon yeast cell surface display compared to expression in the native host
and/or intracellular expression. For glycosylated proteins, the stability of mutants may also be

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

altered because of hyper glycosylation of protein on the yeast cell surface compared to proteins
expressed in mammalian systems or prokaryotic systems where glycosylation is absent. The
presence of glycosylation may also affect the binding to a cognate partner which in turn may
give rise to false results. This does not appear to be the case for the SARS-CoV-2 RBD which
contains a single glycan at residue 343, but may be an issue for protein with multiple
glycosylation site. We are examining these possibilities in ongoing studies. Despite these
caveats, the present study suggests that the proposed methodology can accurately distinguish
buried from active-site residues, quantitatively estimate thermal stabilities of destabilized
mutants in large libraries and also be used to identify stabilized mutants.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Materials and Methods
Bacterial strains, yeast strains and plasmids
E.coli CSH501 strain carries a mutation in the gyrA gene which abolishes inhibition and
poisoning by CcdB [67]. The EBY100 strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae has the aga1 gene
under the Gal1 promoter for inducible expression and a TRP1 auxotrophic mutation. The strain
lacks the aga2 gene, so only Aga2p fused protein expressed from the plasmid, will form a
complex with the Aga1p for yeast cell surface display [68]. The ccdB gene was cloned in the
pBAD24 plasmid for controllable expression in E.coli. ccdB mutants were cloned in the pPNLS
shuttle vector for yeast cell surface expression [69].
Cloning of WT and mutant ccdB in E.coli.
ccdB mutants in pBAD24 were generated using three fragment Gibson assembly. Briefly, ccdB
was amplified in two fragments using two sets of oligos (Supplementary Figure S1). For each
fragment one of the oligos binds to the vector and the other binds to the gene. The primer of
both fragments which bind to the gene were completely overlapping and contained the desired
mutation. The fragments were gel extracted and Gibson assembled with NdeI and HindIII
digested pBAD24 vector. The Gibson assembled product was electroporated in E.coli CSH501
strain and positive transformants were selected on LB agar media containing ampicillin (100
μg/mL). The sequence was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Sequence confirmed WT or
mutant ccdB in pBAD24 vector was used as a template for PCR to amplify the ccdB gene by
Vent DNA polymerase. The PCR amplified product was co-transformed with SfiI digested
pPNLS vector in the EBY100 strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae using LiAc/SS carrier
DNA/PEG method for in vivo recombination [70]. Positive transformants were selected on
SDCAA Tryptophan dropout media plates and the sequence was confirmed by Sanger
sequencing.
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Protein Purification
WT and mutant CcdB was purified as described previously [71]. Briefly, an overnight culture
was diluted 100-fold in LB media containing ampicillin (100µg/ml) and induced with Larabinose (0.2% w/v) at an OD600 of ~0.5. Following induction for 3 hours, cells were harvested
and lysed by sonication. The soluble fraction was separated using centrifugation and incubated
with CcdA peptide (residues 45-72n) coupled to Affigel-15 at 4 ᴼC. The unbound fraction was
removed and the column was washed with bicarbonate buffer (50 mM NaHCO3, 500 mM
NaCl, pH 8.5). The bound protein was eluted with 200 mM glycine (pH 2.5) and collected in
an equal volume of 400 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8) to neutralize the acidity of glycine.
GyrA14 was purified as described previously [72]. Briefly, an overnight culture was diluted
100-fold in LB media containing ampicillin (100µg/ml) and induced with IPTG (1 mM) at an
OD600 of ~0.5. Following induction for 3 hours, cells were harvested and resuspended in TES
buffer (0.2 M Tris, pH 7.5, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5 M sucrose and 1 mM PMSF). Cells were lysed
and the soluble fraction was separated using centrifugation. The soluble fraction was incubated
with pre-equilibrated Ni-NTA beads for 2 hours at 4 ᴼC. The unbound fraction was removed,
and the column was washed with 100 column volumes of wash buffer (50 mM imidazole in
0.05 M Tris, pH 8, 0.5 M NaCl). The protein was eluted with 500 mM imidazole in 0.05 M
Tris, pH 8, 0.5 M NaCl and dialysed against 1x PBS.
Estimation of solubility of WT and mutant CcdB in E.coli.
E.coli CSH501 strain, transformed with pBAD24 plasmid containing WT or mutant ccdB, was
grown in media containing ampicillin for 16 hours at 37 ᴼC and 180 RPM. A secondary culture
was grown by diluting overnight grown culture 100-fold. Upon reaching an OD600 of 0.4-0.5,
CcdB variants were induced with Arabinose at a final concentration of 0.2%(w/v) for 3 hours.
The cells were harvested from 1.5 ml culture and lysed in 500µL 1X PBS, using sonication.
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supernatant and pellet fractions were separated by centrifugation at 13000 RPM at 4 ᴼC. The
pellet fraction was resuspended in 500 µL 1X PBS and equal volumes of pellet and supernatant
fractions were loaded on Tricine-SDS-PAGE to measure the relative amounts of protein in
each fraction.
Protein thermal stability measurement using Thermal shift assay (TSA)
The thermal shift assay was conducted in an iCycle iQ5 Real Time Detection System (BioRad, Hercules, CA). A solution of total volume 20 μL containing 10 μM of the purified CcdB
protein and 2.5X Sypro orange dye in suitable buffer (200 mM HEPES, 100 mM glycine), pH
7.5 was added to a well of a 96-well iCycler iQ PCR plate. The plate was heated from 15 ᴼC to
90 ᴼC with a 0.5 ᴼC increment every 30 seconds. The normalized fluorescence data was plotted
against temperature and Tm measured as described [23,73].
Yeast surface expression of WT and mutant CcdB proteins in EBY100 cells and flow
cytometric analysis.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae EBY100 cells containing WT ccdB or mutant in pPNLS plasmids
were grown in three ml SDCAA media (glucose 20g/L, yeast nitrogen base 6.7g/L, casamino
acid 5g/L, citrate 4.3g/L, sodium citrate dihydrate 14.3g/L) for sixteen hours. Grown cells were
diluted to an OD600 of 0.2 in three ml SDCAA media and grown till the OD600 reached two.
Thirty million cells were harvested using centrifugation and resuspended in three ml SGCAA
induction media (galactose 20g/L, yeast nitrogen base 6.7g/L, casamino acid 5g/L, citrate
4.3g/L, sodium citrate dihydrate 14.3g/L) for sixteen hours at 30 ᴼC, 250 RPM [24]. One
million cells were used for flow cytometric analysis. The amount of total protein expressed on
the yeast cell surface was estimated by incubating the induced cells in 20 μL FACS buffer (1X
PBS and 0.5% BSA), containing chicken anti-HA antibodies from Bethyl labs (1˸600 dilution)
for 30 minutes at 4 ᴼC. This was followed by washing the cells twice with 100 μL FACS buffer
at 4 ᴼC. Washed cells were incubated with 20 µL FACS buffer containing goat anti-chicken
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

antibodies conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (1:300 dilution), for 20 minutes at 4 ᴼC. Fluorescence
of yeast cells was measured by flow-cytometric analysis. The total amount of active protein on
the yeast cell surface was estimated by incubating the induced cells in 20 μL FACS buffer
containing 100 nM GyrA14 for 45 minutes at 4 ᴼC. Cells were washed and incubated with 20µL
mouse anti-FLAG antibodies (1˸300). This was followed by washing the cells twice with FACS
buffer, followed by incubating with 20 µL rabbit anti-mouse antibodies conjugated to Alexa
Fluor 633 (1:1600 dilution). The flow-cytometric analysis was carried out on BD Accuri or
BD Aria III instruments.
Yeast surface expression and sorting of CcdB Single-site saturation mutagenesis (SSM)
library.
Previously, an SSM library of ccdB was generated in the pBAD24 vector [4,23]. The library
was PCR amplified using primers having homology to the pPNLS vector. The PCR amplified
library was gel extracted and cloned in pPNLS vector using yeast in vivo recombination.
A similar protocol was used for sample preparation of the library for FACS as described above
for the single mutants with slight modifications. Briefly, ten million cells were taken for FACS
sample preparation and the reagents were used in 10X higher volumes compared to the earlier
flowcytometric analysis. Two different concentrations of GyrA14 (100 nM, 5 nM) were used
for sorting CcdB mutants based on the binding in the 1D histogram. The cells were sorted in
11 and 10 different populations (bins) in case of binding with GyrA14 at concentrations of 100
nM and 5 nM respectively. Additionally, 11 different populations (bins) were sorted from the
expression histogram. The experiment was repeated in a biological replicate. The sorting of
CcdB libraries was performed using a BD Aria III cell sorter.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Sample preparation for deep sequencing
Sorted populations were grown on SDCAA agar plates for 48 hours. Colonies were scraped
and plasmids were extracted from the cells. The ccdB gene was PCR amplified using primers
which bind upstream and downstream of the ccdB sequence and had multiplex identifier (MID)
sequence to segregate the reads from different sorted bins. The DNA was amplified for 15
cycles using PCR and the amplified product was gel extracted and purified. Equal amounts of
DNA from each sorted population were pooled, and the library was generated using the
TruSeq™ DNA PCR-Free kit from Illumina. The sequencing was done on an Illumina HiSeq
2500 250PE platform at Macrogen, South Korea after incorporating 20% X174 DNA in the
library.
Analysis of deep sequencing data
Deep sequencing data for the ccdB mutants obtained from the Hiseq 2500 platform was
processed using a pipeline developed by adopting certain aspects from an already existing inhouse protocol (https://github.com/skshrutikhare/cys_library_analysis). The latter method
involved the alignment with wild type sequence followed by merging of the paired-end reads,
while in the modified protocol, the reads are first merged and then aligned with the wild-type
sequence. The present methodology consists of the following steps: assembling the paired end
reads, quality filtering, binning, alignment and mutant identification. All these steps were
incorporated in a pipeline and made executable from a single command using a parameter file
unique to a given data-set. In the first step, paired end reads were assembled using the PEAR
v0.9.6 (Paired-End Read Merger) tool [74]. The "quality filtering" step involved deletion of
terminal "NNN" residues in the reads, and removal of reads, not containing the relevant MID
and/or primers, along with the reads having mismatched MID's. Finally, only those reads
having bases with Phred score ≥ 20 are retained. A binning step involved further filtering,

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

which eliminated all those reads having incorrectly placed primers, truncated MIDs/primers
(due to quality filtering) and shorter/longer sequences than the length of the wild type
sequences. The remaining reads were binned according to the respective MIDs. In the
alignment step, reads were aligned with the wild type ccdB sequence using the Water v6.4.0.0
program [75] and reformatted. The default values of all parameters, except the gap opening
penalty, which was changed to 20, was used. In the final step of "substitution", reads were
classified based on insertions, deletions and substitutions (single, double etc mutants).
MFI reconstruction from deep sequencing data
Reads of each mutant were normalized across different bins individually (Equation 1), and the
fraction of each mutant (Xi) distributed amongst the different bins was calculated (Equation 2).
The reconstructed MFI for an individual mutant was calculated by the summation of the
product, obtained upon multiplying the fraction (Xi) of the mutant in a particular bin (i) with
the MFI of the corresponding bin obtained from the FACS experiment (Fi), across the various
bins populated by the respective mutant (Equation 3).
Normalized read of mutant in bin i (Ni) =

No. of reads of mutant 𝑖 in bin 𝑖
∑ reads in bin 𝑖

.… Equation 1

𝑵𝒊

Fraction of mutant in each gate (Xi) = ∑𝒏 𝑵𝒊 …. Equation 2
𝟏

Reconstructed MFI = ∑𝑛1 𝐹𝑖 ∗ 𝑋𝑖 …. Equation 3
The MFIseq of the biological replicates were different so the MFIseq of one of the replicates was
adjusted using “m” and “c” obtained from the correlation between the replicates and then
averaged.

Average MFIseq =

MFIseq (replicate 1)+(m∗MFIseq (replicate 2)+𝐶)
2

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Depth, accessibility and RankScore calculations.
Depth was calculated using the server DEPTH [32,76]. Accessibility was calculated using the
program NACCESS [77]. In both cases, the input co-ordinates were homodimeric CcdB (PDB
ID 3VUB). RankScore and MSseq are measures of mutational sensitivity in E.coli. Values were
obtained from Adkar et al [4]. Buried residues were those with <10% accessibility in 3VUB.
Active-site residues were those with ΔASA>0. ΔASA difference between the solvent
accessible surface area of CcdB residues in the free (3VUB) and GyrA14-bound forms (1X75)
respectively [78].
Deep mutational scanning of SARS COV-2 receptor binding domain (RBD)
The deep mutational scanning data was taken from a recent report [26] in which two
independent libraries of RBD were generated and sorted in four different bins based on
expression or binding to ACE-2. In the MFI of binding and expression for individual mutants
was reconstructed in that study using a maximum likelihood method using fitdistrplus R
package. The expression MFI (Sortseq (expr)) data was shared by the authors in a repository
(https://github.com/jbloomlab/SARS-CoV-2-RBD_DMS). We reconstructed the binding MFI
(Sortseq (bind)) at an ACE-2 concentration of 100 pM (TiteSeq_09). For Sortseq (bind)
estimation we used the script provided by the authors (https://github.com/jbloomlab/SARSCoV-2-RBD_DMS/blob/master/results/summary/compute_expression_meanF.md).The
authors used data from both single and multiple mutants, together with a model to account for
epistatic effects to infer the MFI values for individual mutants. We modified the script to
change the input data required to calculate Sortseq (bind). For both Sortseq (bind) and Sortseq
(expr), we analyzed only single mutant data to avoid any artifacts that might arise from the
epistatic model and took the average of delta Sortseq MFI (log(Sortseq (WT)) – log(Sortseq
(mutant))) of mutants which had multiple barcodes. The Sortseq MFI values of mutants were

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

averaged between the two libraries and the antilog was calculated for delta Sortseq MFI to
analyse the ratio of Sortseq (bind) or Sortseq (expr) of mutants with respect to WT.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded in part by a grant to RV from the Department of Science and
Technology, grant number-EMR/2017/004054, DT.15/12/2018), Government of India,
Department of Biotechnology, grant no. BT/COE/34/SP15219/2015 DT. 20/11/2015, Ministry
of Science and Technology, Government of India and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
(USA). We also acknowledge funding for infrastructural support from the following programs
of the Government of India: DST FIST, UGC Centre for Advanced study, Ministry of Human
Resource Development (MHRD), and the DBT IISc Partnership Program. The funders had no
role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for
publication. S.A. acknowledges Council of Scientific & Industrial Research for his fellowship
(SPM-07/079(0218)/2015-EMR-I). K.M. is thankful to Department of Science and Technology
(DST) Science and Engineering Research Board for financial support, sanction order no:
PDF/2017/002641. Aparna Ashok is duly acknowledged for FACS.
Author contribution
R.V. and S.A. designed the experiments. S.A. performed all the experiments, R.V. and S.A.
analyzed all the data. K.M. wrote the software and carried out the processing of the deep
sequencing data. R.V. and S.A. wrote most of the manuscript.
Footnotes
The authors claim no conflict of interest.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
[1]

P.C. Jain, R. Varadarajan, A rapid, efficient, and economical inverse polymerase chain

reaction-based method for generating a site saturation mutant library., Anal. Biochem. 449
(2014) 90–8.
[2]

L. Zheng, U. Baumann, J.-L. Reymond, An efficient one-step site-directed and site-

saturation mutagenesis protocol, Nucleic Acids Res. 32 (2004) e115.
[3]

E.E. Wrenbeck, J.R. Klesmith, J.A. Stapleton, A. Adeniran, K.E.J. Tyo, T.A.

Whitehead, Plasmid-based one-pot saturation mutagenesis., Nat. Methods. 13 (2016) 928–930.
[4]

B. V. Adkar, A. Tripathi, A. Sahoo, K. Bajaj, D. Goswami, P. Chakrabarti, M.K.

Swarnkar, R.S. Gokhale, R. Varadarajan, Protein model discrimination using mutational
sensitivity derived from deep sequencing, Structure. 20 (2012) 371–381.
[5]

D.M. Fowler, C.L. Araya, S.J. Fleishman, E.H. Kellogg, J.J. Stephany, D. Baker, S.

Fields, High-resolution mapping of protein sequence-function relationships, Nat. Methods. 7
(2010) 741–746.
[6]

K.A. Matreyek, L.M. Starita, J.J. Stephany, B. Martin, M.A. Chiasson, V.E. Gray, M.

Kircher, A. Khechaduri, J.N. Dines, R.J. Hause, S. Bhatia, W.E. Evans, M. V. Relling, W.
Yang, J. Shendure, D.M. Fowler, Multiplex assessment of protein variant abundance by
massively parallel sequencing, Nat. Genet. 50 (2018) 874–882.
[7]

M. Bhasin, R. Varadarajan, Prediction of Function Determining and Buried Residues

Through Analysis of Saturation Mutagenesis Datasets., Front. Mol. Biosci. 8 (2021) 635425.
[8]

L.L. Jones, S.E. Brophy, A.J. Bankovich, L.A. Colf, N.A. Hanick, K.C. Garcia, D.M.

Kranz, Engineering and characterization of a stabilized alpha1/alpha2 module of the class I
major histocompatibility complex product Ld., J. Biol. Chem. 281 (2006) 25734–44.
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[9]

R.L. Schweickhardt, X. Jiang, L.M. Garone, W.H. Brondyk, Structure-expression

relationship of tumor necrosis factor receptor mutants that increase expression., J. Biol. Chem.
278 (2003) 28961–28967.
[10]

E. Shusta, L. Pepper, Y. Cho, E. Boder, A Decade of Yeast Surface Display

Technology: Where Are We Now?, Comb. Chem. High Throughput Screen. 11 (2008) 127–
134.
[11]

E.T. Boder, K.D. Wittrup, Yeast surface display for screening combinatorial

polypeptide libraries, Nat. Biotechnol. 15 (1997) 553–557.
[12]

E. V. Shusta, M.C. Kieke, E. Parke, D.M. Kranz, K.D. Wittrup, Yeast polypeptide

fusion surface display levels predict thermal stability and soluble secretion efficiency, J. Mol.
Biol. 292 (1999) 949–956.
[13]

Y. Hagihara, P.S. Kim, Toward development of a screen to identify randomly encoded,

foldable sequences, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 (2002) 6619–6624.
[14]

S. Park, Y. Xu, X.F. Stowell, F. Gai, J.G. Saven, E.T. Boder, Limitations of yeast

surface display in engineering proteins of high thermostability., Protein Eng. Des. Sel. 19
(2006) 211–217.
[15]

A. Piatesi, S.W. Howland, J.A. Rakestraw, C. Renner, N. Robson, J. Cebon, E.

Maraskovsky, G. Ritter, L. Old, K.D. Wittrup, Directed evolution for improved secretion of
cancer-testis antigen NY-ESO-1 from yeast, Protein Expr. Purif. 48 (2006) 232–242.
[16]

A. Chevalier, D.A. Silva, G.J. Rocklin, D.R. Hicks, R. Vergara, P. Murapa, S.M.

Bernard, L. Zhang, K.H. Lam, G. Yao, C.D. Bahl, S.I. Miyashita, I. Goreshnik, J.T. Fuller,
M.T. Koday, C.M. Jenkins, T. Colvin, L. Carter, A. Bohn, C.M. Bryan, D.A. FernándezVelasco, L. Stewart, M. Dong, X. Huang, R. Jin, I.A. Wilson, D.H. Fuller, D. Baker, Massively

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

parallel de novo protein design for targeted therapeutics, Nature. 550 (2017) 74–79.
[17]

G.J. Rocklin, T.M. Chidyausiku, I. Goreshnik, A. Ford, S. Houliston, A. Lemak, L.

Carter, R. Ravichandran, V.K. Mulligan, A. Chevalier, C.H. Arrowsmith, D. Baker, Global
analysis of protein folding using massively parallel design, synthesis, and testing., Science. 357
(2017) 168–175.
[18]

B. Basanta, M.J. Bick, A.K. Bera, C. Norn, C.M. Chow, L.P. Carter, I. Goreshnik, F.

Dimaio, D. Baker, An enumerative algorithm for de novo design of proteins with diverse
pocket structures, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 117 (2020) 22135–22145.
[19]

J. Dou, A.A. Vorobieva, W. Sheffler, L.A. Doyle, H. Park, M.J. Bick, B. Mao, G.W.

Foight, M.Y. Lee, L.A. Gagnon, L. Carter, B. Sankaran, S. Ovchinnikov, E. Marcos, P.-S.
Huang, J.C. Vaughan, B.L. Stoddard, D. Baker, De novo design of a fluorescence-activating
β-barrel., Nature. 561 (2018) 485–491.
[20]

M.W. Traxlmayr, E. V. Shusta, Directed evolution of protein thermal stability using

yeast surface display, in: Methods Mol. Biol., Humana Press, New York, NY, 2017: pp. 45–
65.
[21]

P. Bernard, M. Couturier, Cell killing by the F plasmid CcdB protein involves poisoning

of DNA-topoisomerase II complexes, J. Mol. Biol. 226 (1992) 735–745.
[22]

K. Bajaj, P.C. Dewan, P. Chakrabarti, D. Goswami, B. Barua, C. Baliga, R.

Varadarajan, Structural correlates of the temperature sensitive phenotype derived from
saturation mutagenesis studies of CcdB, Biochemistry. 47 (2008) 12964–12973.
[23]

A. Tripathi, K. Gupta, S. Khare, P.C. Jain, S. Patel, P. Kumar, A.J. Pulianmackal, N.

Aghera, R. Varadarajan, Molecular Determinants of Mutant Phenotypes, Inferred from
Saturation Mutagenesis Data, Mol. Biol. Evol. 33 (2016) 2960–2975.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[24]

G. Chao, W.L. Lau, B.J. Hackel, S.L. Sazinsky, S.M. Lippow, K.D. Wittrup, Isolating

and engineering human antibodies using yeast surface display, Nat. Protoc. 1 (2006) 755–768.
[25]

A. Sahoo, S. Khare, S. Devanarayanan, P.C. Jain, R. Varadarajan, Residue proximity

information and protein model discrimination using saturation-suppressor mutagenesis, Elife.
4 (2015) e09532.
[26]

T.N. Starr, A.J. Greaney, S.K. Hilton, D. Ellis, K.H.D. Crawford, A.S. Dingens, M.J.

Navarro, J.E. Bowen, M.A. Tortorici, A.C. Walls, N.P. King, D. Veesler, J.D. Bloom, Deep
Mutational Scanning of SARS-CoV-2 Receptor Binding Domain Reveals Constraints on
Folding and ACE2 Binding, Cell. 182 (2020) 1295-1310.e20.
[27]

L.R. Pepper, Y.K. Cho, E.T. Boder, E. V Shusta, A decade of yeast surface display

technology: where are we now?, Comb. Chem. High Throughput Screen. 11 (2008) 127–134.
[28]

E. Sharon, Y. Kalma, A. Sharp, T. Raveh-Sadka, M. Levo, D. Zeevi, L. Keren, Z.

Yakhini, A. Weinberger, E. Segal, Inferring gene regulatory logic from high-throughput
measurements of thousands of systematically designed promoters, Nat. Biotechnol. 30 (2012)
521–530.
[29]

N. Peterman, E. Levine, Sort-seq under the hood: implications of design choices on

large-scale characterization of sequence-function relations., BMC Genomics. 17 (2016) 206.
[30]

G. Cambray, J.C. Guimaraes, A.P. Arkin, Evaluation of 244,000 synthetic sequences

reveals design principles to optimize translation in Escherichia coli., Nat. Biotechnol. 36 (2018)
1005–1015.
[31]

W.L. Noderer, R.J. Flockhart, A. Bhaduri, A.J. Diaz de Arce, J. Zhang, P.A. Khavari,

C.L. Wang, Quantitative analysis of mammalian translation initiation sites by FACS-seq., Mol.
Syst. Biol. 10 (2014) 748.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[32]

S. Chakravarty, R. Varadarajan, Residue depth: a novel parameter for the analysis of

protein structure and stability., Structure. 7 (1999) 723–32.
[33]

F. Pucci, J.M. Kwasigroch, M. Rooman, Protein Thermal Stability Engineering Using

HoTMuSiC., Methods Mol. Biol. 2112 (2020) 59–73.
[34]

J. Chen, Z. Lu, J. Sakon, W.E. Stites, Increasing the thermostability of staphylococcal

nuclease: Implications for the origin of protein thermostability, J. Mol. Biol. 303 (2000) 125–
130.
[35]

R.S. Prajapati, M. Das, S. Sreeramulu, M. Sirajuddin, S. Srinivasan, V. Krishnamurthy,

R. Ranjani, C. Ramakrishnan, R. Varadarajan, Thermodynamic effects of proline introduction
on protein stability, Proteins Struct. Funct. Genet. 66 (2007) 480–491.
[36]

A.P. Pandurangan, B. Ochoa-Montaño, D.B. Ascher, T.L. Blundell, SDM: A server for

predicting effects of mutations on protein stability, Nucleic Acids Res. 45 (2017) W229–W235.
[37]

D.E.V. Pires, D.B. Ascher, T.L. Blundell, MCSM: Predicting the effects of mutations

in proteins using graph-based signatures, Bioinformatics. 30 (2014) 335–342.
[38]

Y. Dehouck, J.M. Kwasigroch, D. Gilis, M. Rooman, PoPMuSiC 2.1: A web server for

the estimation of protein stability changes upon mutation and sequence optimality, BMC
Bioinformatics. 12 (2011) 151.
[39]

C.H.M. Rodrigues, D.E.V. Pires, D.B. Ascher, DynaMut: Predicting the impact of

mutations on protein conformation, flexibility and stability, Nucleic Acids Res. 46 (2018)
W350–W355.
[40]

D.E.V. Pires, D.B. Ascher, T.L. Blundell, DUET: A server for predicting effects of

mutations on protein stability using an integrated computational approach, Nucleic Acids Res.
42 (2014) W314–W319.
33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[41]

J. Laimer, J. Hiebl-Flach, D. Lengauer, P. Lackner, MAESTROweb: a web server for

structure-based protein stability prediction, Bioinformatics. 32 (2016) 1414–1416.
[42]

H. Cao, J. Wang, L. He, Y. Qi, J.Z. Zhang, DeepDDG: Predicting the Stability Change

of Protein Point Mutations Using Neural Networks, J. Chem. Inf. Model. 59 (2019) 1508–1514.
[43]

V. Parthiban, M.M. Gromiha, D. Schomburg, CUPSAT: Prediction of protein stability

upon point mutations, Nucleic Acids Res. 34 (2006) W239–W242.
[44]

Y. Chen, H. Lu, N. Zhang, Z. Zhu, S. Wang, M. Li, PremPS: Predicting the impact of

missense mutations on protein stability, PLOS Comput. Biol. 16 (2020) e1008543.
[45]

C. Savojardo, P. Fariselli, P.L. Martelli, R. Casadio, INPS-MD: a web server to predict

stability of protein variants from sequence and structure: Table 1., Bioinformatics. 32 (2016)
2542–2544.
[46]

B.E. Jones, P.L. Brown-Augsburger, K.S. Corbett, K. Westendorf, J. Davies, T.P.

Cujec, C.M. Wiethoff, J.L. Blackbourne, B.A. Heinz, D. Foster, R.E. Higgs, D.
Balasubramaniam, L. Wang, R. Bidshahri, L. Kraft, Y. Hwang, S. Žentelis, K.R. Jepson, R.
Goya, M.A. Smith, D.W. Collins, S.J. Hinshaw, S.A. Tycho, D. Pellacani, P. Xiang, K.
Muthuraman, S. Sobhanifar, M.H. Piper, F.J. Triana, J. Hendle, A. Pustilnik, A.C. Adams, S.J.
Berens, R.S. Baric, D.R. Martinez, R.W. Cross, T.W. Geisbert, V. Borisevich, O. Abiona, H.M.
Belli, M. de Vries, A. Mohamed, M. Dittmann, M. Samanovic, M.J. Mulligan, J.A. Goldsmith,
C.-L. Hsieh, N. V Johnson, D. Wrapp, J.S. McLellan, B.C. Barnhart, B.S. Graham, J.R.
Mascola, C.L. Hansen, E. Falconer, LY-CoV555, a rapidly isolated potent neutralizing
antibody, provides protection in a non-human primate model of SARS-CoV-2 infection.,
BioRxiv Prepr. Serv. Biol. (2020). https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.30.318972.
[47]

S.K. Malladi, R. Singh, S. Pandey, S. Gayathri, K. Kanjo, S. Ahmed, M.S. Khan, P.

Kalita, N. Girish, A. Upadhyaya, P. Reddy, I. Pramanick, M. Bhasin, S. Mani, S.
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Bhattacharyya, J. Joseph, K. Thankamani, V.S. Raj, S. Dutta, R. Singh, G. Nadig, R.
Varadarajan, Design of a highly thermotolerant, immunogenic SARS-CoV-2 spike fragment.,
J. Biol. Chem. 296 (2020) 100025.
[48]

T. Xue, W. Wu, N. Guo, C. Wu, J. Huang, L. Lai, H. Liu, Y. Li, T. Wang, Y. Wang,

Single point mutations can potentially enhance infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 revealed by in silico
affinity

maturation

and

SPR

assay,

BioRxiv.

(2020).

https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.24.424245.
[49]

J. Zahradník, S. Marciano, M. Shemesh, E. Zoler, J. Chiaravalli, B. Meyer, O. Dym, N.

Elad, G. Schreiber, SARS-CoV-2 RBD in vitro evolution follows contagious mutation spread,
yet

generates

an

able

infection

inhibitor,

BioRxiv.

(2021).

https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425392.
[50]

Y. Weisblum, F. Schmidt, F. Zhang, J. DaSilva, D. Poston, J.C.C. Lorenzi, F.

Muecksch, M. Rutkowska, H.-H. Hoffmann, E. Michailidis, C. Gaebler, M. Agudelo, A. Cho,
Z. Wang, A. Gazumyan, M. Cipolla, L. Luchsinger, C.D. Hillyer, M. Caskey, D.F. Robbiani,
C.M. Rice, M.C. Nussenzweig, T. Hatziioannou, P.D. Bieniasz, Escape from neutralizing
antibodies by SARS-CoV-2 spike protein variants., Elife. 9 (2020) e61312.
[51]

U.T. Bornscheuer, B. Hauer, K.E. Jaeger, U. Schwaneberg, Directed Evolution

Empowered Redesign of Natural Proteins for the Sustainable Production of Chemicals and
Pharmaceuticals, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 58 (2019) 36–40.
[52]

K. Chen, F.H. Arnold, Enzyme engineering for nonaqueous solvents: Random

mutagenesis to enhance activity of subtilisin E in Polar Organic Media, Bio/Technology. 9
(1991) 1073–1077.
[53]

G. Winter, A.D. Griffiths, R.E. Hawkins, H.R. Hoogenboom, Making antibodies by

phage display technology, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 12 (1994) 433–455.
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[54]

K.L. Maxwell, A.K. Mittermaier, J.D. Forman-Kay, A.R. Davidson, A simple in vivo

assay for increased protein solubility, Protein Sci. 8 (1999) 1908–1911.
[55]

W.C. Wigley, R.D. Stidham, N.M. Smith, J.F. Hunt, P.J. Thomas, Protein solubility

and folding monitored in vivo by structural complementation of a genetic marker protein, Nat.
Biotechnol. 19 (2001) 131–136.
[56]

A.C. Fisher, Genetic selection for protein solubility enabled by the folding quality

control feature of the twin-arginine translocation pathway, Protein Sci. 15 (2006) 449–458.
[57]

G.S. Waldo, B.M. Standish, J. Berendzen, T.C. Terwilliger, Rapid protein-folding

assay using green fluorescent protein, Nat. Biotechnol. 17 (1999) 691–695.
[58]

M.W. Traxlmayr, C. Obinger, Directed evolution of proteins for increased stability and

expression using yeast display, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 526 (2012) 174–180.
[59]

O. Esteban, H. Zhao, Directed evolution of soluble single-chain human class II MHC

molecules, J. Mol. Biol. 340 (2004) 81–95.
[60]

Y.-S. Kim, R. Bhandari, J.R. Cochran, J. Kuriyan, K.D. Wittrup, Directed evolution of

the epidermal growth factor receptor extracellular domain for expression in yeast., Proteins. 62
(2006) 1026–1035.
[61]

M.C. Kieke, E. V Shusta, E.T. Boder, L. Teyton, K.D. Wittrup, D.M. Kranz, Selection

of functional T cell receptor mutants from a yeast surface-display library., Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 96 (1999) 5651–5656.
[62]

S. Park, Y. Xu, X.F. Stowell, F. Gai, J.G. Saven, E.T. Boder, Limitations of yeast

surface display in engineering proteins of high thermostability, Protein Eng. Des. Sel. 19 (2006)
211–217.
[63]

S. Khare, M. Bhasin, A. Sahoo, R. Varadarajan, Protein model discrimination attempts
36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

using mutational sensitivity, predicted secondary structure, and model quality information,
Proteins Struct. Funct. Bioinforma. 87 (2019) 326–336.
[64]

E.M. Jones, N.B. Lubock, A.J. Venkatakrishnan, J. Wang, A.M. Tseng, J.M. Paggi,

N.R. Latorraca, D. Cancilla, M. Satyadi, J.E. Davis, M.M. Babu, R.O. Dror, S. Kosuri,
Structural and functional characterization of G protein-coupled receptors with deep mutational
scanning., Elife. 9 (2020) e61312.
[65]

B.J. Livesey, J.A. Marsh, Using deep mutational scanning to benchmark variant effect

predictors and identify disease mutations., Mol. Syst. Biol. 16 (2020) e9380.
[66]

G.M. Findlay, R.M. Daza, B. Martin, M.D. Zhang, A.P. Leith, M. Gasperini, J.D.

Janizek, X. Huang, L.M. Starita, J. Shendure, Accurate classification of BRCA1 variants with
saturation genome editing, Nature. 562 (2018) 217–222.
[67]

K. Bajaj, P.C. Dewan, P. Chakrabarti, D. Goswami, B. Barua, C. Baliga, R.

Varadarajan, Structural correlates of the temperature sensitive phenotype derived from
saturation mutagenesis studies of CcdB, Biochemistry. 47 (2008) 12964–12973.
[68]

E.T. Boder, K.D. Wittrup, Yeast surface display for directed evolution of protein

expression, affinity, and stability, Meth. Enzym. 328 (2000) 430–444.
[69]

T.A. Najar, S. Khare, R. Pandey, S.K. Gupta, R. Varadarajan, Mapping Protein Binding

Sites and Conformational Epitopes Using Cysteine Labeling and Yeast Surface Display,
Structure. 25 (2017) 395–406.
[70]

R.D. Gietz, R.H. Schiestl, High-efficiency yeast transformation using the LiAc/SS

carrier DNA/PEG method, Nat. Protoc. 2 (2007) 31–34.
[71]

G. Chattopadhyay, R. Varadarajan, Facile measurement of protein stability and folding

kinetics using a nano differential scanning fluorimeter, Protein Sci. 28 (2019) 1127–1134.
37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[72]

M.H. Dao-Thi, L. Van Melderen, E. De Genst, L. Buts, A. Ranquin, L. Wyns, R. Loris,

Crystallization of CcdB in complex with a GyrA fragment, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D Biol.
Crystallogr. 60 (2004) 1132–1134.
[73]

F.H. Niesen, H. Berglund, M. Vedadi, The use of differential scanning fluorimetry to

detect ligand interactions that promote protein stability, Nat. Protoc. 2 (2007) 2212–2221.
[74]

J. Zhang, K. Kobert, T. Flouri, A. Stamatakis, PEAR: A fast and accurate Illumina

Paired-End reAd mergeR, Bioinformatics. 30 (2014) 614–620.
[75]

T.F. Smith, M.S. Waterman, Identification of common molecular subsequences, J. Mol.

Biol. 147 (1981) 195–197.
[76]

K.P. Tan, R. Varadarajan, M.S. Madhusudhan, DEPTH: a web server to compute depth

and predict small-molecule binding cavities in proteins., Nucleic Acids Res. 39 (2011) W242–
W248.
[77]

T.J. Hubbard SJ, NACCESS, Dep. Biochem. Mol. Biol. Univ. Coll. London. (1993).

[78]

N.K. Aghera, J. Prabha, H. Tandon, G. Chattopadhyay, S. Vishwanath, N. Srinivasan,

R. Varadarajan, Mechanism of CcdA-Mediated Rejuvenation of DNA Gyrase., Structure. 28
(2020) 562-572.e4.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figures

Figure 1: Comparison of the level of expression and binding of CcdB mutants on the yeast
cell surface. (A) The expression and (B) binding to GyrA14 of individual mutants. Most
mutants expressed at high levels, however, the amount of active protein varied widely. A few
mutants which showed a high level of expression did not show any binding to GyrA14. In both
panels, mutants are arranged in order of increasing expression level.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2: Correlation of E.coli in vivo solubility and in vitro thermal stability with the
amount of total and active protein on the yeast cell surface. For individual mutants, MFI‘s
of expression and binding were estimated by probing the HA tag on surface expressed protein
and the FLAG tag on cell surface bound GyrA14 respectively. Correlation of the total amount
of protein displayed on the yeast cell surface with (A) in vivo solubility or (B) ΔTm (Tm
(mutant)- Tm (WT)) of CcdB mutants. Correlation of the amount of active protein on the yeast
cell surface with (C) E.coli in vivo solubility or (D) ΔTm of CcdB mutants. A better correlation
was observed between biophysical parameters with binding MFI rather than expression MFI.
In the figure, the ΔTm of WT was increased by 1○C to remove overlap with another point. Data
for E.coli in vivo solubility and thermal stability was taken from Tripathi et al [23]. WT data is
shown in open circles.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3: Heatmap of normalized MFIseq values for CcdB mutants. MFIseq value of mutant
was divided by the MFIseq value of WT to normalize it. (A) MFIseq (expr) and (B) MFIseq (bind)
at 100 nM GyrA14 for exposed non active-site residues. (C) MFIseq (expr) and (D) MFIseq
(bind) for buried and active-site residues. Exposed, buried (PDB ID:3VUB) and active-site
(PDB ID:1X75) residues are segregated based on the crystal structure. Residues which had
accessibility greater than 10% were considered exposed, all remaining residues were
considered buried, and active-site mutants in contact with GyrA14 were identified as explained

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the Methods section. Blue to red colour represents increasing normalized MFIseq values, black
colour shows the WT residue at the corresponding position. White colour indicates that the
mutant is not available. The buried site residues have very high mutational sensitivity both in
case of expression and binding. The active-site residues show mutational sensitivity only with
respect to Gyrase binding. Information about the mutational sensitivity of expression and
binding can be used to differentiate exposed, buried and active-site residues.

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4: Identification of buried and active-site residues from MrMFIcharged (bind) and
MrMFIcharged (expr). Side chain accessibilities in dimeric CcdB (PDB: 3VUB), darker to
lighter shade indicate increasing accessibility, accessibility is reported as log accessibility. the
mutants were clustered into two bins based on the distribution of MrMFIcharged and k-means and
standard deviations were calculated for both distributions. The distributions were named D1
(higher MrMFIcharged) and D2 (lower MrMFIcharged). Residues which had MrMFIcharged (binding)
and MrMFIcharged (expr) lower than (µ+0.5*σ) of distribution D2 were characterized as buried.
The false negatives were Y6, D19, Q21, S22, S70, V75 and G77, the polar side chains of these
residues are pointing towards the surface. Active-site residues were identified as those in
contact with GyyrA14 (PDB ID 1X75). Residues which had MrMFIcharged (binding) less than
(µ+σ) of D2 distribution and MrMFIcharged (expr) higher than (µ-2*σ) of distribution D1 were
predicted as active-site. We obtained a few putative false positives. However, these residues
are likely involved in functional aspects of activity that cannot be inferred from the
CcdB:GyrA14 crystal structure. The same residues were seen to be important for CcdB activity
in vivo in E.coli [23]. Some positions could not be categorized due to lack of reads, such
positions are indicated with an ‘X’. Positions indicated with ‘*’ are the one where MrMFIcharged
(expr) was observed and the mutants had high read counts but the mutants were absent in
MrMFIcharged (bind), such positions were assigned MrMFIcharged (bind) values similar to other
buried positions.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5: ΔTm of putative stabilized CcdB mutants. Mutants were identified from A) MFIseq
(bind) at 5 nM GyrA14, (B) MFIseq (ratio) at 5 nM GyrA14, (C) MFIseq (bind) at 100 nM
GyrA14, (D) MFIseq (ratio) at 100 nM GyrA14.

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6: Comparison of stabilities estimated by DeepDDG and yeast surface display.
Heat maps for (A,C) MFIseq (bind) normalized to WT and (B, D) ΔΔG predicted by DeepDDG.
Residue positions or specific amino acid mutations showing significantly different predicted
stabilities by the two methods are highlighted by a box. Blue to red colour corresponds to
increasing stability.

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 7: Prediction of buried and active-site positions in SARS-CoV-2 RBD from
Sortseq data. Buried residues were identified from chain C of PDB ID 7KMH, residues which
46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.31.446445; this version posted June 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

had <10% side chain accessibility were categorized as buried. The accessibility and depth was
calculated using DEPTH server [76]. Active-site residues were identified from PDB ID 6M0J
as explained earlier [47]. Criteria used to predict buried and active-site positions from MFI data
were identical to those used for CcdB. Positions which did not have MrMFI data or could not
be assigned to either buried or active-site categories are highlighted with “X”. Accessibility
calculated by DEPTH server for glycine is zero and these are marked with a ‘*’.

47

