bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Arena3Dweb
​ ​: Interactive 3D visualization of multilayered networks.
Evangelos Karatzas​1,​*, Fotis A. Baltoumas​1​, Nikolaos A. Panayiotou​2​, Reinhard Schneider​3​, Georgios A.
Pavlopoulos​1,​*
1​

Institute for Fundamental Biomedical Research, BSRC "Alexander Fleming", Vari, Greece
School of Mechanical Engineering, Section of Industrial Management and Operational Research,
National Technical University of Athens, Zografou, Athens, Greece
3​
University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, Bioinformatics Core,
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
2​

* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +30-210-9656310; Fax: +30-210-9653934; Email:
pavlopoulos@fleming.gr​; karatzas@fleming.gr

Present Address: Georgios A. Pavlopoulos, Institute for Fundamental Biomedical Research, BSRC
"Alexander Fleming", 34 Fleming Street, Vari, 16672, Greece

ABSTRACT
Efficient integration and visualization of heterogeneous biomedical information in a single view is a key
challenge. In this study, we present Arena3D​web​, the first, fully interactive and dependency-free, web
application which allows the visualization of multilayered graphs in 3D space. With Arena3D​web​, users can
integrate multiple networks in a single view along with their intra- and inter-layer connections. For clearer
and more informative views, users can choose between a plethora of layout algorithms and apply them on
a set of selected layers either individually or in combination. Users can align networks and highlight node
topological features, whereas each layer as well as the whole scene can be translated, rotated and scaled
in 3D space. User-selected edge colors can be used to highlight important paths, while node positioning,
coloring and resizing can be adjusted on-the-fly. In its current version, Arena3D​web supports weighted and
unweighted undirected graphs and is written in R, Shiny and JavaScript. We demonstrate the functionality
of Arena3D​web ​using two different use-case scenarios; one regarding drug repurposing for SARS-CoV-2
and one related to GPCR signaling pathways implicated in melanoma. Arena3D​web is available at
http://bib.fleming.gr:3838/Arena3D​.
INTRODUCTION
Simple networks are often used to model relationships between entities in real-world systems. Typical
examples of such networks in the biomedical field are the gene co-expression networks, sequence
similarity networks (SSNs), protein-protein interaction networks (PPIs), metabolic networks, signal
transduction networks, gene regulatory networks, gene-disease networks, evolution networks, bipartite
graphs, food webs and others ​(1)​. Most of these networks come with certain topological features and fall
into one of the Erdos–Rényi (random), Watts-Strogatz (small-word) and Barabási–Albert (scale-free)
categories ​(2)​. Efficient visualizers take advantage of these topological properties and utilize advanced
graph-drawing (layout) algorithms (e.g. force-directed, hierarchical, orthogonal and spectral) to generate
informative and appealing 2D/3D views thus minimizing any possible node overlaps and connection
crossovers ​(3)​. Among a decent variety of applications today ​(4, 5)​, widely-used interactive 2D visualizers
include the Cytoscape ​(6)​, Cytoscape.js ​(7)​, String ​(8)​, NORMA ​(9)​, Gephi ​(10)​, Pajek ​(11) and Tulip ​(12)
whereas successful 3D visualizers include the Graphia (Kajeka) and BioLayout Express ​(13)​.
Despite the great functionality and interactivity of these viewers, most of them currently offer

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

over-simplified views and often fail to capture patterns in today’s data heterogeneity and complexity. In
the biomedical field for example, a new trend is to integrate heterogeneous information from various
repositories in a single view or support experimental findings (e.g. biomarker detection) in multiple ways
(e.g. genomics, proteomics, metabolomics). Therefore, visualizers able to offer a more structured analysis
along with contemporary multilayer network visualization are necessary ​(14)​. While this area of network
analysis is still in its infancy, few implementations in this direction have been already proposed. The
Arena3D standalone version ​(15, 16) for example, enables an interactive multilayered graph visualization
but is poor in the inter/intra-layer layouts that it offers. Pymnet is a python library which can produce high
quality static images of multilayer and multiplex networks and therefore, familiarity with Python
programming language is required. Similarly, Py3plex ​(17) a python library, which handles multilayered
networks and enables common operations such as aggregation, slicing, indexing and traversal but lacks
interactivity and fails to solve the edge overlapping problem. Mully ​(18) is an R package to create, modify
and visualize multilayered graphs but lacks interactivity too. Finally, MuxViz ​(19) is a framework which is
more suitable for layer analysis and visualization of geospatial data.
In this article, we propose Arena3D​web​, the first web application which offers a fully interactive 3D
visualization and analysis of multilayered networks. Arena3D​web comes with many inter/intra-layer layouts
and network metrics for node scaling, is dependency-free and is easily accessible to non-experts from a
web browser. It is written in R, Shiny and JavaScript whereas the backend calculations are based on the
igraph library ​(20)​. We believe that Arena3D​web is a general-purpose tool which can successfully address
many of the complexity issues in the biomedical field and can offer informative and appealing
visualizations suitable for knowledge integration, representation, transfer and communication.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Input and export files
In its current version, Arena3D​web mainly accepts three different types of tab-delimited files as input. The
main file is a four- or a five-column file describing the network in a simple format like: ​node i from layer x
is connected to node j from layer y . In the case of a weighted graph, weights can be added as an extra
column. In addition to the main file, users are allowed to upload two more files with further information
about the node and edge attributes. In the first case, nodes can be accompanied by a URL, a description,
a color, and a custom size whereas in the second case, edges can be accompanied by a color. For
convenience, the column order in any of the aforementioned files is insignificant as long as headers are
used strictly. Notably, users can save and export the status of a network at any time in an Arena3D​web file
format. This file contains all the necessary information from nodes and connections to colors and 3D
coordinates. It is a text file format which users can modify manually at any time.
Graph drawing and layouts
As a default option, Arena3D​web places all uploaded layers in parallel and spreads them horizontally. Once
the main network has been loaded and rendered, users can choose between a variety of layout
algorithms to adjust the node coordinates. By applying a layout algorithm on a selected layer or a set of
selected layers individually, users can eliminate the intra-layer line crossovers without impacting the
inter-layer connections. On the contrary, when users decide to apply a layout algorithm on a set of
selected layers in combination, then more focus is given on eliminating the inter-layer crossovers. In the
second case, the layout algorithm will handle all nodes from the selected layers and their connections as
one unified network and will place them back on their originating layers once the layout algorithm has
converged. The latter is a powerful feature for creating network pseudo-alignments (Figure 1, layers 5 and

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

6) and generating appealing and informative views. Finally, users are allowed to apply any of the offered
layout algorithms locally on a set of selected nodes per layer.
In this version, Arena3D​web supports a variety of layout algorithms implemented as part of the
R/igraph library ​(20)​. Briefly, these are:
● Circle:​ It is a simple layout and places the vertices on a circle, ordered by their vertex ids.
● Grid​: This simple layout places vertices on a rectangular 2D grid.
● Random:​ This function places the vertices of the graph on a 2D plane uniformly using random
coordinates.
● Star:​ It places the vertices of a graph on the plane, according to the simulated annealing
algorithm developed by Davidson and Harel. It is a simple layout generator that places one vertex
in the center of a circle and the rest of the vertices equidistantly on the perimeter.
● Reingold-Tilford (​ 21)​: It is a tree-like layout more suitable for trees, hierarchies and graphs
without many cycles.
● Sugiyama​: Like Reingold-Tilford, this layout algorithm is more suitable for hierarchies and layered
directed acyclic graphs.
● Fruchterman-Reingold ​(22)​: It places nodes on the plane using the force-directed layout algorithm
developed by Fruchterman and Reingold.
● Davidson-Harel ​(23)​: It is a force-directed algorithm which uses simulated annealing and a
sophisticated energy function to place nodes on a plane.
● Distributed Recursive (Graph) Layout ​(24)​: DrL is a force-directed graph layout toolbox focused
on real-world large-scale graphs.
● Multidimensional scaling ​(25)​: It aims to place points from a higher dimensional space on a 2D
plane, so that the distance between the points are kept as much as possible.
● Kamada-Kawai ​(26)​: This force-directed layout places the vertices on a 2D plane by simulating a
physical model of springs.
● Large Graph Layout (LGL):​ A force-directed layout suitable for larger graphs.
● Graphopt:​ A force-directed layout algorithm, which scales relatively well to large graphs.
● Gem (​ 27)​: It places vertices on the plane using the GEM force-directed layout algorithm.
In Figure 1, we show representative views which demonstrate some of the aforementioned functionalities.
Nodes on the first layer have been placed on a simple grid whereas node coordinates on the second layer
(random acyclic graph) have been generated by the Reingold-Tilford layout. The force-directed
Kamada-Kawai layout algorithm has been applied separately on a small-world and a scale-free random
network on layers 3 and 4 accordingly. Finally networks on layer 5 and 6 have been treated as one unified
network aligned with the use of the Fruchterman-Reingold force-directed algorithm.
Topological features
Nodes on a set of selected layers can be resized according to topological properties such as the ​degree​,
clustering coefficient and ​betweenness centrality.​ For example, nodes with higher connectivity degrees
can be forced to appear larger. This function can be performed on each of the selected layers individually
or in combination. In the first case, only the intra-layer connections are taken into account whereas in the
second case both the intra- and inter-layer connections are considered. Briefly, as ​degree deg i , we define
the total number of connections adjacent to a node i . The ​clustering coefficient of a node i shows
whether this node has the tendency to form clusters and is defined as the number of edges between a
node’s neighbors divided by the number of all possible connections between these neighbors. The
betweenness centrality highlights nodes which can act as mediators in order for two communities to
σ xy (i)
communicate with each other. It is calculated as B i = σxy where σ xy is the total number of shortest paths
from node x to node y and σ xy (i) is the number of those paths that pass through the node i . For

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

demonstration purposes, in Figure 1, nodes on layers 1 and 2 have been resized based on their
connectivity degree. Nodes on layers 3 and 4 have been resized based on their clustering coefficient.
Finally, nodes on layers 5 and 6 have been resized based on their degree, while considering both layers
as one unified network.

Figure 1​. Random networks with different topologies were drawn with the use of various layout algorithms supported
by igraph and subsequently by Arena3D​web​. Nodes on layer 1 are placed on a grid. Nodes on layer 2 have been
placed in a hierarchy using the Reingold-Tilford layout algorithm. Nodes on the first two layers are scaled based on
degree. Layer 3 shows a small-world network drawn using the Kamada-Kawai layout algorithm. Layer 4 shows a
scale-free network also drawn with the Kamada-Kawai layout algorithm. Nodes on layers 3 and 4 are scaled based
on their clustering coefficient. Layers 5 and 6 have been combined and are drawn using the Fruchterman-Reingold
layout algorithm. Both layers were handled as a unified network and nodes were placed back to their layers after the
completion of the layout algorithm, thus giving a sense of a network alignment. The node scale of these two layers is
relative to their degree.

Navigation controls
Arena3D​web comes with various control buttons for easy 3D navigation (Figure 2). These buttons are
grouped in three main categories. These are: ​i) buttons for the whole scene, ​ii) buttons for each layer, ​iii)
buttons for the nodes within a layer.
The Scene:​ Arena3D​web uses a global cartesian coordinate system and adopts the red green and
blue colors to highlight the x, y and z axes accordingly. The whole network can be rotated clockwise and
counter-clockwise around any on the three axes using the navigation buttons. The rotation angle and
subsequently the rotation speed can be adjusted manually. Zooming, panning and orbiting are controlled
by mouse events as well as by keyboard strokes.
The Layer​: In Arena3D​web​, each layer comes with its own individual coordinate system. Users are
allowed to rotate and translate any layer around any of the x, y, z axes and place them anywhere in 3D
space. In the case where multiple layers have been selected, each transformation will be applied to each

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

of them individually. Like before, the rotation angle as well as the translation step can be adjusted
manually. In addition, each layer floor can be scaled up or down by a user-defined factor and node
coordinates on the corresponding layer will be adjusted automatically. Finally, to avoid incomprehensive
views when layers are placed too close to each other, users have the option to expand or collapse the
view by adjusting their in-between distance.
The nodes​: Nodes can be placed anywhere on a plane regardless the position and orientation of
the layer. Users can select a single node or multiple nodes simultaneously using a rectangle selection
and translate them in 3D space. To cope with node and label overlapping problems, users can apply any
of the offered layout algorithms locally on a set of selected nodes or increase and decrease their local
coordinates thus giving the feeling of repulsion or attraction. Like before, the translation step can be
manually adjusted. Finally, node sizes can be scaled manually with the use of a slide bar.
Styles and colors
Arena3D​web comes with a plethora of options to avoid incomprehensive visualizations. Users can show
and hide the labels of each layer as well as the layer itself along with the corresponding connections.
Similarly, users can show and hide the coordinate system of the whole scene as well as the coordinate
systems of each individual layer. Nodes and edges can be manually colored to highlight important paths
whereas edge weights are represented by an edge's opacity. The lower the weight, the more transparent
the edge’s color and vice versa. The background color as well as each layer’s floor color can be changed
with the use of a color picker whereas each floor’s transparency can be adjusted manually. Finally, the
inter-layer and the intra-layer connection opacities can be adjusted. This way, one can emphasize on the
intra- or the inter-layer edges separately. Finally, Arena3D​web gives the option to highlight the
first-neighbors of a node along with their corresponding connections or highlight the paths that this node
is involved in across all layers.

Figure 2​. Random networks visualized by Arena3D​web​. A) Layers 1-4 are placed in a 3D cube. Node sizes on layers 1
and 2 are adjusted by connectivity degree, nodes on layer 3 by betweenness centrality and nodes on layer 4 by
clustering coefficient. The Kamada Kawai layout algorithm has been applied on each layer individually. First
neighbors of a node and their connections are colored yellow. B) Layers 1-3 host three different scale-free random
networks whereas layer 4 hosts a small-world random network. Based on a node attributes file, nodes with higher
connectivity degree are resized and colored red, green, purple and yellow. Based on an edge attributes file, the
inter-layer edges of the upscaled nodes are colored red, green, blue and yellow. The Fruchterman-Reingold layout
algorithm has been applied on each layer individually.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Implementation
Arena3D​web is mainly written in R and JavaScript programming languages. It’s frontend is written using the
R/Shiny package, HTML, CSS and JavaScript. The Shiny package was used as the mediator to establish
the communication between the R and JavaScript variables and functions. In the backend, the igraph
library was used for all network layout algorithms as well as for the calculation of the topological metrics
used for node scaling. 3D graphics in the main view were handled by the three.js JavaScript library. The
library uses the WebGL JavaScript API for graphics and 3D object rendering.
RESULTS
In order to demonstrate how Arena3D​web can visualize heterogeneous complex information in real case
scenarios, we provide two examples, the one related to drug repurposing for SARS-CoV-2 (network with
456 nodes and 985 edges) and the other related to GPCR signaling pathways implicated in melanoma
(network with 64 nodes and 332 edges).
Drug repurposing for SARS-CoV-2 - A case study
SARS-CoV-2 is the causative coronavirus for the disease COVID-19 ​(28) which has infected over 46
million people and has led to more than 1.2 million deaths (worldometers.info/coronavirus - 11/2020). In a
recent study of Gordon et. al ​(29)​, 26 SARS-CoV-2 proteins have been cloned, tagged and expressed in
HEK-293T/17 human cells in order to identify physically interacting proteins with the use of
affinity-purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) technology. Experiments led to the identification of 332
high-confidence protein–protein interactions between the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the human proteins. In
addition to this, the study highlights existing drugs which target the human proteins and which can be
potentially repurposed and be used for the COVID-19 treatment.
In more detail, the 2019-nCoV/USA-WA1/2020 SARS-CoV-2 genome (MN985325) was taken
from the GenBank database ​(30) and was analyzed across its 29 possible open-reading frames (ORFs).
The analysis reported 26 annotated protein baits which were found to interact with proteins in human
cells. In many cases, these human proteins were found to form protein complexes, reported in the
CORUM database ​(31)​. In addition, functional enrichment analysis reported Gene Ontology (GO)
biological process terms ​(32)​, collected from the Molecular Signature Database ​(33)​. Interacting drugs
with both viral and human proteins were identified through literature searching for targets and pathways,
as well as based on cheminformatics searches in the 2020 IUPHAR/BPS Guide to Pharmacology ​(34)
and the ChEMBL25 ​(35)​ databases.
In order to combine the heterogeneous information from this example in a single view, based on
the data provided by the Gordon et al. study, we constructed a five-level multilayered network with
Arena3D​web ​(Figure 3). In detail, these layers are: (i) human proteins and their interactions, (ii) protein
complexes these proteins belong to, (iii) biological processes these proteins are involved in, (iv)
SARS-CoV-2 proteins and their interactions with the human proteins and (v) possibly repurposable drugs
and their respective targets in both the SARS-CoV-2 and human protein layers. To create a more
comprehensive view, we treated the different layers as one network and aligned them via the
Kamada-Kawai layout. Drugs on the last layer were grouped using a local circular layout and
FDA-approved drugs were marked in a cerulean color.
We focused on pevonedistat and zotatifin drugs as they target several SARV-CoV-2 proteins as
well as certain human protein complexes. We highlight the inter-layer paths these drugs belong to with
green and pink colors respectively as well as their protein targets and their distinct complexes. For better
visualization, on the human protein layer, we applied the local circular layout where necessary.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

With an at-a-glance view, we observe that the SARS-CoV-2 ORF10 ubiquitin ligase interacts with
members from the cullin-2 (CUL2) RING E3 ligase complex and more specifically with the CUL2​ZYG11B
complex. Either ORF10 binds to the CUL2​ZYG11B complex and hijacks it for ubiquitination and degradation
of restriction factors, or ZYG11B binds to the N-terminal glycine in ORF10 and targets it for degradation
(36)​. Pevonedistat is a NEDD8-activating enzyme ​(37) that allows the neddylation of CUL2, a process
which is required for transfering ubiquitin to substrates ​(38)​. Therefore, pevonedistat may inhibit the
ubiquitination of host proteins that is caused when ORF10 hijacks the CUL2​ZYG11B ​complex.
In general, coronaviruses produce their proteins via cap-dependent mRNA translation ​(39)​.
Eukaryotic translation initiation factors 4 (eIF4) are proteins that, as their name implies, act as initiation
factors for the translational process ​(40)​. Key eIF4F–cap binding components are attractive candidates for
potential coronavirus treatments ​(41, 42)​. Zotatifin directly targets the SARS-CoV-2 NSP2 protein as well
as the eIF4H and eIF4E2 human proteins. Specifically, Gordon et al. observed a strong antiviral effect
through zotatifin, which inhibits eIF4A, a partner of eIF4H. Through the eIF4A inhibition, zotatifin may
prevent the translation of a viral 5’ region by impeding its unwinding. The eIF4H human protein also
interacts with the viral protein NSP9. Subsequently, NSP9 interacts with human proteins that belong to
the nuclear pore and fibrillin protein complexes. Furthermore, the nuclear pore NUP98–RAE1
sub-complex was found to interact with the SARS-CoV-2 ORF6 protein. ORF6 perturbs nuclear transport
in order to antagonize host interferon signalling in SARS-CoV ​(43)​. In SARS-CoV-2, the
NUP98–RAE1-ORF6 interaction may have a similar effect.
Pevonedistat and zotatifin both target key human proteins that interact with SARS-CoV-2
proteins, as well as viral proteins which in turn interact with distinct human protein complexes. Since there
are no overlaps among the targets of the aforementioned drugs, a cotherapy of the two should be further
evaluated as a potential treatment against symptoms of COVID-19.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 3​. A multilayered COVID-19 related example based on the work of Gordon et al. Nodes are placed on five
different layers (SARS-CoV-2 proteins, drugs, human proteins, protein complexes, biological processes). The vertices
are aligned across every layer via the Kamada-Kawai layout algorithm. Two of the most interesting multilayer paths of
this study are highlighted in green and pink colors respectively. With green color, pevonedistat directly targets the
CUL2 protein complex and the SARS-CoV-2 ORF10 protein. With pink color, zotatifin directly targets eIF4 human
proteins and the SARS-CoV-2 NSP2 protein. The latter indirectly interacts both with protein members of the nuclear
pore and fibrillin complexes as well as with SARS-CoV-2 NSP9 and ORF6 proteins.

GPCR signaling pathways implicated in melanoma - A case study
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are one of the largest and most diverse superfamilies of
cell-surface receptors in eukaryotic organisms. They regulate the majority of cell responses related to
signaling stimuli and have been implicated in a wide range of diseases. As a result, today GPCRs are
targets for more than 30% of drugs on the market ​(44)​. Most GPCR functions are conducted through
heterotrimeric G-proteins, composed by Gα subunits and Gβγ heterodimers, which act as molecular
switches that modulate intracellular signaling cascades as responses to receptor activation ​(45)​.
G-proteins are grouped, based on the Gα subunit, in four families, Gα​s​, Gα​i/o​, Gα​q/11 and Gα​12/13​. They
regulate the function of a wide and diverse range of effector proteins, including several enzymes,
regulators of protein function, chaperones, transcription factors and cytoskeletal components. However,
other signaling pathways also exist, either complementary to or independent from G-protein signaling.
Phosphorylation of GPCRs by a special class of kinases, known as G-protein coupled receptor kinases
(GRKs), leads to the internalization of the receptors; the internalized GPCRs can subsequently initiate
signaling pathways regulating the expression of genes that control cell growth and/or apoptosis ​(46)​.
Another example is GPCR oligomerization; a phenomenon during which multiple GPCRs form
supramolecular homo- or hetero-complexes, leading to diverse signal transduction mechanisms ​(47)​.
Finally, several GPCRs have been found to directly interact with effectors such as ion channels. All of the
aforementioned signaling mechanisms result in complex and diverse signaling networks for GPCRs, with
a single receptor capable of regulating a large number of pathways and therefore, a wide range of cell
functions ​(48)​.
GPCR signaling can be deregulated in cancer; either due to damaging mutations affecting the
receptors themselves or due to changes in proteins participating in the receptors’ signaling pathways. As
a result, many GPCRs constitute attractive pharmacological targets for cancer management and
treatment ​(49)​. A characteristic example for a type of cancer with GPCRs as potential pharmacological
targets is the malignant melanoma ​(50)​. Melanoma is a type of skin cancer that develops from
melanocytes, melanin-producing cells primarily located in the stratum basale, the bottom layer of the
skin’s epidermis. It is one of the most dangerous types of skin cancer; while it is highly treatable if
detected early. Advanced melanoma can spread to the lymph nodes and internal organs ​(51)​. A
promising treatment involves the signaling pathways of endothelins, a group of peptide hormones
(52–54)​. Endothelin signaling is conducted through two GPCRs, the endothelin receptors A and B
(EDNRA and EDNRB, respectively). The two GPCRs have been implicated in various types of cancer
(50) and the use of endothelin antagonists has been found to diminish cancer cells ​in vitro and ​in vivo​,
with both receptors having an impact ​(52)​. However, while in several types of cancer both EDNRA and
EDNRB are promising drug targets, in the case of melanoma, EDNRB targeting seems to have a more
profound impact upon cancer progression compared to EDNRA ​(54)​.
To analyze the signaling pathways of EDNRA and EDNRB and show the importance of the latter
in melanoma, we constructed a multilayered interaction network (Figure 4). Initial interaction evidence for
GPCR-related signaling in skin melanocytes was retrieved from hGPCRnet, a web application which
allows the tissue-specific visualization and analysis of GPCR signal transduction networks, based on
gene expression evidence on different tissues and cell types ​(48)​. The initial skin melanocyte network

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

was then filtered to retrieve the signaling pathways of EDNRA and EDNRB, as well as all the related
protein-protein interactions, which were subsequently used to construct a 3D representation in
Arena3D​web​. The GPCR signaling network obtained is organized in four distinct layers: the top layer
includes the receptors; namely, EDNRA and EDNRB. The two intermediate layers represent G-proteins
and GRKs, for the intermediate steps of the G-protein and phosphorylation/internalization signaling
pathways, respectively. Finally, the bottom layer contains all effectors that are regulated from the
aforementioned pathways. Visual inspection of the EDNRA-EDNRB network (Figure 4) reveals a rather
complex signaling network for the two receptors. The network consists of a total of 331 interactions; these
include not only inter-layer links (e.g. GPCR-G-protein, G-protein-effector contacts), representing the
different steps of the signaling pathways, but also intra-layer contacts, particularly in the effectors layer,
as many effectors form supramolecular complexes with one-another to achieve a common cell response
(e.g. tubulin subunits organize to microtubules). The edges representing the signaling pathways of the
two receptors have been colored using red for the pathways unique to EDNRA, blue for the pathways
unique to EDNRB and green for pathways controlled by both receptors.
Inspection of the EDNRA-EDNRB signaling network reveals that the vast majority of
endothelin-related cell responses in skin melanocytes are controlled by both receptors. Activated EDNRA
and EDNRB both interact with three major G-protein subunits, GNAI1, GNAI2 and GNAI3, belonging to
the Gα​i/o family; through these, the two GPCRs control the formation of cytoskeletal components by
influencing the functionality of α-, β- and γ-tubulins (TUBA1A, TUBA1B, TUBB1, TUBG1 etc), the folding
and maturation of proteins through interactions with chaperones such as HSP90-β (HSP90AB1), and the
mechanisms of apoptosis and cell death through the control of apoptotic factors such as TNF-associated
factor 6 (TRAF6) and the PTEN phosphatase (PTEN). Positive or negative disruption of the
aforementioned processes can lead to the uncontrolled cell growth/multiplication or cell death,
respectively; thus, showcasing the importance of both receptors in various types of cancer. At the same
time, both receptors interact with GNA11, a member of the Gα​q family, which controls the function of
Phospholipase C (PLCB2). The latter is an enzyme that initiates signaling cascades of second messenger
molecules that regulate Protein Kinase C (PKC) and in turn, control the MAPK kinase pathway (MAP3K5).
The MAPK pathway is typically deregulated in melanoma; therefore inhibitors for key members of that
pathway have been used for treatment in the past ​(55)​.
However, while EDNRA’s signaling mechanisms are mostly limited to the above, a number of
pathways exist that are unique to EDNRB. These feature interactions of the receptor with all members of
the Gα​q/11 family (GNAQ, GNA11, GNA13 and GNA14), which also control PLCβ and MAPK. EDNRB
controls the activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3 kinases (PIKC3A and PIK3CB); these effectors play a
key role in inducing drug resistance after treatment in melanoma patients and are, therefore, a decisive
target for novel drug design in melanoma therapy ​(56)​. Another pathway includes the regulation of Rho
Guanine Exchange Factors (RhoGEFs). EDNRB, through GNAQ and GNA13, regulates the function of
RhoGEFs 1 (ARHGEF1), 11 (ARHGEF11) and 12 (ARHGEF12); these effectors regulate the enzyme
activity of Rho GTPases that control the movement and morphology of melanoma cells ​(57)​. Finally,
EDNRB controls the function of Cadherin-1 (CDH1), a regulator of cell adhesion and a tumor suppressor
in melanoma ​(58)​. Overall, the aforementioned pathways show that while both GPCRs control a number
of functions and cell mechanisms related to the progression of cancer in general and melanoma in
particular, including the MAPK pathway, EDNRB exclusively regulates a number of additional signaling
mechanisms that are specific to this type of cancer and is, therefore, a more suitable target for the design
of anti-melanoma treatments.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 4​. Overview of the EDNRA-EDNRB endothelin receptor signaling network. Nodes are placed in four different
layers representing the different hierarchical levels in GPCR signaling (GPCRs, GRKs, G-proteins and effectors). The
inter-layer edges representing the signaling pathways of the two receptors have been colored using red for the
pathways unique to EDNRA, blue for the pathways unique to EDNRB and green for pathways controlled by both
receptors. Intra-layer edges, connecting proteins in the same hierarchical level (e.g. effector-effector interactions) are
colored grey. Effectors with clinical relevance to melanoma (CDH1, MAP3K5 etc) are shown bigger and colored
magenta.

DISCUSSION
To avoid confusion, while Arena3D​web has been inspired by the Arena3D standalone version, it is a new
application which has been written from scratch using different technologies. Compared to Arena3D,
Arena3D​web comes with a much richer functionality and navigation options. A characteristic example is its
greater variety of layout algorithms which can be used very efficiently and in multiple ways. The most
advanced feature in Arena3D​web is the possibility to apply the layout algorithms to a subset of layers or the
whole network. This allows us to generate views with much less line crossovers and makes it easier to
detect feature patterns. Furthermore, as a web server application, Arena3D​web can run on any browser
and attract a much broader audience beyond the biomedical field. On the contrary, Arena3D comes with
many library dependencies, could run only on Windows and Linux and was bound to certain Java and

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

OpenGL versions as well to the outdated Java3D library. Finally, Arena3D​web comes with a more flexible
input file format as well as with a more advanced export function to save and re-import the status of a
network at any time.
Concerning scalability, in its online version, Arena3D​web can handle networks of up to 5,000
nodes. This limitation can be bypassed when running the application locally, by adjusting the
max_allowed_edges variable value in the global.R file. We tested Arena3D​web ​on a 32GB RAM, ​6-core
processor @ 4.2 GHz, AMD Radeon RX 5700 XT desktop machine. We ran the application ​οn all platforms
(Unix, Windows, MacOS) using a network consisting of 1,600 nodes and 2,396 edges. We tested the
application on Rstudio, Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge and Safari and benchmarked its
memory and CPU requirements. We observed that Arena3D​web ​consumed ~300-500MB RAM on Edge
browser and ~1-1.5GB RAM on Chrome, Firefox and Rstudio (including the memory needed by each
browser). Due to a memory leak, on Windows systems, Mozilla Firefox kept exhausting the memory
during execution, an issue which might have been evoked by a conflict between Firefox and the WebGL
renderer. This problem does not occur when running Firefox on Linux. The memory requirements on
MacOS across all three browsers was significantly lower ( ~200MB for Chrome and Safari and ~500MB
for Firefox). In addition, enabling hardware acceleration on a browser helps in achieving smoother 3D
transformations. Hence, a CPU load reduction from ~50% to ~13% was observed when visualizing the
aforementioned network at 30 frames per seconds (FPS). Finally, the navigation controls run smoother on
any of the browsers compared to RStudio, and therefore Unix and MacOS users are encouraged to run
Arena3D​web ​on any of those. Windows users are encouraged to run Arena3D​web ​on Microsoft Edge which
was found to be the most memory efficient.
Overall, due to its ease-of-use, simplicity and interoperability, we expect Arena3D​web to become
the reference tool for multilayer graph analysis and visualization.
AVAILABILITY
Arena3D​web​ is an open source application. Its code can be downloaded from the GitHub repository:
https://github.com/PavlopoulosLab/Arena3Dweb​. The service is available online at
http://bib.fleming.gr:3838/Arena3D​.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
EK wrote the code and implemented the tool. FB generated all the necessary data related to the case
studies. NAP benchmarked the tool. RS conceived new concepts which make Arena3D​web more
accessible than Arena3D. GAP conceived the idea and supervised the whole project from the beginning
to its end. All authors wrote parts of the article.
FUNDING
This study was funded by the Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation (H.F.R.I) under the “First
Call for H.F.R.I Research Projects to support faculty members and researchers and the procurement of
high-cost research equipment grant”, Grant ID: 1855-BOLOGNA.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
All authors have read and approved the manuscript and declare no conflict of interest.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

REFERENCES
1. Koutrouli,M., Karatzas,E., Paez-Espino,D. and Pavlopoulos,G.A. (2020) A Guide to Conquer the
Biological Network Era Using Graph Theory. ​Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol.​, ​8​, 34.
2. Doncheva,N.T., Assenov,Y., Domingues,F.S. and Albrecht,M. (2012) Topological analysis and
interactive visualization of biological networks and protein structures. ​Nat. Protoc.​, ​7​, 670–685.
3. Pavlopoulos,G.A., Paez-Espino,D., Kyrpides,N.C. and Iliopoulos,I. (2017) Empirical Comparison of
Visualization Tools for Larger-Scale Network Analysis. ​Adv. Bioinforma.​, ​2017​, 1278932.
4. Pavlopoulos,G.A., Wegener,A.-L. and Schneider,R. (2008) A survey of visualization tools for biological
network analysis. ​BioData Min.​, ​1​, 12.
5. Gehlenborg,N., O’Donoghue,S.I., Baliga,N.S., Goesmann,A., Hibbs,M.A., Kitano,H., Kohlbacher,O.,
Neuweger,H., Schneider,R., Tenenbaum,D., ​et al. (2010) Visualization of omics data for systems
biology. ​Nat. Methods,​ ​7​, S56-68.
6. Shannon,P., Markiel,A., Ozier,O., Baliga,N.S., Wang,J.T., Ramage,D., Amin,N., Schwikowski,B. and
Ideker,T. (2003) Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular
interaction networks. ​Genome Res.,​ ​13​, 2498–2504.
7. Franz,M., Lopes,C.T., Huck,G., Dong,Y., Sumer,O. and Bader,G.D. (2016) Cytoscape.js: a graph
theory library for visualisation and analysis. ​Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl.,​ ​32​, 309–311.
8. Szklarczyk,D., Morris,J.H., Cook,H., Kuhn,M., Wyder,S., Simonovic,M., Santos,A., Doncheva,N.T.,
Roth,A., Bork,P., ​et al. (2017) The STRING database in 2017: quality-controlled protein–protein
association networks, made broadly accessible. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​, ​45​, D362–D368.
9. Koutrouli,M., Karatzas,E., Papanikolopoulou,K. and Pavlopoulos,G.A. (2020) NORMA-The network
makeup artist: a web tool for network annotation visualization Bioinformatics.
10. Bastian,M., Heymann,S. and Jacomy,M. (2009) Gephi: An Open Source Software for Exploring and
Manipulating Networks.
11. Mrvar,A. and Batagelj,V. (2016) Analysis and visualization of large networks with program package
Pajek. ​Complex Adapt. Syst. Model.,​ ​4​.
12. Auber,D., Archambault,D., Bourqui,R., Delest,M., Dubois,J., Lambert,A., Mary,P., Mathiaut,M.,
Melançon,G., Pinaud,B., ​et al. (2017) Tulip 5. In Alhajj,R., Rokne,J. (eds), ​Encyclopedia of Social
Network Analysis and Mining.​ Springer New York, New York, NY, pp. 1–28.
13. Theocharidis,A., van Dongen,S., Enright,A.J. and Freeman,T.C. (2009) Network visualization and
analysis of gene expression data using BioLayout Express(3D). ​Nat. Protoc.,​ ​4​, 1535–1550.
14. McGee,F., Ghoniem,M., Melançon,G., Otjacques,B. and Pinaud,B. (2019) The State of the Art in
Multilayer Network Visualization. ​Comput. Graph. Forum​, ​38​, 125–149.
15. Pavlopoulos,G.A., O’Donoghue,S.I., Satagopam,V.P., Soldatos,T.G., Pafilis,E. and Schneider,R.
(2008) Arena3D: visualization of biological networks in 3D. ​BMC Syst. Biol.​, ​2​, 104.
16. Secrier,M., Pavlopoulos,G.A., Aerts,J. and Schneider,R. (2012) Arena3D: visualizing time-driven
phenotypic differences in biological systems. ​BMC Bioinformatics,​ ​13​, 45.
17. Škrlj,B., Kralj,J. and Lavrač,N. (2019) Py3plex toolkit for visualization and analysis of multilayer
networks. ​Appl. Netw. Sci.,​ ​4​, 94.
18. Hammoud,Z. and Kramer,F. (2018) mully: An R Package to Create, Modify and Visualize Multilayered
Graphs. ​Genes​, ​9​, 519.
19. De Domenico,M., Porter,M.A. and Arenas,A. (2015) MuxViz: a tool for multilayer analysis and
visualization of networks. ​J. Complex Netw.,​ ​3​, 159–176.
20. Gabor Csardi and Tamas Nepusz (2006) The igraph software package for complex network
research. I​ nterJournal,​ ​Complex Systems​, 1695.
21. Reingold,E.M. and Tilford,J.S. (1981) Tidier Drawings of Trees. ​IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng.​, ​SE-7​,
223–228.
22. Fruchterman,T.M.J. and Reingold,E.M. (1991) Graph drawing by force-directed placement. ​Softw.
Pract. Exp.​, ​21​, 1129–1164.
23. Davidson,R. and Harel,D. (1996) Drawing graphs nicely using simulated annealing. ​ACM Trans.
Graph.​, ​15​, 301–331.
24. Bryan,M.,Shawn, Brown,W.M., Klavans,R. and Boyack,K.W. (2008) DrL: Distributed Recursive
(Graph) Layout. ​SAND Rep.
25. Cox,T.F. and Cox,M.A.A. (2001) Multidimensional scaling 2nd ed. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

26. Kamada,T. and Kawai,S. (1989) An algorithm for drawing general undirected graphs. ​Inf. Process.
Lett.​, ​31​, 7–15.
27. Frick,A., Ludwig,A. and Mehldau,H. (1995) A fast adaptive layout algorithm for undirected graphs
(extended abstract and system demonstration). In Tamassia,R., Tollis,I.G. (eds), ​Graph Drawing​,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, Vol. 894, pp.
388–403.
28. Cevik,M., Kuppalli,K., Kindrachuk,J. and Peiris,M. (2020) Virology, transmission, and pathogenesis of
SARS-CoV-2. ​BMJ​, ​371​, m3862.
29. Gordon,D.E., Jang,G.M., Bouhaddou,M., Xu,J., Obernier,K., White,K.M., O’Meara,M.J., Rezelj,V.V.,
Guo,J.Z., Swaney,D.L., ​et al. (2020) A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for
drug repurposing. ​Nature,​ ​583​, 459–468.
30. Clark,K., Karsch-Mizrachi,I., Lipman,D.J., Ostell,J. and Sayers,E.W. (2016) GenBank. ​Nucleic Acids
Res.,​ ​44​, D67-72.
31. Giurgiu,M., Reinhard,J., Brauner,B., Dunger-Kaltenbach,I., Fobo,G., Frishman,G., Montrone,C. and
Ruepp,A. (2019) CORUM: the comprehensive resource of mammalian protein complexes—2019.
Nucleic Acids Res.​, ​47​, D559–D563.
32. Gene Ontology Consortium (2004) The Gene Ontology (GO) database and informatics resource.
Nucleic Acids Res.​, ​32​, 258D – 261.
33. Liberzon,A., Subramanian,A., Pinchback,R., Thorvaldsdottir,H., Tamayo,P. and Mesirov,J.P. (2011)
Molecular signatures database (MSigDB) 3.0. ​Bioinformatics,​ ​27​, 1739–1740.
34. Armstrong,J.F., Faccenda,E., Harding,S.D., Pawson,A.J., Southan,C., Sharman,J.L., Campo,B.,
Cavanagh,D.R., Alexander,S.P.H., Davenport,A.P., ​et al. (2019) The IUPHAR/BPS Guide to
PHARMACOLOGY in 2020: extending immunopharmacology content and introducing the
IUPHAR/MMV Guide to MALARIA PHARMACOLOGY. ​Nucleic Acids Res.,​ 10.1093/nar/gkz951.
35. Gaulton,A., Bellis,L.J., Bento,A.P., Chambers,J., Davies,M., Hersey,A., Light,Y., McGlinchey,S.,
Michalovich,D., Al-Lazikani,B., ​et al. (2012) ChEMBL: a large-scale bioactivity database for drug
discovery. ​Nucleic Acids Res.,​ ​40​, D1100–D1107.
36. Timms,R.T., Zhang,Z., Rhee,D.Y., Harper,J.W., Koren,I. and Elledge,S.J. (2019) A glycine-specific
N-degron pathway mediates the quality control of protein N-myristoylation. ​Science​, ​365​,
eaaw4912.
37. Czuczman,N.M., Barth,M.J., Gu,J., Neppalli,V., Mavis,C., Frys,S.E., Hu,Q., Liu,S., Klener,P.,
Vockova,P., ​et al. (2016) Pevonedistat, a NEDD8-activating enzyme inhibitor, is active in mantle
cell lymphoma and enhances rituximab activity in vivo. ​Blood​, ​127​, 1128–1137.
38. Soucy,T.A., Smith,P.G., Milhollen,M.A., Berger,A.J., Gavin,J.M., Adhikari,S., Brownell,J.E.,
Burke,K.E., Cardin,D.P., Critchley,S., ​et al. (2009) An inhibitor of NEDD8-activating enzyme as a
new approach to treat cancer. ​Nature​, ​458​, 732–736.
39. Nakagawa,K., Lokugamage,K.G. and Makino,S. (2016) Viral and Cellular mRNA Translation in
Coronavirus-Infected Cells. In ​Advances in Virus Research​. Elsevier, Vol. 96, pp. 165–192.
40. Gingras,A.-C., Raught,B. and Sonenberg,N. (1999) eIF4 Initiation Factors: Effectors of mRNA
Recruitment to Ribosomes and Regulators of Translation. ​Annu. Rev. Biochem.​, ​68​, 913–963.
41. Müller,C., Schulte,F.W., Lange-Grünweller,K., Obermann,W., Madhugiri,R., Pleschka,S., Ziebuhr,J.,
Hartmann,R.K. and Grünweller,A. (2018) Broad-spectrum antiviral activity of the eIF4A inhibitor
silvestrol against corona- and picornaviruses. ​Antiviral Res.,​ ​150​, 123–129.
42. Cencic,R., Desforges,M., Hall,D.R., Kozakov,D., Du,Y., Min,J., Dingledine,R., Fu,H., Vajda,S.,
Talbot,P.J., ​et al. (2011) Blocking eIF4E-eIF4G Interaction as a Strategy To Impair Coronavirus
Replication. ​J. Virol.​, ​85​, 6381–6389.
43. Frieman,M., Yount,B., Heise,M., Kopecky-Bromberg,S.A., Palese,P. and Baric,R.S. (2007) Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus ORF6 Antagonizes STAT1 Function by Sequestering
Nuclear Import Factors on the Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum/Golgi Membrane. ​J. Virol.,​ ​81​,
9812–9824.
44. Rosenbaum,D.M., Rasmussen,S.G.F. and Kobilka,B.K. (2009) The structure and function of
G-protein-coupled receptors. ​Nature​, ​459​, 356–363.
45. Oldham,W.M. and Hamm,H.E. (2008) Heterotrimeric G protein activation by G-protein-coupled
receptors. ​Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.,​ ​9​, 60–71.
46. Gurevich,E.V., Tesmer,J.J.G., Mushegian,A. and Gurevich,V.V. (2012) G protein-coupled receptor
kinases: More than just kinases and not only for GPCRs. ​Pharmacol. Ther.,​ ​133​, 40–69.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.391318; this version posted November 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

47. Casadó,V., Cortés,A., Mallol,J., Pérez-Capote,K., Ferré,S., Lluis,C., Franco,R. and Canela,E.I. (2009)
GPCR homomers and heteromers: a better choice as targets for drug development than GPCR
monomers? ​Pharmacol. Ther.,​ ​124​, 248–257.
48. Apostolakou,A.E., Baltoumas,F.A., Stravopodis,D.J. and Iconomidou,V.A. (2020) Extended Human
G-Protein Coupled Receptor Network: Cell-Type-Specific Analysis of G-Protein Coupled
Receptor Signaling Pathways. ​J. Proteome Res.​, ​19​, 511–524.
49. Lappano,R. and Maggiolini,M. (2011) G protein-coupled receptors: novel targets for drug discovery in
cancer. ​Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.​, ​10​, 47–60.
50. Lee,H.J., Wall,B. and Chen,S. (2008) G-protein-coupled receptors and melanoma. ​Pigment Cell
Melanoma Res.​, ​21​, 415–428.
51. Siegel,R.L., Miller,K.D. and Jemal,A. (2019) Cancer statistics, 2019. ​CA. Cancer J. Clin.​, ​69​, 7–34.
52. Rosanò,L., Spinella,F. and Bagnato,A. (2013) Endothelin 1 in cancer: biological implications and
therapeutic opportunities. ​Nat. Rev. Cancer,​ ​13​, 637–651.
53. Saldana-Caboverde,A. and Kos,L. (2010) Roles of endothelin signaling in melanocyte development
and melanoma: Endothelins in melanocyte development and melanoma. ​Pigment Cell Melanoma
Res.,​ ​23​, 160–170.
54. Smith,M.P., Rowling,E.J., Miskolczi,Z., Ferguson,J., Spoerri,L., Haass,N.K., Sloss,O., McEntegart,S.,
Arozarena,I., Kriegsheim,A., ​et al. (2017) Targeting endothelin receptor signalling overcomes
heterogeneity driven therapy failure. ​EMBO Mol. Med.,​ ​9​, 1011–1029.
55. Urtatiz,O. and Van Raamsdonk,C.D. (2016) Gnaq and Gna11 in the Endothelin Signaling Pathway
and Melanoma. ​Front. Genet.,​ ​7​, 59.
56. Davies,M.A. (2012) The role of the PI3K-AKT pathway in melanoma. ​Cancer J. Sudbury Mass,​ ​18​,
142–147.
57. Sanz-Moreno,V. and Marshall,C.J. (2009) Rho-GTPase signaling drives melanoma cell plasticity. ​Cell
Cycle Georget. Tex​, ​8​, 1484–1487.
58. Hsu,M.Y., Meier,F.E., Nesbit,M., Hsu,J.Y., Van Belle,P., Elder,D.E. and Herlyn,M. (2000) E-cadherin
expression in melanoma cells restores keratinocyte-mediated growth control and down-regulates
expression of invasion-related adhesion receptors. ​Am. J. Pathol.​, ​156​, 1515–1525.

14

