bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Deconvoluting the T cell response to SARS-CoV-2: specificity versus chance- and
cognate cross-reactivity
Alexander A. Lehmann1, Greg A. Kirchenbaum1, Ting Zhang1, Pedro A. Reche2 and Paul V. Lehmann1
Cellular Technology Ltd., Shaker Heights, OH, United States
Laboratorio de Inmunomedicina & Inmunoinformatica, Departamento de Immunologia & O2, Facultad
de Medicina, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

1
2

* Corresponding Author:
Paul V. Lehmann, paul.lehmann@immunospot.com
Keywords: mega peptide pools, ELISPOT, ImmunoSpot, immune monitoring, COVID-19, T cell affinity
Running title: SARS-CoV-2 T cell monitoring

Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 infection takes a mild or clinically inapparent course in the majority of humans who contract
this virus. After such individuals have cleared the virus, only the detection of SARS-CoV-2-specific
immunological memory can reveal the exposure, and hopefully the establishment of immune
protection. With most viral infections, the presence of specific serum antibodies has provided a reliable
biomarker for the exposure to the virus of interest. SARS-CoV-2 infection, however, does not reliably
induce a durable antibody response, especially in sub-clinically infected individuals. Consequently, it is
plausible for a recently infected individual to yield a false negative result within only a few months after
exposure. Immunodiagnostic attention has therefore shifted to studies of specific T cell memory to
SARS-CoV-2. Most reports published so far agree that a T cell response is engaged during SARS-CoV-2
infection, but they also state that in 20-81% of non- SARS-CoV-2-exposed individuals, T cells respond to
SARS-CoV-2 antigens (mega peptide pools), allegedly due to T cell cross-reactivity with coronaviruses
causing Common Cold (CCC), or other antigens. Here we show that by introducing irrelevant mega
peptide pools as negative controls to account for chance cross-reactivity, and by establishing the antigen
dose-response characteristic of the T cells, one can clearly discern between cognate T cell memory
induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection vs. cross-reactive T cell responses in individuals who had not been
infected with SARS-CoV-2.
1. Introduction
Traditionally, the assessment of immune memory has relied upon measurements of serum antibodies
without queries of the T cell compartment. However, SARS-CoV-2 infection highlights the shortcoming
of such a serodiagnostic approach. While the majority of SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals initially
develop an antibody response to this virus, false negative results are a concern because not all infected
individuals attain high levels of serum antibody reactivity acutely after infection 1-3, and those who do
develop detectable antibody reactivity may decline to the limit of detection within a few months 4. In
such cases, the detection of T cell memory might be the only evidence of such infection, and a surrogate
of acquired immune protection from SARS-CoV-2 reinfection.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fueled additionally by evidence that T cell-mediated immunity is required for immune protection
against SARS-CoV-2 5-7, attention has turned to T cell immunodiagnostics trying to establish whether the
detection of T cell memory may be a more sensitive and reliable indicator of SARS-CoV-2 exposure than
antibodies 8-11. In most studies published so far SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell memory cells were detected in
the majority of infected individuals, but such were also found in 20-81% of control subjects who clearly
could not have been infected by the SARS-CoV-2 virus 9, 12-19. If generalizable, such results would imply
that T cell assays are unsuited to reliably identify who has, or has not, been infected by SARS-CoV-2
providing false positive results in up to 81% of the individuals tested. It should be noted right away,
however, that the notion of cross-reactive SARS-CoV-2 antigen recognition by T cells being common in
unexposed subjects might be related to the T cell assay and the test conditions used as it was not
observed by others 14, 20, 21. Progress with settling the issue of T cell cross-reactivity in SARS-CoV-2
antigen recognition, and identifying suitable test systems, will decide whether T cell diagnostics can
reliably detect specific immune memory to SARS-CoV-2 infection/exposure, and possibly identify the
immune protected status of those subjects.
Next to possible cross-reactivity, T cell immune diagnostics of SARS-CoV-2 infection faces the challenge
of having to reliably detect antigen-specific T cells in blood that occur in very low frequency. The
numbers of SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells in blood post-infection is about one tenth of the numbers of T
cells specific for viruses that induce strong T cell responses, such as influenza, Epstein Barr- (EBV) or
human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) 11, 22, and reliably detecting even the latter is at the border of current
technology. Further complicating matters, the frequencies of SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells are even lower
in subjects who underwent a mild or asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to those who
developed more severe COVID-19 12, 21, 23, 24. Owing to these low T cell frequencies, and the antigeninduced signal being small in magnitude, any contribution of cross-reactive T cell stimulation will
interfere with the reliable detection of genuine SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells. Setting up clear cut-off
criteria for identifying antigen-specific T cell memory is therefore paramount.
Because T cell assays rely upon detecting SARS-CoV-2 antigen-specific T cells in blood via memory T cell
re-activation ex vivo, the choice and formulation of the SARS-CoV-2 antigen itself used for the T cell
recall will critically define the assay result. As the epitope utilization in the T cell response to SARS-CoV2 is not known yet, by necessity, the aforementioned T cell diagnostic efforts tailored towards this virus
have relied either on pools of hundreds of peptides that cover the entire proteome of the virus, or on
pools of a multitude of predicted epitopes (mega peptide pools). Traditional T cell immune monitoring
efforts, however, have called for the utilization of select, highly purified individual peptides whose
specificity has been carefully established. Presently it is unproven whether pools of hundreds of
unpurified peptides are even suited for reliable T cell diagnostics, and whether false positive or false
negative results obtained using them are inherent to the recall antigen formulation. The chance for T
cell cross-reactivity can be expected to increase with every peptide added into a pool, multiplying the
chance for false positive results. Conversely, irrelevant peptides (those not recognized by T cells) also
present in the pool can be expected to compete with the actually recognized T cell epitopes for binding
to HLA-molecules, possibly causing false negative results 25. To our knowledge, it has not yet been
systematically addressed whether and how chance cross-reactivity or peptide competition affects T cell
immune monitoring results when mega peptide pools are used for testing. Instead of relying on third
party mega peptide pools as the proper negative control to establish the background noise of the T cell
assay, in all SARS-CoV-2 studies published so far, the mega peptide pool-induced T cell activation has
been compared to PBMC cultured in medium alone, in the absence of any exogenously added peptide.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

In this report we introduce suitable negative control mega peptide pools, and using them, we address
how to reliably detect even the very low frequency SARS-CoV-2 antigen-specific T cells in subjects who
have undergone mild SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Cognate T cell cross-reactivity between related pathogens, such as SARS-CoV-2 and seasonal
coronaviruses Common Cold (CCC), needs to be distinguished from the afore-mentioned chance crossreactivities19. In cognate cross-reactivity, the TCR binds peptide sequences of two antigens that have
extensive sequence homologies. In the majority of documented cases, such cross-reactive peptide
sequences differ in only one or two amino acids with an additional requirement being that the exchange
of amino acid(s) does not interfere with the peptides’ binding to, and folding in, the peptide binding
groove of the restricting HLA molecule. Examples of experimentally verified cognate cross-reactivities
include T cell recognition of serotypes of the Dengue virus 26, 27, influenza A virus strains 28-31, hepatitis C
virus escape variants 32, and HIV epitope variants from different clades 33, 34.
It is still controversial how exclusively specific T cell antigen recognition is in general35. On one hand,
there are reports suggesting that T cell recognition might be highly promiscuous with individual T cell
clones being able to cross-reactively recognize 106 different peptides 36. On the other hand, changing
even a single amino acid in the presented peptide frequently abrogates T cell recognition, in particular if
the change affects the binding of the peptide for the restricting MHC molecule, its conformation when
bound to the MHC molecule, or when involving a TCR contact residue: while some studies have
indicated an extremely low frequency of T cell cross-reactions between unrelated peptides 37-39, other
studies (relying on tetramers) claim the opposite 40, 41. Accordingly, it needed to be addressed what
impact TCR chance cross-reactivity has on ex vivo T cell monitoring when using mega peptide pools in
general, and for SARS-CoV-2 antigen recognition in particular.
When T cell activation was seen in SARS-CoV-2-unexposed individuals using SARS-CoV-2 mega peptide
pools for recall, the finding was interpreted as cognate cross-reactivity with related coronaviruses that
cause harmless, common cold-like epidemies in the human population 42. There are four seasonal
coronavirus strains, 229E, NL63, OC43, and HKU1, which cause pandemics in multiyear infection cycles
in the human population world-wide 43. Although in any given year only 15-30% of humans displaying
symptoms of common cold are indeed infected by one of these seasonal coronaviruses, 90% of the adult
human population eventually becomes seropositive for at least three of these coronaviruses 44-46. From
the perspective of T cell immune diagnostics of SARS-CoV-2, such cross-reactive T cell responses would
generate false positive results. Another major scope of the present study was to establish to what
extent cognate T cell cross-reactions of seasonal coronavirus antigens interferes with the detection of T
cell memory induced by the SARS-CoV-2 virus itself.
The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has made its rounds for nearly a year by now, yet its prevalence in the human
population remains unknown as most of those infected go undiagnosed, having developed mild or no
clinical symptoms at all 47. By now serum antibodies are no longer reliable in revealing, in retrospect,
who has or has not been infected more than 3 months ago. If measurements of T cell memory would
also fail to provide this information, our understanding of SARS-CoV-2’s prevalence will remain
shrouded. Should vaccines under present development fail, without this information it will remain
guesswork to decide whether and when sufficient herd immunity has developed in a population, or if
robust immunity develops at all following natural infection 48. Without knowing who has or has not been
infected by SARS-CoV-2, one cannot distinguish whether a candidate vaccine can prime a protective

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

immune response in naïve individuals, or whether it merely boosts immunity that has been preestablished by the natural infection. Without this information, all those individuals – possibly the
majority of the population - who already went through an uncomplicated SARS-CoV-2 infection and
might be protected from re-infection, or are prone to develop a mild disease if reinfected again, need to
continue to live in fear of contracting a potentially lethal disease.
In this report we sought solutions to deconvolute T cell reactivity to SARS-CoV-2 mega peptide pools so
as to clearly distinguish between individuals who have or have not been infected with this virus.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1 Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells
Pre-COVID Era Donors. PBMC from healthy human donors were obtained from CTL’s ePBMC library (CTL,
Shaker Heights, OH, USA) collected prior to Dec 31, 2019. The PBMC had been collected by HemaCare
Blood Donor Center (Van Nuys, CA) under HemaCare’s IRB and sold to CTL identifying donors by code
only while concealing the subjects’ identities. All PBMC were from healthy adults who had not taken
medication within a month of the blood draw that might influence their T cell response. In addition,
tests were done on each donor at HemaCare’s CLIA certified laboratory to identify common infections,
including Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). Subjects positive for HIV were disqualified for the
ePBMC library. The donors’ age, sex, and ethnicity are shown in S. Table 1.
SARS-CoV-2 Infected Donors. PBMC of subjects were collected under Advarra IRB Approved #
Pro00043178, CTL study number: GL20-16 entitled COVID 19 Immune Response Evaluation. All subjects
tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 RNA in PCR performed on nasal swabs, and these tests were performed
in accredited medical laboratories. All such donors underwent mild COVID infection from which the
subjects fully recovered within one or two weeks. These subjects were bled between 2 weeks and 3
months post recovery (median of 24 days). The donors’ age, sex, and ethnicity are shown in S. Table 1.
PBMC were isolated and cryopreserved at CTL.
The cryopreserved cells were thawed following an optimized protocol 49 resulting in viability exceeding
90% for all samples. The PBMC were resuspended in CTL-TestTM Medium (from CTL). CTL-TestTM Medium
is serum-free and has been developed for low background and high signal performance in ELISPOT
assays. The number of PBMC plated in the ELISPOT experiments was 2 x 105 viable PBMC per well.
2.2. ELISA Assays
MaxiSorp 96-well microplates (Thermo Fisher) were coated with recombinant SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid
(RayBiotech, Peachtree Corners, GA), truncated Spike protein (S1 domain) (The Native Antigen Company,
Oxford, UK) or receptor binding domain (RBD) (Center for Vaccines and Immunology (CVI), UGA, Athens,
GA) at 2ug/mL in PBS overnight at 4˚C. Plates were then blocked with ELISA blocking buffer containing 2%
w/v bovine serum albumin in PBS with 0.1% v/v Tween20 (PBS-T) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h at room
temperature. Donor plasma were serially diluted in assay plates and incubated overnight at 4˚C. Plates
were then washed with PBS prior to addition of horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-human IgG
detection reagents (from CTL) and incubation for 2 h at room temperature. Plates were then washed with
PBS prior to development with TMB chromogen solution (Thermo Fisher). 1M HCl was used to stop
conversion of TMB and optical density was measured at 450nm (OD450) and 540nm (OD540) using a Spectra
Max 190 plate reader (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA USA). Optical imperfections in assay plates were

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

corrected through subtraction of OD540 values. Antigen-specific IgG concentrations are reported as μg/mL
IgG equivalents and were interpolated from a standard curve generated using an IgG reference protein
(Athens Research and Technology, Athens, GA) coated directly into designated wells of assay plates.
2.3. Antigens and Peptides
All mega peptide pools used in this study are products of, and were purchased from JPT (Berlin, Germany).
The peptide pools representing the individual antigens are shown in S. Table 2. All these mega peptide
pools consisted of 15-mer peptides that covered the entire amino acid (aa) sequence of the respective
proteins in steps (gaps of) 11 aa. All mega peptide pools were tested at a ﬁnal concentration of 1.5 µg/mL
of each peptide within the pool at the highest concentration, followed by three 1+2 (vol + vol) serial
dilutions, as specified in the Tables. CPI (from CTL) was used as a positive control for the activation of
antigen-specific CD4+ T cells 50. CPI is a combination of protein antigens derived from CMV, inﬂuenza and
parainﬂuenza viruses, and was used at a ﬁnal concentration of 6.25 µg/mL in ELISPOT assays. CERI (from
CTL) was used as a positive control for CD8+ T cells 51. CERI is a mega peptide pool consisting of 124
peptides of Cytomegalo- (CMV), Epstein-Barr-(EBV), Human respiratory syncytial-(HRSV) and Influenza
viruses. The individual peptides, 9 amino acids long, were selected based upon peptide binding predictions
for a broad range of HLA class I alleles expressed in all human races and diverse ethnic subpopulations.
Both CPI and CERI elicit T cell recall responses in all healthy donors tested so far51.
All mega peptide pools were delivered as lyophilized powder. The individual peptide pools were initially
dissolved following the manufacturer’s directions in 40 µl DMSO, followed by addition of 210 µl of PBS
generating a “primary peptide stock solution” at 100 ug/mL (0.1mg/mL) with 16% v/v DMSO. From each
of these wells, a “secondary peptide stock solution” was prepared in a 96-Well Deep Well Plate, with
peptides starting at 3 ug/mL which were then threefold serially diluted. Using a 96-well multichannel
pipettor 100ul was transferred “en block” into a pre-coated ImmunoSpot® assay plates. Finally, 100 µL of
PBMC (containing 2 x 105 cells) in CTL-Test media was added “en block” to achieve the desired final
peptide concentrations of 1.5, 0.5, 0.17 and 0.06 ug/mL in the ELISPOT assay.
2.4. Human IFN-γ ELISPOT Assays
Single-color enzymatic ImmunoSpot® kits from CTL were used for the detection of in vivo-primed IFN-γproducing Th1-type memory T cells. Test procedures followed the manufacturer’s recommendations. In
brief, peptides were plated at the specified concentrations into capture antibody-precoated ELISPOT
assay plates in a volume of 100 µL per well, dissolved in CTL-Test™ Medium. The plates with the antigen
were stored at 37◦C in a CO2 incubator for less than an hour until the freshly thawed PBMC were ready for
plating. The PBMC were added at 200,000 viable cells /well in 100 µL CTL-Test™ Medium and cultured
with the peptides for 24h at 37 ◦C and 9% CO2 in an incubator. After removal of the cells, addition of
detection antibody, and enzymatic visualization of plate-bound cytokine, the plates were air-dried prior
to scanning and counting of spot forming units (SFU). ELISPOT plates were analyzed using an
ImmunoSpot® S6 Ultimate Reader, by CTL. SFU numbers were automatically calculated by the
ImmunoSpot® Software for each stimulation condition using the AutogateTM function of the ImmunoSpot®
Software 52.
2.5. Statistical Analysis
As ELISPOT counts follow Gaussian (normal) distribution among replicate wells, the use of parametric
statistics was justified to identify positive and negative responses, respectively. Positive responses were
defined as SFU counts exceeding 3 SD of the mean SFU counts of the specified negative control, identifying
such at 99.7% confidence.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

3. Results and Discussion
3.1. SARS-CoV-2- Antibody Reactivity in Subjects Recovered from Mild COVID-19
The primary goal of this study was to characterize T cell memory to SARS-CoV-2 antigens in subjects who
recovered from PCR-verified mild COVID-19 infection. We gained access to nine such subjects’ blood,
referring to them as “SARS-CoV-2 PCR-Positive Subjects” in this communication. First, we tested
whether these individuals exhibited evidence of IgG reactivity against SARS-CoV-2 antigens. As shown in
Figure 1A, and consistent with prior findings 53, 54, IgG reactivity against the SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid
protein was significantly (p<0.01) increased in these subjects compared to our control cohort,
individuals who were bled in the pre-COVID-19 era. We refer to these latter donors as “Pre-SARS-CoV-2
Era Subjects”. Similarly, IgG reactivity against the truncated Spike (S1) protein was also significantly
(p<0.001) elevated in the COVID-19-recovered donors (Figure 1B) 55. Despite PCR confirmation of recent
SARS-CoV-2 infection, 1/3 of the COVID-19 recovered donors exhibited indistinguishable IgG binding to
the Nucleocapsid and S1 probes compared to the Pre-COVID-19 collected samples. Collectively, these
binding assays demonstrate that measurement of serum IgG reactivity against the Nucleocapsid and/or
S1 proteins alone is insufficient to identify all donors who were recently infected with the SARS-CoV-2
virus.
In contrast to the Nucleocapsid and S1 probes, IgG reactivity against the receptor binding domain (RBD)
of the SARS-CoV-2’s Spike protein was not detected in the Pre-SARS-CoV-2 Era Subjects (Figure 1C), but
was significantly (p<0.001) increased in the SARS-CoV-2-PCR Positive Cohort. Thus, the presence of IgG
reactivity against the RBD probe appears to be a reliable indicator of recent virus infection) 55, and
possibly also of neutralizing potency 55, 56.
Two of 9 donors in our COVID-19-recovered cohort exhibited low IgG reactivity against each of the SARSCoV-2 probes. (These were subjects dC4 and dC7, of whom dC4 did reveal T cell memory, but dC7 did
not, see below, Table 2). In the absence of the PCR-confirmed diagnosis, their respective exposures to
SARS-CoV-2 would be difficult to verify if solely based on serologic assessment. Our observations are
consistent with the notion that the severity of clinical disease and the magnitude of the elicited humoral
response to SARS-CoV-2 are positively correlated 4, 55. Weak antibody responses in sub-clinically infected
subjects, along with recent evidence for declining antibody titers within the first 3 months of
convalescence 4, pose a substantial challenge to serology-based assessment of SARS-CoV-2 immunity.
Hence, we focused on the detection of T cell memory to this virus.
3.2. Experimental Design for Assessment of T Cell Memory to SARS-CoV-2
3.2.1. The Rationale for Selecting IFN-γ ELISPOT for Detecting SARS-CoV-2-Specific Memory T cells
T cell immune monitoring aims at detecting in vivo expanded and differentiated antigen-specific T cell
populations directly ex vivo, either in freshly isolated PBMC, or in PBMC that have been cryopreserved
following protocols that maintain full T cell functionality upon thawing the cells 57. The number
(frequency) and functions (e.g. cytokine signature) of antigen/peptide-specific T cells need to be
measured as present in the body without inducing additional clonal expansions or T cell differentiation
in vitro during the short-term ex vivo antigen stimulation that is required to detect the antigen-reactive
T cells. In ELISPOT/ImmunoSpot® assays, antigen- (peptide)-specific T cells present in the PBMC become

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

activated, and they start producing cytokine. This cytokine is captured on a membrane around each
secreting T cell, resulting in a cytokine spot (a spot forming unit, SFU). Counting of SFUs permits to
establish, at single-cell resolution, the number of antigen-triggered cytokine-producing T cells 58, and
thus the frequency of such cells in PBMC. In this study we focused on IFN-γ measurements because, in
subjects who successfully overcome SARS-CoV-2 infection, Th1 cells have been reported to prevail by far
5, 9, 18, 59, 60
. Th1 cells have been implicated as a protective class of response while Th2 and Th17 have
been linked to immune pathology 59, 61. Furthermore, the standard 24h IFN-γ ELISPOT assay detects in
vivo primed Th1 effector memory cells only; naïve T cells or central memory cells are not detected in this
assay as the latter require several days of differentiation following antigen encounter before they begin
secreting IFN-γ 62, 63.
We also selected the ex vivo ELISPOT platform because it requires as few as 200,000 peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) per antigen stimulation condition, and this assay lends itself to high
throughput analysis. Utilizing only 32 million PBMC per subject (obtainable from 32 mL of blood), we
established 155 T cell reactivity datapoints per subject, testing 37 mega peptide pools (see S Table 2),
each at four concentrations, plus 4 media and 3 positive control wells, all in a single high-throughput
experiment. In the mega peptide pools, the individual peptides were present at 1.5 µg/mL at the
highest concentration tested, and in 0.5 µg/mL, 0.17 µg/mL, and 0.06 µg/mL in the subsequent 1 + 2
(vol+vol, 3-fold) serial dilutions. Instead of using replicates, these serial antigen dilutions served not
only to confirm positive results, but additionally permitted us to establish the affinity of the responding
T cells.
3.2.2. The Rationale for Using Mega Peptide Pools for Detecting SARS-CoV-2-Specific Memory T cells
Due to the highly individualized nature of T cell epitope recognition in general, for which evidence is
also starting to accumulate for SARS-CoV-2 11-13, 16, 21, 60, and due to the size of the virus (whose genome
is approximately 29.8 kb 64 there are only two viable options for selecting peptides for a comprehensive
assessment of T cell immunity to SARS-CoV-2. One option is to perform in silico epitope predictions, and
such has already been reported for SARS-CoV-2 65, but their accuracy has recently been convincingly
called into question 66, 67. Moreover, for a comprehensive assessment, the epitope predictions would
need to be customized for each test subject, accounting for all HLA class I and class II molecules
expressed in each individual. Because it is impractical to individualize predicted peptide epitopes for
each subject, we have elected to take the agnostic route, in which the entire sequence of each protein
antigen is covered by a series of overlapping peptides. However, this means that, dependent upon the
length of the protein, hundreds of peptides need to be combined into mega pools (see S. Table 2).
While, in theory, the mega peptide pool approach permits systematic coverage of all possible T cell
epitopes within a virus, it introduces an as yet undefined dimension: chance cross-reactivity between
unrelated peptides.
3.2.3. The Rationale for Selecting Negative Control Mega Peptide Pools
To account for chance T cell cross-reactivity, we tested mega peptide pools covering foreign antigens to
which it is unlikely the test subjects have been exposed (one Ebola virus peptide pool, five HIV antigen
pools) and a self-antigen, Actin, that due to its abundance in the body is likely to have established selftolerance. These mega peptide pools are defined in S. Table 2, including the number of peptides
contained in each.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

3.2.4. Avoiding Inter-Assay Variations
To reduce assay variables, all peptide pools used in this study were from the same vendor, were
synthetized, stored, dissolved and tested the same way, and had the exact same formulation consisting
of 15 amino acid long peptides that systematically walk the entire sequence of the respective proteins in
steps of 11 amino acids. Taking advantage of the high-throughput suitability of ELISPOT, all the peptide
pools (S. Table 2) and their dilutions were tested on each PBMC donor in a single experiment which
rendered the peptides the only assay dependent variable. This approach therefore permitted us to
firmly establish within each PBMC sample the number of Th1 T cells responding to the different mega
peptide pools, and thus to compare the frequencies of the respective mega peptide pool-reactive T cells
within each PBMC donor, and amongst donors in the cohorts.
We compared T cell reactivity to all the above mega peptide pools in 18 healthy Pre-COVID-19 Era
Subjects and in the 9 individuals who recovered from mild SARS-CoV-2 infection as verified by PCR. In
the following we describe and interpret the results.
3.3. Classic Single Antigen and Single Antigen Dose-Based Data Analysis does not Permit to Distinguish
Between SARS-CoV-2-Infected Subjects and Controls
Figure 2 shows the test results comparing frequencies of SARS-CoV-2 antigen-reactive IFN-γ-producing T
cells in the SARS-CoV-2 PCR-verified (also referred to as COVID-recovered) and Pre-SARS-CoV-2
(hereafter referred to as Pre-COVID) cohorts when tested at a single antigen concentration, 1.5 µg/mL of
peptide within each peptide pool. Essentially identical results have been reported by others 9, 12-18
showing that, as a cohort, the frequency of SARS-CoV-2 antigen-specific T cells is significantly elevated in
COVID-recovered individuals versus the cohort that has not been infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus. In
all these aforementioned studies, and for T cell immune monitoring in general, it has been of concern
however, that such results are inconclusive for the individuals, as a large fraction of COVID-recovered
subjects show similar or even lower frequencies of SARS-CoV-2 antigen-specific T cells than the PreCOVID control subjects. Simple T cell frequency measurements using single SARS-CoV-2 antigens at a
single antigen concentration therefore do not permit to reliably distinguish whether an individual has or
has not been infected by SARS-CoV-2. This finding, along with the low frequency of SARS-CoV-2 antigenreactive T cells, may come as a surprise because massive clonal expansions are typically seen initially
after infections and vaccinations 63. There is increasing evidence that the SARS-CoV-2 virus actively
disrupts the engagement of an immune response 68-74 explaining its weak immunogenicity. The low
frequencies of SARS-CoV-2 antigen-reactive T cells in COVID-recovered individuals in turn makes it
challenging to unambiguously detect them.
3.4. Accounting for Chance Cross-Reactivity when Testing Suitable Control Mega Peptide Pools to
Establish the Background Noise in ELISPOT Assays
The challenge with selecting mega peptide pools that are suited for negative controls (PP. Neg Contr.) is
that one needs to identify antigens to which the test population has not been exposed. As one such
antigen we selected the Ebola virus nucleoprotein (pN6, standing for peptide pool negative control 6;
abbreviations used for peptide pools and the specifics of them are listed in S. Table 2). We also included
five HIV antigens (nN2, pN3, Pn4 and pN7) as the participating subjects needed to be HIV-seronegative
to qualify for this study. Finally, we tested as a negative control a peptide pool that covers the sequence
of the self-antigen, Actin (pN5). As we did for SARS-CoV-2 peptide pools, all these PP. Neg Contr.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

candidates were tested at four concentrations, 1.5 µg/mL, 0.5 µg/mL, 0.17 µg/mL, and 0.06 µg/mL of
each peptide within the pool. The number of PP. Neg Contr. candidate-induced IFN-γ-producing cells
was compared to the medium control, the latter measured in quadruplicate wells. CPI, CERI, and CEFX
antigens were measured in singlet, and served as positive controls, respectively 51. For each PBMC
sample, the mean and standard deviation (SD) of four replicate medium control wells was established,
and compared to the SFU counts induced by the candidate negative control peptide pools. SFU counts
greater than 3 SD of the mean medium control counts are highlighted in Table 1.
The peptide pool covering HIV Envelope (Env) protein (pN7) induced vigorous SFU formation (> 100
SFU/200,000 PBMC) in 3 subjects’ PBMC, and relatively strong SFU formation (17-42 SFU/200,000
PBMC) in two additional subjects, recalling positive responses in 3-4 consecutive peptide dilutions. At
the highest concentration, this peptide pool also elicited elevated SFU numbers in 4 additional subjects.
All these subjects who responded to HIV Env protein were HIV-seronegative as established by the blood
bank (Hemacare, Van Nuis, CA) that collected them. The HIV Env protein belongs to the p24 superfamily,
which is shared sequence conservation with related proteins expressed by many retroviruses 75. Thus,
cognate cross-reactivity with T cells primed by such retroviruses strikes us as the likely explanation for
the pN7-triggered recall responses seen in HIV-seronegative subjects. Be that as it may, the HIV Env
peptide pool is clearly unsuited as a negative control peptide pool.
The six remaining candidate negative control peptide pools occasionally triggered elevated SFU counts,
but these occurred at relatively low frequencies, and predominantly at only the highest peptide
concentration (Table 1). The data therefore provide evidence for low-level chance cross-reactivity when
mega peptide pools are tested in ELISPOT assays. In theory, at higher peptide concentrations this chance
cross-reactivity might increase, however, as T cells with low affinity for the peptides also reach their
activation threshold.
Therefore, when analyzing the following SARS-CoV-2 peptide pool-triggered T cell responses, we will use
– and compare – two negative controls. One is the conventional “Medium control”, established as the
mean and SD of 4 replicate wells in which PBMC were cultured with medium alone. The second is the
“peptide pool negative control” (PP Neg. Control.), calculated as the mean and SD of each donor’s SFU
count induced by the six negative control peptide pools at 1.5 µg/mL. Again, these six negative control
pools encompassed Ebola, Actin, and the 4 HIV antigen pools (excluding HIV Env). The mean and SD for
the PP Neg. Control, and Medium control, and the raw data from which these were derived are specified
for each subject in Table 1.
3.5. Chance Cross-Reactivity Accounts for Most of SARS-CoV-2 Peptide Reactivity in Pre-COVID Era
Subjects
We compared the SFU counts induced by SARS-CoV-2 mega peptide pools in the subjects who recovered
from mild COVID-19, and those who were bled prior to the COVID era. The SARS-CoV-2 peptide-induced
SFU counts were analyzed vs. either the Medium control, or the PP. Neg. Control, in each case
highlighting positive SFU counts as defined by exceeding 3 SD of the respective mean control count, a
threshold that identifies positive responses with > 99.6% confidence. As can be seen in S. Table 3, in PreCOVID subjects the number of SARS-CoV-2 peptide-induced positive SFU counts was significantly lower
when control peptide pools were used as to establish the background noise level. Thus, chance crossreactivity, rather than cognate cross-reactivity with seasonal coronaviruses, accounted for most of the
positive responses detected in Pre-COVID control subjects. The few apparently positive cross-reactive

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

responses left after filtering for chance cross-reactivity in this cohort could be discerned from cognate T
cell responses to SARS-CoV-2 peptides in SARS-CoV-2 PCR-verified individuals when taking the affinity of
the T cell response into account, as will be shown below.
3.6. Affinity for SARS-CoV-2 Peptides Distinguishes Cognate from Cross-Reactive T cell Recognition
Testing peptide pools in four serial dilutions not only permits generation of confirmatory results without
using replicate wells, but also permits one to gain insights into the affinity of the T cells recognizing the
respective peptides. In the context of this study, we will distinguish between Level 4 affinity (high
affinity, with all four peptide concentrations recalling T cells, color coded in red), Level 3 affinity
(intermediate affinity, eliciting a recall response across 3 consecutive peptide dilutions, highlighted in
orange), Level 2 affinity (low affinity, only the two highest peptide concentrations elicit a T cell response,
color coded in yellow), and Level 1 affinity (borderline low, eliciting a significant T cell response at the
highest peptide concentration only, color coded in beige).
As seen in Table 2, most COVID-recovered subjects displayed Level 4 (red) affinity T cell responses to
several SARS-CoV-2 antigens, while this level was absent in the Pre-COVID Era controls. In the latter,
only occasional Level 3 (orange) and Level 2 affinities (yellow) were seen. Thus, high affinity responses
to several SARS-Cov-2 antigens (unlike responses detected against individual antigens at a single antigen
concentration, see Fig. 1) appear to be suited to distinguish cognate SARS-CoV-2 specific T cells in
COVID-recovered subjects from cross-reactive T cells in subjects infected by other coronaviruses in the
Pre-COVID Era. The frequency of SARS-CoV-2 mega peptide pool-specific T cells was low, but clearly
elevated > 3 SD over the negative control mega peptide pool control level. As ELISPOT SFU counts follow
normal distribution 76, the mean of background plus > 3 SD positivity cut-off definition sets the chances
for a single datapoint being a false positive at <0.4%; for four responses in a row being false positive, the
chances are negligible at a probability of < 0.0256%.
These types of affinity measurements, which rely on serial dilution of peptides and are simple to
perform, also require high-throughput suitable test platforms that are frugal with regards PBMC
utilization, such as ELISPOT. To our knowledge, such T cell affinity measurements have so far not been
applied systematically to characterize virus-specific T cell responses, thus permitting to compare the
above affinity distributions observed for SARS-CoV-2 with other viruses. To compare the SARS-CoV-2
antigen-induced T cell responses with T cell reactivity to a better characterized virus, we also tested
mega peptide pools that covered 14 antigens of Epstein Barr Virus (EBV), which commonly infects most
humans by the time they have reached adulthood. The raw data are shown in S. Table 4. As summarized
in Table 3, the percentage of EBV mega peptide pools recognized at affinity Levels 1-4 was comparable
in both cohorts to the percentage of SARS-CoV-2 peptide pools eliciting Level 1-4 T cell recall responses
in the COVID-recovered subjects. SARS-CoV-2 infection, therefore, seems to induce a T cell response
that, at least as far as the affinity of nominal antigen-recognition goes, is comparable to the T cell
response to EBV.
3.7. Fine Specificity of SARS-CoV-2 Antigen Recognition in COVID-19-Recovered Subjects
The SARS-CoV-2 peptide pools we used in our study encompassed eight major viral proteins, and
systematically covered the respective antigens. Comparing within each donor the SFU counts triggered
by these peptide pools permits therefore to assess, first, the total T cell mass mobilized against the virus,
and second which antigens are preferentially targeted by T cells, i.e., the T cell immune dominance

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

hierarchy within SARS-CoV-2 antigens. As shown in Table 4, Spike protein (pC5&6) was dominant, or codominant, in all COVID-recovered subjects, with 24-51% of all SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells targeting this
protein in the individual subjects (it was 40+9% for the cohort). The recognition of Nucleocapsid(NCAP)
(pC2, 18+6%) and VMA-1 (pC8, 16+12%) was next most abundant for the COVID-recovered cohort, while
S-RBD (pC7, 9+6%), Nsp12 (pC3, 8+6%) and AP3A (pC1, 6+4%) peptide pools constituted third tier
targets for T cells. There was therefore a clear T cell response hierarchy at the level of the cohort, but it
did not always hold up for each individual within the cohort. For subject dC9, for example, only 24% of
the SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells targeted Spike protein vs. 49% being specific for VMA-1, 19% for NCAP,
and 8% targeting S-RBD. An immune monitoring effort that focused only on the “immune dominant”
Spike protein would have detected only 24% of the relevant T cells in this subject. In Subject dC2, 40% of
the SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells targeted Spike protein, but these T cells were of lower affinity than the
25% that recognized NCAP. T cell immune monitoring efforts for SARS-CoV-2 therefore ideally should
include all antigens of the virus, tested in serial dilutions. Supplemental Table 4 shows for EBV how
inaccurate the assessment of T cell immunity to this virus would be if it was restricted to a single
antigen, and at a single peptide dose. The same holds for HCMV 77.
One possible explanation for the relative immune dominance of Spike protein over the other SARS-CoV2 proteins is its size relative to the others. The longer a protein, the more potential T cell epitopes it
contains. Spike protein was covered by 315 peptides vs. for example NCAP, one third as long, which was
covered by 102 peptides and VMA1, half as long as NCAP, with 53 peptides. Indeed, for these three
antigens, and also for S-RBD and AP3A, the percentage of T cells targeting them divided by the number
of peptides present in each pool (corresponding to the length of the respective protein) gave numbers in
the same ballpark: 0.13%, 0.18%, 0.3%, 0.17%, and 0.09% for Spike, NCAP, VMA1, SRBD, and AP3A,
respectively (Table 4). For these SARS-CoV-2 antigens, therefore, the magnitude of T cell response
targeting each appeared to be a mere function of the proteins’ respective sizes. With this ratio
substantially lower, at 0.03%, NSP12 and NSP5 were under-targeted relative to their size, possibly
suggesting that the expression levels of these two antigens is lower during SARS-CoV-2 replication than
that of the other SARS-CoV-2 antigens.
3.8. Non-Cross-Reactive T Cell Recognition of Seasonal Coronavirus Spike proteins
People around the world commonly get infected with seasonal coronaviruses such as 229E, NL63, OC43,
and HKU1, and over the years most adults can be expected to have been infected with several of these
coronavirus strains. T cell reactivity induced by SARS-CoV-2 mega peptide pools in individuals who
clearly have not been exposed to SARS-CoV-2 have therefore been attributed to cognate cross-reactivity
with seasonal coronavirus. By introducing negative control mega peptide pools to account for noise
created by chance cross-reactivity (Table 1), and by adding the requirement for high affinity T cell
recognition (Table 2), we show that SARS-CoV-2 antigens are not recognized by subjects in the PreCOVID cohort as a consequence of cross-reactivity with seasonal coronavirus antigens. We therefore
asked the reverse question: do mega peptide pools that specifically cover seasonal coronaviruses detect
T cell memory in both cohorts?
We tested Spike proteins of 229E, NL63, OC43, and HKU1, which, due to their size, were each
represented in two mega peptide pools (as was the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein itself). These peptide
pools were also tested at four concentrations, following exactly the same protocol as specified above for
the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein, and all other peptide pools tested in this study. While no Level 4 affinity

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

response to SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein peptides were seen in Pre-COVID-19 subjects (Table 2B), eight of
20 subjects in this cohort exhibited a Level 4 response to at least one of the seasonal coronavirus Spike
proteins (Table 5B). Cognate T cell reactivity to Spike proteins of seasonal coronaviruses, which do not
cross-react with Spike protein of SARS-CoV-2, can therefore be detected in subjects bled in the PreCOVID Era.
Individuals in the SARS-CoV-2 PCR-verified cohort also showed Level 4 and Level 3 recall responses to
Spike proteins of seasonal coronaviruses (Table 5A), however, with SFU numbers that were comparable
with the Pre-COVID cohort. If these seasonal coronavirus-specific T cells cross-reacted with SARS-CoV-2
Spike protein, then they should occur in substantially elevated numbers compared to the Pre-COVID era
subjects since the recent SARS-CoV-2 infection should have boosted such pre-existing memory cells and
caused their numbers to selectively expand. Since seasonal coronavirus-reactive T cells occurred in
comparable frequencies in both donor cohorts evaluated in this study, this further supports the data
presented in Table 2 that peptides covering the SARS-CoV-2 Spike and seasonal coronavirus Spike
antigens do not activate T cells in a cross-reactive fashion. Instead, T cells specifically recognizing the
different coronavirus Spike proteins can be attributed to sequence disparities in the amino acid
sequence of the Spike proteins expressed by these seasonal coronaviruses and the novel SARS-CoV-2
virus 54, 65, 78.
4. Concluding Remarks
The overall question that we addressed was whether test conditions can be established that permit to
clearly identify SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell memory engaged in individuals who underwent a mild
infection vs. humans who have not been infected with this virus. Previous publications on this subject
matter reported up to 80% false positive results for uninfected individuals due to alleged T cell crossreactivity. Here we have established criteria by which false positive results can be reduced to 0% (0 of 18
Pre-COVID Era test subjects), while permitting the detection of SARS-CoV-2-reactive T cells in eight of
nine (89%) SARS-CoV-2 PCR-verified subjects. To accomplish this discrimination, a combination of four
criteria needed to be used. First, the detection of ex vivo IFN-γ producing effector memory T cells.
Second, we introduced negative control mega peptide pools, instead of medium alone, to establish the
background noise level caused by chance cross-reactivity. Third, we introduced the criterion that a T cell
response scores positive only if it has sufficient affinity, being triggered by at least four 1+2 (vol + vol) (3fold) serial dilutions of the test peptides. Lastly, as COVID-recovered donors responded to several SARSCoV-2 antigens, a broad T cell response profile was established as a requirement for scoring a subject
positive. In addition to exhibiting a high affinity T cell response to at least one mega peptide pool, a
second high or intermediate affinity level T cell response was also identified in 89% our SARS-CoV-2 PCRverified cohort.
Following infection with the original SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV), antibody and B cell memory wanes,
but evidence for T cell memory remains 79. Antibody titers, and potentially B cell memory, also appear
to be short-lived after SARS-CoV-2 infection as well 80, but it is presently not known whether T cell
memory to this virus will be durably maintained. If serum antibody reactivity fails to provide reliable
information on previous exposure to SARS-CoV-2, then potentially T cell diagnostics could fill this gap.
Even though we report here that SARS-CoV-2 and EBV-specific T cells occur in similar frequencies in
COVID-recovered subjects (See Table 2 vs. S. Table 4), it might be premature to conclude that such
findings signify the induction of a robust cognate T cell response following SARS-CoV-2 infection.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Cognate T cell responses in general show a typical kinetic: in the first weeks after the onset of infection
the frequency of the antigen-specific T cells reaches a peak, after which the frequencies drop to a
substantially lower steady state level 80. We measured frequencies of SARS-CoV-2 antigen-specific T
cells close to their expected peak in our COVID-recovered cohort, while the frequencies of the EBVspecific T cells were assessed in steady state. Therefore, in light of the typical T cell response kinetic, the
data reported here, and supported by existing literature, may also signify that mild/asymptomatic SARSCoV-2 infection induces a much weaker T cell response than natural EBV infection, or other viruses
against which we develop protective immunity. The already low numbers of SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells
early on after a mild/asymptomatic infection might further decrease with time, which needs to be
established. Being able to accurately detect such rare SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells is an important step
for immune diagnostics, but is just the first step toward understanding their role in host defense.
Acknowledgements
We thank Ruliang Li of Cellular Technology Limited for expert technical assistance, Drs. Magdalena TaryLehmann, Nicholas Tomko and Alexey Y. Karulin for valuable discussions, and Diana Roen for editorial
assistance. We also thank Melisa Sebok, Malachi Wickman, and Jennifer Penfold from American Red
Cross, as well as Tibor Baki and Victoria Gaidaenko of CTL for helping us access blood from COVID-19recovered subjects.
Data Availability Statement
The datasets generated in this study will be made available by the authors, without undue reservation, to
any qualified researcher.
Conflict of Interest
All authors, except PAR, are employees of Cellular Technology Limited (CTL), a company that specializes
in ELISPOT testing, producing high-throughput-suitable readers, test kits, and GLP-compliant contract
research. PAR declares no financial, commercial or other relationships that might be perceived by the
academic community as representing a potential conflict of interest.
Author Contributions
Experiments were designed by A.A.L, PVL and P.A.R. Experimental data were generated by A.A.L, T.Z,
and G.A.K.
Funding
This study was funded by the R&D budget of Cellular Technology Limited.

5. References
1.
Long QX, Tang XJ, Shi QL, Li Q, Deng HJ, Yuan J, Hu JL, Xu W, Zhang Y, Lv FJ, Su K, Zhang F, Gong J,
Wu B, Liu XM, Li JJ, Qiu JF, Chen J, Huang AL. Clinical and immunological assessment of asymptomatic
SARS-CoV-2 infections. Nature Medicine. 2020; 26:1200-4. PubMed PMID: 32555424.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

2.
Mallapaty S. Will antibody tests for the coronavirus really change everything? Nature. 2020;
580:571-2. PubMed PMID: 32313159.
3.
Woloshin S, Patel N, Kesselheim AS. False negative tests for SARS-CoV-2 infection — challenges
and implications. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020; 383(6):38. PubMed PMID: 32502334.
4.
Seow J, Graham C, Merrick B, Acors S, Pickering S, Steel KJA, Hemmings O, O’Byrne A, Kouphou
N, Galao RP, Betancor G, Wilson HD, Signell AW, Winstone H, Kerridge C, Huettner I, Jimenez-Guardeño
JM, Lista MJ, Temperton N, Snell LB, Bisnauthsing K, Moore A, Green A, Martinez L, Stokes B, Honey J,
Izquierdo-Barras A, Arbane G, Patel A, Tan MKI, O’Connell L, O’Hara G, MacMahon E, Douthwaite S,
Nebbia G, Batra R, Martinez-Nunez R, Shankar-Hari M, Edgeworth JD, Neil SJD, Malim MH, Doores KJ.
Longitudinal observation and decline of neutralizing antibody responses in the three months following
SARS-CoV-2 infection in humans. Nature Microbiology. 2020; 5:1598-607.PubMed PMID: 33106674.
5.
Rydyznski Moderbacher C, Ramirez SI, Dan JM, Grifoni A, Hastie KM, Weiskopf D, Belanger S,
Abbott RK, Kim C, Choi J, Kato Y, Crotty EG, Kim C, Rawlings SA, Mateus J, Tse LPV, Frazier A, Baric R,
Peters B, Greenbaum J, Ollmann Saphire E, Smith DM, Sette A, Crotty S. Antigen-specific adaptive
immunity to SARS-CoV-2 in acute COVID-19 and associations with age and disease severity. Cell.
2020;183:996-1012 PubMed PMID: 33010815.
6.
Xu B, Fan C-y, Wang A-l, Zou Y-l, Yu Y-h, He C, Xia W-g, Zhang J-x, Miao Q. Suppressed T cellmediated immunity in patients with COVID-19: A clinical retrospective study in Wuhan, China. Journal of
Infection. 2020;81:51-60. PubMed PMID: 32315725.
7.
Zhao J, Zhao J, Mangalam AK, Channappanavar R, Fett C, Meyerholz DK, Agnihothram S, Baric
RS, David CS, Perlman S. Airway memory CD4(+) T cells mediate protective immunity against emerging
respiratory coronaviruses. Immunity. 2016:1379-91. PubMed PMID: 27287409.
8.
Gallais F, Velay A, Wendling M-J, Nazon C, Partisani M, Sibilia J, Candon S, Fafi-Kremer S.
Intrafamilial exposure to SARS-CoV-2 induces cellular immune response without seroconversion.
medRxiv. [Preprint] 2020:2020.06.21.20132449.
9.
Sekine T, Perez-Potti A, Rivera-Ballesteros O, Strålin K, Gorin JB, Olsson A, Llewellyn-Lacey S,
Kamal H, Bogdanovic G, Muschiol S, Wullimann DJ, Kammann T, Emgård J, Parrot T, Folkesson E,
Rooyackers O, Eriksson LI, Henter JI, Sönnerborg A, Allander T, Albert J, Nielsen M, Klingström J,
Gredmark-Russ S, Björkström NK, Sandberg JK, Price DA, Ljunggren HG, Aleman S, Buggert M. Robust T
cell immunity in covalescent individuals with asymptomatic or mild COVID-19. Cell. 2020; 183:158-68.
PubMed PMID: 32979941.
10.
Thieme CJ, Anft M, Paniskaki K, Blazquez-Navarro A, Doevelaar A, Seibert FS, Hoelzer B, Konik
MJ, Berger MM, Brenner T, Tempfer C, Watzl C, Meister TL, Pfaender S, Steinmann E, Dolff S, Dittmer U,
Westhoff TH, Witzke O, Stervbo U, Roch T, Babel N. Robust T Cell response toward spike, membrane,
and nucleocapsid SARS-CoV-2 proteins is not associated with recovery in critical COVID-19 patients. Cell
Reports. Medicine. 2020;1(6):100092. PubMed PMID: 32904468.
11.
Schwarzkopf S, Krawczyk A, Knop D, Klump H, Heinold A, Heinemann F, Thümmler L, Temme C,
Breyer M, Witzke O, Dittmer U, Lenz V, Horn P, Lindemann M. Cellular Immunity in COVID-19
Convalescents with PCR-confirmed infection but with undetectable SARS-CoV-2–specific IgG. Emerging
Infectious Disease Journal. 2020;27(1). PubMed PMID: 33058753.
12.
Braun J, Loyal L, Frentsch M, Wendisch D, Georg P, Kurth F, Hippenstiel S, Dingeldey M, Kruse B,
Fauchere F, Baysal E, Mangold M, Henze L, Lauster R, Mall MA, Beyer K, Rohmel J, Voigt S, Schmitz J,
Miltenyi S, Demuth I, Muller MA, Hocke A, Witzenrath M, Suttorp N, Kern F, Reimer U, Wenschuh H,
Drosten C, Corman VM, Giesecke-Thiel C, Sander LE, Thiel A. SARS-CoV-2-reactive T cells in healthy
donors and patients with COVID-19. Nature. 2020; 587:270-4. PubMed PMID: 32726801.
13.
Grifoni A, Weiskopf D, Ramirez SI, Mateus J, Dan JM, Moderbacher CR, Rawlings SA, Sutherland
A, Premkumar L, Jadi RS, Marrama D, de Silva AM, Frazier A, Carlin AF, Greenbaum JA, Peters B,
Krammer F, Smith DM, Crotty S, Sette A. Targets of T Cell responses to SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus in

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

humans with COVID-19 disease and unexposed individuals. Cell. 2020; 181:1489-501. PubMed PMID:
32473127.
14.
Le Bert N, Tan AT, Kunasegaran K, Tham CYL, Hafezi M, Chia A, Chng MHY, Lin M, Tan N, Linster
M, Chia WN, Chen MIC, Wang L-F, Ooi EE, Kalimuddin S, Tambyah PA, Low JG-H, Tan Y-J, Bertoletti A.
SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell immunity in cases of COVID-19 and SARS, and uninfected controls. Nature.
2020; 584:457-62. PubMed PMID: 3266844415.
15.
Mateus J, Grifoni A, Tarke A, Sidney J, Ramirez SI, Dan JM, Burger ZC, Rawlings SA, Smith DM,
Phillips E, Mallal S, Lammers M, Rubiro P, Quiambao L, Sutherland A, Yu ED, da Silva Antunes R,
Greenbaum J, Frazier A, Markmann AJ, Premkumar L, de Silva A, Peters B, Crotty S, Sette A, Weiskopf D.
Selective and cross-reactive SARS-CoV-2 T cell epitopes in unexposed humans. Science. 2020; 370: 8994. PubMed PMID: 32753554.
16.
Nelde A, Bilich T, Heitmann JS, Maringer Y, Salih HR, Roerden M, Lübke M, Bauer J, Rieth J,
Wacker M, Peter A, Hörber S, Traenkle B, Kaiser PD, Rothbauer U, Becker M, Junker D, Krause G,
Strengert M, Schneiderhan-Marra N, Templin MF, Joos TO, Kowalewski DJ, Stos-Zweifel V, Fehr M,
Rabsteyn A, Mirakaj V, Karbach J, Jäger E, Graf M, Gruber L-C, Rachfalski D, Preuß B, Hagelstein I,
Märklin M, Bakchoul T, Gouttefangeas C, Kohlbacher O, Klein R, Stevanović S, Rammensee H-G, Walz JS.
SARS-CoV-2-derived peptides define heterologous and COVID-19-induced T cell recognition. Nature
Immunology. 2020. PubMED PMID: 32999467.
17.
Ni L, Ye F, Cheng ML, Feng Y, Deng YQ, Zhao H, Wei P, Ge J, Gou M, Li X, Sun L, Cao T, Wang P,
Zhou C, Zhang R, Liang P, Guo H, Wang X, Qin CF, Chen F, Dong C. Detection of SARS-CoV-2-specific
humoral and cellular immunity in COVID-19 convalescent individuals. Immunity. 2020;52:971-7. PubMed
PMID: 32413330.
18.
Weiskopf D, Schmitz KS, Raadsen MP, Grifoni A, Okba NMA, Endeman H, van den Akker JPC,
Molenkamp R, Koopmans MPG, van Gorp ECM, Haagmans BL, de Swart RL, Sette A, de Vries RD.
Phenotype and kinetics of SARS-CoV-2–specific T cells in COVID-19 patients with acute respiratory
distress syndrome. Science Immunology. 2020;5(48):eabd2071. PubMed PMID: 32591408.
19.
Reche PA. Potential cross-reactive immunity to SARS-CoV-2 from common human pathogens
and vaccines. Frontiers in Immunology. 2020;11:586984. PubMed PMID: 33178220.
20.
Ogbe A, Kronsteiner B, Skelly DT, Pace M, Brown A, Adland E, Adair K, Akhter HD, Ali M, Ali S-E,
Angyal A, Ansari MA, Arancibia-Carcamo CV, Brown H, Chinnakannan S, Conlon CP, de Lara C, de Silva T,
Dold C, Dong TD, Donnison T, Eyre DW, Flaxman A, Fletcher HA, Gardner J, Grist JT, Hackstein C-P,
Jaruthamsophon K, Jeffrey K, Lambe T, Lee L, Li W, Lim N, Matthews PC, Mentzer AJ, Moore SC, Naisbitt
DJ, Ogese M, Ogg G, Openshaw P, Pirmohamed M, Pollard AJ, Ramamurthy N, Rongkard P, RowlandJones S, Sampson OL, Screaton G, Sette A, Stafford L, Thompson C, Thomson PJ, Thwaites R, Vieira V,
Weiskopf D, Zacharopoulou P, Turtle L, Klenerman P, Goulder P, Frater J, Barnes E, Dunachie S. T cell
assays differentiate clinical and subclinical SARS-CoV-2 infections from cross-reactive antiviral responses.
medRxiv. [Preprint] 2020:2020.09.28.20202929.
21.
Peng Y, Mentzer AJ, Liu G, Yao X, Yin Z, Dong D, Dejnirattisai W, Rostron T, Supasa P, Liu C,
Lopez-Camacho C, Slon-Campos J, Zhao Y, Stuart DI, Paesen GC, Grimes JM, Antson AA, Bayfield OW,
Hawkins D, Ker DS, Wang B, Turtle L, Subramaniam K, Thomson P, Zhang P, Dold C, Ratcliff J, Simmonds
P, de Silva T, Sopp P, Wellington D, Rajapaksa U, Chen YL, Salio M, Napolitani G, Paes W, Borrow P,
Kessler BM, Fry JW, Schwabe NF, Semple MG, Baillie JK, Moore SC, Openshaw PJM, Ansari MA, Dunachie
S, Barnes E, Frater J, Kerr G, Goulder P, Lockett T, Levin R, Zhang Y, Jing R, Ho LP, Oxford Immunology
Network Covid-19 Response TcC, Investigators IC, Cornall RJ, Conlon CP, Klenerman P, Screaton GR,
Mongkolsapaya J, McMichael A, Knight JC, Ogg G, Dong T. Broad and strong memory CD4(+) and CD8(+)
T cells induced by SARS-CoV-2 in UK convalescent individuals following COVID-19. Nature Immunology.
2020; 21:1336-45. PubMed PMID: 32887977.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

22.
Habel JR, Nguyen THO, van de Sandt CE, Juno JA, Chaurasia P, Wragg K, Koutsakos M, Hensen L,
Jia X, Chua B, Zhang W, Tan H-X, Flanagan KL, Doolan DL, Torresi J, Chen W, Wakim LM, Cheng AC,
Doherty PC, Petersen J, Rossjohn J, Wheatley AK, Kent SJ, Rowntree LC, Kedzierska K. Suboptimal SARSCoV-2−specific CD8+ T cell response associated with the prominent HLA-A*02:01 phenotype.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2020; 117:24384-91. PubMed PMID: 3291305322.
23.
Mathew D, Giles JR, Baxter AE, Oldridge DA, Greenplate AR, Wu JE, Alanio C, Kuri-Cervantes L,
Pampena MB, D'Andrea K, Manne S, Chen Z, Huang YJ, Reilly JP, Weisman AR, Ittner CAG, Kuthuru O,
Dougherty J, Nzingha K, Han N, Kim J, Pattekar A, Goodwin EC, Anderson EM, Weirick ME, Gouma S,
Arevalo CP, Bolton MJ, Chen F, Lacey SF, Ramage H, Cherry S, Hensley SE, Apostolidis SA, Huang AC,
Vella LA, Unit UPCP, Betts MR, Meyer NJ, Wherry EJ. Deep immune profiling of COVID-19 patients
reveals distinct immunotypes with therapeutic implications. Science. 2020;369(6508)eabc8511. PubMed
PMID: 32669297.
24.
Pepper M, Rodda L, Netland J, Shehata L, Pruner K, Morawski P, Thouvenel C, Takahara K,
Eggenberger J, Hemann E, Waterman H, Fahning M, Chen Y, Rathe J, Stokes C, Wrenn S, Fiala B, Carter L,
Hamerman J, King N, Gale M, Campbell D, Rawlings D. Functional SARS-CoV-2-specific immune memory
persists after mild COVID-19. Research Square. [Preprint] 2020; PubMed PMID: 32818218.
25.
Adorini L, Muller S, Cardinaux F, Lehmann PV, Falcioni F, Nagy ZA. In vivo competition between
self peptides and foreign antigens in T-cell activation. Nature. 1988;334:623-5. PubMed PMID: 3261393
26.
Friberg H, Bashyam H, Toyosaki-Maeda T, Potts JA, Greenough T, Kalayanarooj S, Gibbons RV,
Nisalak A, Srikiatkhachorn A, Green S, Stephens HA, Rothman AL, Mathew A. Cross-reactivity and
expansion of dengue-specific T cells during acute primary and secondary infections in humans. Scientific
Reports - Nature. 2011;1:51. PubMed PMID: 22355570.
27.
Friberg H, Burns L, Woda M, Kalayanarooj S, Endy TP, Stephens HA, Green S, Rothman AL,
Mathew A. Memory CD8+ T cells from naturally acquired primary dengue virus infection are highly
cross-reactive. Immunology & Cell Biology. 2011;89:122-9. PubMed PMID: 20421879.
28.
Gras S, Kedzierski L, Valkenburg SA, Laurie K, Liu YC, Denholm JT, Richards MJ, Rimmelzwaan GF,
Kelso A, Doherty PC, Turner SJ, Rossjohn J, Kedzierska K. Cross-reactive CD8+ T-cell immunity between
the pandemic H1N1-2009 and H1N1-1918 influenza A viruses. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America. 2010; 107:12599-604. PubMed PMID: 20616031.
29.
Haanen JB, Wolkers MC, Kruisbeek AM, Schumacher TN. Selective expansion of cross-reactive
CD8(+) memory T cells by viral variants. The Journal of Experimental Medicine. 1999; 190:1319-28.
PubMed PMID: 10544203.
30.
Roti M, Yang J, Berger D, Huston L, James EA, Kwok WW. Healthy human subjects have CD4+ T
cells directed against H5N1 influenza virus. Journal of Immunology. 2008; 180:1758-68. PubMed PMID:
18209073.
31.
Townsend AR, Skehel JJ. The influenza A virus nucleoprotein gene controls the induction of both
subtype specific and cross-reactive cytotoxic T cells. The Journal of Experimental Medicine. 1984;
160:552-63. PubMed PMID: 6206181.
32.
Urbani S, Amadei B, Cariani E, Fisicaro P, Orlandini A, Missale G, Ferrari C. The impairment of
CD8 responses limits the selection of escape mutations in acute hepatitis C virus infection. Journal of
Immunology. 2005;175:7519-29. PubMed PMID: 16301660.
33.
Conrad JA, Ramalingam RK, Smith RM, Barnett L, Lorey SL, Wei J, Simons BC, Sadagopal S,
Meyer-Olson D, Kalams SA. Dominant clonotypes within HIV-specific T cell responses are programmed
death-1high and CD127low and display reduced variant cross-reactivity. Journal of Immunology. 2011;
186:6871-85. PubMed PMID: 21562156.
34.
Lee JK, Stewart-Jones G, Dong T, Harlos K, Di Gleria K, Dorrell L, Douek DC, van der Merwe PA,
Jones EY, McMichael AJ. T cell cross-reactivity and conformational changes during TCR engagement. The
Journal of Experimental Medicine. 2004; 200:1455-66. PubMed PMID: 15583017.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

35.
Petrova G, Ferrante A, Gorski J. Cross-reactivity of T cells and its role in the immune system.
Critical Reveviews in Immunology. 2012;32:349-72. PubMed PMID: 23237510.
36.
Wooldridge L, Ekeruche-Makinde J, van den Berg HA, Skowera A, Miles JJ, Tan MP, Dolton G,
Clement M, Llewellyn-Lacey S, Price DA, Peakman M, Sewell AK. A single autoimmune T cell receptor
recognizes more than a million different peptides. The Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2012; 287: 116877. PubMed PMID: 22102287.
37.
Ishizuka J, Grebe K, Shenderov E, Peters B, Chen Q, Peng Y, Wang L, Dong T, Pasquetto V,
Oseroff C, Sidney J, Hickman H, Cerundolo V, Sette A, Bennink JR, McMichael A, Yewdell JW.
Quantitating T cell cross-reactivity for unrelated peptide antigens. Journal of Immunology. 2009; 183:
4337-45. PubMed PMID: 19734234.
38.
Oseroff C, Kos F, Bui HH, Peters B, Pasquetto V, Glenn J, Palmore T, Sidney J, Tscharke DC,
Bennink JR, Southwood S, Grey HM, Yewdell JW, Sette A. HLA class I-restricted responses to vaccinia
recognize a broad array of proteins mainly involved in virulence and viral gene regulation. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2005;102:13980-5. PubMed PMID:
16172378.
39.
Sylwester AW, Mitchell BL, Edgar JB, Taormina C, Pelte C, Ruchti F, Sleath PR, Grabstein KH,
Hosken NA, Kern F, Nelson JA, Picker LJ. Broadly targeted human cytomegalovirus-specific CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells dominate the memory compartments of exposed subjects. The Journal of Experimental
Medicine. 2005;202:673-85. PubMed PMID: 16147978.
40.
Campion SL, Brodie TM, Fischer W, Korber BT, Rossetti A, Goonetilleke N, McMichael AJ, Sallusto
F. Proteome-wide analysis of HIV-specific naive and memory CD4(+) T cells in unexposed blood donors.
The Journal of Experimental Medicine. 2014;211:1273-80. PubMed PMID: 24958850.
41.
Su LF, Davis MM. Antiviral memory phenotype T cells in unexposed adults. Immunological
Reviews. 2013;255:95-109. PubMed PMID: 23947350.
42.
Cui J, Li F, Shi Z-L. Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses. Nature Reviews
Microbiology. 2019;17:181-92. PubMed PMID: 30531947.
43.
Killerby ME, Biggs HM, Haynes A, Dahl RM, Mustaquim D, Gerber SI, Watson JT. Human
coronavirus circulation in the United States 2014-2017. Journal of Clinical Virology. 2018; 101:52-6.
PubMed PMID: 29427907.
44.
Gorse GJ, Patel GB, Vitale JN, O'Connor TZ. Prevalence of antibodies to four human
coronaviruses is lower in nasal secretions than in serum. Clinical and Vaccine Immunology.
2010;17:1875-80. PubMed PMID: 20943876.
45.
Severance EG, Bossis I, Dickerson FB, Stallings CR, Origoni AE, Sullens A, Yolken RH, Viscidi RP.
Development of a nucleocapsid-based human coronavirus immunoassay and sstimates of individuals
exposed to coronavirus in a U.S. Metropolitan Population. Clinical and Vaccine Immunology.
2008;15:1805-10. PubMed PMID: 18945884.
46.
Zhou W, Wang W, Wang H, Lu R, Tan W. First infection by all four non-severe acute respiratory
syndrome human coronaviruses takes place during childhood. BMC Infectious Diseases. 2013; 13:433
PubMed PMID: 24040960.
47.
Guan WJ, Ni ZY, Hu Y, Liang WH, Ou CQ, He JX, Liu L, Shan H, Lei CL, Hui DSC, Du B, Li LJ, Zeng G,
Yuen KY, Chen RC, Tang CL, Wang T, Chen PY, Xiang J, Li SY, Wang JL, Liang ZJ, Peng YX, Wei L, Liu Y, Hu
YH, Peng P, Wang JM, Liu JY, Chen Z, Li G, Zheng ZJ, Qiu SQ, Luo J, Ye CJ, Zhu SY, Zhong NS, China Medical
treatment expert group for clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in China. New England
Journal of Medicine. 2020; 382:1708-20. PubMed PMID: 32109013.
48.
Tillett RL, Sevinsky JR, Hartley PD, Kerwin H, Crawford N, Gorzalski A, Laverdure C, Verma SC,
Rossetto CC, Jackson D, Farrell MJ, Van Hooser S, Pandori M. Genomic evidence for reinfection with
SARS-CoV-2: a case study. Lancet Journal of Infectious Diseases. 2020; S1473-3099(20)30764-7 PubMed
PMID: 33058797.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

49.
Ramachandran H, Laux J, Moldovan I, Caspell R, Lehmann PV, Subbramanian RA. Optimal
thawing of cryopreserved peripheral blood mononuclear cells for use in high-throughput human
immune monitoring studies. Cells. 2012;1:313-24. PubMed PMID: 24710478.
50.
Schiller A, Zhang T, Li R, Duechting A, Sundararaman S, Przybyla A, Kuerten S, Lehmann PV. A
positive control for detection of functional CD4 T cells in PBMC: the CPI pool. Cells. 2017;6:47-58.
PubMed PMID: 29215584.
51.
Lehmann AA, Reche PA, Zhang T, Suwansaard M, Lehmann PV. CERI, CEFX, and CPI: largely
improved positive controls for testing antigen-specific T cell function in PBMC compared to CEF. bioRxiv.
[Preprint] 2020:2020.11.12.380188.
52.
Zhang W, Lehmann PV. Objective, user-independent ELISPOT data analysis based on
scientifically validated principles. Methods in Molecular Biology). 2012;792:155-71. PubMed PMID:
21956509.
53.
Long QX, Liu BZ, Deng HJ, Wu GC, Deng K, Chen YK, Liao P, Qiu JF, Lin Y, Cai XF, Wang DQ, Hu Y,
Ren JH, Tang N, Xu YY, Yu LH, Mo Z, Gong F, Zhang XL, Tian WG, Hu L, Zhang XX, Xiang JL, Du HX, Liu HW,
Lang CH, Luo XH, Wu SB, Cui XP, Zhou Z, Zhu MM, Wang J, Xue CJ, Li XF, Wang L, Li ZJ, Wang K, Niu CC,
Yang QJ, Tang XJ, Zhang Y, Liu XM, Li JJ, Zhang DC, Zhang F, Liu P, Yuan J, Li Q, Hu JL, Chen J, Huang AL.
Antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 in patients with COVID-19. Nature Medicine. 2020;26:845-48.
PubMed PMID: 32350462.
54.
Okba NMA, Muller MA, Li W, Wang C, GeurtsvanKessel CH, Corman VM, Lamers MM, Sikkema
RS, de Bruin E, Chandler FD, Yazdanpanah Y, Le Hingrat Q, Descamps D, Houhou-Fidouh N, Reusken C,
Bosch BJ, Drosten C, Koopmans MPG, Haagmans BL. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2specific antibody responses in coronavirus disease patients. Emerging Infectious Diseases. 2020;
26:1478-88. PubMed PMID: 32267220.
55.
Suthar MS, Zimmerman MG, Kauffman RC, Mantus G, Linderman SL, Hudson WH, Vanderheiden
A, Nyhoff L, Davis CW, Adekunle O, Affer M, Sherman M, Reynolds S, Verkerke HP, Alter DN, Guarner J,
Bryksin J, Horwath MC, Arthur CM, Saakadze N, Smith GH, Edupuganti S, Scherer EM, Hellmeister K,
Cheng A, Morales JA, Neish AS, Stowell SR, Frank F, Ortlund E, Anderson EJ, Menachery VD, Rouphael N,
Mehta AK, Stephens DS, Ahmed R, Roback JD, Wrammert J. Rapid generation of neutralizing antibody
responses in COVID-19 patients. Cell Reports Medicine. 2020;1:100040. PubMed PMID: 32835303.
56.
Mazzini L, Martinuzzi D, Hyseni I, Lapini G, Benincasa L, Piu P, Trombetta CM, Marchi S, Razzano
I, Manenti A, Montomoli E. Comparative analyses of SARS-CoV-2 binding (IgG, IgM, IgA) and neutralizing
antibodies from human serum samples. bioRxiv. [Preprint] 2020:2020.08.10.243717.
57.
Kreher CR, Dittrich MT, Guerkov R, Boehm BO, Tary-Lehmann M. CD4+ and CD8+ cells in
cryopreserved human PBMC maintain full functionality in cytokine ELISPOT assays. Journal of
Immunological Methods. 2003; 278:79-93. PubMed PMID: 12957398.
58.
Hesse MD, Karulin AY, Boehm BO, Lehmann PV, Tary-Lehmann M. A T cell clone’s avidity is a
function of its activation state. Journal of Immunology. 2001;167:1353-61. PubMed PMID: 11466353
59.
Janice Oh HL, Ken-En Gan S, Bertoletti A, Tan YJ. Understanding the T cell immune response in
SARS coronavirus infection. Emerging Microbes & Infections. 2012 (9):23. PubMed PMID: 26038429.
60.
Neidleman J, Luo X, Frouard J, Xie G, Gill G, Stein ES, McGregor M, Ma T, George AF, Kosters A,
Greene WC, Vasquez J, Ghosn E, Lee S, Roan NR. SARS-CoV-2-specific T Cells exhibit phenotypic features
of helper function, lack of terminal differentiation, and high proliferation potential. Cell Reports
Medicine. 2020;1:100081. PubMed PMID: 32839763.
61.
Hotez PJ, Bottazzi ME, Corry DB. The potential role of Th17 immune responses in coronavirus
immunopathology and vaccine-induced immune enhancement. Microbes and Infection. 2020; 22:165167. PubMed PMID: 32305501
62.
O'Garra A. Cytokines induce the development of functionally heterogeneous T helper cell
subsets. Immunity. 1998;8:275-83. PubMed PMID: 9529145.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

63.
Pepper M, Jenkins MK. Origins of CD4(+) effector and central memory T cells. Nature
Immunology. 2011; 12:467-71. PubMed PMID: 21739668.
64.
Jiang HW, Li Y, Zhang HN, Wang W, Yang X, Qi H, Li H, Men D, Zhou J, Tao SC. SARS-CoV-2
proteome microarray for global profiling of COVID-19 specific IgG and IgM responses. Nature
Communications. 2020; 11:3581. PubMed PMID: 32665645.
65.
Grifoni A, Sidney J, Zhang Y, Scheuermann RH, Peters B, Sette A. A sequence homology and
bioinformatic approach can predict candidate targets for immune responses to SARS-CoV-2. Cell Host &
Microbe. 2020;27:671-80. PubMed PMID: 32183941.
66.
Lehmann AA, Zhang T, Reche PA, Lehmann PV. Discordance between the predicted vs. the
actually recognized CD8+ T cell epitopes of HCMV pp65 antigen and aleatory epitope dominance.
bioRxiv. [Preprint]. 2020:2020.11.06.371633.
67.
Mei S, Li F, Leier A, Marquez-Lago TT, Giam K, Croft NP, Akutsu T, Smith AI, Li J, Rossjohn J,
Purcell AW, Song J. A comprehensive review and performance evaluation of bioinformatics tools for HLA
class I peptide-binding prediction. Briefings in Bioinformatics. 2020;21:1119-35. PubMed PMID:
31204427.
68.
Jewett A. The potential effect of novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 on NK cells; a perspective on
potential therapeutic interventions. Frontiers in Immunology. 2020;11:1692. PubMed PMID: 32754162.
69.
Kaneko N, Kuo HH, Boucau J, Farmer JR, Allard-Chamard H, Mahajan VS, Piechocka-Trocha A,
Lefteri K, Osborn M, Bals J, Bartsch YC, Bonheur N, Caradonna TM, Chevalier J, Chowdhury F, Diefenbach
TJ, Einkauf K, Fallon J, Feldman J, Finn KK, Garcia-Broncano P, Hartana CA, Hauser BM, Jiang C, Kaplonek
P, Karpell M, Koscher EC, Lian X, Liu H, Liu J, Ly NL, Michell AR, Rassadkina Y, Seiger K, Sessa L, Shin S,
Singh N, Sun W, Sun X, Ticheli HJ, Waring MT, Zhu AL, Alter G, Li JZ, Lingwood D, Schmidt AG, Lichterfeld
M, Walker BD, Yu XG, Padera RF, Jr., Pillai S. Loss of Bcl-6-expressing T follicular helper cells and germinal
centers in COVID-19. Cell. 2020; 183:143-57. PubMed PMID: 32877699.
70.
Olagnier D, Farahani E, Thyrsted J, Blay-Cadanet J, Herengt A, Idorn M, Hait A, Hernaez B,
Knudsen A, Iversen MB, Schilling M, Jorgensen SE, Thomsen M, Reinert LS, Lappe M, Hoang HD, Gilchrist
VH, Hansen AL, Ottosen R, Nielsen CG, Moller C, van der Horst D, Peri S, Balachandran S, Huang J,
Jakobsen M, Svenningsen EB, Poulsen TB, Bartsch L, Thielke AL, Luo Y, Alain T, Rehwinkel J, Alcami A,
Hiscott J, Mogensen TH, Paludan SR, Holm CK. SARS-CoV2-mediated suppression of NRF2-signaling
reveals potent antiviral and anti-inflammatory activity of 4-octyl-itaconate and dimethyl fumarate.
Nature Communications. 2020;11:4938. PubMed PMID: 33009401.
71.
Remy KE, Mazer M, Striker DA, Ellebedy AH, Walton AH, Unsinger J, Blood TM, Mudd PA, Yi DJ,
Mannion DA, Osborne DF, Martin RS, Anand NJ, Bosanquet JP, Blood J, Drewry AM, Caldwell CC,
Turnbull IR, Brakenridge SC, Moldwawer LL, Hotchkiss RS. Severe immunosuppression and not a
cytokine storm characterizes COVID-19 infections. Journal of Clinical Investigation Insight. 2020;
5(17):e140329. PubMed PMID: 32687484.
72.
Schub D, Klemis V, Schneitler S, Mihm J, Lepper PM, Wilkens H, Bals R, Eichler H, Gartner BC,
Becker SL, Sester U, Sester M, Schmidt T. High levels of SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells with restricted
functionality in severe courses of COVID-19. Journal of Clinical Investigation Insight. 2020; 5:e142167.
PubMed PMID: 32937615.
73.
Zhang X, Tan Y, Ling Y, Lu G, Liu F, Yi Z, Jia X, Wu M, Shi B, Xu S, Chen J, Wang W, Chen B, Jiang L,
Yu S, Lu J, Wang J, Xu M, Yuan Z, Zhang Q, Zhang X, Zhao G, Wang S, Chen S, Lu H. Viral and host factors
related to the clinical outcome of COVID-19. Nature. 2020;583:437-40. PubMed PMID: 32434211.
74.
Zhou R, To KK, Wong YC, Liu L, Zhou B, Li X, Huang H, Mo Y, Luk TY, Lau TT, Yeung P, Chan WM,
Wu AK, Lung KC, Tsang OT, Leung WS, Hung IF, Yuen KY, Chen Z. Acute SARS-CoV-2 infection impairs
dendritic cell and T cell responses. Immunity. 2020; 53:864-877. PubMed PMID: 32791036.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

75.
Campos-Olivas R, Newman JL, Summers MF. Solution structure and dynamics of the Rous
sarcoma virus capsid protein and comparison with capsid proteins of other retroviruses. Journal of
Molecular Biology. 2000;296:633-49. PubMed PMID: 10669613.
76.
Karulin AY, Caspell R, Dittrich M, Lehmann PV. Normal distribution of CD8+ T-cell-derived
ELISPOT counts within replicates justifies the reliance on parametric statistics for identifying positive
responses. Cells. 2015;4:96-111. PubMed PMID: 25738924.
77.
Lehmann PV, Suwansaard M, Zhang T, Roen DR, Kirchenbaum GA, Karulin AY, Lehmann A, Reche
PA. Comprehensive Evaluation of the Expressed CD8+ T Cell Epitope Space Using High-Throughput
Epitope Mapping. Front Immunol. 2019;10:e655. PubMed PMID: 31105686.
78.
Ahmed SF, Quadeer AA, McKay MR. Preliminary identification of potential vaccine targets for
the COVID-19 coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) based on SARS-CoV immunological studies. Viruses. 2020;
12(3):254 . PubMed PMID: 32106567.
79.
Tang F, Quan Y, Xin ZT, Wrammert J, Ma MJ, Lv H, Wang TB, Yang H, Richardus JH, Liu W, Cao
WC. Lack of peripheral memory B cell responses in recovered patients with severe acute respiratory
syndrome: a six-year follow-up study. Journal of Immunology. 2011; 186:7264-8. PubMed PMID:
21576510.
80.
Bevan MJ. Understand memory, design better vaccines. Nature Immunology. 2011;12:463-5.
PubMed PMID:21587308.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. IgG antibody reactivity against SARS-CoV-2 antigens. Plasma from 18 Pre-SARS-CoV-2 Era
Subjects and 9 individuals who underwent mild PCR-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection (SARS-CoV-2 PCRPositive Subjects) were assessed for IgG antibody against A) SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid protein, B) the
truncated SARS-CoV-2 Spike fragment, S1, or C) the Spike RBD fragment. ELISA binding signal was then
interpolated into ug/mL IgG equivalents using a reference standard. Each serum sample is represented
by a dot. Statistical significance between the two cohorts was determined using an unpaired Student’s ttest. Significant differences between cohorts are marked with ** denoting p < 0.01, and *** p < 0.001,
respectively.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. Classic representation of SARS-CoV-2 antigen-specific T cell frequencies in SARS-CoV-2 PCRverified Subjects (+) versus Pre-Covid Era Subjects (-) cohorts. PBMC of each individual within the
cohort is represented by a dot. The PBMC were challenged with the SARS-CoV-2 peptide pools
specified on the right, each pool covering different antigens of the virus (see Suppl. Table 2). The
individual peptides in each pool were tested at 1.5 µg/mL. An ELISPOT assay was performed measuring
the numbers of antigen-induced IFN-γ-secreting cells, spot forming units (SFU), in 200,000 PBMC;
following convention, the numbers have been normalized to per million PBMC, as shown on the Y axis.
Significant differences between SARS-CoV-2-infected vs. non-exposed cohorts are marked with *
denoting p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, and *** p < 0.001, respectively.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

SARS‐CoV‐2 PCR‐verified Subjects
Negative Control Peptide Pool

Media Controls

[ ] pN1 pN2 pN3 pN4 pN5 pN6 pN7

ID.

Media 

σ +3σ

PP Neg. Ctrl.


σ +3σ

dP1

1
2
1
1

1.25

0.50

2.75

2.83

1.33

6.82

dP2

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

2
3
2
0

3
5
2
3

1
2
1
4

0
1
1
2

2
0
0
2

3
4
3
0

2
3
0
0

0
0
2
0

0.50

1.00

3.50

1.83

1.17

5.34

4.67

dP3

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
1
0
0

0
2
4
1

1
1
4
0

0
2
4
0

0
3
1
2

2
1
3
3

0
4
2
5

0
3
3
0

1.50

1.73

6.70

0.50

0.84

3.01

3.42

dP4

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
3
1
1

3
2
3
3

0
1
1
2

6
6
4
3

0
4
2
3

4
6
2
6

8
5
5
1

0
5
5
0

2.50

2.89

11.16

2.17

2.56

9.85

13.09

dP5

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

11
1
5
1

4
2
4
0

1
1
1
2

2
3
4
1

5
2
3
1

3
2
4
0

0
4
2
1

3
1
0
1

1.25

1.26

5.02

4.33

3.56

15.01

6.17

dP6

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

4
7
4
3

5
6
4
5

10
7
3
4

7
6
4
3

7
8
5
4

6
5
3
9

6
3
4
2

4
1
2
0

1.75

1.71

6.87

6.50

2.07

12.72

dP7

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

4
1
0
1

1
1
1
1

1
1
1
2

2
1
2
3

2
1
2
2

0
1
4
1

20
10
3
2

1
1
0
1

0.75

0.50

2.25

1.67

1.37

5.77

dP8

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1
0
2
0

4
3
3
3

3
0
5
3

2
1
2
5

3
1
3
2

2
3
11
7

2
9
6
3

1
2
0
7

2.50

3.11

11.83

2.50

1.05

5.65

dP9

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

5
0
2
2

2
2
2
2

3
0
3
0

1
1
2
2

1
1
0
0

8
1
1
1

20
3
0
0

2
0
0
0

0.50

1.00

3.50

3.33

2.73

11.53

dP10

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

25
6
2
1

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0

1
0
1
1

146
89
57
12

0
1
0
0

0.25

0.50

1.75

4.50 10.05

34.66

dP11

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1
1
0
0

5
4
1
4

1
0
0
1

0
1
0
1

0
1
0
1

2
3
2
0

2
1
1
1

1
0
0
1

0.50

0.58

2.23

1.50

1.87

7.11

dP12

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

20
10
1
2

1
0
2
0

0
1
0
0

2
0
1
1

1
0
0
0

0
0
1
1

148
87
27
11

1
1
0
2

1.00

0.82

3.45

4.00

7.87

27.62

dP13

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

4
2
0
0

0
1
0
2

4
2
2
0

0
3
1
2

1
1
3
2

3
3
1
5

1
2
2
0

0
0
1
3

1.00

1.41

5.24

2.00

1.90

7.69

dP14

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

9
3
1
4

6
6
3
7

7
1
2
3

6
3
6
3

6
4
2
5

10
7
3
5

7
4
7
1

2
8
1
6

4.25

3.30

14.16

7.33

1.75

12.59

dP15

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

6
2
5
9

4
4
4
5

5
2
3
1

6
3
4
2

2
1
3
2

6
4
3
3

7
1
2
1

5
1
5
8

4.75

2.87

13.37

4.83

1.60

9.64

dP16

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

11
4
5
7

8
4
4
4

17
7
3
7

7
6
8
7

18
6
3
8

11
9
5
6

17
15
16
18

18
18
11
56

15.67 4.04

27.79

12.00 4.56

25.68

dP17

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

2
2
2
4

4
1
0
1

2
2
3
0

4
3
0
4

1
2
1
3

2
5
0
2

1
1
1
4

0
3
2
9

3.50

3.87

15.12

2.50

1.22

6.17

dP18

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

4
12
1
6

14
11
5
3

3
3
7
6

15
4
7
3

12
14
7
3

10
9
11
2

8
6
8
2

2
4
0
3

2.25

1.71

7.37

9.67

5.09

24.92

dC1

8
0
0
0

2.00

4.00

14.00

0.67

1.21

4.30

dC2

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
2
5
0

0
2
0
1

3
1
0
2

0
1
0
1

0
0
0
1

3
1
2
0

2
1
1
2

1
0
2
1

1.00

0.82

3.45

1.00

1.55

5.65

dC3

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

3
1
0
1

1
1
0
2

2
0
0
1

0
0
2
0

0
0
0
1

1
4
1
1

9
5
1
2

0
1
0
0

0.25

0.50

1.75

1.17

1.17

dC4

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1
2
5
3

2
0
6
3

2
3
3
3

1
2
3
1

1
1
2
1

0
1
3
2

0
0
4
1

2
1
0
0

0.75

0.96

3.62

1.17

0.75

dC5

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

8
10
6
2

6
7
2
3

0
3
2
1

2
4
7
0

5
5
5
2

1
3
7
5

27
23
8
3

4
0
0
2

1.50

1.91

7.24

3.67

3.14

dC6

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

3
1
2
8

1
1
1
6

4
34
2
3

1
0
2
3

3
2
9
3

3
5
6
4

17
7
9
9

0
3
2
2

1.75

1.26

5.52

2.50

1.22

dC7

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

2
0
0
0

2
1
0
4

16
1
0
1

0
2
2
2

1
1
9
3

2
3
1
0

8
5
1
4

0
1
1
3

dC8

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
1
1
0

2
1
0
3

0
0
3
4

1
1
3
1

1
1
2
5

0
2
0
2

1
0
1
0

0
1
3
0

dC9

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
1
0

1
3
0
0

0
0
0
2

1
1
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

C

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.67

0.33

0.82

0.52

21.87

3.12

1.88

Negative Control Peptide Pools

Code Protein name
pN1
pN2
pN3
pN4
pN5
pN6
pN7

Nef Protein
Gag polyprotein
Pol Polyprotein
Con B gag motif
Actin
Nucleoprotein
ENV GP

Origin
HIV
HIV
HIV
HIV
Human
Ebola‐Thai
HIV

Protein‐ID
LAN*
LAN*
LAN*
LAN*
P68133**
B8XCN6**
LAN*

# of Peptides
150
150
150
123
92
182
150

σ +3σ

3
5
3
2

1
0
1
0

5.24



4
1
4
6

0
0
0
0

1.41

PP Neg. Ctrl.

1
2
3
2

1
2
1
0

1.00

σ +3σ

4
0
0
2

3
2
0
0

6.01

Media Controls
Media 

2
5
5
1

0
0
0
0

3.83

[ ] pN1 pN2 pN3 pN4 pN5 pN6 pN7
2
4
2
1

0
0
1
0

5.02

Negative Control Peptide Pool

ID.

4
3
2
6

0
0
0
0

1.26

Pre‐COVID Era Subjects
1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1.25

B

Table 1. IFN-γ SFU counts triggered in both cohorts by control peptide pools. PBMC of 9 subjects with
SARS-CoV-2-PCR-verified infection (A) and PBMC from 18 subjects from Pre-Covid Era (B) where tested
in an ELISPOT assay with the peptides specified in (C). These peptide pools were tested in 4 serial
dilutions on each PBMC sample. Highlighted are SFU counts that exceeded the mean of the four
medium control SFU counts by more than 3 SD for the respective subject, as listed under “Media
Control”. The mean, SD and 3 SD for the Peptide Negative Control (PP Neg. Cont.) is also shown for
each subject as calculated from the SFU counts triggered by the six negative control peptide pools, pP1pP6, at 1.5 ug/mL, with the exclusion of pN7 (HIV Core protein), for reasons specified in the Text.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

SARS‐CoV‐2 PCR‐verified Subjects
ID.

SARS‐CoV‐2 Peptide Pools

[ ]

PP Neg. Ctrl.

pC1 pC2 pC3 pC4 pC5 pC6 pC7 pC8



σ

+3σ

dC1

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

12
13
17
13

15
6
4
2

16
2
0
2

0
0
0
0

27
22
6
3

22
5
9
4

9
5
2
2

22
19
27
26

0.67

1.21

4.30

dC2

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

6
2
3
1

13
16
16
6

6
6
1
3

0
2
0
1

6
9
5
6

15
8
7
4

1
1
1
0

5
5
1
7

1.00

1.55

dC3

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

4
3
3
1

5
7
6
5

1
0
1
1

2
4
1
1

15
22
16
11

5
11
5
10

4
9
2
4

4
1
2
3

1.17

dC4

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

2
3
3
2

14
18
6
6

4
5
6
38

2
3
3
1

7
8
8
4

25
33
24
15

5
3
8
3

9
11
6
13

dC5

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

5
0
5
5

61
53
43
48

0
3
8
4

6
5
6
4

143
105
85
40

45
40
24
19

90
60
26
22

dC6

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

5
3
7
1

34
23
15
4

12
2
2
6

2
4
2
5

18
31
14
15

20
19
19
19

dC7

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

17
14
6
7

14
12
7
6

13
4
0
0

1
0
0
2

30
23
5
5

dC8

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

4
0
1
1

15
4
2
5

12
16
9
7

1
2
0
0

dC9

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
4
4
2

17
12
9
8

0
0
1
0

0
0
0
0

C
pC1
pC2
pC3
pC4
pC5
pC6
pC7
pC8

Pre‐COVID Era Subjects
ID.

SARS‐CoV‐2 Peptides Pools

[ ]

PP Neg. Ctrl.

pC1 pC2 pC3 pC4 pC5 pC6 pC7 pC8



σ

+3σ

dP1

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
0
0
1

5
3
3
5

2
3
4
3

3
1
0
6

5
6
3
2

8
7
7
5

4
8
0
5

2
1
2
1

2.83

1.33

6.82

5.65

dP2

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
2
4
2

0
2
2
3

3
1
2
2

3
2
1
1

1
3
2
0

6
0
3
2

2
4
2
1

1
1
3
3

1.83

1.17

5.34

1.17

4.67

dP3

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
2
1
4

4
2
1
1

7
10
4
3

1
0
1
0

1
4
5
1

6
4
2
3

3
1
1
1

1
3
1
1

0.50

0.84

3.01

1.17

0.75

3.42

dP4

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

12
15
4
6

6
14
7
12

11
11
6
5

5
7
10
1

8
7
4
4

35
28
7
4

6
0
1
2

3
13
8
1

2.17

2.56

9.85

34
41
35
30

3.67

3.14

13.09

dP5

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

5
2
1
2

1
0
1
2

3
0
2
2

2
2
3
1

1
1
0
2

1
3
1
0

0
1
1
2

0
4
3
2

4.33

3.56

15.01

4
2
1
5

15
14
11
15

2.50

1.22

6.17

dP6

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

2
2
4
0

3
4
5
3

4
5
2
2

4
6
3
6

3
3
0
6

1
4
4
3

4
8
1
3

1
2
6
2

6.50

2.07

12.72

45
28
10
4

4
7
4
5

22
17
17
11

3.83

6.01

21.87

dP7

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

3
5
1
1

0
1
0
1

4
3
0
1

1
2
2
0

2
4
1
1

2
5
3
1

4
1
1
2

3
4
1
1

1.67

1.37

5.77

8
8
4
4

14
18
19
11

11
2
3
8

5
5
1
2

0.67

0.82

3.12

dP8

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

6
3
7
5

0
1
0
0

1
1
2
1

0
3
1
1

5
5
10
3

4
3
4
3

1
4
4
3

4
5
4
4

2.50

1.05

5.65

17
12
6
7

5
9
4
1

7
1
1
3

44
36
17
12

0.33

0.52

1.88

dP9

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1
0
0
1

0
0
3
0

1
1
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
1
1
3

2
0
1
1

2
0
0
1

3.33

2.73

11.53

dP10

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
0
0
1

0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
2

0
2
0
0

1
2
0
1

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

4.50

10.05

34.66

SARS-CoV-2 Peptide Pools

Code

B

Protein name

Protein-ID

AP3A
NCAP
Nsp12
Nsp5
Spike Pool A
SpiKe Pool B
S‐RBD
VME1

P0DTC3
P0DTC9
P0DTC9:4393‐5324
P0DTC1:3264‐3569
P0DTC2
P0DTC2:319‐541
P0DTC5

# of Peptides
66
102
231
74
158
157
53
53

dP11

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1
0
4
1

3
3
1
2

2
1
3
2

0
3
0
1

5
1
2
0

4
2
3
3

4
0
0
0

1
0
0
0

1.50

1.87

7.11

dP12

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
2
1
1

1
1
0
0

2
4
2
0

3
4
0
0

4
2
0
7

3
5
1
4

3
1
0
1

1
0
2
2

4.00

7.87

27.62

dP13

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
2
0
0

1
1
0
1

2
0
0
3

1
2
0
0

0
2
1
1

0
0
1
0

0
1
6
1

0
1
1
3

2.00

1.90

7.69

dP14

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1
4
3
2

6
6
6
6

2
2
3
3

8
2
5
1

1
3
8
4

3
5
3
1

2
3
2
1

4
7
4
1

7.33

1.75

12.59

dP15

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

7
5
3
4

5
6
4
7

6
1
8
3

4
3
5
3

7
3
5
7

10
2
7
7

6
7
4
9

5
2
0
6

4.83

1.60

9.64

dP16

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

13
8
7
10

18
11
6
11

22
13
8
11

7
11
7
12

23
20
14
15

16
30
9
15

15
11
9
16

11
3
2
7

12.00

4.56

25.68

dP17

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
2
0
1

0
0
1
2

1
4
0
1

0
2
3
3

0
1
0
0

3
2
2
2

0
1
1
2

4
1
7
4

2.50

1.22

6.17

dP18

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
0
0
0

4
2
4
1

1
1
4
4

2
2
5
4

9
9
9
3

6
9
7
8

5
7
10
3

6
10
5
5

9.67

5.09

24.92

Table 2. Affinity analysis of SFU counts triggered by SARS-CoV-2 peptides in PBMC of donors with SARSCoV-2-PCR-verified infection (A) and in pre-Covid Era subjects (B). Affinity levels are color-coded. Red:
high affinity, defined as four consecutive peptide dilutions eliciting a positive recall response with SFU
counts exceeding 3 SD of the negative peptide pool-based background (PP Neg. Contr.), as specified for
each PBMC sample on the right. Orange: intermediate affinity, defined as three consecutive peptide
dilutions eliciting a positive recall response. Yellow: low affinity, with only the two highest peptide
concentrations eliciting positive SFU counts.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A
Aff. Level
4
3
2
1

Definition
4 serial + peptides
3 serial + peptides
2 serial + peptides
First + only

SARS‐CoV‐2 Peptide Pools Positive (%)
Color Code COVID‐recovered Subjects Pre‐COVID Era Subjects
31%
0%
6%
3%
10%
5%
10%
5%

Definition
4 serial + peptides
3 serial + peptides
2 serial + peptides
First + only

EBV Peptide Pools Positive (%)
Color Code COVID‐recovered Subjects Pre‐COVID Era Subjects
28%
36%
6%
12%
6%
11%
9%
23%

B
Aff. Level
4
3
2
1

Table 3. Affinity distributions of T cells recognizing SARS-CoV-2 peptides in SARS-CoV-2-recovered and
Pre-COVID era subjects (A) vs. the affinity distribution of T cells recognizing EBV peptides in both
cohorts. Peptide pools eliciting positive T cell recall responses in the specified affinity level categories
within the cohort are shown in absolute numbers (No. Positive) or as the percentage of all positive
responses within the cohort (% Positive). The raw data are shown in Table 2 for the SARS-Cov-2
peptides, and in S. Table 5 for the EBV peptides.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

SARS‐CoV‐2 Peptide Pools
ID.
dC1
dC2
dC3
dC4
dC5
dC6
dC7
dC8
dC9

∑ SFU
191
267
230
264
216
332
253
184
81

pC1
10%
12%
10%
3%
1%
5%
12%
6%
0%

pC2
12%
25%
13%
21%
16%
31%
10%
21%
19%

pC3
13%
12%
3%
6%
0%
11%
9%
17%
0%

pC4
0%
0%
5%
3%
2%
2%
1%
1%
0%

pC5&6
40%
40%
50%
47%
49%
35%
51%
31%
24%

pC7
7%
2%
10%
7%
23%
4%
3%
16%
8%

pC8
18%
10%
10%
13%
9%
14%
15%
7%
49%


σ
# Pept.
/(# Pept.)

na
na
na
na

6%
4%
66
0.09%

18%
6%
102
0.18%

8%
6%
231
0.03%

2%
3%
74
0.03%

40%
9%
315
0.13%

9%
6%
53
0.17%

16%
12%
53
0.30%

B

Code
Protein name
Protein‐ID

(б)

Reference Code for SARS‐CoV‐2 Peptide Pools
pC1
pC2
pC3
AP3A
NCAP
Nsp12
P0DTC3 P0DTC9 P0DTC9:4393‐5324

pC4
pC5
pC6
pC7
pC8
Nsp5
Spike Pool A Spike Pool B
S‐RBD
VME1
P0DTC1:3264‐3569/P0DTD1:3264‐3569
P0DTC2:319‐541 P0DTC5
P0DTC2

Table 4. T cell immune dominance of SARS-CoV-2 proteins. The total SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell mass
(∑SFU) was calculated by adding up for each SARS-CoV-2-recovered donor the numbers of SFU elicited
by all SARS-CoV-2 peptide pools in that donor at 1.5 µg/mL (see the raw data in Table 2). In the top
panel, the percentage of T cells targeting each of the SARS-CoV-2 antigens is shown relative to the total
clonal SARS-CoV-2-specific T cell mass in that individual, representing an immune dominance index. The
superimposed heatmap specifies the affinity level of the respective T cell population, with the color
code defined in Table 2. The lower panel shows the mean percentage () and SD of this
immunedominance index for the cohort. Addressing the hypothesis that T cell immune dominance of a
SARS-CoV-2 antigen is related to its size, the number of peptides in each pool is shown (# Pept.) and the
mean immune dominance index () is normalized for the number of peptides (/(# Pept).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402677; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

SARS‐CoV‐2 PCR‐verified Subjects

A

Peptide Pool for Common Cold Coronaviruses



ID.

[ ]

dC1

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

3
5
10
2

8
11
8
6

0
1
2
3

11
5
11
3

1
1
1
1

9
13
8
5

4
2
5
3

25
11
4
9

0.67

1.21

dC2

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1
5
4
8

17
8
6
6

3
2
9
0

11
13
6
9

2
4
3
3

28
24
20
18

6
6
8
6

5
9
10
7

1.00

dC3

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

4
7
3
3

7
7
5
0

0
1
1
0

4
3
5
2

3
5
22
2

8
14
9
16

2
10
20
19

19
12
13
4

dC4

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

3
0
0
5

25
9
6
7

10
6
3
3

14
14
9
4

6
2
4
13

21
15
12
27

7
0
2
3

dC5

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1
8
2
0

10
9
3
1

3
7
3
2

21
10
9
1

5
2
4
1

21
16
13
13

dC6

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
4
3
3

34
21
24
5

1
2
2
4

13
12
21
15

3
3
3
10

dC7

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

10
4
7
3

3
5
2
1

0
3
4
3

27
14
13
5

dC8

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

7
12
10
3

4
3
7
1

11
12
8
5

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

0
2
3
1

3
4
0
0

6
4
8
8

dC9

C

+σ

HKU1

Uniport: Q5MQD0

229E

Uniport: P15423

NL63

Uniport: Q6Q1S2

OC43

Uniport: P36334

PP Neg. Ctrl.


σ +3σ

[ ]

4.30

dP1

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

19
18
22
13

7
4
5
10

8
0
3
3

6
6
9
9

13
7
6
5

14
11
11
10

6
11
5
3

28
25
13
20

2.83

1.33

6.82

1.55

5.65

dP2

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1
2
1
3

2
0
3
0

1
4
1
2

1
2
3
0

1
0
2
2

6
3
1
8

4
3
2
2

8
0
1
1

1.83

1.17

5.34

1.17

1.17

4.67

dP3

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

7
6
0
5

3
4
14
6

2
2
1
0

0
2
1
4

1
2
2
2

1
1
2
0

1
0
0
0

2
2
0
1

0.50

0.84

3.01

8
12
4
10

1.17

0.75

3.42

dP4

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

20
14
3
2

8
32
29
3

4
19
13
3

12
15
4
6

3
3
0
0

0
0
1
1

1
1
1
0

1
1
6
2

2.17

2.56

9.85

3
7
3
4

11
7
9
7

3.67

3.14

13.09

dP5

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1
7
4
1

6
8
8
2

9
2
3
2

7
4
1
3

2
5
1
5

11
5
6
4

6
3
10
12

2
4
1
1

4.33

3.56

15.01

22
27
18
12

12
4
14
6

14
8
6
6

2.50

1.22

6.17

dP6

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

1
2
3
2

4
4
2
6

5
6
4
1

7
7
5
5

4
6
2
1

6
4
8
4

7
0
4
3

6
4
3
0

6.50

2.07

12.72

3
5
4
0

25
24
17
8

13
14
11
3

6
10
4
2

3.83

6.01

21.87

dP7

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

10
13
8
3

10
0
4
2

5
10
3
3

16
13
5
4

1
3
5
4

15
20
6
5

6
7
8
4

11
6
4
5

1.67

1.37

5.77

9
4
10
1

6
9
2
3

13
8
5
5

2
0
3
1

3
9
1
7

0.67

0.82

3.12

dP8

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

4
3
5
4

10
10
5
3

15
15
14
12

11
21
6
6

11
6
9
8

23
14
10
6

4
3
7
2

1
8
3
4

2.50

1.05

5.65

9
2
4
2

0
0
0
0

13
5
0
2

2
0
0
0

1
1
1
0

0.33

0.52

1.88

dP9

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

9
11
5
1

7
0
1
1

3
2
1
0

4
3
1
1

2
0
1
5

7
4
4
25

1
0
3
5

5
3
4
4

3.33

2.73

11.53

dP10

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

2
1
2
1

0
3
0
1

2
0
0
0

2
1
0
0

1
0
0
1

6
4
2
1

2
5
3
2

7
4
1
2

4.50

10.05

34.66

dP11

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

9
9
6
10

28
11
19
10

2
3
0
0

16
12
15
9

6
6
4
3

39
50
18
17

13
8
5
9

22
14
26
10

1.50

1.87

7.11

dP12

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

9
5
8
7

11
15
7
4

7
2
6
2

27
15
9
7

9
4
3
3

22
30
17
8

15
17
10
5

15
12
7
1

4.00

7.87

27.62

dP13

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

10
9
15
6

15
7
13
7

13
5
9
12

9
11
7
6

0
3
1
1

18
12
13
8

3
0
3
1

4
8
6
0

2.00

1.90

7.69

dP14

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

12
8
13
4

11
13
8
5

7
8
9
5

28
30
24
6

8
7
9
5

19
20
14
11

15
23
20
14

10
7
4
2

7.33

1.75

12.59

dP15

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

7
10
5
2

12
14
8
6

15
10
10
3

30
11
17
15

3
9
10
10

14
18
11
13

20
10
11
10

10
7
6
8

4.83

1.60

9.64

dP16

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

21
18
12
13

42
28
25
25

25
18
21
16

63
34
26
25

103
68
59
44

91
53
70
69

70
56
43
56

67
48
70
70

12.00

4.56

25.68

dP17

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

2
2
3
3

4
1
1
2

5
15
1
4

5
7
8
4

13
6
4
5

27
10
19
10

2
4
4
23

10
5
4
6

2.50

1.22

6.17

dP18

1.5 ug/mL
0.5 ug/mL
0.17ug/mL
0.06 ug/mL

8
8
7
13

12
8
10
2

18
13
13
10

33
14
26
10

9
6
12
8

19
22
8
6

4
14
3
5

12
16
11
2

9.67

5.09

24.92

σ

Common Cold Coronavirus Peptide Pools
Spike Protein ID

Peptide Pool for Common Cold Coronaviruses

ID.

pP1 pP2 pP3 pP4 pP5 pP6 pP7 pP8

Virus

Pre‐COVID Era Subjects

B

PP Neg. Ctrl.

Peptide Pool

Code

HKU-1 S1
HKU-1 S2
229E S1
229E S2
NL63 S1
NL63 S2
OC43 S1
OC43 S2

pP1
pP2
pP3
pP4
pP5
pP6
pP7
pP8

pP1 pP2 pP3 pP4 pP5 pP6 pP7 pP8

Table 5. T cell recall responses to Spike proteins of the four Common Cold Coronaviruses, 229E, NL63,
OC43, and HKU1, each represented due to size in two peptide pools. The code for the peptides is
deciphered in S. Table 2. Each peptide pools has been tested in the specified four concentrations in a
standard IFN-γ ELISPOT assay. SFU counts exceeding 3SD of the mean of the negative peptide pool
control (PP. Neg. Contr.) shown on the left for each subject, are highlighted according to T cell affinity
levels, as specified in Table 2.

