bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

In situ structural analysis of SARS-CoV-2 spike reveals flexibility mediated by
three hinges

Beata Turoňová 1,2,*, Mateusz Sikora 3,*, Christoph Schürmann 4,*, Wim J. H. Hagen 1, Sonja
Welsch 5, Florian E. C. Blanc3, Sören von Bülow3, Michael Gecht3, Katrin Bagola7,
Cindy Hörner4,8, Ger van Zandbergen 7,9,10, Shyamal Mosalaganti 1,2, Andre Schwarz1,
Roberto Covino 3,11, Michael D. Mühlebach 4,8, Gerhard Hummer3,6, Jacomine Krijnse Locker12,
Martin Beck1,2

* contributed equally
Correspondence to gerhard.hummer@biophys.mpg.de, jacomina.krijnselocker@pei.de,
martin.beck@biophys.mpg.de

1 European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology Unit,
Meyerhofstr. 1, Germany.
2 Department of Molecular Sociology, Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, Max-von-Laue Str.
3, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
3 Department of Theoretical Biophysics, Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, Max-von-Laue Str.
3, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
4 Division of Veterinary Medicine, Paul Ehrlich Institute, Paul Ehrlich Strasse 51-59, 63225
Langen, Germany.
5 Central electron microscopy facility, Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, Max-von-Laue Str.
3, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
6 Institute of Biophysics, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60438 Frankfurt am Main , Germany.
7 Division of Immunology, Paul Ehrlich Institute, Paul Ehrlich Strasse 51-59, 63225 Langen,
Germany.
8 German Center for Infection Research, Gießen-Marburg-Langen, Germany
9 Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz,
Mainz, Germany.
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

10 Research Center for Immunotherapy (FZI), University Medical Center, Johannes GutenbergUniversity Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
11 Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies, Ruth-Moufang-Str. 1, 60438 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany.
12 Electron Microscopy of Pathogens Unit, Paul Ehrlich Institute, Paul Ehrlich Strasse 51-59,
63225 Langen, Germany.

Abstract
The spike (S) protein of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is
required for cell entry and is the major focus for vaccine development. We combine cryo
electron tomography, subtomogram averaging and molecular dynamics simulations to
structurally analyze S in situ. Compared to recombinant S, the viral S is more heavily
glycosylated and occurs predominantly in a closed pre-fusion conformation. We show that the
stalk domain of S contains three hinges that give the globular domain unexpected
orientational freedom. We propose that the hinges allow S to scan the host cell surface,
shielded from antibodies by an extensive glycan coat. The structure of native S contributes to
our understanding of SARS-CoV-2 infection and the development of safe vaccines. The large
scale tomography data set of SARS-CoV-2 used for this study is therefore sufficient to resolve
structural features to below 5 Ångstrom, and is publicly available at EMPIAR-10453.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
As of June 2020, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
pandemic has reached all five continents with over >9 million confirmed cases and >460.000
SARS-related deaths. Compared to its close relatives SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2
appears to spread more efficiently. Without a vaccine, human distancing is currently the only
effective measure to contain the pandemic, causing dramatic impact on the socio-economical
landscape. The coronaviral spike surface protein (S) is the primary vaccine target, being
exposed on the virus, mediating binding of the virus to the cell surface and fusion with cellular
membranes required to initiate infection (de Haan and Rottier, 2005). S also determines
tissue- and cell tropism and mutations in S may alter the host range of the virus and cross
species barriers (Hulswit et al., 2016; Li, 2016). Vaccine efforts therefore focus on inducing
cellular and humoral immunity with neutralizing antibodies that block viral binding, entry,
fusion and infection by binding to S.
S is a trimer that adopts a typical club-like shape of ~20 nm in length on the surface of
the virus. The ectodomain consists of a globular top and a slender stalk that connects the
former to the membrane. Because S is essential for infection and the major target of vaccine
development, understanding its molecular structure is of utmost importance and truncated
or detergent extracted S over-expressed in mammalian cells has been subjected to various
structural investigations in vitro by single particle cryo-EM (Wrapp et al., 2020, Walls et al.,
2020, Cai et al., bioRxiv 2020, Henderson et al., bioRxiv 2020, Xiong et al., bioRxiv 2020). SARSCoV-2 S is structurally similar to SARS-CoV S and binds to the same receptor, the angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ACE2) (Walls et al., 2020, Wrapp et al., 2020). The globular domain
contains the receptor binding domains (RBDs) that reside on top and are shielded by the Nterminal domains (NTDs). Two conformational states have been observed for the truncated
versions of S investigated in vitro. A closed conformation in which all three RBDs are
positioned in-between the NTD and the RBD of the neighbouring monomer, thereby hiding
the receptor binding site; and an open conformation in which one of the RBDs is exposed
upwards, while the other two remain in the closed conformation (Wrapp et al., 2020, Walls et
al., 2020). Although it has been suggested that this conformational variability might be related
to receptor binding (Wrapp et al., Science 2020), in vitro structural analysis of detergent
extracted, full-length S exclusively observed the fully closed conformation (Cai et al. bioRxiv
2020). The latter study also reported a spontaneous transition into the post -fusion state
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

during purification. The extent to which such spontaneous transitions occur on the viral
surface remains uncertain. Further, the most C-terminal part of the protein, in particular large
parts of the stalk and the entire transmembrane domain remained poorly resolved in any of
the previous studies.
In some coronavirus strains, S may be cleaved at the interface between the S1 and S2
subunits by furin, a cellular protease located in late or post-Golgi compartments; the Nterminal S1 harbors the RBD, while the C-terminal S2 contains the fusion machinery and the
transmembrane anchor. Although not necessary for infection, furin cleavage of S is linked to
virulence in vivo (Li 2016; Belouzard et al., 2012). Considerable effort has been undertaken to
stabilize S for structural investigations in vitro (Walls et al., 2017b). To lock S in a pre-fusion
conformation the furin cleavage site was deleted and two proline residues introduced at
position 986 and 987 (Kirchdorfer et al. 2018). Further, the truncated ectodomain of S was
fused to an artificial C-terminal trimerization tag (Wrapp et al., Science 2020; Walls et al.,
2020; Xiong et al., bioRxiv 2020). To potentially facilitate the generation of conformation
specific antibodies, dedicated constructs of S have been engineered that lock the RBDs into
either the open or closed conformation (Henderson et al., bioRxiv 2020, Xiong etal., bioRxiv
2020). To what extent these conformational states are representative of the in situ scenario
on the viral surface remains unknown.
The SARS CoV2 S is a type I membrane glycoprotein with an N-terminal signal sequence
for synthesis on, and translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where it trimerizes
and becomes glycosylated at its 22 predicted N-linked glycosylation sites. S protein transport
through the Golgi apparatus and further processing of its glycosylation is thought to occur
once incorporated into virions that bud at pre-Golgi membranes and exit infected cells by
vesicular transport (de Haan and Rottier, 2005). Previous in vitro cryoEM studies resolved
roughly two thirds of the predicted 22 N-linked glycans (Walls et al., 2020; Wrapp et al., 2020).
Although an N-terminal signal peptide for secretion was fused to S, it is not clear if overexpression of the protein alone in HEK 293F cells (Walls et al., 2020) ultimately led to the same
glycosylation pattern as compared to viral assembly that massively impacts onto various
organellular systems (Gordon et al., 2020; Bojkova et al., 2020; Ulasli et al., 2010).
While these previous studies provided valuable data of isolated spike protein or its
fragments, in situ structural analysis of SARS-CoV-2 remains preliminary. Structural
information about S in situ is a prerequisite towards understanding the molecular mechanisms
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

of host cell entry. It would allow to explore the conformational variability within the virion and
the accessibility of epitopes for neutralizing antibodies; to determine the glycosylation pattern
of S generated during viral assembly; and to analyze the yet unresolved stalk domain that
flexibly connects S to the viral surface. Here we combined cryo electron tomography of
purified SARS-CoV-2 virions with subtomogram averaging, molecular dynamics simulations
and integrative structural modeling to address these challenges.

Results

Large scale tomographic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 virions
To structurally analyze SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in situ, we passaged the virus through tissue
culture cells and purified it from the inactivated supernatant by sucrose centrifugation (see
methods for detail). The origin of the SARS-CoV-2 isolate used in this study is south Germany
and described in detail in the supplement. We acquired a large scale cryo electron tomography
data set of purified virions using acquisition parameters that are suitable for subtomogram
averaging (see methods). Visual inspection of the tomographic reconstructions revealed a
very high quality data set in which, individual protein domains are clearly visible (Figure 1A,
Movie S1). The raw data of 266 tilt-series with >1000 viruses have been deposited EMPIAR10453 and might be used in the future to explore various structural properties of SARS-CoV2, in particular its pleiomorphic features. In this initial study we will exemplify the potential of
our data as a resource with the in situ structural analysis of S.

The pre-fusion conformation of spike dominates the surface of virions purified from tissue
culture cells
Visual inspection of viral surface revealed that spike was mostly present in the prefusion conformation, while some notable exceptions appeared strikingly similar to previous
analyses of an alternative conformation (Figure 1B) thought to be the post -fusion
conformation (Cai et al bioRxiv 2020; Duquerroy et al., 2005). We hypothesized that the prefusion conformation might have been positively selected during passage through tissue
culture cells, in the virions that we purified from the supernatant. We sequenced the viral
genome at passages 1 to 5, the latter of which was used for the preparation of cryo -EM
samples. The furin proteolytic cleavage site was gradually lost during passage through tissue
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

culture as shown by Sanger sequencing and western blot analysis on the protein level
confirming previous studies (Figure 1C, Figure S1; Lau et al., bioRxiv 2020; Ogando et al.,
bioRxiv 2020). It has been previously noted that due to the location of the furin site within a
loop, its cleavage may have little impact on the S trimer in the pre-fusion conformation, other
than ultimately allowing for the dissociation of the S1 fragment (Cai et al ., bioRxiv 2020). A
study that appeared on bioRxiv during the preparation of this manuscript suggests that in
virions produced in Vero E6 cells the pre-fusion is predominant while this may be different for
other cell types (Klein et al., bioRxiv 2020), thus underscoring that our large scale data set is
representative of the native state.
We manually picked the virions and oversampled their exterior to extract
subtomograms (see methods for detail). After a few iterations of alignment, they converged
into a low-resolution structure of the globular domain of spike in its pre-fusion conformation.
Statistical analysis of the resulting positions revealed that on average 40 copies of S trimer
reside on the surface, although their density varies across virions. Individual spike complexes
appeared randomly distributed on the viral surface and did not show any significant tendency
to cluster but rather had slightly repellent properties (Figure 2A).

We refined the globular domain to 7.6 Ångstrom using procedures implemented in
NovaSTA

(https://github.com/turonova/novaSTA)

and

STOPGAP

packages

(https://github.com/williamnwan/STOPGAP, see methods for detail). At this resolution,
secondary structure elements and individual glycosylation sites are clearly discernible (Figure
2B, C). Although there was no symmetry imposed during the refinement, the average was
highly symmetric, suggesting that conformational variability across the three different
monomers is minimal. Structural analysis of the asymmetric unit yielded an average map from
65780 subtomograms at an overall 4.9 Ångstrom resolution. In particular the cluster of parallel
helices in the center of the globular domain was nicely resolved (Figure 2D) and flexible fitting
revealed that larger side chains are clearly discernible (Figure S3). Simulated annealing-based
classification as implemented in STOPGAP of both, the S-trimer but also the asymmetric unit
did not yield any distinct classes. However, separate cross-correlation against the single
particle structures with either the closed or open RBD identified a fraction of S-trimers in the
open conformation (Figure S4).
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

An unusual coiled-coil resides next to a hinge in the stalk domain of spike
While the globular domain was fully contained in the tomographic map, only the
directly adjacent part of the stalk domain was resolved, emphasizing the flexibility of the
latter. Remarkably, a right-handed coiled coil emerges from the neck of the spike head
(~P1140-L1159), forming the upper part of the stalk domain (subsequently referred to as the
"upper leg" of the stalk). Right-handed trimeric coiled coils were long thought to be absent
from the structural proteome (Harbury et al., 1998), but can be seen in the post-fusion
structure of the related mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) spike (PDB ID 6B30; Walls et al., 2017a).
The density in the single-particle structures of SARS-CoV-2 spike (Wrapp et al., 2020), albeit
only moderately resolved in this region next to the trimerization tag, is consistent with a righthanded coiled-coil. The assignment as right-handed coiled-coil is also consistent with the
observation that this sequence stretch is not part of the post-fusion left-handed coiled-coil,
as resolved for SARS-CoV spike (PDB ID 1WYY; Duquerroy et al., 2005), which indicates a
certain incompatibility with left-handedness.
The observed electron density sharply declined at a defined position within the
trimeric coiled-coil, suggesting at least one flexible hinge (Figure 2B). We analyzed the
conformational variability of the stalk domains based on the position of the globular domain
and its orientation with respect to the membrane as defined by subtomogram averaging. The
globular domain exhibited large positional and orientational freedom, tilting up to ~90
degrees with respect to the normal at distances of 5-35 nm from the membrane without
discernible correlation (Figure 2E). We grouped our subtomograms into four classes according
to their distance from the bilayer and averaged them separately. In most classes the stalk
remained invisible and the density of the bilayer was blurred, suggesting a highly kinked
conformation of the stalk (Figure 2F). At an intermediate distance, however, parts of the stalk
and bilayer were resolved, suggesting a more defined conformation. We sub-selected ~3200
particles in which the globular domain was oriented roughly perpendicular to the membrane
and averaged them separately (see methods). In the resulting average, the stalk domain wa s
resolved (Figure S5A). Visual inspection of the respective subtomograms, in which the stalk
domains are clearly observed, further corroborated the idea of a kinked stalk with potentially
several hinges (Figure 2F). We used local masking to focus the subtomogram averaging on the
lower part of the stalk domain (subsequently referred to as the lower leg). We obtained a
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

moderately resolved structure that would be consistent with the continuation of the coiled
coil below a flexible hinge (subsequently referred to as the "knee", Figure S5B).

Molecular dynamics simulations of spike in the context of the bilayer
We performed a 2.8 microseconds long all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of a
4.1-million atom system containing four glycosylated S proteins anchored into a patch of viral
membrane and embedded in aqueous solvent (Figure 3A). The simulations helped us pinpoint
the molecular origins of the flexibility seen in the tomograms. Whereas the S head remained
stable, the stalk exhibited pronounced hinging motions at the junctions between S head and
upper leg ("hip"), between upper and lower leg ("knee") and between lower leg and
transmembrane domain ("ankle"), consistent with pronounced leg segments seen in raw
tomograms (Figure 3B-C). The hip joint flexed the least (16.5 +/-8.8 deg), followed by the ankle
(23.0 +/- 11.7 deg) and knee (28.4 +/- 10.2 deg) (Figure 3D).

Hinges predicted by MD simulations are consistent with the tomographic data
The 3D tomographic density of S proteins protruding from the viral surface is well described
by selected MD snapshots even without flexible fitting (Figure 4A). Strikingly, hip, knee and
ankle can be pinpointed in individual copies of S seen in the tomographic reconstructions
(Figure 4A). We flexibly fitted suitable snapshots of the MD simulations into subtomogram
averages classified according to the distance of the globular domain from the membrane
(compare Figure 2F to Figure 4B). In the stalk region, hinge bending gives S the required
flexibility. The hinges facilitate a lateral displacement of the upper and lower leg with respect
to the globular domain, if the latter is positioned closer to the membrane. As a result the stalk
is diluted out in subtomogram averages focused on the globular domain (Figure 2B-C, F, 4B)
but can be retrieved if the globular domains are aligned with the membrane normal (Figure
S5A) or if the stalk itself is averaged separately (Figure S5B). We calculated electron density
averaged over the whole MD trajectory and filtered it to a resolution comparable to the
classified subtomograms. We obtained a highly similar 3D map that underscores this
interpretation (Figure 4B). In rare cases, the coiled-coil near the membrane appears to be
unfolded in the original tomograms (Figure S5C) and continuous with the disordered loops of
the MD model.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

N-glycosylation sites are very pronounced in tomographic data
The predicted N-glycosylation sites, many already annotated in single particle EM maps (Walls
et al., 2020), are generally very pronounced in the subtomogram averages. Aided by the MD
model, we systematically examined glycosylation of S. The electron density of N-glycans
averaged over the MD trajectory was highly consistent with the tomographic map (Figure 5A).
Clustered glycosylation sites are visible in the raw electron density before averaging, e.g.
protruding from the lower part of the S body (Figure 5B). Analysis of individual sites in
subtomogram averages further supports the decoration of spikes with rather large glycan
chains (Figure 5C). Notably, a number of sequons were resolved with more pronounced
branching than previously reported in the single particle maps (Walls et al., 2016). By contrast,
the density map in the region of two previously reported O-glycosylation sites (Shajahan et
al., 2020) does not allow for unambiguous assignment (Figure S6A), suggestive of low glycan
occupancy at these sites in situ. Sequon N17LT, due to its location on the unstructured Nterminus, was not localised in the density (Figure S6B). Elongated features protruding from
the tip of the N-terminal domain (Figure S6B) may suggest presence of sequons N74GT and
N149KS, but are less pronounced as compared to the N-glycosylation sites discussed above,
likely because they are located on highly flexible loops. All these sites were recently shown to
be in a close proximity to an antibody bound to the N-terminal domain (Chi et al., 2020).

Integrative analysis suggests that the hinges are heavily N-glycosylated
N-glycosylation is predicted also on the knee (N1158HT, N1173AS) and the ankle (N1194ES)
outside the region resolved by single particle EM (Figure 3A). We observed that these
positions generally appear more bulky in tomographic reconstructions than one might expect
if they were not glycosylated (Figures 1B and 5D). In subtomogram averages of the globular
domain and stalk, additional density is very clearly observed at the respective positions (Figure
5E, F and Figure S5A, B), strongly suggesting that they are modified. Consistent features are
present in the electron density calculated from the MD trajectory aligned on the lower leg
(Figure S6C), where we can unequivocally attribute them to glycans. N-glycosylation in this
position might protect the functionally important hinges from antibody binding and help to
keep them flexible.

Discussion
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The two major structural analysis techniques combined in this study are
complementary. While cryo electron tomography facilitates the experimental analysis of cryo
fixed specimen at moderate resolution in their native context, molecular dynamics
simulations reveal protein motions at atomic resolution as a function of time. In the part icular
case of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, the tomographic data reveal its conformational
freedom and glycosylation sites on the viral surface but they cannot resolve the flexible stalk
domain to high detail. The molecular dynamics simulations integrate various experimental
parameters, in particular single-particle structures and independently determined
glycosylation sites, and allow fully atomic models to evolve in time.

Our MD simulations revealed three highly flexible hinges within the stalk, coined hip,
knee and ankle, which are consistent with the experimental data. One might speculate that
the high degree of conformational freedom of the spike on the viral surface is important for
the mechanical robustness of the virus. It might also allow the spike to engage the relatively
flat surface of host cells with better avidity prior to fusion or find access to its receptor more
efficiently in the crowded environment of tissue in vivo (Figure 5G-H). This would allow the
virus to explore the surface of host cells more effectively and potentially to bind to multiple
copies of ACE2. Tomographic studies of actual infection events might further address this in
the future.

In contrast to the pre-fusion conformation of spike, the post-fusion conformation
previously observed in vitro and in situ (Cai et al., bioRxiv 2020 Klein et al., bioRxiv 2020) and
in this study (Figure 1B) is entirely straight and apparently inflexible. A particularly unusual
feature masked at the edge of the resolved density of the single-particle structures but well
resolved in the subtomogram averages is the short right-handed coiled-coil at the top of the
pre-fusion stalk. Being lost in the post-fusion structure as resolved for SARS-CoV (PDB ID
1WYY; Duquerroy et al. 2005), we speculate that the right-handed coiled-coil is only marginally
stable, priming the protein for a large structural reorganization in a spring-loaded viral fusion
mechanism. These findings underline that all three hinges become irrelevant during the
transition to the post-fusion conformation, which places them outside the structural core (Cai
et al., bioRxiv 2020; Duquerroy et al., 2005).
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A remarkable difference between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 spike is the presence of
a furin cleavage site in the latter (Wrapp et al., 2020). This site is rapidly lost by passaging in
cell culture as shown before (Lau et al., bioRxiv 2020; Ogando et al., bioRxiv
2020) likely because its loss favours virions with stable spikes. In Vero cells this results in the
release of SARS-CoV-2 virions with S in a closed formation (this study; Klein et al., bioRxiv
2020). In the latter recent study the authors proposed that S released on SARS-CoV-2 particles
is readily transformed into a conformation resembling the post-fusion protein when exposed
to cells that express high levels of ACE2. Whether this conformational change relates to
receptor binding, to cleavage at the S2' site by the serine protease TMPRSS2 (Belouzard et al.,
2012) or to both was not addressed in this study. In addition, it was not clear if the furin
cleavage site is intact in the unpassaged isolate used in this study and, if so, to what extent S
was cleaved during passage of newly assembled virus through the secretory pathway. In Vero
cells we found for instance cleavage of S containing the furin cleavage site to be partial, with
the majority of S remained unprocessed, suggesting that efficiency of furin cleavage may be
cell type dependent. Nonetheless, the observations made in this study are interesting and
open the possibility to compare the pre-fusion with the presumed post-fusion structure of S
in situ.

The predominant in situ conformation of S observed in our study is the closed prefusion conformation. This finding emphasizes that the highly-engineered, recombinant
versions of S in which this conformation is locked (Henderson et al., bioRxiv 2020, Xiong
bioRxiv 2020) may indeed be valuable tools for vaccine development, although there are also
differences to the in situ structure. N-glycosylation sites appear very bulky in the tomographic
map as compared to previous single particle analysis, suggesting that decoration with sugars
may indeed be more extensive during viral assembly as compared to the recombinant
ectodomain modified during default vesicular transport. Our map is suggestive of additional
N-glycosylation at the hinges of the stalk domain and possibly on the very tips of S NTDs. This
might be important for the accessibility of epitopes on the crowded viral surface were the NTD
and stalk domains appear occluded by neighbouring spikes (Figure 5G). Indeed, glycan
shielding of epitopes on the coronavirus spike protein has been described before (Walls et al.,
2016) emphasizing the importance of identifying the glycosylation pattern on the native spike
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

protein. We did not detect any density for the predicted O-glycosylation sites emphasizing
that it must be less extensive as compared to N-glycosylation.

Here we demonstrate the potential of our large scale tomographic data set for
resolving structural features of SARS-CoV-2 particles to high resolution in their native context.
The in situ structure of several key viral components, including e.g. the M protein that is highly
enriched in the membrane and the nucleocapsid remain enigmatic. Our data might thus be
explored to resolve the structures of such features in the future. We further demonstrate that
high resolution structural models can be fitted directly into the tomographic reconstructions,
underlining the remarkable quality of the data. This strategy might be further explored in the
future to build structural models of entire virions.

Depositions
The original tilt series have been deposited (EMPIAR-10453). Subtomogram averages were
deposited into the electron microscopy data base under accession numbers EMD-11222 (Strimer), EMD-11223 (asymmetric unit with closed RBD), and EMD-11347 (asymmetric unit
with open RBD).

Author contributions
B.T. experimental design, tomographic reconstruction, particle picking, subtomogram
averaging, structural analysis, paper writing. M.S. molecular dynamics simulations, structural
analysis, paper writing. C.S. experimental design, virus purification and biochemical analysis.
W.H. experimental design, cryo-EM data acquisition, tomographic reconstruction. S.W.
experimental design, sample preparation and screening, data analysis. F.E.C.B., S.v.B., M.G.
and R.C. molecular dynamics simulations, structural analysis. K.B. experimental design and
virus purification. C.H. experimental design and virus growth. GvZ experimental design,
supervision. S.M. subtomogram averaging. A.S. tomographic reconstruction, particle picking.
M.D.M. experimental design, supervision. G.H. data analysis, supervision, paper writing. J.K.L.
experimental design, supervision, paper writing. M.B. experimental design, supervision, paper
writing.
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgments
The cryo electron tomography data was collected at the EMBL Heidelberg Cryo Electron
Microscopy Service Platform. We thank EMBL (BT, WH, SM, AS, MB), the Max Planck Society
(BT, MS, SW, FECB, SvB, MG, SM, RC, GH, MB), the Max Planck Computing and Data Facility
for providing computational resources. We also acknowledge a generous SuperMUC-NG
computing allocation at the Leibniz Supercomputing Centre. (MS,SvB,MG,FECB,RC,GH), the
Human Frontier Science Program (RGP0026/2017; SvB, GH), the German Ministry of Health
(CS), the German Center for Infection Research (CH,MDM) and the Loewe centre DRUID from
the Justus Liebig university Giessen (JKL) for funding. BT acknowledges William Wan
(Vanderbilt University) for helpful discussions. JKL acknowledges excellent support by Regina
Eberle (PEI). RC acknowledges the support of the Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies. MS
acknowledges support from the Austrian Science Fund FWF (Schroedinger Fellowship, J4332B28). The authors are indebted to G. Dobler and R. Wölfel, Bundeswehr Institute for
Microbiology, for providing SARS-CoV-2 strain MUC-IMB1. The authors declare no competing
interests.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figures

Figure 1 - Cryo electron tomography of SARS-CoV-2 virions. (A) Slices through tomographic
reconstructions of highly pleiomorphic SARS-CoV-2 virions. Scale bar 30 nm. (B) Same as (A),
but as a gallery highlighting individual copies of S. All domains, including the transmembrane
part, are clearly resolved. Although the vast majority of S is reminiscent of the pre-fusion
conformation, the particles framed in orange are strikingly similar to the post -fusion
conformation as proposed by (Cai et al, bioRxiv 2020; compare to their Figure 4C). (C) Western
blot showing the loss of furin cleavage products of SARS-CoV-2 S and the increase of uncleaved
S (180 kDa) within 5 passages through tissue culture (loading control using anti -N antibody).

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2 - Subtomogram analysis of SARS-CoV-2 S protein. (A) Distance (top) and cluster-size
distributions (bottom) of S on the viral surface, with non-overlapping hard disks of 10 nm
diameter as reference. (B) Subtomogram average of the ectodomain of S shown isosurface
rendered and fitted with the previously published atomic model as determined by single
particle EM (PDB ID 6VXX). Subtomogram average in transparent grey, secondary structure
elements in red and glycosylation sites in blue. (C) Same subtomogram average but shown as
slices through the reconstruction. Scale bar 5 nm. (D) Detail of the average of the symmetric
unit of S. Scale bar 5 Å. (E) Distribution of the angular orientation and distance of the
ectodomain with respect to the bilayer. (F) Averages of subtomograms classified according to
the distance of the ectodomain (increasing from left to right) from the bilayer. Examples of
individual particles are shown as slices at the bottom panel (scale bar 30 nm). At an optimal
distance, the stalk domain stretches out and is resolved.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3 - MD simulations of SARS-CoV-2 S protein. (A) Model of the S protein. The three
individual chains of S are shown in shades of red, N-glycosylation in blue, lipids of the ER-like
membrane in grey with phosphates in green; "hip", "knee" and "ankle" mark positions of the
three flexible hinges. (B) Examples of the hinges as seen in the de-convoluted tomograms.
Cyan and orange arrowheads indicate upper and lower leg respectively, with their typical
lengths indicated. Scale bar 10 nm. (C) Hinge flexibility in the MD simulation illustrated
through backbone traces (grey) at 75 ns intervals with different parts of the S protein fixed
(red). (D) Probability density functions for hinge bending angles at hip, knee and ankle.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4 - Fitting of molecular simulations into cryo electron tomograms. (A) The hinges of
the stalk domain predicted by structural modeling (orange arrowheads) are consistent with
the tomographic data. Slices through tomograms (left) and snapshots of respective MD
simulations superimposed with isosurface rendered tomograms are shown for multiple
instances. Scale bar 5 nm. (B) Fit of snapshots of MD simulations into the classes obtained for
different distances of the globular domain from the membrane (1-4) as presented in Figure
2F. Shorter distances are concomitant with a stronger bending of the hinges and a lateral
displacement of the stalk. Average MD density filtered to a resolution comparable to the
subtomogram averages is shown as isosurface render (right).

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5 - Analysis of S protein glycosylation sites and epitopes. (A) N-glycosylation sites are
clearly discernible in the subtomogram average of the globular domain. From left to right:
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Isosurface rendering of subtomogram average with an individual N-glycosylation site
indicated (orange arrowhead); same superimposed with the MD-calculated density for all
annotated N-glycosylation sites; superimposed with previous structural model of the globular
domain (PDB ID 6VXX); superimposed with a snapshot of the MD simulations. N-glycosylation
sites are shown in blue. (B) Tomographic slice highlighting an N-glycosylation site (orange
arrow heads) in the original data. Scale bar 5 nm. (C) Highlight of N-glycosylation positions 709
and 1134 of the MD simulations (top) and in a previous structural model (bottom; PDB ID
6VXX, EMD-21452). The subtomogram average is shown superimposed at different isosurface
thresholds (transparent grey). Extensive additional density is visible. (D-F) The stalk domain
is heavily glycosylated at the hinges. (D) Exemplifying tomographic slices with bulky density at
the hinge positions (orange arrowheads). Scale bar 5 nm. (E) Superposition of the
subtomogram averages (transparent grey isosurfaces) of the globular domain (framed red)
and the stalk domain (framed green) with a respective snapshot of the MD simulations
emphasizing the glycosylation at the hinges. (F) Same as (E) but shown as maximum intensity
projection through the subtomogram averages. (G) Fits of snapshots from MD simulations
into the surface of a virion; tomogram shown isosurface rendered in transparent grey. The
position of epitopes for neutralizing antibodies at the RBDs are indicated with cyan
arrowheads. (H) Cartoon illustrating a hypothetical docking event in which the hinges facilitate
the engagement of multiple instances of S with their receptors.

Materials and Methods: see Supplementary Material - separate document

References
Belouzard, S., Millet, J.K., Licitra, B.N., and Whittaker, G.R. (2012). Mechanisms of
Coronavirus Cell Entry Mediated by the Viral Spike Protein. Viruses 4, 1011-1033.
Bojkova, D., Klann, K., Koch, B., Widera, M., Krause, D., Ciesek, S., Cinatl, J., and Münch,
C. (2020). Proteomics of SARS-CoV-2-infected host cells reveals therapy targets. Nature in
press.
Chi, X., Yan, R., Zhang, J., Zhang, G., Zhang, Y., Hao, M., Zhang, Z., Fan, P., Dong, Y.,
Yang, Y., et al. (2020). A neutralizing human antibody binds to the N-terminal domain of the
Spike protein of SARS-CoV-2. Science. eabc6952.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Chuang Liu, Yang Yang, Yuanzhu Gao, Chenguang Shen, Bin Ju, Congcong Liu, Xian Tang,
Jinli Wei, Xiaomin Ma, Weilong Liu, Shuman Xu, Yingxia Liu, Jing Yuan, Jing Wu, Zheng
Liu, Zheng Zhang, Peiyi Wang, L.L. (2020). Viral Architecture of SARS-CoV-2 with PostFusion Spike Revealed by Cryo-EM. bioRxiv.
de Haan, C.A.M., and Rottier, P.J.M. (2005). Molecular Interactions in the Assembly of
Coronaviruses. In Advances in Virus Research, pp. 165-230.
Duquerroy, S., Vigouroux, A., Rottier, P.J.M., Rey, F.A., and Jan Bosch, B. (2005). Central
ions and lateral asparagine/glutamine zippers stabilize the post-fusion hairpin conformation of
the SARS coronavirus spike glycoprotein. Virology 335, 276-285.
Forster, F., Medalia, O., Zauberman, N., Baumeister, W., and Fass, D. (2005). Retrovirus
envelope protein complex structure in situ studied by cryo-electron tomography. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 102, 4729-4734.
Funke, S., Maisner, A., Mühlebach, M.D., Koehl, U., Grez, M., Cattaneo, R., Cichutek, K.,
and Buchholz, C.J. (2008). Targeted Cell Entry of Lentiviral Vectors. Mol. Ther. 16,
1427-1436.
Gordon, D.E., Jang, G.M., Bouhaddou, M., Xu, J., Obernier, K., White, K.M., O’Meara, M.J.,
Rezelj, V. V., Guo, J.Z., Swaney, D.L., et al. (2020). A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map
reveals targets for drug repurposing. Nature, in press.
Grant, T., and Grigorieff, N. (2015). Measuring the optimal exposure for single particle cryoEM using a 2.6 Å reconstruction of rotavirus VP6. Elife 4.
Hagen, W.J.H., Wan, W., and Briggs, J.A.G. (2017). Implementation of a cryo-electron
tomography tilt-scheme optimized for high resolution subtomogram averaging. J. Struct. Biol.
197, 191-198.
Harbury, P.B., Plecs, J.J., Tidor, B., Alber, T., Kim, P.S. 1998. High-Resolution Protein
Design with Backbone Freedom. Science 282 (5393), 1462-1467. DOI:
10.1126/science.282.5393.146
Hubert, J. (1984). Spearman-Karber method. Bioassay 2nd editio.
Hulswit, R.J.G., de Haan, C.A.M., and Bosch, B.-J. (2016). Coronavirus Spike Protein and
Tropism Changes. In Advances in Virus Research, pp. 29-57.
Kirchdoerfer, R.N., Cottrell, C.A., Wang, N., Pallesen, J., Yassine, H.M., Turner, H.L.,
Corbett, K.S., Graham, B.S., McLellan, J.S., and Ward, A.B. (2016). Pre-fusion structure of a
human coronavirus spike protein. Nature 531, 118-121.
Kremer, J.R., Mastronarde, D.N., and McIntosh, J.R. (1996). Computer Visualization of
Three-Dimensional Image Data Using IMOD. J. Struct. Biol. 116, 71-76.
Lau, S.-Y., Wang, P., Mok, B.W.-Y., Zhang, A.J., Chu, H., Lee, A.C.-Y., Deng, S., Chen, P.,
Chan, K.-H., Song, W., et al. (2020). Attenuated SARS-CoV-2 variants with deletions at the
S1/S2 junction. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 9, 837-842.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Li, F. (2016). Structure, Function, and Evolution of Coronavirus Spike Proteins. Annu. Rev.
Virol. 3, 237-261.
Loganathan, S.K., Schleicher, K., Malik, A., Quevedo, R., Langille, E., Teng, K., Oh, R.H.,
Rathod, B., Tsai, R., Samavarchi-Tehrani, P., et al. (2020). Rare driver mutations in head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas converge on NOTCH signaling. Science (1264-1269). 367,
1264-1269.
Mastronarde, D.N. (2005). Automated electron microscope tomography using robust
prediction of specimen movements. J. Struct. Biol. 152, 36-51.
Natacha S. Ogando, Tim J. Dalebout, Jessika C. Zevenhoven-Dobbe, Ronald W. Limpens,
Yvonne van der Meer, Leon Caly, Julian Druce, Jutte J. C. de Vries, Marjolein Kikkert,
Montserrat Bárcena, Igor Sidorov, E.J.S. (2020). SARS-coronavirus-2 replication in Vero E6
cells: replication kinetics, rapid adaptation and cytopathology. bioRxiv.
Otsu, N.A. (1979). A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms. IEEE Trans.
Sys. Man. Cyber 9, 62-66.
Rohou, A., and Grigorieff, N. (2015). CTFFIND4: Fast and accurate defocus estimation from
electron micrographs. J. Struct. Biol. 192, 216-221.
Rory Henderson, Robert J Edwards, Katayoun Mansouri, Katarzyna Janowska, Victoria
Stalls, Sophie Gobeil, Megan Kopp, Allen Hsu, Mario Borgnia, Rob Parks, Barton F. Haynes,
P.A. (2020). Controlling the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein Conformation. bioRxiv.
Sebastian Lewis, Deborah Andrew D. Davidson, M.K.W., Joanna Ellis, Phillip Shoemark,
Miles W. Carroll, Kate Heesom, M.Z., and Hiscox, David A. Matthews A. Lewis, J.A.
(2020). Characterisation of the transcriptome and proteome of SARS-CoV-2 using direct
RNA sequencing and tandem mass spectrometry reveals evidence for a cell passage induced
in-frame deletion in the spike glycoprotein that removes the furin-like cleavage site. bioRxiv.
Shajahan, A., Supekar, N.T., Gleinich, A.S., and Azadi, P. (2020). Deducing the N- and Oglycosylation profile of the spike protein of novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. Glycobiology.
Steffen Klein, Mirko Cortese, Sophie L. Winter, Moritz Wachsmuth-Melm, C.J.N., and Berati
Cerikan, Megan L. Stanifer, Steeve Boulant, Ralf Bartenschlager, P.C. (2020). SARS-CoV-2
structure and replication characterized by in situ cryo-electron tomography. bioRxiv.
Turoňová, B., Hagen, W.J.H., Obr, M., Mosalaganti, S., Beugelink, J.W., Zimmerli, C.E.,
Kräusslich, H.-G., and Beck, M. (2020). Benchmarking tomographic acquisition schemes for
high-resolution structural biology. Nat. Commun. 11, 876.
Turoňová, B., Schur, F.K.M., Wan, W., and Briggs, J.A.G. (2017). Efficient 3D-CTF
correction for cryo-electron tomography using NovaCTF improves subtomogram averaging
resolution to 3.4 Å. J. Struct. Biol. 199, 187-195.
Ulasli, M., Verheije, M.H., De Haan, C.A.M., and Reggiori, F. (2010). Qualitative and
quantitative ultrastructural analysis of the membrane rearrangements induced by coronavirus.
Cell. Microbiol. 12, 844-861.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.173476; this version posted July 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Walls, A.C., Park, Y.-J., Tortorici, M.A., Wall, A., McGuire, A.T., and Veesler, D. (2020).
Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein. Cell 181, 281292.e6.
Walls, A.C., Tortorici, M.A., Frenz, B., Snijder, J., Li, W., Rey, F.A., DiMaio, F., Bosch, B.J., and Veesler, D. (2016). Glycan shield and epitope masking of a coronavirus spike protein
observed by cryo-electron microscopy. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 23, 899-905.
Walls, A.C., Tortorici, M.A., Snijder, J., Xiong, X., Bosch, B.-J., Rey, F.A., and Veesler, D.
(2017a). Tectonic conformational changes of a coronavirus spike glycoprotein promote
membrane fusion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, 11157-11162.
Walls, A., Tortorici, M.A., Bosch, B.-J., Frenz, B., Rottier, P.J.M., DiMaio, F., Rey, F.A., and
Veesler, D. (2017b). Crucial steps in the structure determination of a coronavirus spike
glycoprotein using cryo-electron microscopy. Protein Sci. 26, 113-121.
Wan, W., Kolesnikova, L., Clarke, M., Koehler, A., Noda, T., Becker, S., and Briggs, J.A.G.
(2017). Structure and assembly of the Ebola virus nucleocapsid. Nature 551, 394-397.
Wrapp, D., Wang, N., Corbett, K.S., Goldsmith, J.A., Hsieh, C.-L., Abiona, O., Graham, B.S.,
and McLellan, J.S. (2020). Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion
conformation. Science. 367, 1260-1263.
Xiaoli Xiong, Kun Qu, Katarzyna A. Ciazynska, Myra Hosmillo, Andrew P. Carter, Soraya
Ebrahimi, Zunlong Ke, Sjors H.W. Scheres, Laura Bergamaschi, Guinevere L. Grice, Ying
Zhang, The CITIID-NIHR COVID-19 BioResource Collaboration, James A. Nathan,
Stephen, J.A.G.B. (2020). A thermostable, closed, SARS-CoV-2 spike protein trimer.
bioRxiv.
Yongfei Cai, Jun Zhang, Tianshu Xiao, Hanqin Peng, Sarah M. Sterling, Richard M. Walsh
Jr., Shaun Rawson, Sophia Rits-Volloch, B.C. (2020). Distinct conformational states of
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. bioRxiv.

22

