bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A “Deep Dive” into the SARS-Cov-2 Polymerase Assembly: Identifying Novel Allosteric
Sites and Analyzing the Hydrogen Bond Networks and Correlated Dynamics
Khaled Barakat1,2*, Marawan Ahmed1, Yasser Tabana1 and Minwoo Ha1.
1

Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada.
2
Li Ka Shing Applied Virology Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

* Corresponding author: kbarakat@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Replication of the SARS-CoV-2 genome is a fundamental step in the virus life cycle and
inhibiting the SARS-CoV2 replicase machinery has been proven recently as a promising
approach in combating the virus. Despite this recent success, there are still several aspects related
to the structure, function and dynamics of the CoV-2 polymerase that still need to be addressed.
This includes understanding the dynamicity of the various polymerase subdomains, analyzing the
hydrogen bond networks at the active site and at the template entry in the presence of water,
studying the binding modes of the nucleotides at the active site, highlighting positions for
acceptable nucleotides’ substitutions that can be tolerated at different positions within the
nascent RNA strand, identifying possible allosteric sites within the polymerase structure and
studying their correlated dynamics relative to the catalytic site. Here, we combined various
cutting-edge modelling tools with the recently resolved SARS-CoV-2 cryo-EM polymerase
structures to fill this gap in knowledge. Our findings provide a detailed analysis of the hydrogen
bond networks at various parts of the polymerase structure and suggest possible nucleotides’
substitutions that can be tolerated by the polymerase complex. We also report here three
“druggable” allosteric sites within the nsp12 RdRp that can be targeted by small molecule
inhibitors. Our correlated motion analysis shows that the dynamics within one of the newly
identified sites are linked to the active site, indicating that targeting this site can significantly
impact the catalytic activity of the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase.
Introduction
SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped, positive-sense RNA virus belonging to the Nidovirales family
and has been identified as the cause of COVID-19 disease that began in Wuhan, China1. The
virus is closely related to the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and to
several other bat coronaviruses2. The genome of SARS-CoV-2 is composed of 26-32 kilobases
(kb), making it among the largest RNA genomes known to date. Replication of this genome is a
fundamental step in the virus life cycle and inhibiting this mechanism has been proven recently
as a promising approach in combating and controlling SARS-CoV-2 infection. A successful

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

proof of concept for this approach is remdesivir, a nucleoside analog (NA) drug that has been
repurposed recently against COVID-193.
The SARS-CoV-2 replicase machinery involves several non-structural proteins (nsp)s encoded
by the viral genome and assembled around the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp),
nsp124. This includes the nsp7 and nsp8 RdRp cofactors; the dimer forming RNA binding
protein, nsp9; the cofactor in viral replication, nsp10; and the nsp14 exoribonuclease (ExoN)4-7.
The presence of the latter proofreading ExoN adds an additional challenge in blocking the
replication of SARS-CoV-2. This ExoN is a CoV-specific intrinsic mechanism, which does not
exist in other RNA viruses, and can simply remove the incorporated nucleoside analog (NA) and
restore the viral polymerase function8-9. Although the interaction between all these proteins is
important for the proper replication of the viral genome, several studies identified the nsp7-nsp8nsp12 complex as the minimal functional assembly required to study this process. Additional
studies showed also that the nsp12 on its own, although still functional, has low processivity,
compared to the nsp7-nsp8-nsp12 complex3. Other studies argued that the nsp8 protein is capable
of de novo initiating the replication process and has been proposed to function as a primase10.
The recent SARS-CoV-2 polymerase cryo-EM structures provide a detailed picture for
the organization of the polymerase complex5, 11. A functional nsp7-nsp8-nsp12 complex involves
a single nsp7 and two nsp8 monomers attached to the nsp12 RdRp (see Figure 1). In this
structure, nsp12 adopts the conserved “right hand” shaped fold associated with all RNA viruses.
This fold includes three distinct subdomains that can be clearly identified as fingers (S397 to
A581 and K621 to G679), palm (T582 to P620 and T680 to Q815) and thumb (H816 to E920). In
addition, the CoV-2 nsp12 includes an n-terminal extension domain (D60 to R249), which
adopts a nidovirus RdRp-associated nucleo-tidyltransferase (NiRAN) domain12. This NiRAN
subdomain is connected to the rest of the nsp12 structure through an interface formed by residues
A250 to R365. Furthermore, residues D29-K50 form an additional n-terminal β-hairpin loop that
is bound into a groove close to the NiRAN domain. The polymerase active site (i site) is located
within the palm subdomain and is made up from the conserved RdRp A-G motives. Motif A
comprises residues T611 to M626, which include the classical aspartate residue, D618. This
residue helps in coordinating two catalytic divalent magnesium ions at the active site along with
the two other aspartate residues, D760 and D761, located in motif C. Motif B includes residues
T680 to T710, motif C includes residues F753 to N767, motif D contains residues L775 to E796,
motif E includes residues H810 to V820, motif F includes residues K912 to E921, and finally,
motif G includes residues K500 to S5185.
To our knowledge, the present work is the first study to use the recently resolved SARSCoV-2 cryo-EM structures to explore the CoV-2 polymerase complex. With the absence of a
crystal structure for CoV-2, earlier studies used the CoV-1 polymerase as a template to construct
homology models for the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase8-9, 13-14. Despite its similarity with CoV-2,
the available Cov-1 cryo-EM structure lacked the first 116 residues of the nsp12 protein5. The
importance of these residues will be discussed further below. Furthermore, these earlier studies
did not go beyond the active site of the polymerase and most of them did not consider the
dynamicity of the polymerase complex and did not study the hydrogen bond networks to the
depth provided in the current work8-9, 13-14. Additionally, none of these studies investigated the
polymerase complex for possible allosteric sites or studied the correlated dynamics within the
polymerase structure. Therefore, the objective of the current study is to use the recent SARSCoV-2 cryo-EM polymerase structures as a tool to fill this gap in knowledge. In this context, the
current work is focused on understanding the dynamicity of the various polymerase subdomains,

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

analyzing the hydrogen bond networks at the active site and at the template entry in the presence
of water, studying the binding modes of various substrates at the active site, highlighting
positions for acceptable nucleotides’ substitutions that can be tolerated at different positions
within the nascent RNA strand, identifying possible allosteric sites within the polymerase
structure and studying their correlated motion with the catalytic site.
To achieve these goals, we combined classical and accelerated molecular dynamics
simulations with principal component analyses, conformational clustering, free energy
calculations, binding site identification tools and correlated dynamics. The present work provides
an overall view of the nsp7-nsp8-nsp12 polymerase complex, with the resolution of a single
atom and with the ability to observe small and large conformational changes in the context of a
bound RNA. Our findings analyze the hydrogen bond networks at various parts of the
polymerase structure and suggest possible nucleotides’ substitutions that can be tolerated by the
polymerase complex. We also report here three “druggable” allosteric sites within the nsp12
RdRp that can be targeted by small molecule inhibitors. Our correlated motion analysis reveals a
connection between the dynamics within one of the new identified sites and the polymerase
active site, indicating that targeting this site is expected to significantly impact the catalytic
activity of the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase.
Results
Initial assessment of the polymerase complex. Figure 1 shows the complete structure of
SARS-CoV-2 nsp12-nsp8-nsp7 polymerase complex, as constructed in this work, based on the
recently resolved Cryo-EM structures5, 11 (see methods). In this model the “right hand” shaped
RdRp domain of nsp12 is bound to nascent and template RNA strands and clearly reveals the
NiRAN subdomain and its interface to the RdRp domain. Furthermore, it highlights the location
of the n-terminal β-hairpin loop (D29-K50), which inserts into a groove close to the NiRAN
domain. The catalytic active site (i site) within the polymerase domain contains two magnesium
ions that are well-coordinated by three aspartate residues (D618, D670 and D671) (see below). It
also includes two zinc ions that are chelated with a histidine and three cystine residues, each.
Similar to the Cryo-EM structure (PDB ID: 6M71)5, our model also shows the correct
proportions of nsp7, nsp8 and nsp12 as well as their conserved orientations and interfaces within
the complex. Our initial structural assessment shows that the missing residues in the original
Cryo-EM structures were properly added to the three protein structures. This is evident by the
local quality estimates and Ramachandran plots, which shows > 95% of the nsp12 protein
structure in the favoured regions for the dihedral angles with only 0.43% Ramachandran outliers.
Similar scores were obtained for both the nsp8 and nsp7 proteins (see Figures S1 to S3,
supplementary data).
Stability and dynamics of the polymerase assembly. With all components of the SARS-CoV-2
polymerase complex are properly repaired and assembled, our next step was to study the
dynamicity of the whole complex in a functional and physiological state. To do that, we first
constructed nine polymerase complexes. This included five complexes in which a nucleotide
triphosphate (NTP) was incorporated within the active site. These five NTPs comprised the four
normal RNA nucleotides (i.e. ATP, CTP, GTP and UTP) in addition to remdesivir triphosphate.
Hereafter, these five systems are called the BOUND systems. In addition to the five BOUND
systems, we constructed four complexes in which the nucleotides are incorporated in the (i+1)

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

position in the nascent RNA. As the polymerase catalytic site is free from substrates in these
complexes, we call these systems the FREE systems. To evaluate the dynamicity of all nine
systems, both FREE and BOUND structures were subjected to 100 ns MD simulations. Figure 2
shows the root mean square deviation (RMSD) and atomic fluctuations (beta factors) of the
backbone atoms of the nsp12 protein in the BOUND systems (Figure 2A, B) and FREE systems
(Figure 2C, D). The RMSD data for both BOUND and FREE systems show that nsp12 behaved
relatively similar and was stable in all nine simulations. All nsp12 equilibrated conformations
fluctuated from 1.9 Å to 2.5 Å from their initial reference structures, with the UTP system
showing the most deviation in the BOUND complexes and remdesivir is showing the least. In the
FREE systems the (i+1) incorporated ATP and GTP systems are showing a final similar RMSD
behaviour and occupying the upper bound of the RMSD spectrum, while the (i+1) incorporated
CTP and UTP systems are showing a lower deviation from the initial structure. The atomic
fluctuations for both BOUND and FREE systems (Figure 2C, D) shows several regions with
very little flexibility, such as the bound NTPs, the two chelated zinc ions and the two magnesium
ions within the catalytic site (see Figure S4). However, this data also shows portions of nsp12
that exhibit large flexibilities (Figure 2C, D), with the most flexible regions comprising the nterminal β-hairpin (D29-K50), the NiRAN subdomain (D60-R249) and the NiRAN interface
subdomain (A250-R365).
The RMSD and atomic fluctuations for the nsp7 protein and the two nsp8 monomers are
shown in Figures S5 to S7 (see supplementary data). With the exception of the FREE CTP
system, all nsp7 structures did not deviate significantly from the initial structure. NSP7 in all
bound systems deviated from 2 Å to 3 Å from its initial structures (Figure S5A). While the same
trend was shown in three of the FREE systems, nsp7 in the fourth CTP free system, has deviated
almost 5 Å from its initial structure (Figure S5C). This is also reflected in the atomic
fluctuations for the nsp7 residues (Figure S5B, D). While for both systems the nsp7 residues S1
to L60 show a clear rigidity during the nine MD simulations, the last ten residues, representing
the c-terminal of nsp7 show much larger flexibility. While the nsp7 rigid residues are
sandwiched between nsp12 and nsp8, the flexible nsp7 c-terminal are more liberated and interact
only with two alpha helices from the nsp7-bound nsp8 monomer (see Figure S8). The RMSD
and atomic fluctuations for this nsp8 monomer are shown in Figure S4. Both NTP BOND and
FREE systems deviated from 4 Å to 6 Å from their initial structures (see Figure S6A, C), with
the FREE systems are showing the greatest fluctuations (see Figure S4C). The most flexible
regions in this nsp7-bound nsp8 monomer are the n-terminal residues M67 to R80, where the
CTP BOND and FREE systems are showing the largest fluctuations at this region. This part of
nsp8 is free to move in our model and has been recently shown to interact with the product RNA
(PDB ID: 6YYT, to be published by Hellin et al.). Additionally, residues T107 to I120 in this
nsp8 structure form a short alpha helix that is connected to a turning loop and seem to be flexible
in both BOUND and FREE systems (see Figure S8). Interestingly, a bound GTP at the catalytic
site seems to induce significantly large atomic fluctuations in this region, compared to all other
bound and incorporated NTPs.
The second nsp8 monomer did not have a large deviation from the initial structure,
compared to the nsp7-bound nsp8 monomer (Figure S7). It is worth mentioning that this
monomer was clearly characterized in both Cryo-EM structures that were used to construct this
model, indicating its less flexibility compared to the other nsp8 monomer. However, similar to
the nsp7-bound nsp8 monomer, the n-terminal of this nsp8 monomer shows the largest flexibility
in this structure as this region is also free to move in our model and has been recently shown

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

recently to interact with the product RNA (PDB ID: 6YYT, to be published by Hellin et al.). A
few other regions of this protein are showing some flexibility, including residues T107 to I120,
described above.
Figure S9 shows the RMSD and atomic fluctuations of the nascent RNA strand. All NTP
BOUND systems had and average RMSD around 3 Å at their final equilibrated states (Figure
S9A). On the other hand, the nascent strand RMSD data for the FREE systems (Figure S9C)
showed an interesting trend, where one can see a clear separation in RMSD averages, ranging
from 2 to 5 Å, with the ATP system showing the most deviation from the initial structure. It is
worth emphasizing that these systems represent the elongated state of the polymerase, where the
bound nucleotides have now been incorporated within the nascent RNA strand and translocated
from the (i) site to the (i+1) position, and the (i) site is now empty, waiting for a new incoming
nucleotide to be incorporated. The atomic fluctuations for all five BOUND systems exhibit a
similar trend (Figure S9B), where the first five nucleotides (i+1) to (i+5) are very stable within
the RNA channel. Only nucleotides beyond the (i+5) position are showing large flexibility.
These nucleotides are no longer surrounded by the nsp12 residues as they are now extending past
the product RNA hybrid exit channel, and are only attached through their base-pairing to the
template nucleotides. Similarly, the five nucleotides at positions (i+1) to (i+5) are also stable in
the FREE systems (Figure S9D) and nucleotides beyond the fifth position are still flexible;
however, they are less flexible, compared to their corresponding nucleotides in the BOUND
systems. This RMSD and atomic fluctuations data show a clear difference between the BOUND
and FREE states for the stability and dynamicity of the nascent RNA strand.
Figure S10 shows the RMSD and atomic fluctuations of the template RNA strand. With
the exception of the ATP BOUND case, the template strand deviated from 2 to 4 Å from their
initial structures (Figure S10A). There was a significant fluctuation in the RMSD for the ATP
case. These fluctuations seem to emerge from the flexibility of nucleotides beyond the (i+5)
position, where similar to the nascent RNA strand, these nucleotides are no longer bound by the
protein residues and are extending beyond the hybrid exit channel and are only bound through
base-paring with their complementary nucleotides in the nascent RNA strand. The RMSDs for
the template strand in the FREE systems exhibit a similar trend to those of the nascent RNA
strand, where a clear separation in the RMSD averages can be observed, with the GTP system
showing the most deviation from the initial structure (Figure S10C) and has the most fluctuating
nucleotides (Figure S10D).
Principal component analysis (PCA). Figure 3 shows the magnitudes of the eigenvalues for the
first 10 eigenvectors for the BOUND systems. It also shows the projections of their trajectories
on the first and second eigenvectors for each system. It is important to emphasize that this PCA
was focused on the catalytic site, represented by the bound NTP at the (i) site, the two
magnesium ions as well as all the protein and RNA residues within 5 Å from the bound NTP.
Our main objective was to study all possible modes of binding of the bound NTPs and to
understand their interactions with the surrounding environment. The resulting eigenvectors
constitute the essential vectors of the motion, where the larger an eigenvalue, the more important
its corresponding eigenvector in the collective motion. As shown in Figure 3, for all BOUND
systems the magnitudes of the eigenvalues for the eigenvectors are following an exponential
decay, a feature that is associated with reaching an acceptable sampling of the trajectories. A
detailed representation of the conformational dynamics can be obtained by projecting the
trajectories onto the planes spanned by the most dominant eigenvectors, and these projections

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

provide a visual tool to quantify the size of the conformational space sampled by these
trajectories. The higher the occupancy of a conformational state in this projection, the lower the
free energy of that state 46,47. Therefore, by observing the regions at which many conformations
cluster, one can predict the minimal energy conformations visited by these MD trajectories and
estimate the number of dominant modes of binding for each bound NTP. As shown in Figure 3,
all bound NTPs visited more than one conformation, with the bound CTP seem to have a major
mode of binding within the catalytic site. On the other hand, the bound UTP seem to have
multiple binding modes. The projections for the bound ATP show that ATP is restricted between
two major conformations with a possibility to adopt around 2 minor conformations. Figure 3 also
shows that both GTP and remdesivir has visited two flexible dominant conformations as their
projected trajectories highlight two main clusters spanning a wide area in their projections. For
the FREE systems, all projections of the incorporated NTPs follow an almost identical trend
(Figure S11), where all NTPs along with their surrounding environment seem to have visited two
major conformations, well-separated in their projections. These two main conformations are
accompanied with very minor conformations as shown in Figure S11.
Clustering analysis. Our next step was to identify and to study the dominant conformations
highlighted by the PCA projections described above. To do that we performed RMSD
conformational clustering of all conformations visited by the bound NTPs. Figure 4 shows the
clustering metrics observed for different cluster counts as well as the clusters’ sizes at the
predicted optimal number of clusters for both remdesivir (Figure 4A, B) and ATP (Figure 4C,
D). Similar analyses for the other three bound NTPs are shown in Figures S12 to S14. For
remdesivir a local minimum in the DBI parameter is observed at a cluster count of 10, which
coincides with a plateau in the percentage of variance explained by the data (SSR/SST),
indicative of 10 clusters as the optimal number of clusters for remdesivir conformations. The
largest cluster of those includes only around 30% of the whole trajectory, and the sizes of the
second to the fifth clusters are comparable to the largest cluster, indicating the presence of more
than a single dominant conformation for remdesivir. On the other hand, although 14 clusters are
predicted to be the optimal number of clustering for the ATP trajectory, the dominant cluster in
this case includes more than 70% of the whole ATP trajectory, indicating the existence of a main
dominant conformation for ATP within the catalytic binding site. Figure 5 shows a superposition
of the centroids of each cluster for ATP (Figure 5A) and remdesivir (Figure 5B). The
superimposed centroids are coloured by the ranking of their corresponding clusters, where a red
colour represents a higher ranking. For ATP, the representatives of the largest clusters are all
grouped close to the dominant conformation. On the other hand, remdesivir seem to have at least
two additional major conformations to its main mode of binding.
NTPs dominant modes and hydrogen bonds analysis. The main mode of binding from the
largest cluster for remdesivir is shown in Figure 5C. This binding mode reveals the intricate
hydrogen bonding network formed within the catalytic site, which is needed to align the coming
nucleotide in its correct confirmation to be incorporated within the nascent RNA. In this binding
mode, the triphosphate group from remdesivir are coordinating the two divalent magnesium ions
through strong ionic bonds. The magnesium ions are also coordinated by the carbocyclic groups
from the three deprotonated catalytic aspartates (D616, D670 and D671). The phosphate groups
from remdesivir are further aligned in their position through at least two hydrogen bonds with
the protonated K621. The modified adenosine base from remdesivir is forming two hydrogen

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bonds with its complementary uracil base from the template. There is also an additional
hydrogen bond between the remdesivir base and S682. This interaction is further strengthened
through a hydrogen bond between the backbones of A558 and S682. The sugar moiety of
remdesivir is properly oriented at the catalytic site through two hydrogen bonds. The first is
between the sugar 3` hydroxyl group and the deprotonated carbocyclic group of D623. The
second hydrogen bond is between the oxygen atom of the sugar 2` hydroxyl group and S759.
Interestingly, the 1`-ribose cyano substitution in remdesivir forms an extra hydrogen bond with
the template nucleotide at the (i+1) position. Finally, the 3`-hydroxyl group from the nascent
RNA nucleotide at the (i+1) position is forming a strong hydrogen bond with the oxygen from
the first phosphate group in remdesivir. This interaction is essential for nucleotide incorporation
as a covalent bond is expected to be formed at this location.
The dominant modes of binding for the four types of RNA nucleotides are shown in
Figure 6, where the positions for the 1’-ribose and 1’-ribose hydrogens are represented by vdW
mauve spheres, to highlight the available space in these locations for possible substitutions. The
ATP dominant mode of binding (Figure 6A) is very similar to that of remdesivir, where K621,
D623 and S682 play the same roles described above. Despite this similarity there are still a few,
but not significant, differences, such as the involvement of R625, which forms a hydrogen bond
with the carbocyclic group of D623. This interaction helps D623 in aligning the ATP sugar
moiety in its proper position. An additional difference is the loss of the hydrogen bond formed
between the oxygen atom of the sugar 2` hydroxyl group and S759.
The mode of binding for CTP (Figure 6B) reveals an interesting role for water molecules
in coordinating the hydrogen bond network for various interactions. It also emphasizes the
importance of studying the polymerase complex in an explicitly solvated environment, otherwise
these types of water mediated interactions would not be recognized. Similar to the case for ATP
and remdesivir, K621, D623 and S682 continue to play the same roles described above in
positioning the bound nucleotide for the chemistry to take place. The hydrogen bond between
K621 and the phosphate groups are further strengthened via an extra water mediated hydrogen
bond. Moreover, R625 is connected to the oxygen of the phosphate group in the nascent RNA
nucleotide at position (i+1) through two water mediated hydrogen bonds. The mode of binding
also shows the return of S759 to form a hydrogen bond with CTP sugar moiety.
The bound GTP (Figure 6C) seem to have a different set of interactions with the catalytic
binding site residues. The GTP mode of binding retains the preserved coordination between the
its phosphate groups and the two divalent magnesium ions as well as its strong hydrogen bond
with the 3`-hydroxyl group from the nascent RNA nucleotide at the (i+1) position. However,
GTP lost its hydrogen bond with D623, although this lost interaction is compensated for by a
hydrogen bond with T680, which seems to play the same role of D623 for other nucleotides. In
this mode of binding, D623 is forming a hydrogen bond with K621, which still interact with the
phosphate groups, as described above.
The UTP mode of binding is shown in Figure 6D. Although in this binding mode UTP
seems to lost its base-pairing hydrogen bonds with the template, the UTP bound nucleotide is
still aligned properly through a more intricate water network, compared to the CTP case. For
example, the UTP 3` hydroxyl group is forming two water-mediated hydrogen bonds with the
deprotonated carbocyclic group of D623, which is further strengthened by an additional
hydrogen bond with K651. R555 is forming a hydrogen bond with the nascent RNA nucleotide
base at the (i+1) and is keeping the base-pairing template nucleotide at position (i) in close

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

proximity to the bound GTP through a hydrogen bond, which is supported by an additional
hydrogen bond with S682.
The persistence of the important hydrogen bonds described above for both the bound
NTP and template alignment are shown in Figures S15 and S16 for the BOUND and FREE
systems, respectively. All bound NTPs, including remdesivir, show stable hydrogen bonding
with the base-paring template nucleotide at the (i) position as well as with S759 and D623.
Remdesivir has the most persistent and dominant hydrogen bond interactions with K621 and in
the presence of remdesivir seem to strengthen the hydrogen bond interactions between A558 and
S682. A bound UTP seem to have the dominant hydrogen bond interactions with D623, while a
bound ATP sustains a strong interaction with S759. GTP forms the strongest interactions with
the template nucleotide at the (i+1) position.
Aside from the interactions with the base-pairing nucleotide at the (i) position, most of
the hydrogen bond interactions described above are weekend once the bound nucleotide is
translocated from the (i) to the (i+1) position (see Figure S16). For example, all incorporated
nucleotides lost their hydrogen bond interactions with the template nucleotide at position (i+1)
and only UTP and ATP show very weak interactions with S759. On the other hand, D623 and
S682 seem to still strongly interact with the incorporated nucleotide at position (i+1), possibly
due to the lack of a bound nucleotide at the (i) site.
The template at the entry. Figure S17 [now figure 7] shows the hydrogen bond network
associated with the RNA template strand at the entrance to the catalytic site for the remdesivir
case as an example. This network of hydrogen bonds reveals the complex interactions between
the RNA template backbone and the nsp12 residues at the template entrance. In these
interactions the protonated R569 seem to play a major role in orchestrating this network. It forms
at least 3 strong hydrogen bonds with the backbones of the two template nucleotides at positions
(i) and (i+1). It also forms a hydrogen bond with K500, which in turn forms a hydrogen bond
with the backbone of the complementary nucleotide to remdesivir. The backbone of S501 forms
two hydrogen bonds with the backbone of the two nucleotides preceding the (i) site. An
additional hydrogen bond is formed between N507 with the last nucleotide in the template
strand.
Figures S17 and S18 show the persistence of hydrogen bonds between nsp12 protein and
the RNA template at the template entrance gate, for the BOUND and FREE systems,
respectively. R569 is clearly playing a key role in aligning the template at this position. Its
hydrogen bond interaction with the variable bas-pairing nucleotide at position (i) (denoted as
V(i) in Figures S17 and S19) is very strong, in both BOUND and FREE systems. R569 also
forms a strong hydrogen bond with K500. This interaction seems not to be largely affected with
the type of bound nucleotide at the active site. On the other hand, the hydrogen bond between
S501 and the template nucleotide preceding the base-paring nucleotide (i.e. U(i-1)) has been
predominantly lost in the FREE systems, except for the UTP system.
Dihedral angles. Figures S19 and S20 shows the dihedral angles for the catalytic binding site
amino acids, for the BOUND and FREE systems, respectively. The dihedral angles for the four
conserved residues D618, S759, D760 and D761 are restricted throughout the simulations for all
systems. This is mainly due to their key role in coordinating the two magnesium ions. While both
dihedral angles for K621are constrained to ~  40଴ to ~80଴ when an NTP is present at the (i)
site, both angles can move freely when the bound NTP is translocated to the (i+1) site. Similarly,

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the dihedral angels for D623 and S682 span a larger area in the FREE systems compared to their
positions when a nucleotide is present at the catalytic site.
Electrostatic Calculations. Figure 8 shows the electrostatic potential mapped over the whole
polymerase complex. The negative electrostatic potential of the RNA strands is surrounded by a
predominantly positive potential from the surrounding basic proteins’ residues. Figure 8B shows
a detailed electrostatic potential view of the catalytic site with the bound remdesivir. The
presence of the two divalent magnesium ions as well as the basic lysine residue, K621, provided
a favourable positive electrostatic environment for the negatively charged phosphate groups of
remdesivir. The side chains for K545, V557, K621, D623, S682, T687, A688 and N691, provide
a positive potential cage for the bound remdesivir nucleotide and its complementary template
base, UMP, where the negative electrostatic potential of the 1’-ribose cyano substitution is
completely buried between S682, T687, A688, N691from one side, and K545, V557 from the
other side.
Figure S21 shows the electrostatic potential for the environment surrounding the two
chelated ZINC ions. Each of the two positively charged ZINC ions are chelated with three
deprotonated cystine residues and a histidine residue, protonated at their epsilon positions. The
four residues on each site provide the necessary electrostatic environment to coordinate and
confine the two ZINC ions. The nearby positively charged nsp12 amino acids also provide a
favourable environment for the bound RNA in the background.
Interaction energies at the active site. Table S1 shows the total vdW, electrostatic energy and
total non-bonded interactions for remdesivir and the three nucleotides, UTP, CTP and GTP,
relative to the ATP energies. Although remdesivir show very similar vdW energy compared to
ATP, its electrostatic energy is significantly larger. This is mainly due to the 1’-cyano group
substitution, which is buried in the electrostatic cage described above. While UTP seem to have
the largest electrostatic interactions within the active site (~-135 kcal/mole), it also shows the
most unfavorable vdW interactions among all nucleotides (~+35kcal/mole). GTP shows the same
total energy as ATP. Its slightly unfavorable vdW interactions (~+6 kcal/mole) is compensated
for by (-6kcal/mole) from its electrostatic interactions. A bound CTP shows the same trend as for
remdesivir. Although all bound NTPs as well as remdesivir show the same energetic trend in
their interactions with the two magnesium ions and three aspartate residues (see Figure S22), the
unfavourable UTP vdW energies seem to stem from its interaction with site. These unfavourable
interactions are compensated for by electrostatics interactions with the magnesium ions and their
attached aspartate residues (D618, D760 and D761) (see Figure S22) as well as favourable
interactions with D623 (see Figure S23). Furthermore, all bound NTPS tend to interact similarly
with S795 and all show better interactions with this residue compared to ATP, with an average
total relative energy of ~-3 kcal/mole for all NTPs (see Figure S24).
A bound remdesivir shows the most favourable energetics for the overall bound RNA,
with around 90 kcal/mole lower energy compared to a bound ATP (see Figure S25 and Table
S2). The second favoured NTP for the bound RNA is CTP, which chows around 50 kcal/mole
overall lower energy compared to the bound ATP case. On the other hand, a bound ATP seems
to be more favourable to the RNA compared to bound UTP and GTP, which lead to around ~+13
kcal/mole and ~+86 kcal/mole higher energy for the RNA, compared to ATP.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Water accessible surface area for NTPs. Figure S26 shows the water accessible surface area
(SASA) around the different NTPs in the BOUND (Figure S26A) and FREE (Figure S26B)
systems. As expected, remdesivir shows the largest SASA, due mainly to the extended 1’-ribose
cyano substitution. The difference in SASA between remdesivir and all other NTPs is clear since
the beginning of the simulations. The second largest SASA is associated with the bound GTP.
The SASA for all NTPs while they are binding at the catalytic (i) site is bigger than their SASA
once they are incorporated within the nascent RNA. The smallest available SASA is for UTP in
its (i+1) position, which is significantly smaller than other nucleotides. The SASA for all NTPs
ranges from 250 Åଶ for the uracil nucleotide at position (i+1) to 360 Åଶ for remdesivir at position
(i).
Translocation of bound NTPs and implications for possible substitutions. Figure 9 shows the
interactions of the RNA nascent nucleotides at position i+1 (Figure 9A) and i+2 (Figure 9B). It
also shows possible substitutions positions (highlighted in green) that would be tolerable by the
surrounding environment at these locations. Substitutions at these locations will allow the bound
nucleotides at the active site (site i) to be translocated to sites i+1 and i+2. This can protect these
incorporated nucleotides from the nsp14 exonuclease (ExoN). Among all possible substitutions,
it seems that only modifications at the 1’-ribose and 3`-ribose as well as possible substations in
the base would be acceptable at position i+1. Similarly, modifications at the 1’-ribose and 3`ribose are still acceptable at the i+2 site. This is mainly because these two locations are not
interacting with the surrounding environment (see Figure 9) and small modifications at these
locations will not affect either the base-paring of the RNA nascent nucleotides with the template
strand.
Allosteric Binding sites. Our binding site search tools (see methods) identified three potential
allosteric pockets within the nsp12 polymerase. The locations for the three pockets are shown in
Figure 1 and a close up on these pockets is shown in Figure S27. The first pocket (denoted here
as the β-hairpin pocket) is located in the proximity of the n-terminal β-hairpin loop (D29-K50).
This pocket is formed by the nsp12 residues F35 to N39, K50, N52, V71, K73, R74, R116,
G203, V204, T206, D208, N209, Y217 to F222 and S236. The second binding site, denoted here
as pocket 2, is located within the NiRAN interface subdomain and is close to the nsp8 monomer
(see Figure 1). This pocket is formed by the nsp12 residues V315 to P323, F326 to P328, Y346
to E350, T394 to F396 to C622 to L630, S664, M666, V675 to P678. The third pocket (pocket 3)
is located close to the NRA product exit channel (see Figure 1) and is formed by the nsp12
residues V588 to F594, W598, M601, A688, Y689, L758, F812 to A815, R836, S861to D865. It
is important to emphasize that our site prediction tools identified serval pockets within the
polymerase complex, however, these three pockets ranked the highest in terms of size,
druggability and accessibility to small molecule compounds. To evaluate the accessibility and
size of these pockets throughout the MD simulations, we studied the water hydration of these
pockets, by counting the number of water molecules within the first and second hydration shells
(see methods). Figure S28 shows the number of water molecules within the first two shells for
the three pockets in the BOUND state, compared to the catalytic binding site. While the active
site allows only up to 30 water molecules to enter in the presence of a bound NTP, the identified
pockets allow from 150 to 250 water molecules in the first hydration shell, and up to 400 water
molecules in the second hydration shell.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Accelerated MD simulations. Figure 10A (Figure S29) shows the protein heavy atoms root
mean square deviations (RMSD) values during the last 80 ns of the accelerated and classical MD
simulations. The average RMSD values increase from 2.6 Å In the classical simulation to reach
a value of 3.3 Å for the accelerated simulation. Maximum RMSD values also increased from 3.3
Å during the classical MD simulation to reach a value of 4.2 Å in the accelerated MD simulation.
Both systems converge approximately after 10 ns of simulations time. The small increase in the
average and maximum RMSD values is attributed to the biasing potential, which only exists in
the accelerated simulations.
Pockets Average Volumes. The three identified pockets (see above) have been analyzed for
their volume and druggability scores using TRAPP (see methods) throughout the classical and
accelerated MDS. Figure 10 A shows the volumes and druggability scores data (i.e. logistic
regression scores and CNN scores) depicted as a boxplot. The average pocket size for the three
pockets ranged from 352.73 Åଷ (for pocket 2) to 561.42 Åଷ (for the β-hairpin pocket). Also,
while the β-hairpin pocket and pocket 2 exhibit limited flexibilities, as evident by their reduced
distributions of the standard deviation values of pocket sizes during the MD simulations (both
classical and accelerated), pocket 3 showed a wider distribution of the standard deviation values
(> 170.0 Åଷ ). This indicates that this pocket has undergone a significant geometrical
transformation during the simulations. This is not surprising given the close proximity of pocket
3 to the catalytic site. On the other hand, the maximum pocket size was observed for the βhairpin pocket, with an average size of ~552-562 Åଷ .
Pockets’ Druggability and Residue Correlation Analysis. Figure 10A shows the TRAPP-LR
and the TRAPP-CNN druggability scores calculated for the three pockets, employing the same
MD frames used for volume calculations. Typical TRAPP-LR and TRAPP-CNN scores range
between 0 (poor druggability score) to 1 (optimum druggability scores), with a consensus score
of ~ 0.9 from both models usually highlights acceptable druggable pockets. Figure 10A shows a
dramatic difference in the predicted druggability scores of the three pockets, and these did not
change between the classical and the accelerated MD simulations. Optimum druggability scores
were observed for pocket 2, with an LR score ranging between 0.87±0.12 to 0.94±0.04 and CNN
scores ranging between 0.93±0.17 to 0.8±0.24, for the accelerated versus classical simulations,
respectively. On the other hand, the β-hairpin pocket and pocket 3 exhibited lower druggability
scores, compared to pocket 2. The average LR druggability scores of the β-hairpin pocket is 0.55
in the classical simulation to 0.7 for the accelerated simulation (see Figure 10 A). A lower score
(0.42 to 0.58) was observed for pocket 3. The same trend was observed for the CNN scores,
ranging from 0.47 to 0.53 for the β-hairpin pocket and from 0.45 to 0.49 for pocket 3.
Given the good druggability scores for pocket 2, we decided to perform a more detailed
correlation analysis on the amino acid residues forming this pocket to investigate their coupled
motion relative to the catalytic site residues. This can provide more insights on the effect of
targeting this pocket on the enzymatic activity of the catalytic site. In this context, the excellent
memory utilization of the BIO3D package enabled us to use the full accelerated and classical
MD trajectories (20,000 MD frames each) as inputs for the intended correlation analysis. The
generated LMI correlation matrices were saved as comma-separated value files (CSV) and were
processed with matplotlib to generate correlation heatmaps focused on the coordinated motions
between residues forming pocket 2 and residues within the catalytic. The heatmaps (Figures 10B
and 10C) are colour-coded by the correlation coefficient values. To facilitate the interpretation,

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

we have also explicitly recorded the correlation values for cells that showed correlation values
>= 0.4.
As shown in Figures 10B and 10 C, there is a relatively strong correlated motion between
residues in pocket 2 and the catalytic site residues. As expected, this is more apparent in the
AMDS trajectory, compared to the classical trajectory. For example, the correlation values of the
catalytic site residue THR680 with several P2 residues such as P627, N628, M629, L630, S664,
M666, V675 and K676) have been increased from (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.6, 0.5, 0.5, 0.6) in the
classical MDS to (0.6, 0.7, 0.6, 0.7, 0.7, 0.7, 0.7, 0.7), in the accelerated simulation, respectively.
Similar observations can be made for residues C622, K621, D623 and S682.
Discussion
Replication of SARS-CoV-2 genome is a fundamental step in the virus life cycle and is mediated
by a huge replicase protein complex, involving the nonstructural proteins (nsp)7 to nsp164.
While the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), nsp12, forms the core of this complex,
several auxiliary proteins and cofactors are essential for the coordinated processes needed to
produce the final RNA product15. Studying how these proteins associate together to form the
viral replicase can have a significant impact on understating their structure, function and
organization within this complicated machinery. It can also provide deep insights on the
hydrogen bond networks formed within the polymerase structure and the important role played
by water molecules in mediating these networks. Additionally, studying the stability, dynamicity
and correlated motions within this complex can lead to the discovery of important regions and
novel druggable hotspots to inhibit the replicase activity. These allosteric binding sites are
usually hidden in the inactive/unbound forms of proteins and their discovery requires an overall
view of the replicase complex, with the resolution of a single atom and with the ability to
observe small and large conformational changes in the context of a bound RNA. The existence of
such allosteric sites is supported by our findings (see results) as well as by earlier lessons from
similar RNA viruses (e.g. the HCV polymerase has four druggable allosteric sites in addition to
its active site16-17). The need to identify more druggable binding sites within the SARS-CoV-2
replicase machinery is highly desirable as targeting only the active site of the polymerase with
nucleoside analogs (NA)s may not prove enough to fully inhibit viral replication. This is mainly
due to the presence of an additional CoV-specific mechanism, which impairs NAs potency,
represented by an exonuclease (ExoN), residing in the N-terminal of nsp14, with similarity to the
active site in nsp129, 18-19. This domain proofreads the generated viral genome and can simply
remove the incorporated NA and restore the viral polymerase function8-9.
The recent SARS-CoV-2 polymerase cryo-EM structures5, 11) provide a unique
opportunity to construct an accurate model for this complex. Therefore, the objective of the
current work was to use these structures as a starting point and build several comprehensive
dynamical models for the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase to study several aspects related to its
function. This includes understanding the dynamicity of the various polymerase domains,
analyzing the hydrogen bond networks at the active site and at the template entry in the presence
of water, studying the binding modes of the nucleotides at the active site, highlighting positions
for acceptable nucleotides’ substitutions that can be tolerated at different positions within the
nascent RNA strand, identifying possible allosteric sites within the polymerase structure and
studying their correlated motion with the catalytic site. Our results provide a detailed view of the
SARS-CoV-2 polymerase complex in the context of these research questions. Furthermore, our

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

findings suggest possible nucleotides’ substitutions that can be tolerated by the polymerase
structure and reveal three possible allosteric sites within the nsp12 RdRp that can be targeted by
small molecule inhibitors.
To our knowledge, this is the first study to use a SARS-CoV-2 structure to build the
polymerase complex. A few recent homology modelling studies used the SARS-CoV polymerase
as a template to construct a model for SARS-CoV-28-9, 13-14. However, these studies did not go
beyond the active site of the polymerase and most of them did not consider the dynamicity of the
polymerase complex and did not study the hydrogen bond networks to the depth provided in the
current work. Furthermore, none of these studies explored the polymerase complex for possible
allosteric sites or studied the correlated dynamics within the polymerase structure. It is also
important to emphasize that the CoV-1 nsp12 that was used in all these earlier studies as a
template lacked the first 116 residues5. These residues include the n-terminal β-hairpin loop
(D29-K50) and a major part of the NiRAN domain of nsp12. Aside from the importance of these
residues in maintaining the stability and dynamicity of the whole nsp12 protein (see Figure 2),
these residues also form one of the three binding sites that we identified in the current study (see
Figure 1 and Figure S27).
Our findings revealed the detailed modes of binding at the catalytic site for all four types of RNA
nucleotides as well as for remdesivir. Our results also show the importance of water molecules in
mediating the interactions of the bound nucleotides – a factor that was never discussed or
considered in earlier publications related to the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase. The bound CTP and
UTP provide a clear example for the role of water in facilitating their interactions within the
active site (See Figure 6). This is not surprising as our water shell analysis also show a presence
of at least 20 water molecules within 4 Å from the bound nucleotide in the (i) site. This
observation was noted for all bound nucleotides (see Figure 28S A), suggesting a major role for
water inside the active site. It is important to also note that all the predicted binding modes have
been obtained following a comprehensive PCA and clustering analyses. Although there is no
guarantee that a complete equilibrium sampling of the nucleotides’ conformations has been
reached, the achieved eigenvalues and the exponential decay of their magnitudes as well as the
observed projections of the trajectories on the dominant eigenvectors (see Figure 3) suggest that
an adequate conformational sampling for the catalytic site has been obtained for all simulations.
RMSD conformational clustering analyses were then used to identify and to study the dominant
conformations suggested by our PCA projections. Of the various clustering metrics described in
the literature20 [refs], we used the elbow criterion and the DBI index as a measure for clustering
convergence 42. These two metrics have been extensively tested and validated to study MD
trajectories20 and the visualization of clustering convergence using these metrics is obvious.
Here, we have applied this methodology by calculating the percentage of variance found within
the data after each attempt to extract a new cluster from the simulated systems. As the number of
clusters exceeds the optimal number, the percentage of variance plateaus, and the DBI exhibits a
local minimum, indicating a complete extraction of the significant information included in the
MD simulations42. This is illustrated in Figures 4 and Figures S12 to S14, where the elbow
criterion suggested different cluster counts for the different bound nucleotides and the numbers
of suggested clusters were in an excellent correlation with the projections obtained from PCA
(see Figure 3).
The proposed binding modes not only explain how each nucleotide is interacting within
the catalytic site, but can also suggest positions within these nucleotides to modify without
affecting their hydrogen bond network. Since any drug designed to occupy the catalytic site has

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

to be a derivative of a natural nucleotide, studying the hydrogen bond patterns and their
persistence throughout the simulations for the individual nucleotides is tremendously important.
If a loss of a particular hydrogen bond is not significant in altering the alignment of a given
nucleotide within the catalytic site, then a modification at this position would be tolerable by the
polymerase. Tolerable modifications at the i+1 and i+2 sites are also desirable and can also
provide further protection for the incorporated drug from the nsp14 ExoN9, 18-19. For example,
our modelling explains how the 1`-ribose cyano substitution in remdesivir is not only allowed
within the active site, but also improves the electrostatic interactions relative to its parent
scaffold, ATP. This cyano group forms an extra hydrogen bond with the template nucleotide at
the (i+1) position (see Figure 5C) and its negative electrostatic potential is completely buried
within a positive electrostatic potential cage formed by the nsp12 residues S682, T687, A688,
N691, K545, V557 (see Figure 8). This provided remdesivir with a significantly favourable
electrostatic energy (~-100 kcal/mole) and with almost no difference in its vdW energy (~zero
kcal/mole), relative to ATP. This data is supported by the recent findings from Gordan et al.13,
where their competitive inhibition RNA synthesis data suggested that remdesivir can compete
with its natural counterpart, ATP and showed that the drug can be indeed incorporated within the
polymerase more efficiently compared to ATP, with an IC50 of ~32 nM 13. It is important to note
that we used ATP as a reference in all our energy calculations as it was previously identified as
the natural substrate of the SARS-CoV polymerase21.
Among all possible substitutions that can be integrated within the nucleotides, our
modelling suggests that only modifications at the 1`-ribose and 3`-ribose as well as possible
substations in the bases would be acceptable for a nucleotide to move from position i to positions
i+1 and i+2 (see Figures 6 & 9). These possible substitution points in the bound nucleotides’
structures do not participate in any important interactions with the surrounding environment and
can allow small modifications. The observed solvent accessible surface area (SASA) for the
different nucleotides at positions (i) and (i+1) are ranging from 250 Åଶ for the uracil nucleotide at
position (i+1) to 360 Åଶ for remdesivir at position (i) (see Figure S26). This SASA data can
provide guidance on the allowable sizes for nucleotides’ modifications at the different sites
within the polymerase. As discussed above, it is important for a modified nucleotide to be
translocated from the (i) position to a further position within the nascent RNA strand to be
protected from the nsp14 ExoN9. Our findings also show that the first 5 nucleotides (from
position i+1 to i+5) in both RNA strands are very stable, indicating their tight binding and
optimal interactions with the nsp12 polymerase residues forming the RNA channel (see Figures
S9 and S10). A clear example of these strong interactions is the hydrogen bond network formed
at the template entrance, where residues such as R569, K500 and N507 play a major role in
orchestrating the hydrogen bond network stabilizing the RNA template nucleotides (see Figure
S7). These hydrogen bonds are very stable and persistent throughout the MD simulations for
both FREE and BOUND systems (see Figures S17 & S18).
A major finding from the current study is the identification of three “druggable” binding
sites within the nsp12 RdRp (see Figure 1 and Figure S27). It is important to emphasize that
recognizing these pockets directly in the initial Cryo-EM structures would not be possible. This
is evident by our water shell analysis, which shows that the number of water molecules entering
these pockets maximizes only after a significant time of our MD simulations and is almost
ZERO during the first few nano seconds (see Figure S28). Furthermore, identifying the β-hairpin
pocket (see results) would not be possible in the earlier SARS-CoV-2 polymerase studies, which
used the nsp12 from CoV-1 as a template. As discussed above, the available CoV-1Cryo-EM

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

structure lacks the first 116 residues20, which encompass the n-terminal β-hairpin loop (D29K50) and a major part of the NiRAN domain of nsp12. The electrostatic map for this pocket is
shown in Figure S30 and reveals a sizable rectangular pocket, extending along the β-hairpin
loop, with a nicely distributed electrostatic potential, showing a negative electrostatic middle
core in between two electrostatic positive regions at the north and south borders of the binding
site. This β-hairpin pocket can accommodate at least ~100 water molecules as indicated by our
water shell analysis (see Figure S28). Our second pocket (pocket 2) is located within the NiRAN
interface domain of nsp12 (see Figures 1 and S27). This is a smaller pocket, relative to the βhairpin pocket and is formed by the nsp12 residues V315 to P323, F326 to P328, Y346 to E350,
T394 to F396 to C622 to L630, S664, M666, V675 to P678. This pocket is relatively rigid,
compared to other residues within the NiRAN interface domain, as indicated by the atomic
fluctuations data shown in Figure S31. The third pocket (pocket 3) is located close to the active
site in a cavity between the primer and template strands (see Figures 1 and S27). Comparing
these binding sites to the four know HCV allosteric sites16, 22 reveals interesting observation (see
Figure S32). While pocket 2 and the hairpin pocket identified in the current study seem to be
unique to nsp12, due to its distinctive organization, the identified pocket 3 overlaps with the two
palm pockets in the HCV polymerase. This comparison also illustrates the clear differences in
the architecture between the SARS-CoV-2 and HCV polymerase structures. For example, while
the two polymerases share the same right-hand fold with clear fingers, thump and palm
subdomains as well as a conserved catalytic site, the nsp12 includes two additional subdomains,
namely the NiRAN and its interface subdomain. Furthermore, while the β-hairpin loop is located
within the thump domain of the HCV polymerase (see Figure S32), in nsp12, the β-hairpin is
located within the n-terminal and in a close proximity to the nsp12 NiRAN domain and very far
from the nsp12 thump domain. Our accelerated MD simulations and druggability analysis
suggest that pocket 2 is the most druggable among the three identified pockets. Its average
volume was around 352.73 Åଷ with an average LR druggability score ranging between
0.87±0.12 to 0.94±0.04 and CNN scores ranging between 0.93±0.17 to 0.8±0.24, for the
accelerated versus classical simulations. These druggability scores are significantly higher than
what were observed for the β-hairpin pocket and pocket 3. Residues in pocket 2 also showed
very strong correlated dynamics with the catalytic site residues (see Figure 10). Particularly
residues P627, N628, M629, L630, S664, M666, V675 and K676 from pocket 2 seem to be
highly correlated with the catalytic site resides T680, K621, C622, D623 and S682. This suggests
that targeting this pocket can have a significant impact on the catalytic activity of the SARSCoV-2 polymerase.
As the burden of the novel corona virus, SARS-CoV-2, in the world is immense, there is
an urgent and rapid need for innovative and effective treatment options against COVID-19.
Furthermore, the short life cycle and virulence of SARS-CoV-2 provide a very short window for
effective therapeutic intervention. This implies that focusing on a single viral target/binding site
may not be enough to overcome the virus before developing severe symptoms or death, and
raises an urgent need to add more druggable options (e.g. allosteric sites) within the viral
proteins. In this context, we hope the abovementioned findings help expedite the rational
discovery of potent and more effective treatments against SARS-CoV-2 infection. We also hope
the newly reported allosteric binding sites in this work provide more drug intervention
possibilities against the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase beyond conventional nucleoside analogs.
Conclusion

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SARS-CoV-2 is an enveloped, positive-sense RNA virus and has been identified as the cause of
COVID-191. Replication of the SARS-CoV-2 genome is a fundamental step in the virus life
cycle and inhibiting the SARS-CoV2 replicase machinery has been proven recently as a
promising approach in combating the virus2. A successful proof of concept is remdesivir, a
nucleoside analog (NA) drug that has been repurposed recently against COVID-193. Studying
the structure and dynamics of the CoV-2 viral replicase can lead to the discovery of important
regions and novel druggable hotspots to inhibit the replicase activity. It can also provide deep
insights on the hydrogen bond networks formed within the polymerase structure and the
important role played by water molecules in mediating these networks.
Earlier efforts to study the CoV-2 polymerase used CoV-1 structures as templates8-9, 13-14.
These earlier studies were focused mainly on the active site of the polymerase and on
understanding the mode of binding of a substrate within this site. In doing so, most of these
studies did not consider the dynamicity of the polymerase complex and did not study the
hydrogen bond networks to the depth provided in the current work. Additionally, none of these
studies investigated the CoV-2 polymerase complex for possible allosteric sites or studied the
correlated dynamics within the polymerase structure8-9, 13-14.
The recent SARS-CoV-2 polymerase cryo-EM structures5, 11 provide a unique
opportunity to fill this gap in knowledge using a more accurate structure. Therefore, the focus of
the current study was to use these structures to analyze the hydrogen bond networks at the active
site and at the template entry in the presence of water, study the binding modes of the nucleotides
at the active site, highlight positions for acceptable nucleotides’ substitutions that can be
tolerated at different positions within the nascent RNA strand, identify possible allosteric sites
within the polymerase structure and study their correlated motion with the catalytic site.
To achieve these goals, we combined classical and accelerated molecular dynamics
simulations with principal component analyses, conformational clustering, free energy
calculations, binding site identification tools and correlated dynamics. The present work provides
an overall view of the nsp7-nsp8-nsp12 replicase complex, with the resolution of a single atom
and with the ability to observe small and large conformational changes in the context of a bound
RNA. Our findings analyze the hydrogen bond networks at various parts of the polymerase
structure and suggest possible nucleotides’ substitutions that can be tolerated by the polymerase
complex. We also report here three “druggable” allosteric sites within the nsp12 RdRp that can
be targeted by small molecule inhibitors. Our correlated motion analysis reveals a connection
between the dynamics within these new identified sites and the polymerase active site, indicating
that targeting these sites can impact the catalytic activity of the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase.
Methods
Preparation of the nsp12-nsp8-nsp7-RNA complex. The recent SARS-CoV-2 polymerase
cryo-electron microscopy structures (PDB IDs: 6M715 and 7BV211) were used to construct the
nsp7-nsp8-nsp12-RNA assembly. In this context, the 7BV2 structure was used to build the initial
complex, as it included a bound RNA and an incorporated remdesivir drug within the RNA
primer chain. While this structure provided a good starting point to model the nsp12-RNA
complex, it suffered from various anomalies. For example, the trio-aspartate residues D618,
D670 and D671 as well as the two magnesium ions were not properly positioned at their
coordination conformation. Furthermore, this structure lacked a complete nsp8 monomer that has
been reported to interact with the nsp7 protein on the surface of nsp12 [ref]. This structure also

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

lacked various residues in nsp7, nsp8 and snp12 (highlighted in blue in Figure S33) (See
supplementary data). To incorporate the missing nsp8 monomer, we used the SARS-CoV-2
polymerase structure (PDB ID: 6M71), which included a nsp8 dimer, with one of the nsp8
monomers was correctly positioned to interact with nsp7. Missing residues in all three proteins
were added using homology modelling tools. The full sequences for the three proteins were
obtained from the 7BV2 related files as deposited in the Protein Data Bank. For selecting the
best templates to incorporate the missing residues, sequence alignments were performed in
BLASTP suite using BLOSUM62 algorithm. Through this process BLOSUM62 identified chain
A of the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase complex (PDB ID: 6M71) as the best template for nsp12 and
chain C of the same structure for nsp8. On the other hand, it identified the bound nsp7 in the
nsp7-nsp8 complex (PDB ID: 6WIQ) as the best template for nsp7. Several homology models
were built using I-TASSER, Modeller Suite and SWISS-MODEL. The highest quality model
based on QMEAN scoring function, Ramachandran plots and ERRAT error values was
ultimately chosen (from SWISS-MODEL). It is worth mentioning that our use of homology
modelling was not meant to construct the whole structures of nsp7, nsp8 and nsp12 from scratch,
as these structures were properly determined at a 2.5Å resolution and, overall, they were
correctly folded, particularly at the proteins’ interfaces (i.e. 6M71) and at the interaction sites of
nsp12 and the bound RNA (i.e. 7BV2). Our use of homology modelling was mainly focused on
incorporating missing residues that formed critical discontinued regions within the protein
structures. Therefore, our final constructed nsp12-nsp7-nsp8-RNA complex included the
continues residues’ sequences V30 to E919 for nsp12; S1 to E73 for nsp7; and M67 to N192 for
NSP8. Our final structure also included the RNA primer sequence (GCUAUGUGAGAUUAA
GUUAU)
and
the
RNA
template
sequence
(UUUUUUUUUUAUAA
CU
UAAUCUCACAUAGC).
Preparation of Bound and Incorporated Substrates. The active site of the SARS-CoV-2
polymerase is formed by the conserved polymerase motifs A-G in its palm domain, similar to
other RNA polymerases23. Given this conserved nature of the polymerase among RNA viruses,
we used the structure of the hepatitis C virus (HCV) polymerase, NS5B, in complex with ppsofosbuvir (PDB ID: 4WTG)24 to guide our modelling of the metal coordination within the
SARS-CoV-2 nsp12 active site. To do that, we used the software MOE25 to superimpose the
SARS-CoV-2 and HCV polymerase structures and to manually orient the three aspartate residues
D618, D670 and D871 (corresponding to D220, D318 and D319 in HCV) to be properly
positioned to coordinate the two magnesium ions. It is worth mentioning that the nsp12 SARSCoV-2 structure (PDB ID: 7BV2) contained three magnesium ions. Only two of these ions were
kept in our model and were positioned at their correct coordination sites, with guidance from the
HCV NS5B structure. To accurately position the incoming nucleotide triphosphate (NTP) within
the nsp12 active site, we first removed the incorporated remdesivir from the primer chain in the
nsp12 complex (PDB ID: 7BV2) and used the bound sofosbuvir diphosphate in the HCV NS5B
structure (PDB ID: 4WTG) as a guidance to position remdesivir triphosphate. We then used this
model to create four additional complexes for the four possible types of RNA nucleotides (i.e.
ATP, CTP, GTP and UTP). Therefore, we created five different active site-bound systems in
total. To construct models for the incorporated nucleotides within the primer chain, we used the
incorporated remdesivir in the 7BV2 structure as a starting point and modified its bound
chemical structure to other nucleotides’ structures (i.e. A, C, G and U) using the MOE
software25. We also modified the template complementary nucleotide (at position i) to the correct

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

base-paring matching structure for each nucleotide. Therefore, in addition to the five bound
systems, we have also constructed four polymerase structures representing the incorporation of
the four different types of RNA nucleotides in the RNA chain.
Protonation States Adjustment. Protonation states of all ionizable residues for the nine systems
described above were calculated using the program PDB2PQR at pH 726. Protein residues were
then visualized and carefully inspected to ensure that their correct protonation states were
predicted by PDB2PQR. For example, the three catalytic aspartate residues (D220, D318 and
D319) were deprotonated to provide a negatively charged environment for the two positively
charged magnesium ions. The nearby aspartate, D623 was also deprotonated. Lysine residues
K798, K551, K621as well as the serine residue S759 were all protonated. All ZINC chelating
cysteine residues (i.e. C301-C306 and C487-C645) were deprotonated and their corresponding
histidine residues (H295 and H642) were protonated at their epsilon positions.
Classical MD Simulations. The nine protein-RNA complexes, described above, were subjected
to classical MD simulations at a temperature of 300 K, employing the software NAMD27 at
physiological pH (pH 7) and using the all-hydrogen AMBER99SB force field. Charges for the
bound remdesivir and four nucleotides were calculated at the semi-empirical AM1-BCC
procedures in Antechamber 28 and their force field parameters were prepared according to the
generalized amber force field (GAFF) 29. All systems were immersed in the center of a TIP3P
water cube after adjusting the protonation states of proteins, RNA and bound ligands. The cube
dimensions were chosen to provide at least a 14 Å buffer of water molecules around each
complex. The total initial charge for the five nucleotide-bound protein-RNA complexes were -42
and were -38 for the four nucleotide-free complexes. To neutralize and prepare the protein-RNA
complexes with a physiological ionic concentration (i.e. 150 mM), chloride and sodium ions
were introduced by replacing water molecules having the highest electrostatic energies on their
oxygen atoms. In total we added 181 sodium and 140 chloride ions to the nucleotide-bound
systems and added 178 sodium and 140 chloride ions to the nucleotide-free systems. Following
an MD protocol similar to our earlier published work [ref], the fully solvated-ionized systems
were then minimized and subsequently heated gradually to the simulation temperature with
heavy restraints placed on all backbone atoms of the proteins and RNA as well as on the bound
ligands, metal ions and their coordinating amino acids. Following heating, the systems were
equilibrated using periodic boundary conditions for 200 ps and energy restraints were reduced to
zero in successive steps of the MD simulations. The simulations were then continued for ~100 ns
and atomic coordinates were collected at intervals of 0.1 ps for subsequent analyses.
Principal component analysis. The active site residues for all nine systems was subjected to
principal component analysis (PCA). This analysis transforms the original space of correlated
variables from the MD trajectories into a reduced space of independent variables comprising the
essential dynamics of each system39. We focused in this analysis on the bound/incorporated
nucleotide, the base paring RNA nucleotide (+1), the two magnesium ions, and all heavy atoms
of 18 nsp12 residues forming the catalytic site (i.e. K551, R555, D618, P620, K621, C622,
D623, T680, S682, G683, T687, A688, N691, S759, D760, D761 and K798). To perform PCA
on these atoms, we followed our earlier work30-31, by first fitting the entire MD trajectory for
each system to a reference structure (i.e. the minimized complex). This was important in order to

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

remove all rotations and translations. The covariance matrix was then calculated from the
Cartesian atomic coordinates of the residues mentioned above as follows:

σ ij = ( ri − ri

)( r j −

rj

)

(Eq. 1)

The eigenvectors of the covariance matrix constitute the essential vectors of the motion. It is
generally accepted that the larger an eigenvalue, the more important its corresponding
eigenvector in the collective motion. To ensure completeness of conformational sampling of the
active site residues and the bound nucleotides, we projected the whole trajectory for these
residues, for each system, on the first and second eigenvectors as well as on the second and third
eigenvectors.
Clustering Analysis Protocol. To analyze the conformational dynamics of the bound
nucleotides and to extract their dominant mode(s) of binding within the active site, we carried
out RMSD conformational clustering on the whole MD trajectories. We used the average-linkage
algorithm as implemented in the CPPTRAJ utility of AMBER18 using cluster counts ranging
from 2 to 100 clusters. The application of the average-linkage algorithm, among other clustering
algorithms, to MD trajectories has been validated in recent studies.32. To perform the clustering
analysis, we focused on all atoms of the bound/incorporated nucleotide by first performing an
RMSD fitting of these atoms to their minimized initial structure conformation in order to remove
overall rotation and translation. These atoms were clustered into groups of similar conformations
and the optimal numbers of clusters were predicted after evaluation of the Davies-Bouldin index
(DBI)33 and the "elbow criterion"32. A high-quality clustering scheme is expected when a local
minimum in the DBI values coincides with a plateau in the percentage of variance explained by
the data (SSR/SST), while varying the number of clusters.32 The centroid of each cluster, the
structure having the smallest RMSD to all members of the cluster, was then selected as the
cluster representative structure and the dominant structures, representing the dominant clusters,
were then used for further analysis.
Binding Site Identification Analysis. Trajectories from the MD simulations were used to
identify potential allosteric binding sites within the nsp12-nsp7-nsp8-RNA polymerase assembly.
We used three different pocket identification tools to search for these sites. These tools included
fPocket34 COACH35 and Site Finder as implemented in MOE25. Consensus between the three
tools, size and druggability of the identified sites were the main criterion for the final selection
sites to focus on.
Hydrogen Bond Analysis. Hydrogen bond analyses were performed on the whole trajectory of
each of the nine MD systems using the CPPTRAJ tool as implemented in AMBER 18 and
visualization of the hydrogen bonds was performed using the visualization software VMD36. A
hydrogen bond was defined by a cut-off distance of 3.5Å between a donor and acceptor atom and
an absolute angular deviation below 60o from linearity.
Water Hydration Shell Analysis. To determine the available space around the
bound/incorporated nucleotides within the catalytic site, we counted the number of water
molecules representing the first and second solvation shells in their vicinity. To do that, we used
the CPPTRAJ of AMBER 18 to count the number of water molecules within 2Å and 4Å of their
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

structures. We used the same analysis to predict the size of the identified allosteric sites
throughout the whole MD simulations.
Electrostatics Potential Calculations. Electrostatic potentials for nsp12-nsp8-nsp7-RNA
complexes were calculated using the APBS program37 and mapped onto a reduced molecular
surface with the VMD visualization program38. The solute (proteins, RNA and
bound/incorporated nucleotides) were treated as a low dielectric medium (௜௡  1) surrounded
by a high dielectric solvent (௜௡  78.54 for water). The ionic strength was set to 0.1 M. The
low-dielectric region of the protein was defined as the region inaccessible to contact by a 1.4 Å
sphere rolling over the molecular surface, defined by atomic co-ordinates of the MD structure
and vdW radii taken from the all-hydrogen AMBER99SB force field. The electrostatic potential
calculations employed a 125  125  125 grid with a spacing of 1 Å.
Nonbonded energy analysis. All energy calculations for the nonbonded interaction energy
analysis were performed using the NAMD Energy Plugin, Version 1.4 as implemented in the
VMD visualization software. All energy calculations were performed using the all-hydrogen
AMBER99SB force field and using the same parameters and periodic boundary conditions that
were used to run the classical MD simulations described above.
Accelerated MD Simulations. To study the polymerase system in a time and length scale
beyond the limits of classical MD simulations. To do that, we used accelerated MD simulations
(AMDS) module as implemented in AMBER, which applied a boosting potential with a positive
value (ΔV(r)) when the potential energy falls below a certain energy threshold39. We have
applied the dual boosting simulation scheme (iamd = 3), where the boosting potential is applied
to the whole system, and an additional boosting is applied specifically to the torsion angles. The
method has been usefully applied in a number of studies, where a brute force classical simulation
is not sufficient to study the conformational dynamics of a bio-molecular system40-42. For more
discussion about the method, readers are encouraged to consult our recently published work,
where the method was used to study the conformational dynamics of the programmed death
ligand 1 protein (PD-L1)43. Initial system preparation for AMDS was performed using a FREE
CTP system, similar to what has been descibed above. That is, the solvated system was
minimized in four steps: First, a harmonic potential of 100 kcal/mol/Å2 was applied to all
protein/RNA heavy atoms. In the following minimization stages, the restraining potential was
reduced to 50 kcal/mol/Å2, 5 kcal/mol/Å2 and 0 kcal/mol/Å2. At each step, minimization was
performed by the steepest descent method for the first 1000 steps and the conjugated gradient
method for the rest of the 5000 total minimization steps. Each system was then gradually heated
in the NVT ensemble from 0 to 300 K in 100 ps using a Langevin thermostat with a coupling
coefficient of 1.0/ps, and a force constant of 5.0 kcal/mol/Å2 on the protein/RNA heavy atoms,
using a 1 fs integration time step. And then additional two rounds of MD (50 ps each at 300 K)
were performed with decreasing heavy atoms restraint weights reduced from 1, 0.5 to 0.1
kcal/mol/Å2. Finally, each system was again equilibrated for 10 ns by releasing all restrains. This
was followed by 100 ns accelerated MD simulation, and in parallel, an additional 100 ns
classical MD simulation using the AMBER MD simulations package was used as a reference for
the AMDS. For each simulation, the first 20 ns of the simulation was used as an equilibration
phase and was discarded from the analysis. All equilibration and production simulations were
performed at 300 K with Berendsen temperature coupling 44 and 1 atm with isotropic molecule-

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

based scaling and a 2fs integration time step. Long-range Coulombic interactions were handled
using the particle mesh Ewald (PME) method 45. The cut-off distance for the electrostatic and
van der Waals (vdW) energy term was set at 9.0 Å. To avoid edge effects in all calculations,
periodic boundary conditions were applied. To allow for an integration time step of 2 fs, the
SHAKE algorithm 46was applied for all bonds involving hydrogen atoms. Coordinate trajectories
were recorded every 4 ps throughout all production runs.
Druggability Assessment of the Identified Pockets. 500 protein conformations from the last 80
ns of the accelerated MD simulation were samples and used to confirm the existence of the
identified pockets and to evaluate their druggability. Sampled protein conformations were used
as inputs for TRAnsient Pockets in Proteins (TRAPP) – a powerful machine-learning tool for
binding pocket detection and druggability assessment47-48. In its most recent implementation,
TRAPP offers the possibility of assessing the druggability of the detected pockets using either a
logistic regression model (TRAPP-LR) and/or a convolutional neural network model (TRAPPCNN), deep learning model49. These models were trained using publicly available and authorscollected datasets. In their assessment, the models achieved superior performance in identifying
correct druggable pockets for the test dataset, even in challenging protein targets. Both TRAPPLR and TRAPP-CNN use the geometrical as well as the physicochemical properties (e.g. overall
hydrophobicity, hydrogen bond donors and acceptors) gathered over the sampled protein
conformation to calculate druggability scores for the corresponding sampled protein conformers.
In performing this analysis, all sampled protein conformations were fitted on the heavy atoms of
the starting protein coordinates considered for our analysis (the first frame of the last 80 ns of the
MD simulation). We have focused on the three potential pockets identified from classical MD
simulations (see results), namely the β-hairpin pocket, pocket 2 at the NiRAN interface and
pocket 3, close to the active site. The residues center of mass for each pocket were used a
geometric center for the corresponding pocket search. Pocket volumes and druggability scores
were collected and analyzed (See results).
Correlated Dynamics. A residues correlation analysis between the residues constituting each
pocket and the catalytic site was performed using the LMI algorithm implemented in the BIO3d
R library 50. Correlation analysis was performed for 20,000 snapshots extracted from the last 80
ns production simulation and was performed for the classical as well as the accelerated MD
simulations.
Contributions
KHB conceived the study. KB and MA developed and implemented the computational studies
with contributions from YT and MH. KHB drafted the manuscript. MA, YT and MH edited the
manuscript and analyzed the data.
Acknowledgements
KB acknowledges NSERC Discovery grant and funding from Alberta Cancer Foundation. We
acknowledge the HPC computing facilities provided by Compute Canada.
Conflict of Interests

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

None

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure captions
Figure 1. The overall structure of the nsp-7-nsp8-nsp12 polymerase as constructed in this
work and the location of the three identified allosteric sites. The nsp12 RdRp domain is
bound to nascent and template RNA strands. The β-hairpin pocket, colored in cyan is located in
the proximity of the n-terminal β-hairpin loop (D29-K50). Pocket 2, colored in pink is located
within the NiRAN interface subdomain and is close to the nsp8 monomer. Pocket 3, colored in
mauve, is located close to the catalytic site.
Figure 2. The root mean square deviation (RMSD) and atomic fluctuations (beta factors) of
the backbone atoms of the nsp12 protein in the BOUND systems (A, B) and FREE systems
(2C, D). The RMSD data for both BOUND and FREE systems show that nsp12 behaved
relatively similar. The atomic fluctuations for both BOUND and FREE systems show several
regions with very little flexibility, such as the bound NTPs, the two chelated zinc ions. The most
flexible regions in nsp12 include the n-terminal β-hairpin (D29-K50), the NiRAN subdomain
(D60-R249) and the NiRAN interface subdomain (A250-R365).
Figure 3. Principal component analysis (PCA) on the catalytic site. The magnitudes of the
eigenvalues for the first 10 eigenvectors for the BOUND systems are following an exponential
decay, a feature that is associated with reaching an acceptable sampling of the trajectories.
Projections of the trajectories of the BOUND systems on the first and second eigenvectors are
also shown.
Figure 4. Conformational clustering of the bound nucleotides’ trajectories. Clustering
metrics observed for different cluster counts are shown as well as the clusters’ sizes at the
predicted optimal number of clusters for both remdesivir (A, B) and ATP (C, D).
Figure 5. Binding modes of ATP and remdesivir. Superposition of the centroids of each
cluster for ATP (A) and remdesivir (B). The superimposed centroids are coloured by the ranking
of their corresponding clusters, where a red colour represents a higher ranking. C) The main
mode of binding from the largest cluster for remdesivir reveals the intricate hydrogen bonding
network formed within the catalytic site. The triphosphate group from remdesivir are
coordinating the two divalent magnesium ions, which are are also coordinated by the carbocyclic
groups from the three deprotonated catalytic aspartates (D616, D670 and D671). The phosphate
groups from remdesivir are further aligned in their position through at least two hydrogen bonds
with the protonated K621. There is also an additional hydrogen bond between the remdesivir
base and S682. This interaction is further strengthened through a hydrogen bond between the
backbones of A558 and S682.
Figure 6. The dominant modes of binding for the four types of RNA nucleotides. The
positions for the 1’-ribose and 1’-ribose hydrogens are represented by vdW mauve spheres, to
highlight the available space in their locations for possible substitutions. A) The ATP dominant
mode of binding is very similar to that of remdesivir. B) The dominant mode reveals an
interesting role for water molecules in coordinating the hydrogen bond network. C) The GTP
mode of binding retains the preserved coordination between the its phosphate groups and the two
divalent magnesium ions. the lost hydrogen bond with D623 is compensated for by a hydrogen
bond with T680. D) The UTP mode of binding shows a more intricate water network.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 7. The hydrogen bond network associated with the RNA template strand at the
entrance to the catalytic site for the remdesivir. The protonated R569 plays a major role in
orchestrating the hydrogen bond network network. The backbone of S501 forms two hydrogen
bonds with the backbone of the two nucleotides preceding the (i) site. An additional hydrogen
bond is formed between N507 with the last nucleotide in the template strand.
Figure 8. Electrostatic potential map. A) The electrostatic potential mapped over the whole
polymerase complex. The negative electrostatic potential of the RNA strands is surrounded by a
predominantly positive potential from the surrounding basic proteins’ residues. B) The
electrostatic potential view of the catalytic site with the bound remdesivir. The side chains for
K545, V557, K621, D623, S682, T687, A688 and N691, form a positive potential cage for the
bound remdesivir nucleotide and its complementary template base, UMP, where the negative
electrostatic potential of the 1’-ribose cyano substitution is completely buried between S682,
T687, A688, N691from one side, and K545, V557 from the other side.
Figure 9. Possible nucleotides’ substitutions positions at the i+1 and i+2 sites. The
interactions of the RNA nascent nucleotides at position i+1 (A) and i+2 (B). Possible nucleotide
substitutions positions are highlighted in green. Substitutions at these positions are predicted to
be tolerable by the surrounding environment.
Figure 10. Druggability and correlated analyses. A) Boxplots showing the volume and
druggability scores distribution for 500 snapshots extracted from the classical and the accelerated
trajectories for the three pockets. B & C) residue correlation heatmaps focused on the catalytic
residues relative to residues forming pocket 2.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 7.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 8.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 9.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 10.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.
Zhu, N.; Zhang, D.; Wang, W.; Li, X.; Yang, B.; Song, J.; Zhao, X.; Huang, B.; Shi, W.;
Lu, R.; Niu, P.; Zhan, F.; Ma, X.; Wang, D.; Xu, W.; Wu, G.; Gao, G. F.; Tan, W.; China Novel
Coronavirus, I.; Research, T., A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China,
2019. N Engl J Med 2020, 382 (8), 727-733.
2.
Zhou, P.; Yang, X. L.; Wang, X. G.; Hu, B.; Zhang, L.; Zhang, W.; Si, H. R.; Zhu, Y.; Li,
B.; Huang, C. L.; Chen, H. D.; Chen, J.; Luo, Y.; Guo, H.; Jiang, R. D.; Liu, M. Q.; Chen, Y.;
Shen, X. R.; Wang, X.; Zheng, X. S.; Zhao, K.; Chen, Q. J.; Deng, F.; Liu, L. L.; Yan, B.; Zhan,
F. X.; Wang, Y. Y.; Xiao, G. F.; Shi, Z. L., A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new
coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature 2020, 579 (7798), 270-273.
3.
Gordon, C. J.; Tchesnokov, E. P.; Feng, J. Y.; Porter, D. P.; Gotte, M., The antiviral
compound remdesivir potently inhibits RNA-dependent RNA polymerase from Middle East
respiratory syndrome coronavirus. J Biol Chem 2020, 295 (15), 4773-4779.
4.
Huang, J.; Song, W.; Huang, H.; Sun, Q., Pharmacological Therapeutics Targeting RNADependent RNA Polymerase, Proteinase and Spike Protein: From Mechanistic Studies to
Clinical Trials for COVID-19. J Clin Med 2020, 9 (4).
5.
Gao, Y.; Yan, L.; Huang, Y.; Liu, F.; Zhao, Y.; Cao, L.; Wang, T.; Sun, Q.; Ming, Z.;
Zhang, L.; Ge, J.; Zheng, L.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, H.; Zhu, Y.; Zhu, C.; Hu, T.; Hua, T.; Zhang, B.;
Yang, X.; Li, J.; Yang, H.; Liu, Z.; Xu, W.; Guddat, L. W.; Wang, Q.; Lou, Z.; Rao, Z., Structure
of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase from COVID-19 virus. Science 2020.
6.
Hao, W.; Wojdyla, J. A.; Zhao, R.; Han, R.; Das, R.; Zlatev, I.; Manoharan, M.; Wang,
M.; Cui, S., Crystal structure of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus helicase. PLoS
Pathog 2017, 13 (6), e1006474.
7.
Ma, Y.; Wu, L.; Shaw, N.; Gao, Y.; Wang, J.; Sun, Y.; Lou, Z.; Yan, L.; Zhang, R.; Rao,
Z., Structural basis and functional analysis of the SARS coronavirus nsp14-nsp10 complex. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015, 112 (30), 9436-41.
8.
Neogi, U.; Hill, K. J.; Ambikan, A. T.; Heng, X.; Quinn, T. P.; Byrareddy, S. N.;
Sonnerborg, A.; Sarafianos, S. G.; Singh, K., Feasibility of Known RNA Polymerase Inhibitors
as Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Drugs. Pathogens 2020, 9 (5).
9.
Shannon, A.; Le, N. T.; Selisko, B.; Eydoux, C.; Alvarez, K.; Guillemot, J. C.; Decroly,
E.; Peersen, O.; Ferron, F.; Canard, B., Remdesivir and SARS-CoV-2: Structural requirements at
both nsp12 RdRp and nsp14 Exonuclease active-sites. Antiviral Res 2020, 178, 104793.
10.
Imbert, I.; Guillemot, J. C.; Bourhis, J. M.; Bussetta, C.; Coutard, B.; Egloff, M. P.;
Ferron, F.; Gorbalenya, A. E.; Canard, B., A second, non-canonical RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase in SARS coronavirus. EMBO J 2006, 25 (20), 4933-42.
11.
Yin, W.; Mao, C.; Luan, X.; Shen, D. D.; Shen, Q.; Su, H.; Wang, X.; Zhou, F.; Zhao,
W.; Gao, M.; Chang, S.; Xie, Y. C.; Tian, G.; Jiang, H. W.; Tao, S. C.; Shen, J.; Jiang, Y.; Jiang,
H.; Xu, Y.; Zhang, S.; Zhang, Y.; Xu, H. E., Structural basis for inhibition of the RNAdependent RNA polymerase from SARS-CoV-2 by remdesivir. Science 2020.
12.
Lehmann, K. C.; Gulyaeva, A.; Zevenhoven-Dobbe, J. C.; Janssen, G. M.; Ruben, M.;
Overkleeft, H. S.; van Veelen, P. A.; Samborskiy, D. V.; Kravchenko, A. A.; Leontovich, A. M.;
Sidorov, I. A.; Snijder, E. J.; Posthuma, C. C.; Gorbalenya, A. E., Discovery of an essential
nucleotidylating activity associated with a newly delineated conserved domain in the RNA
polymerase-containing protein of all nidoviruses. Nucleic Acids Res 2015, 43 (17), 8416-34.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

13.
Gordon, C. J.; Tchesnokov, E. P.; Woolner, E.; Perry, J. K.; Feng, J. Y.; Porter, D. P.;
Gotte, M., Remdesivir is a direct-acting antiviral that inhibits RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 with high potency. J Biol Chem 2020, 295
(20), 6785-6797.
14.
Elfiky, A. A., SARS-CoV-2 RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) targeting: an in
silico perspective. J Biomol Struct Dyn 2020, 1-9.
15.
Snijder, E. J.; Decroly, E.; Ziebuhr, J., The Nonstructural Proteins Directing Coronavirus
RNA Synthesis and Processing. Adv Virus Res 2016, 96, 59-126.
16.
Li, H.; Shi, S. T., Non-nucleoside inhibitors of hepatitis C virus polymerase: current
progress and future challenges. Future Med Chem 2010, 2 (1), 121-41.
17.
Ganta, N. M.; Gedda, G.; Rathnakar, B.; Satyanarayana, M.; Yamajala, B.; Ahsan, M. J.;
Jadav, S. S.; Balaraju, T., A review on HCV inhibitors: Significance of non-structural
polyproteins. Eur J Med Chem 2019, 164, 576-601.
18.
Graepel, K. W.; Agostini, M. L.; Lu, X.; Sexton, N. R.; Denison, M. R., Fitness Barriers
Limit Reversion of a Proofreading-Deficient Coronavirus. J Virol 2019, 93 (20).
19.
Agostini, M. L.; Andres, E. L.; Sims, A. C.; Graham, R. L.; Sheahan, T. P.; Lu, X.;
Smith, E. C.; Case, J. B.; Feng, J. Y.; Jordan, R.; Ray, A. S.; Cihlar, T.; Siegel, D.; Mackman, R.
L.; Clarke, M. O.; Baric, R. S.; Denison, M. R., Coronavirus Susceptibility to the Antiviral
Remdesivir (GS-5734) Is Mediated by the Viral Polymerase and the Proofreading
Exoribonuclease. mBio 2018, 9 (2).
20.
Shao, J.; Tanner, S. W.; Thompson, N.; Cheatham, T. E., Clustering Molecular Dynamics
Trajectories: 1. Characterizing the Performance of Different Clustering Algorithms. J Chem
Theory Comput 2007, 3 (6), 2312-34.
21.
te Velthuis, A. J.; Arnold, J. J.; Cameron, C. E.; van den Worm, S. H.; Snijder, E. J., The
RNA polymerase activity of SARS-coronavirus nsp12 is primer dependent. Nucleic Acids Res
2010, 38 (1), 203-14.
22.
Beaulieu, P. L., Recent advances in the development of NS5B polymerase inhibitors for
the treatment of hepatitis C virus infection. Expert Opin Ther Pat 2009, 19 (2), 145-64.
23.
Ferrero, D.; Ferrer-Orta, C.; Verdaguer, N., Viral RNA-Dependent RNA Polymerases: A
Structural Overview. Subcell Biochem 2018, 88, 39-71.
24.
Appleby, T. C.; Perry, J. K.; Murakami, E.; Barauskas, O.; Feng, J.; Cho, A.; Fox, D.,
3rd; Wetmore, D. R.; McGrath, M. E.; Ray, A. S.; Sofia, M. J.; Swaminathan, S.; Edwards, T. E.,
Viral replication. Structural basis for RNA replication by the hepatitis C virus polymerase.
Science 2015, 347 (6223), 771-5.
25.
Vilar, S.; Cozza, G.; Moro, S., Medicinal chemistry and the molecular operating
environment (MOE): application of QSAR and molecular docking to drug discovery. Curr Top
Med Chem 2008, 8 (18), 1555-72.
26.
Dolinsky, T. J.; Nielsen, J. E.; McCammon, J. A.; Baker, N. A., PDB2PQR: an
automated pipeline for the setup of Poisson-Boltzmann electrostatics calculations. Nucleic Acids
Res 2004, 32 (Web Server issue), W665-7.
27.
Grindon, C.; Harris, S.; Evans, T.; Novik, K.; Coveney, P.; Laughton, C., Large-scale
molecular dynamics simulation of DNA: implementation and validation of the AMBER98 force
field in LAMMPS. Philos Transact A Math Phys Eng Sci 2004, 362 (1820), 1373-86.
28.
Wang, J.; Wang, W.; Kollman, P. A.; Case, D. A., Automatic atom type and bond type
perception in molecular mechanical calculations. Journal of molecular graphics & modelling
2006, 25 (2), 247-60.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

29.
Hornak, V.; Abel, R.; Okur, A.; Strockbine, B.; Roitberg, A.; Simmerling, C.,
Comparison of multiple Amber force fields and development of improved protein backbone
parameters. Proteins 2006, 65 (3), 712-25.
30.
Barakat, K. H.; Law, J.; Prunotto, A.; Magee, W. C.; Evans, D. H.; Tyrrell, D. L.;
Tuszynski, J.; Houghton, M., Detailed Computational Study of the Active Site of the Hepatitis C
Viral RNA Polymerase to Aid Novel Drug Design. Journal of chemical information and
modeling 2013, 53 (11), 3031-3043.
31.
Barakat, K.; Mane, J.; Friesen, D.; Tuszynski, J., Ensemble-based virtual screening
reveals dual-inhibitors for the p53–MDM2/MDMX interactions. Journal of Molecular Graphics
and Modelling 2010, 28 (6), 555-568.
32.
Shao J; Tanner SW; Thompson N; Cheatham TE, Clustering Molecular Dynamics
Trajectories: 1. Characterizing the Performance of Different Clustering Algorithms. Journal of
Chemical Theory and Computation. 2007, 3, 2312.
33.
Davies DL; Bouldin DW, A cluster separation measure. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intelligence 1979, 1, 224.
34.
Le Guilloux, V.; Schmidtke, P.; Tuffery, P., Fpocket: an open source platform for ligand
pocket detection. BMC bioinformatics 2009, 10, 168.
35.
Yang, J.; Roy, A.; Zhang, Y., Protein-ligand binding site recognition using
complementary binding-specific substructure comparison and sequence profile alignment.
Bioinformatics 2013, 29 (20), 2588-95.
36.
http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/.
37.
Konecny, R.; Baker, N. A.; McCammon, J. A., iAPBS: a programming interface to
Adaptive Poisson-Boltzmann Solver (APBS). Comput Sci Discov 2012, 5 (1).
38.
Humphrey, W.; Dalke, A.; Schulten, K., VMD: visual molecular dynamics. J Mol Graph
1996, 14 (1), 33-8, 27-8.
39.
Hamelberg, D.; Mongan, J.; McCammon, J. A., Accelerated molecular dynamics: a
promising and efficient simulation method for biomolecules. The Journal of chemical physics
2004, 120 (24), 11919-29.
40.
Gedeon, P. C.; Thomas, J. R.; Madura, J. D., Accelerated molecular dynamics and
protein conformational change: a theoretical and practical guide using a membrane embedded
model neurotransmitter transporter. Methods Mol Biol 2015, 1215, 253-87.
41.
Zhang, F.; Yuan, Y.; Li, H.; Shen, L.; Guo, Y.; Wen, Z.; Pu, X., Using accelerated
molecular dynamics simulation to shed light on the mechanism of activation/deactivation upon
mutations for CCR5. RSC Advances 2018, 8 (66), 37855-37865.
42.
Markwick, P. R. L.; McCammon, J. A., Studying functional dynamics in bio-molecules
using accelerated molecular dynamics. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2011, 13 (45),
20053-20065.
43.
Ahmed, M.; Barakat, K., The Too Many Faces of PD-L1: A Comprehensive
Conformational Analysis Study. Biochemistry 2017, 56 (40), 5428-5439.
44.
Berendsen, H. J.; Postma, J. v.; van Gunsteren, W. F.; DiNola, A.; Haak, J., Molecular
dynamics with coupling to an external bath. The Journal of chemical physics 1984, 81 (8), 36843690.
45.
Darden, T.; York, D.; Pedersen, L., Particle mesh Ewald: An N⋅ log (N) method for
Ewald sums in large systems. The Journal of chemical physics 1993, 98 (12), 10089-10092.

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.130849; this version posted June 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

46.
Ryckaert, J.-P.; Ciccotti, G.; Berendsen, H. J. C., Numerical integration of the cartesian
equations of motion of a system with constraints: molecular dynamics of n-alkanes. Journal of
Computational Physics 1977, 23 (3), 327-341.
47.
Kokh, D. B.; Richter, S.; Henrich, S.; Czodrowski, P.; Rippmann, F.; Wade, R. C.,
TRAPP: a tool for analysis of transient binding pockets in proteins. J Chem Inf Model 2013, 53
(5), 1235-52.
48.
Stank, A.; Kokh, D. B.; Horn, M.; Sizikova, E.; Neil, R.; Panecka, J.; Richter, S.; Wade,
R. C., TRAPP webserver: predicting protein binding site flexibility and detecting transient
binding pockets. Nucleic Acids Res 2017, 45 (W1), W325-W330.
49.
Yuan, J. H.; Han, S. B.; Richter, S.; Wade, R. C.; Kokh, D. B., Druggability Assessment
in TRAPP Using Machine Learning Approaches. J Chem Inf Model 2020, 60 (3), 1685-1699.
50.
Grant, B. J.; Rodrigues, A. P.; ElSawy, K. M.; McCammon, J. A.; Caves, L. S., Bio3d: an
R package for the comparative analysis of protein structures. Bioinformatics 2006, 22 (21), 26956.

38

