bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.423439; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

SNPnexus COVID: Facilitating the analysis of COVID-19 host
genetics
Jorge Oscanoa1†, Lavanya Sivapalan1†, Maryam Abdollahyan1, Emanuela Gadaleta1 and Claude
Chelala1*
1

Centre for Cancer Biomarkers and Biotherapeutics, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of
London, London EC1M 6BQ, UK
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Claude Chelala, Centre for Cancer Biomarkers and
Biotherapeutics, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, UK. Tel: +44
(0)20 7882 3570]; Email: c.chelala@qmul.ac.uk
†

The authors wish it to be known that the first 2 authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.

ABSTRACT
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic has demanded an
unprecedented scientific response, with researchers collaborating on a global scale to better
understand how host genetics can influence susceptibility to coronavirus infection and the severity of
COVID-19 symptoms. The number of projects directed towards sequencing patients’ genomes has
increased rapidly during this time, with the rate of data generation outpacing the resources available for
analysis and biological interpretation of these datasets. SNPnexus COVID is a cutting-edge web-based
analytical platform that allows researchers to analyse and interpret the functional implications of genetic
variants in COVID-19 patient genomes and to prioritise those that demonstrate clinical utility for the
prevention, management and/or treatment of COVID-19. Our resource links to diverse multifactorial
datasets and information resources that would require substantial time and computational power to
otherwise mine independently. This streamlines biological data interpretation and allows researchers to
better understand the multidimensional characteristics of their data. Importantly, SNPnexus COVID is
powered by the SNPnexus software and follows its intuitive infrastructure, which precludes the need for
programmatic experience in its users.
SNPnexus COVID is freely available at https://www.snp-nexus.org/v4/covid/

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.423439; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
The pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has
presented a crisis for global healthcare systems (1,2). Human SARS-CoV-2 infection can result in
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which has been characterised as an acute respiratory illness,
with most patients displaying flu-like symptoms, such as a fever, cough and dyspnoea (1-3). However,
the range and severity of individual symptoms experienced by patients can vary significantly, indicating
a role for host genetics in impacting the susceptibility and severity of COVID-19 disease. Whilst most
symptomatic infections are known to manifest in mild to moderate respiratory symptoms, severe
pneumonia and complications including cytokine release syndrome, which can lead to multi-organ
dysfunction, have also been observed in cases worldwide (4,5).
Global initiatives to sequence the genomes of patients with COVID-19 have driven an expanding new
field of host genomics research to characterise the genetic determinants of COVID-19 disease (1). The
functional annotation and analysis of incoming genomic data, within a clinically relevant turnaround time,
is therefore imperative given the importance and urgency of research efforts to understand the biology
of SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease.
To address these requirements, we developed SNPnexus COVID: a web-based variant annotation tool,
powered by the SNPnexus software (6).

MATERIAL AND METHODS
Architecture
SNPnexus COVID adopted the SNPnexus software and 3-tiered framework as its underlying query
architecture (as described previously (6)). In this framework, the core annotation process is decoupled
from the scheduler and the web interface to streamline the analytical workflow, increase query response
times and reduce computational burdens, thereby allowing for the management of significantly larger
input uploads.
The range of annotations available from SNPnexus COVID is expansive and tailored for the study and
interpretation of COVID-19 host genetics. One of the major enhancements to the SNPnexus framework
is the ability to handle both single and multiple samples from a sequencing project. This new feature in
conjunction with the filtering system and the new annotations, provides a compelling tool for
prioritisation of relevant variations potentially involved in the different symptomatologies of COVID-19.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.423439; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Data queries
A significant proportion of COVID-19 research has applied whole genome and exome sequencing
approaches for host genotyping. Currently, SNPnexus COVID allows users to submit a total of 200,000
variants per single file and up to a maximum of 12 variant files aligned to the hg38 human genome
assembly. Alternatively, unfiltered vcf files can be uploaded to SNPnexus COVID provided that the user
selects the pre-filtering option to restrict input variants based on gene panels reported to be involved in
SARS-CoV-2 virus-host interaction mechanisms from GENCODE and Genomics England
(https://www.gencodegenes.org/human/covid19_genes.html,
https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co.uk/panels/111/). The annotation of human protein-coding genes
is being updated as part of the GENCODE project (7) to include new transcript models for the study of
disease-associated variants in patients with severe COVID-19. Similarly, Genomics England PanelApp
(8) provides a list of genes associated with susceptibility to viral infection, including SARS-CoV-2.

Data annotations
SNPnexus COVID collates and integrates information from a broad range of annotation datasets and
multifactorial resources (Supplementary Table 1). To the best of our knowledge, there is no resource
dedicated to COVID-19 research available in the public domain that provides the breadth of data and
functionalities offered by SNPnexus COVID.
User-directed filtering options are used to filter uploaded vcf files according to the chromosomal loci of
target genes for functional annotation. Similar to the existing SNPnexus architecture, users can
download queried results in either a per-variant or per-annotation view and/or explore the results online
via a range of interactive graphics and tables.
By enabling users to leverage the expansive datasets that are integrated within our tool, through a
simple online filtering and query system, SNPnexus COVID offers significant scope for the acceleration
of drug discovery efforts.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.423439; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Annotation fields for functional characterisation of variants associated with COVID-19 disease
Gender-based population frequencies: COVID-19 has been shown to have a higher mortality rate
amongst men, as well as in the presence of comorbidities, demonstrating the value of genomic profiling
to identify variants that may underpin a possible gender-dependent susceptibility (9,10). Alternate allele
frequencies for variants within COVID-19 genes can be queried against existing normal population
databases; 1000 Genomes, gnomAD exomes / genomes and HapMap. In SNPnexus COVID, gnomAD
annotations allow for gender-based stratification of population variant allele frequencies across different
populations.
Gene expression queries: Evaluating the impact of genetic variation on the expression of genes
involved in SARS-CoV-2-human interaction is integral for the identification of functional coding variants
that may play a role in the variability of SARS-CoV-2 transmission between populations and/or the
severity of COVID-19 symptoms (11). GTEx tissue-specific and global gene expression profiles for
candidate COVID-19 genes are available in SNPnexus COVID (GTEx v8). Moreover, users can analyse
expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) affecting target gene expression across different cell types and
tissues, to identify genetic determinants of expression.
Network characterisation of Protein-Protein and Drug-Target interactions: The characterisation of drugtarget interaction networks can provide an important tool to identify potential targets amenable to
treatment with existing drugs. The networks available from SNPnexus COVID, based on the proteinprotein and protein-drug interactions, will help users gain a better understanding of the host interactome
(12,13). Variants within candidate COVID-19 genes can be queried against the DrugBank database,
for the analysis of potential genotype-driven therapeutic targets.
Pathway analysis: Data interpretation in context of biological systems is vital to understand biological
features defining a phenotype. Pathway analyses are available to further help understand the host
tissue response to COVID-19. Variants in the query set are mapped to their corresponding genes, which,
in turn, are linked to biological pathways in the Reactome Pathway Database. An interactive table and
Voronoi diagram provide users with a landscape of pathways significantly enriched in the uploaded
variant set.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.423439; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Documentation
A description of input/output formats are available from the online User Guide, with practical
demonstrations of single and multi-sample cohort queries also provided as videos. Results from the
practical

demonstrations

are

available

to

query

from

https://www.snp-

nexus.org/v4/covid/results/sarscov2/ and https://www.snp-nexus.org/v4/covid/cohort/covid_cohort/.

RESULTS
Case of Use
Innovative tools and methods are essential to decode the sequencing data and identify actionable
opportunities for intervention aimed at optimising patient outcomes and their safety. To test the
performance of SNPnexus COVID and its ability to analyse and prioritise actionable targets we
conducted a query using variant files obtained from The COVID-19 Host Genetics Initiative
(https://www.covid19hg.org/).
These files comprise filtered variants aligned to the hg38 genome assembly from the B1, C1 and C2
cohorts (https://www.covid19hg.org/results/) and represent hospitalised/non-hospitalised COVID-19
infected patients as well as a COVID-19 negative population.
A summarised view of variant features allows users to inspect variant classification and type, SNV class,
variant distributions across cohorts/patients and top mutated genes (Figure 1A). Mutations in FYCO1,
IFNAR2 and TYK2, genes linked to increased susceptibility to severe viral infections, including SARSCoV-2, and increased risk of severe acute respiratory syndrome in COVID-19 patients, are present in
the input datasets (14-16). To characterise the mutations in these susceptibility genes further, distinct
mutation hotspots in the cohort can be visualised alongside the resulting amino acid (Figure 1B).
SNPnexus COVID integrates data from IntAct Molecular Interaction Database, the Human Phenotype
Ontology and DrugBank to generate networks that allow users to view proteins of interest, their
associated phenotypes and drugs that target them.
Increased concentration of serum proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines has been correlated with
adverse clinical outcomes in COVID-19 patients. Janus kinases (JAKs), such as TYK2, mediate
intracellular signaling pathways employed by cytokines. As such, targeting the JAK-STAT signaling

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.423439; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

pathway with JAK inhibitors is being investigated for its ability to calm the cytokine release syndrome in
COVID-19 patients (17).
Focusing on TYK2, SNPnexus COVID immediately identified TYK2 as a target for fostamatinib and
tofacitinib (Figure 1C). Both of these drugs are being tested in clinical trials on hospitalised patients with
COVID-19: fostamatinib to accelerate recovery and tofacitinib to suppress the pro-inflammatory
response in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04579393,
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04469114).
The literature identifies anosmia and vascular promotion in COVID-19 patients (18,19). SNPnexus
COVID highlights significant disruptions to GPCR signaling, affecting olfactory signaling pathways
(Figure 1D).
SNPnexus COVID provides researchers with an intuitive web-based resource from which to explore
their results, prioritise functionally and clinically relevant variants, and identify promising candidate
drugs for repurposing.

6

a

c

Fostamatinib
Tofacitinib

b

d

7

Figure 1. Analysis of sequence variations from The COVID-19 Host Genetics Initiative cohort. (a) A summarised view of the variant features in each dataset is
provided, highlighting the variant classification distributions, SNV class and the most mutated genes across the cohorts. (b) The lollipop plot enables visualisation
of mutation hotspots in a gene of interest with the amino acid changes for each gene labelled. (c) The protein-drug interaction network displays TYK2 with its
associated phenotype, interacting proteins (targets) and drugs that target all proteins present. (d) The Voronoi diagram depicts enrichments in Reactome
pathways. TYK2-associated pathways, such as signaling by interleukins and signal transduction, are reported as significantly enriched (p<0.05) in the input
dataset.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.423439; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

DISCUSSION
To maximise the usefulness of sequencing data in COVID-19 research, it is vital to have computational
strategies in place capable of interpreting the data generated and ensuring that the clinically-relevant
findings are translated back to the bedside. SNPnexus COVID provides researchers with access to
extensive computational resources and facilitates the identification of novel biomarker and therapeutic
targets in a timely manner. This optimises national efforts directed towards informing strategies for risk
management within vulnerable populations and shaping clinical decision-making on candidate
therapeutics.
SNPnexus COVID aims to remain abreast of evolving COVID research; the gene lists from GENCODE
and Genomics England are continually updated within the tool. Furthermore, we welcome suggestions
from our user community to expand and improve on the functionalities provided in this COVID-19
release.

AVAILABILITY
SNPnexus COVID is freely available at https://www.snp-nexus.org/v4/covid/
FUNDING
This work was supported by the Barts Charity (grant MGU0344 to C.C.) and QMUL COVID-19 Rapid
Response Impact Acceleration Fund (grant number MIMZ1A1R to C.C.).
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
None declared.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.423439; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

REFERENCES

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

Initiative, C.-H.G. (2020) The COVID-19 Host Genetics Initiative, a global initiative to elucidate the
role of host genetic factors in susceptibility and severity of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic. Eur J
Hum Genet, 28, 715-718.
Zhou, P., Yang, X.L., Wang, X.G., Hu, B., Zhang, L., Zhang, W., Si, H.R., Zhu, Y., Li, B., Huang, C.L. et
al. (2020) A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin.
Nature, 579, 270-273.
Huang, C., Wang, Y., Li, X., Ren, L., Zhao, J., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Fan, G., Xu, J., Gu, X. et al. (2020)
Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet, 395,
497-506.
Aziz, M., Fatima, R. and Assaly, R. (2020) Elevated interleukin-6 and severe COVID-19: A metaanalysis. J Med Virol, 92, 2283-2285.
Ye, Q., Wang, B. and Mao, J. (2020) The pathogenesis and treatment of the `Cytokine Storm' in
COVID-19. J Infect, 80, 607-613.
Oscanoa, J., Sivapalan, L., Gadaleta, E., Dayem Ullah, A.Z., Lemoine, N.R. and Chelala, C. (2020)
SNPnexus: a web server for functional annotation of human genome sequence variation (2020
update). Nucleic Acids Res, 48, W185-W192.
Frankish, A., Diekhans, M., Ferreira, A.M., Johnson, R., Jungreis, I., Loveland, J., Mudge, J.M., Sisu,
C., Wright, J., Armstrong, J. et al. (2019) GENCODE reference annotation for the human and
mouse genomes. Nucleic Acids Res, 47, D766-D773.
Martin, A.R., Williams, E., Foulger, R.E., Leigh, S., Daugherty, L.C., Niblock, O., Leong, I.U.S., Smith,
K.R., Gerasimenko, O., Haraldsdottir, E. et al. (2019) PanelApp crowdsources expert knowledge
to establish consensus diagnostic gene panels. Nat Genet, 51, 1560-1565.
Borges do Nascimento, I.J., Cacic, N., Abdulazeem, H.M., von Groote, T.C., Jayarajah, U.,
Weerasekara, I., Esfahani, M.A., Civile, V.T., Marusic, A., Jeroncic, A. et al. (2020) Novel
Coronavirus Infection (COVID-19) in Humans: A Scoping Review and Meta-Analysis. J Clin Med, 9.
Xie, J., Tong, Z., Guan, X., Du, B. and Qiu, H. (2020) Clinical Characteristics of Patients Who Died
of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. JAMA Netw Open, 3, e205619.
Cao, Y., Li, L., Feng, Z., Wan, S., Huang, P., Sun, X., Wen, F., Huang, X., Ning, G. and Wang, W.
(2020) Comparative genetic analysis of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV/SARS-CoV-2) receptor
ACE2 in different populations. Cell Discov, 6, 11.
Gordon, D.E., Jang, G.M., Bouhaddou, M., Xu, J., Obernier, K., White, K.M., O'Meara, M.J., Rezelj,
V.V., Guo, J.Z., Swaney, D.L. et al. (2020) A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets
for drug repurposing. Nature, 583, 459-468.
Zhou, Y., Hou, Y., Shen, J., Huang, Y., Martin, W. and Cheng, F. (2020) Network-based drug
repurposing for novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV/SARS-CoV-2. Cell Discov, 6, 14.
Elhabyan, A., Elyaacoub, S., Sanad, E., Abukhadra, A., Elhabyan, A. and Dinu, V. (2020) The role of
host genetics in susceptibility to severe viral infections in humans and insights into host genetics
of severe COVID-19: A systematic review. Virus Res, 289, 198163.
Liu, D., Yang, J., Feng, B., Lu, W., Zhao, C. and Li, L. (2020) Mendelian randomization analysis
identified genes pleiotropically associated with the risk and prognosis of COVID-19. medRxiv.
Pairo-Castineira, E., Clohisey, S., Klaric, L., Bretherick, A.D., Rawlik, K., Pasko, D., Walker, S.,
Parkinson, N., Fourman, M.H., Russell, C.D. et al. (2020) Genetic mechanisms of critical illness in
Covid-19. Nature.
Luo, W., Li, Y.X., Jiang, L.J., Chen, Q., Wang, T. and Ye, D.W. (2020) Targeting JAK-STAT Signaling
to Control Cytokine Release Syndrome in COVID-19. Trends Pharmacol Sci, 41, 531-543.
Birch, C.A., Molinar-Inglis, O. and Trejo, J. (2021) Subcellular hot spots of GPCR signaling promote
vascular inflammation. Curr Opin Endocr Metab Res, 16, 37-42.
Pierron, D., Pereda-Loth, V., Mantel, M., Moranges, M., Bignon, E., Alva, O., Kabous, J., Heiske,
M., Pacalon, J., David, R. et al. (2020) Smell and taste changes are early indicators of the COVID19 pandemic and political decision effectiveness. Nat Commun, 11, 5152.

10

