bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A Multi-Phenotype System to Discover Therapies for Age-Related
Dysregulation of the Immune Response to Viral Infections
Brandon White1*, Ben Komalo1, Lauren Nicolaisen1, Matt Donne1, Charlie Marsh1, Rachel M.
DeVay1, An M. Nguyen1, Wendy Cousin1, Jarred Heinrich1, William J. Van Trump1, Tempest
Plott1, Colin J. Fuller1, Dat Nguyen1, Daniel Chen1, Delia Bucher2, Sabine Tyrra2, Laura
Haynes3, George Kuchel3, Jorg Goronzy4, Anis Larbi5, Tamas Fulop6, Diane Heiser7, Ralf
Schwandner2, Christian Elabd1, Ben Kamens1*
1Spring

Discovery Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States; 2Assay.Works GmbH, Regensburg,

Germany; 3University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, CT, United States;
4Stanford

University, Stanford, CA, United States; 5Singapore Immunology Network, Agency for

Science Technology and Research, Singapore; 6University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec,
Canada 7Prelude Therapeutics Inc., Wilmington, DE, United States
*For correspondence: bwhite@springdisc.com, kamens@springdisc.com

ABSTRACT
Age-related immune dysregulation contributes to increased susceptibility to infection and
disease in older adults. We combined high-throughput laboratory automation with machine
learning to build a multi-phenotype aging profile that models the dysfunctional immune response
to viral infection in older adults. From a single well, our multi-phenotype aging profile can
capture changes in cell composition, physical cell-to-cell interaction, organelle structure,
cytokines, and other hidden complexities contributing to age-related dysfunction. This system
allows for rapid identification of new potential compounds to rejuvenate older adults’ immune
response. We used our technology to screen thousands of compounds for their ability to make
old immune cells respond to viral infection like young immune cells. We observed beneficial
effects of multiple compounds, of which two of the most promising were disulfiram and
triptonide. Our findings indicate that disulfiram could be considered as a treatment for severe
coronavirus disease 2019 and other inflammatory infections.
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION
Aging increases risk of infection progressing to severe disease and death.1 The cause of this
increased risk is not well understood, but it is known that the immune system undergoes many
changes as it ages. Some changes impact the innate immune system, such as the
dysregulation of inflammatory responses—otherwise known as “inflamm-aging”—which may
disrupt innate antiviral responses by increasing the resting level of circulating proinflammatory
cytokines.2-4 Other changes associated with age may impair the adaptive immune system,
ranging from relative reductions in naïve T cells and increases in memory/effector T-cell
populations to alterations in signaling pathways, epigenetics, and effector functions.5-11
Collectively, these age-related alterations in the immune system are referred to as
“immunosenescence.”1,6
Yet, while immunosenescence and inflamm-aging have been linked with pathology, both
may also have beneficial effects.2,12 Maintaining a balance between the beneficial effects of
these aging processes while targeting those that are detrimental requires an ability to measure
and model a complex interplay of immune states and phenotypes. Such a model could be a
powerful system for finding potential therapies for the dysregulated viral response in older
adults.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) exemplifies this increased risk of infection leading to
hospitalization or death in older adults.13-15 The disease has disproportionally affected older
adults who suffer from the highest morbidity and mortality.13-15 A study of patients hospitalized
with SARS-CoV-2 infection demonstrated that age at admission was associated with a greater
mortality risk than other factors such as obesity and chronic cardiac disease (age 70–79 years
[HR, 9.6]; age ≥80 years [HR, 13.6]; obesity [HR, 1.4]; chronic cardiac disease [HR, 1.3]).15 In
China, the case fatality rate was 0.4% for patients age 40–49 years and 15% for patients ≥80
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

years of age14; in Italy, 96% of COVID-19 deaths occurred in people ≥60 years of age, while
only 1% of patients under the age of 50 years died.13 Some believe that the increased severity
of COVID-19 in older adults may be exacerbated by the aging immune system.16 The
importance of treating the host immune response was recently demonstrated by a randomly
controlled trial of the anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid dexamethasone. Among hospitalized
patients with COVID-19, the use of dexamethasone lowered 28-day mortality in patients
receiving invasive mechanical ventilation (average age 59) and those receiving oxygen without
ventilation (average age 66).17
This tremendous burden of infection in older adults is not limited to COVID-19. Between
12,000 to 61,000 deaths occur as a result of seasonal influenza in the United States each year,
and approximately 90% of these deaths occur in patients ≥65 years of age.18,19 Between
February and May 2020, the combination of deaths related to pneumonia, COVID-19, or
seasonal influenza among all age groups accounted for 14% of deaths in the United States.20 Of
these deaths, 9% were related to pneumonia, 7% to COVID-19, and 1% to influenza.20 Between
2009 and 2014, adults ≥60 years of age accounted for 70% of the sepsis cases reported in the
United States.21 The mortality rate for sepsis was 16% for patients 60−79 years and 18% for
patients ≥80 years of age.21 In another study, patients >80 years of age with sepsis had an inhospital mortality rate of 47%.22
We have developed a system to discover and target the immune mechanisms that
change with age and lead to dysregulated responses to infection. This system combines data
generated from a high-throughput in vitro laboratory with machine learning to model the
dysfunctional viral response in older adults. We trained the system to accurately detect the
differences between young and old viral immune responses by exposing peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from young and old donors (N=89) to vesicular stomatitis virus
encoding a red fluorescent protein (rVSV-ΔG-mCherry). This virus was chosen because of its
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ability to model the innate immune activation pathways of prevalent respiratory RNA viruses and
because it is safe to use in a high-throughput, biosafety level one laboratory.23,24 The virus
infected the monocytes and macrophages, which subsequently created a highly inflamed
environment for the lymphocytes and other PBMCs. The differences between the young and old
immune response were captured in our system’s multi-phenotype aging profile of viral response,
which contained dozens of features measuring changes in cell composition, physical cell-to-cell
interaction, organelle structure, cytokine levels, and other hidden complexities that contribute to
age-related dysfunction. Many of these features showed significant differences between young
and old viral responses. Since these aging profiles can be generated from a single well, we
used them to assess the effect of 3428 bioactive compounds on the viral immune response of
older adults (Figure 1). We ranked these compounds by combining the features in the multiphenotype aging profiles into scores that measured their beneficial effect on immune aging and
disease-specific phenotypes. Among others, the ranking revealed disulfiram and triptonide as
two promising compounds that restored multiple aspects of the viral immune response of old
PBMCs to a younger state. The scalability and generalizability of our system enables a novel
characterization of the aging immune system that could be used to help sustain the health of
older adults over their lifetime.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1. The system produces a multi-phenotype aging profile to measure
immunosenescence.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

RESULTS
Classification of Cell Types Based on Unbiased Morphological Analysis
The first feature we focused on in our multi-phenotype aging profile was cell composition. We
built a scalable method for classifying immune cell types within bulk PBMCs based on cell
morphology, because traditional methods for measuring cell composition were unable to scale
to the needs of our high-throughput system and recent studies have shown that functional
changes in cells can affect their shape while changes in shape can in turn alter their cellular
function.25-27 To highlight a diverse range of morphological changes, the cells were stained with
cell painting palettes that broadly characterized a variety of subcellular compartments such as
the nucleus, cytoskeleton, mitochondria, and cell membrane.28 To understand and verify the
morphological differences between immune cell types, we first isolated PBMCs from whole
blood and then further isolated T cells (CD3+), B cells (CD19+), natural killer (NK) cells (CD56+),
and monocytes (CD14+) using immunomagnetic negative selection based on customarily
defined cell surface markers. Isolated cells were plated, stained with Cell Painting Palette 1
(Supplemental Table S1), and imaged. Within these images, we observed and quantified
notable differences between the shapes of the isolated immune cell populations. As shown in
Figure 2, the T cells and B cells shared the most similarities to each other; the T cells had a
rounder and more uniform morphology, while the B cells had a more oval-shaped form with
small areas of highly concentrated phalloidin staining on either end. The NK cells diverged from
the tightly spherical form of other lymphocytes and showed more elongated and irregular forms.
The monocyte populations were the largest in size and encompassed podosomes, dendrites,
and kidney-shaped nuclei (Figure 2).

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. (a) Representative images of isolated T cells, B cells, NK cells, and monocytes from
human bulk PBMCs using immunomagnetic negative selection and stained with Hoechst (blue),
ConA (red), Phalloidin (green), WGA (far red). The boxed areas represent the single cell shown
in the zoomed image. Scale bar = 10 µm (overview) and 5 µm (zoom). (b) Normalized averages
for a subset of morphologic features that differentiate cell populations. ConA, concanavalin A;
MAD, mean average deviation; NK, natural killer; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell;
WGA, wheat germ agglutinin.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Using the observed phenotypic variation in isolated cells, we designed a computational
model to classify single cells within a mixture of PBMCs. We built the model on PBMCs exposed
to rVSV-ΔG-mCherry so that the multi-phenotype aging profile could accurately measure the
compositional changes between rVSV-exposed PBMCs from young and old donors. These cells
were stained with Cell Painting Palette 2, which revealed similar subcellular compartments as
Cell Painting Palette 1, but included the membrane potential sensitive dye, MitoTracker Orange.
The infected cells also expressed a mCherry-rVSV protein that had an overlapping emission
spectrum with the MitoTracker causing them to be visualized in the same channel
(Supplemental Table S2). Image embeddings, a statistically optimized representation of an
image, were generated on an expert-curated training set of >61,000 single cell images from
over 8 experimental runs using 31 plates seeded with cells from 105 distinct donors. The
embeddings were then used to train a classification model. The model classified a single cell in
an image of bulk PBMCs as a T cell, B cell, NK cell, dead cell and infected monocyte, or
uninfected monocyte (Figure 3a). To validate the accuracy of the classification, we built an
expert-labeled test set of >10,000 single cell images from PBMCs. When we evaluated the
classifier on this data set, the model achieved 91% accuracy (data not shown). We also took
single cell images and ran a principal component analysis on several hundred features derived
from CellProfiler that were not used to train the model. Our model-predicted classification
demonstrated clear clustering on the first two principal components (PC) of our analysis (Figure
3b). Because immune cell populations vary significantly between individuals, the model was run
on PBMCs derived from several different individual donors to see if this variance could be
captured by the classifier.29 Predicted cell compositions not only recapitulated the large interdonor variance but also fell within the expected range of PBMC compositions (Figure 3c).30

8

Figure 3. (a) Images of PBMCs and cells predicted to be T cells, B cells, NK cells, uninfected monocytes, or dead cells or infected
monocytes. The cells were stained with the Cell Painting Palette 2 (Hoechst, blue; Phalloidin, green; MitoTracker/mCherry, red);
WGA; ConA), and the predictions were derived from a model trained on image embeddings. Scale bar = 10 µm (PBMCs) or 5 µm
(predicted cells). (b) PC analysis plot of 1200 morphologic features computed on single cells within bulk PBMCs exposed to rVSVΔG-mCherry. PCs were generated using the average feature value, then colored by cell type labels from a model trained on image
embeddings of cell types. (c) The predicted PBMC composition of 24 donors exposed to rVSV-ΔG-mCherry at 10× MOI. The
predictions were derived from a model trained on image embeddings computed from single-cell crops, labeled by cell type. ConA,
concanavalin A; MOI, multiplicity of infection; NK, natural killer; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; PC, principal component;
rVSV-ΔG-mCherry, recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus expressing a red fluorescent construct; WGA, wheat germ agglutinin.
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

To provide an independent validation of our method, we correlated the cell composition
predictions from our morphological model with those identified using flow cytometry
(Supplemental Figure S1). The cell composition predictions from our model significantly
correlated with those determined by flow cytometry for T cells (r=0.73; P=.007) and NK cells
(r=0.92; P<.001). The dead cell and infected monocyte composition correlated significantly with
all dead and infected myeloid cells derived from flow cytometry (r=0.62; P=.02; Figure 4). A Bcell marker was not included in the flow cytometry panel because of the mCherry overlap, so a
correlation for the B-cell population was not calculated. While flow cytometry was able to
accurately differentiate live and dead cells at different granularities, the morphological properties
of dead cells were very similar to infected monocytes in the images, which made it difficult to
differentiate live and dead infected cells using our system. Overall, the cell type classification
model we developed provides a scalable and reproducible method to incorporate cell
composition and other phenotypic features into our multi-phenotype aging profile.

10

Figure 4. Correlation between the predicted composition of PBMCs exposed to rVSV-ΔG-mCherry and the composition determined
by flow cytometry analysis for (a) T cells, (b) NK cells, and (c) infected and dead myeloid cells. Statistical analysis was performed via
the 2-tailed t test. NK, natural killer; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; rVSV-ΔG-mCherry, recombinant vesicular stomatitis
virus expressing the fluorophore mCherry.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Modeling the Inflammatory Antiviral Immune Response
Dysregulated immune responses are a central driver of disease progression in severe infection
of older adults.31-34 To develop aging profile features that specifically measure phenotypes
related to viral infection, we profiled the responses to viral load in PBMCs from donors ranging
from 30 to 60 years old. We observed notable shifts in cellular composition in virally exposed
PBMCs; specifically, there was a significant increase in dead cells and infected monocytes and
a significant decrease in uninfected monocytes at 0.1×, 1×, and 10× multiplicity of infection
(MOI; P<.001 for all MOIs; Figure 5a). The NK cell population decreased moderately but
significantly for all viral conditions as compared to unexposed conditions (P<.001 for all MOIs;
Figure 5a) but no difference was observed when comparing different viral loads. The T-cell and
B-cell populations did not undergo significant changes due to viral load. We ran an experiment
to test cytokine production of PBMCs when exposed to rVSV at 1×, 5×, 7× and 10× MOI.
Secreted proinflammatory cytokines from the entire PBMC population increased in response to
10× viral exposure relative to 1× exposure, with significantly elevated levels of interleukin (IL)-6
(P<.001), tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α (P<.001), IL-1β (P<.001), and IL-8 (P<.001) at 10× MOI.
In contrast, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP1; P<.001) significantly decreased upon
10× viral exposure compared to 1× exposure (Figure 5b). The significant differences in these
cytokines were also reinforced by similar dose dependent trends at 1×, 5×, 7×, and 10× MOIs
(Figure 5b). Given the robust changes in PBMC composition and cytokine production upon viral
exposure, we incorporated these features into our multi-phenotype aging profile to understand
how they differ with age.

12

Figure 5. (a) Mean cell composition of 24 donors; cells were unexposed or exposed to rVSV-ΔG-mCherry at 0.1×, 1×, and 10× MOI
for 24 h. (b) Cytokine levels in the supernatant 1×, 5×, 7×, and 10× rVSV-ΔG-mCherry-exposed PBMCs from 80 donors. The box and
whisker plots indicate the median and quartiles. Statistical significance (via 2-tailed t test) is indicated; ***, P<.001. IFN, interferon; IL,
interleukin; MCP1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1; MOI, multiplicity of infection; NK, natural killer; PBMC, peripheral blood
mononuclear cell; rVSV-ΔG-mCherry, recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus expressing a red fluorescent construct; TNF, tumor
necrosis factor.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

To more broadly measure how the immune response changes to different viral loads, we
trained machine learning algorithms to learn the differences in the cellular immune response by
titrating rVSV into PBMCs at different MOIs. We first generated embeddings on single cell
images from PBMCs that were exposed to rVSV at 0.1×, 1×, or 10× MOI, and then stained with
Cell Painting Palette 2. The embeddings were then used to train a machine learning classifier to
discriminate the cellular responses to rVSV at a range of MOIs. PBMCs from 24 donors were
evenly distributed across a 384-well plate assay to minimize bias due to plate location then
exposed to rVSV at three different MOIs. We used stratified four-fold cross-validation to
evaluate the classifier’s performance on each well. When we evaluated the model trained on
monocytes only, the classifier was able to differentiate between unexposed, 0.1× MOI, 1× MOI,
and 10× MOI with 91% accuracy across all four folds (Figure 6a). We trained a model on T cells
but we were unable to distinguish between the unexposed cells and the cells exposed to 0.1×
and 1× MOI conditions. However, our model learned significant differences between the T-cell
response to 10× MOI cells and unexposed cells. The model was able to distinguish these
conditions at an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.92 across the
four folds (Figure 6b). T cells, unlike monocytes, are not directly infected by the rVSV and
therefore their response could be dependent on modifications of the environment after viral
exposure which might explain why no difference is observed at lower MOIs. These validated
models of cell response to viral loads can be used to observe whether the phenotype of old
PBMCs looks more similar to the higher viral load phenotype compared with young PBMCs.

14

Figure 6. (a) Cross-validation performance of a single cell model trained on monocyte image embeddings to predict the different
cellular phenotypes of no viral dose (unexposed), low viral dose (0.1× MOI), medium viral dose (1× MOI), and high viral dose (10×
MOI) aggregated by taking the mean of fields in a well. Each condition represents 96 wells (4 replicates/MOI/donor). (b) Average
cross-validation performance of a single cell model trained on T-cell image embeddings to predict the different cellular phenotypes of
no viral dose (unexposed) and high viral dose (10× MOI). AUC, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve; MOI,
multiplicity of infection.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Dysfunction in the Viral Immune Response in Aging Adults
We used our multi-phenotype aging profile to conduct a novel characterization of the differences
between young and old viral immune responses across dozens of features (Table 1). We
generated the aging profiles for PBMCs from 49 young (<35 years of age) donors and 40 old
(>60 years of age) donors. Demographics of the donors reflected the standard population of
older adults, with old donors having a higher number of comorbidities, particularly hypertension,
and taking more medications than young donors (Supplemental Table S3). All 89 donors were
plated across two 384-well plate assays, with the two age populations evenly distributed across
the plate to account for plate position effects. The donors were exposed to rVSV at 10× MOI
and stained with Cell Painting Palette 2. Compared with young donors, PBMCs isolated from old
donors had an increased percentage of dead cells and infected monocytes but showed no
significant change in the percentage of uninfected monocytes (P<.001 and P=.53, respectively;
Figure 7a). The percentage of T cells decreased in both age groups with a significant decrease
in T cells from old donors compared with young donors (P<.001; Figure 7b). In contrast, a
different experiment comparing unexposed PBMCs from young and old donors did not show a
significant difference in T cells (P=.11). More work is necessary to understand these
mechanisms, but the decreased T-cell population could recapitulate, at least in part, the
lymphopenia observed in severely infected patients.38,39

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1. Multi-Phenotype Aging Profile for Viral Response
Category

Metric

Compositional

% T cells
% Dead cells and infected monocytes
% Uninfected monocytes
% NK cells
% B cells

Cytokines

IFNγ, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-17A, MCP1,
TNFα

Aging models

T cell
NK cell
Monocyte
PBMCs

Cell-to-cell interaction

Monocyte ↔ T cell
Monocyte ↔ Monocyte
T cell ↔ T cell

Structural

Reticular mitochondria
Concentric cytoskeleton
Mitochondrial texture

Viral load models

Monocyte viral load response
T-cell viral load response

IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; MCP1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1; MOI, multiplicity of infection;
NK, natural killer; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

17

Figure 7. (a) Percentage of uninfected and rVSV-ΔG-mCherry-infected (at 10× MOI for 24 h) monocytes after viral exposure. (b)
Percentages of T cells identified from unexposed and rVSV-ΔG-mCherry-exposed (at 10× MOI) PBMCs, presented according to
donor age. Statistical significance (via two-tailed t test) between young and old donors after viral exposure is indicated (NS,
nonsignificant; ***, P<.001). The shading around the trend lines indicates the 95% CIs of the fitted lines. MOI, multiplicity of infection;
rVSV-ΔG-mCherry, recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus expressing a red fluorescent protein.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Decreased T-cell levels in older individuals may be driven by cytokine-induced apoptosis
or pyroptosis. This has been demonstrated to occur via induction of proinflammatory cytokines
(eg, TNFα) and defects in the nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) signaling cascade.40,41 To understand
this relationship in aging, we compared the cytokine levels in our multi-phenotype aging profiles
of young and old donors. No significant changes in cytokine production were observed between
young and old donors in unexposed PBMCs (Figure 8a); there was also little difference in
cytokine production of these cells when exposed to rVSV at 1× MOI (Supplemental Figure S2).
However, when PBMCs were exposed to 10× MOI, significant differences in young and old
cytokine production were observed. The production of proinflammatory cytokines significantly
increased in PBMCs from old donors compared with those from young donors (IL-6 [P<.001];
MCP1 [P<.001]; TNFα [P<.001]; IL-1β [P<.001]; interferon [IFN]γ [P<.006]; IL-8 [P<.001]; Figure
8b) Importantly, these same cytokines have been implicated in the progression of
hyperinflammation in diseases that disproportionally affect older adults, such as severe sepsis,
COVID-19, and pneumonia. Interestingly, levels of IFNγ, TNFα, and IL-6 were also inversely
correlated with the percentage of T cells in PBMCs exposed to rVSV at 10× MOI (IFN: old
donors [r=–0.49; P=.02], young donors [r=–0.02; P=.93]; TNFα: old donors [r=–0.60; P<.001],
young donors [r=–0.30; P<.09]; IL-6: old donors [r=–0.60; P<.001], young donors
[r=–0.32; P<.02]; Figure 8c). Two recent studies of patients with COVID-19 demonstrated an
inverse relationship between peripheral T-cell numbers and serum IL-6 and TNFα levels in
patients over 60 years of age.42,43 The decrease in T-cell percentages and increase in
proinflammatory cytokines that we observed in PBMCs obtained from old donors may provide a
relevant in vitro model to study the progression of severe infection. A better understanding of
the mechanisms driving these differences between young and old donors could therefore result
in potential treatments for COVID-19 and reduce disease progression in older adults.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 8. Cytokine levels from the supernatant of (a) unexposed and (b) rVSV-ΔG-mCherryexposed (at 10× MOI for 24 h) PBMCs obtained from 89 donors from young and old adult
populations. Statistical significance (via two-tailed t test) between young and old donors after
viral exposure is indicated (**, P<.01, ***, P<.001). (c) Correlation between cytokine levels and
percentage of T cells for PBMCs exposed to rVSV-ΔG-mCherry at 10× MOI. IFN, interferon; IL,
interleukin; MCP1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1; MOI, multiplicity of infection; PBMC,
peripheral blood mononuclear cell; rVSV-ΔG-mCherry, recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus
expressing a red fluorescent construct; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Next, we used image embeddings of T cells segmented from Cell Painting Palette 2stained PBMCs to train an unbiased machine learning model to learn the hidden complexities
that contribute to the differences between the viral immune response in young and old donors.
We used stratified four-fold cross-validation to evaluate the classifier’s performance on each
well. The model was able to differentiate between the antiviral T-cell response in cells obtained
from young and old donors at an AUC of 0.90 (Figure 9a). The probability distribution of the test
fold predictions was significantly different between young and old populations (P=.002). In
several repeat validation experiments, the model was capable of significantly separating the
same samples from young and old donors (P=.002; Figure 9b). This powerful tool can help
discover modulators of previously unknown aging mechanisms.
Cell composition, cytokines, and unbiased machine-learning–driven aging models are
only a fraction of the features in our multi-phenotype aging profile. One big advantage of cell
imaging is the ability to generate point patterns to model how interactions change with various
perturbations.37 For example, interactions between T cells and antigen-presenting cells can lead
to T-cell activation and aggregation of macrophages can contribute to cytokine production.35,36
To this end, we computed an interaction score using spatial statistical analysis to model nonPoisson multitype point distributions of specific cell types. The point patterns were assessed for
complete spatial randomness using quadrate tests and distance methods. Spatial point pattern
distributions of PBMCs were found to be homogenously distributed with strong evidence of
interpoint interactions (Supplemental Figure S3). When we tested changes in cell-to-cell
interaction between young and old donors, we found that the lymphocyte-to-monocyte
interaction score was significantly increased in old donors compared with young donors (Figure
10a). The virus-related features in our aging profile also showed significant differences between
young and old responses. Our T-cell viral load model predicts the T-cell response to the amount
of viral load (0.1×, 1×, and 10× MOIs), and the same model predicted that the T-cell response of

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

old donors had a higher apparent viral load than young donors (Figure 10a). Together, the many
features within our multi-phenotype aging profile provide a comprehensive understanding of
several differences between young and old donors.
In addition to the above, there are several features in the profile that provide a novel
view of T-cell metabolism. The structural distribution of the mitochondrial network has been
shown to be related to mitochondrial and cellular function. Spherical mitochondria, elongated
mitochondria, and fused/reticular mitochondria all drive specific metabolic needs and
functions.44 In our assay, we observed clear differences in the cellular distribution of
mitochondria in T cells from young donors and old donors after viral exposure. The MitoTracker
used in Cell Painting Palette 2 stains mitochondria in live cells and its accumulation is
dependent upon membrane potential. The intensity of MitoTracker was significantly increased at
the edge of the cell (P=.03) in old donors; we also observed a significant increase in the
standard deviation of mitochondrial distribution throughout the cell (P=.003; Figure 10b). These
measurements were complemented by specific features that calculate the percentage of
reticular mitochondria and changes in the overall texture of the mitochondria. The percentage of
reticular mitochondria was significantly increased in old adults compared with young adults,
while a model of mitochondrial texture also showed significant differences (P=.04; P<.001;
Figure 10a). These general changes in mitochondrial structure between young and old cells are
consistent with reported mitochondrial mechanisms that have been causally linked to the agerelated T-cell senescence and decline in T-cell function.45 Compounds that alter the
mitochondrial behavior in cells from old donors, or any of the other signatures we modeled in
our system, may improve the response to infection in older adults.46 Altogether, there are many
significant differences between young and old viral immune responses as measured by dozens
of features in our multi-phenotype aging profile.

22

Figure 9. (a) Cross-validation performance of a model trained on T-cell image embeddings to predict the difference between immune
responses in cells from young and old donors. (b) Weighted probability of samples being from old donors when the samples were
obtained from a different experiment than the one used for training.

23

Figure 10. (a) Comparison of several features from our multi-phenotype aging profile between young and old donors. (b)
Normalized averages for features measuring the intensity distribution of mitochondria membrane potential in T cells from old and
young donors exposed to rVSV-ΔG-mCherry at a 10× MOI. AUC, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve; MAD,
mitochondrial-associated protein degradation; MOI, multiplicity of infection. rVSV-ΔG-mCherry, recombinant vesicular stomatitis
virus expressing a red fluorescent construct; STD, standard deviation.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Evaluating the Multi-Phenotype Aging Profile of 3428 Bioactive Compounds
To find promising therapeutics for the purpose of rejuvenating immune responses in older
adults, we generated our multi-phenotype aging profile for each of 3428 bioactive compounds.
Of the 3428 compounds, approximately 1900 have been approved and marketed in at least one
country. PBMCs from 35 young and old donors were seeded in 384-well plates and exposed to
rVSV, then the PBMCs from old donors were treated with a single compound or vehicle to be
used as controls. Each individual treatment and control well generated its own multi-phenotype
aging profile containing dozens of age-related features. Every feature in the aging profile was
classified as a “hit” or “miss” based on the magnitude of its distance from old vehicle-only
controls. All labeled features were combined into scores for the aging profile of each compound
by weighting each feature based on its relevance to immune aging or COVID-19. For our
COVID-19 cytokine score, we increased the weights of cytokines reported to be increased in
patients with severe COVID-19 so that compounds moving these cytokine levels in a beneficial
direction ranked more highly. For our immune aging score, we weighted the features based on
the consistency and magnitude of the differences between young and old donors. Generally,
this method allows us to tailor scoring in order to focus on any immune dysfunction in any
specific disease by altering weights of the features. For example, a disease like cancer could
have a score that more heavily weighs the cell-to-cell interaction features to find potential
therapeutics that improve T-cell trafficking.
These immune aging and COVID-19 cytokine scores allowed us to evaluate thousands
of compounds for their therapeutic potential by measuring how each one affects dozens of agerelated phenotypes in rVSV-exposed PBMCs. All compounds were ranked by our COVID-19
cytokine and immune aging scores, then the top 196 highest-scoring compounds were validated
in a follow-up dose-response study. Through this process, we identified two compounds,
disulfiram and triptonide, with the potential for rejuvenating the aging immune system (Figure
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

11). We are sharing two of the top ten hits that are exemplary of our results. We chose to share
our disulfiram results in particular as we believe it is a cheap and widely available drug with a
promising safety profile that may be immediately therapeutically useful.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 11. (a) Immune aging score and COVID-19 cytokine score plotted for the top 40
compounds from our high throughput screen of 3428 bioactive compounds. Ranking defined by
the sum of the immune aging score and the COVID-19 cytokine score. (b) A ranking of our
immune aging score for our top 40 compounds. COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Evaluation of Triptonide’s Effect on the Multi-Phenotype Aging Profile of Old PBMCs
Triptonide, a diterpenoid from the medicinal herb Tripterygium wilfordii Hook F,47 had notable
effects on virally exposed PBMCs from old donors. Tripterygium compounds generally have
demonstrated anti-inflammatory, immunosuppressive, and antiviral effects in animal models and
in vitro studies.47-49 Studies have shown that the anti-inflammatory effects of Tripterygium
compounds target both T cells and macrophages. For T cells, activation is suppressed through
inhibition of NF-κB transcription.50 For macrophages, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNFα production are
decreased and expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-37 is increased.51,52
Consistently, we observed significant decreases in proinflammatory cytokines produced
by triptonide-treated rVSV-exposed PBMCs relative to old vehicle-only control PBMCs. After
normalizing the cytokine levels by the total number of cells, MCP1, IL-1β, and TNFα all showed
significant differences at one or more concentrations tested compared with vehicle-only controls
(Figure 12). The most notable of these was MCP1, which showed a significant, dose-dependent
reduction when compared with vehicle-only controls (Figure 12). These results confirm what
was previously seen in the literature for the Tripterygium compounds and validate the ability of
our aging profile to identify potential immunomodulatory compounds.47,48 Triptonide also shifted
the T-cell metabolic features from an older profile to a younger profile. There was a
concentration-dependent decrease in the percentage of reticular T-cell mitochondria (Figure
13a), consistent with reports that indicate that activated T cells have more fragmented
mitochondrial networks, and activated T cells may be more prevalent in responsive, relatively
young immune systems.53
The immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory effects of Tripterygium compounds have
also been linked to their ability to induce apoptosis in T cells.54 We saw that triponide-treated
PBMCs had a significant increase in the percentage of dead cells and infected monocytes and a
decrease in the percentage of T cells when compared to vehicle-only controls. For the highest
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

three concentrations, there was an average of 21% more dead and infected monocytes and
19% less T cells relative to vehicle-only controls (data not shown). This was a common trend for
many of our top scoring compounds.
The predictions from our T-cell aging models also significantly changed after treatment
with triptonide. Compared with old vehicle-treated controls, PBMCs from old donors treated with
various doses of triptonide shifted the model’s readout from an older phenotype to a younger
phenotype (Figure 13b). At a low concentration, the T-cell age score of triptonide-treated
PBMCs did not significantly change relative to old vehicle-only controls but significantly
decreased with treatment concentrations above 0.33 µM (0.02 µM [P=.85]; 0.1 µM [P=.16]; 0.33
µM [P<.001]; 1.65 µM [P=.001]; 6.25 µM [P=.008]; 25.02 µM [P=.005]; Figure 13b). To better
understand this shift in T-cell age score after treatment, we used image embeddings of T cells
to compute an “on-age” score, measuring the distance from young controls, and a
complementary “off-age” score, measuring the magnitude of the change in the orthogonal
direction to age distances. Several concentrations of triptonide significantly shifted the “on-age”
score closer to vehicle-only cells from young donors and farther from that obtained using
vehicle-only cells from old donors (0.02 µM [P=.27]; 0.1 µM [P<.001]; 0.33 µM [P<.001]; 1.65
µM [P<.001]; 6.25 µM [P<.001]; 25.02 µM [P<.001]; Figure 13c). Triptonide also induced
significant “off-age” effects (0.02 µM [P=.007]; 0.1 µM [P=.43]; 0.33 µM [P<.001]; 1.65 µM
[P<.001]; 6.25 µM [P<.001]; 25.02 µM [P<.001]; Figure 13c). These “off-age” effects are not
definitively detrimental but show that the compound induces effects that are not directly related
to age. In our compound screen, we observed all possible effect combinations; some
compounds only showed “on-age” effects, some showed both “on-age” and “off-age” effects,
some showed neither, and some induced only “off-age” effects. As an example, another
compound, dimethyl fumarate, did not improve the “on-age” effects, as indicated by “on-age”
scores that were very close to those of old vehicle-only controls (Figure 13c).
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Taken together, the multi-phenotype aging profile of old rVSV-exposed PBMCs treated
with triptonide showed restored phenotypes in cytokines, reticular mitochondria, and the T-cell
predicted age at multiple concentrations. A deeper understanding of the aging mechanisms
behind triptonide could shed light into the dysfunction of immune viral responses in older adults.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 12. Cytokine levels from the supernatant of rVSV-ΔG-mCherry-exposed (at 10× MOI)
PBMCs from three old donors and treated with different concentrations of triptonide. The P
values for each donor were combined using the Fisher’s combined probability method. Asterisks
indicate statistical significance (via two-tailed t test) relative to vehicle-only control cells: *P<.05;
**P<.001; ***P<.0001. IL, interleukin; MCP1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1; MOI,
multiplicity of infection; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

31

Figure 13. PBMCs were obtained from three old donors and treated with different concentrations of triptonide. The P values for each
donor were combined using the Fisher’s combined probability method. (a) Reticularity measurement of mitochondria (b) and aging
scores in T cells. Horizontal bars represent the distribution of vehicle-only controls from young (yellow) and old (purple) donors; the
solid line represents the median and the lower and upper dashed lines represent the 25th and 75th quartiles, respectively. The line
graph represents the median and 95% CI for treated cells, with statistical significance relative to vehicle-only control cells indicated
by asterisks. (c) On-age and off-age scores for T cells treated with either triptonide or dimethyl fumarate. Distributions for young and
old control (vehicle only) cells are plotted using a Gaussian kernel density estimation. Statistical significance (via two-tailed t test)
relative to vehicle-only control cells is indicated by the following: *P<.05; **P<.001; ***P<.0001.
32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Evaluation of Disulfiram’s Effects on the Multi-Phenotype Aging Profile of Old PBMCs
In addition to triptonide, the small molecule disulfiram also demonstrated significant beneficial
effects on our multi-phenotype aging profile of PBMCs from old donors exposed to rVSV.
Disulfiram is an approved alcoholism aversion therapy that blocks the reaction converting
acetaldehyde, an alcohol metabolism intermediate, into acetate.55,56 These effects are
complemented by several anti-inflammatory mechanisms, including an ability to inhibit
inflammasome-mediated pyroptotic cell death.57,58
Within our aging profiles, disulfiram significantly reduced several proinflammatory
cytokines when compared with old vehicle-only controls from old donors. After normalizing the
cytokine levels by the total number of cells, MCP1, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNFα were all significantly
decreased for at least two concentrations (Figure 14). The reduction in MCP1 was
concentration-dependent (Figure 14). Similarly, IL-1β was significantly reduced at 0.1 µM, and
this effect was maintained for all subsequently higher concentrations of disulfiram (Figure 14).
These anti-inflammatory effects rank disulfiram highly in our COVID-19 cytokine score, showing
its potential to improve older viral immune responses to infection.
Disulfiram treatment induced similar compositional changes as the other top
compounds. On average, the three highest concentrations of disulfiram increased dead cells
and infected monocytes by 12% and decreased T cells by 13%. This trend is in the opposite
direction of a young phenotype but consistent with disulfiram's ability to induce apoptosis
through redox-related processes.59
The viral features within our multi-phenotype aging profile were also significantly
improved after treatment with disulfiram. Vehicle- and disulfiram-treated PBMCs were exposed
to 10× MOI rVSV, and at several concentrations, disulfiram caused the cells to appear like they
were responding to a lower viral load. In particular, compared with old, vehicle-only controls,
concentrations of disulfiram above 1.65 µM consistently and significantly made the cells appear
33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

to be responding to a lower viral load (0.02 µM [P=.63]; 0.1 µM [P=.01]; 0.33 µM [P=.43]; 1.65
µM [P=.05]; 6.25 µM [P<.001]; 25.02 µM [P<.001]). Additionally, disulfiram treatment exceeding
0.33 µM also significantly reduced the percentage of T cells displaying reticular mitochondrial
networks (0.02 µM [P=.04]; 0.1 µM [P=.42]; 0.33 µM [P<.001]; 1.65 µM [P<.001]; 6.25 µM
[P<.001]; 25.02 µM [P<.001]; Figure 15a). Importantly, these phenotypes restored by disulfiram
are both found at higher viral loads and are significantly different between young and old viral
immune responses.
T cells from rVSV-exposed PBMCs treated with disulfiram also exhibited a significantly
younger phenotype compared with old vehicle-only controls. Disulfiram showed a significant
rejuvenating effect on the T-cell age scores at all concentrations in our multi-phenotype aging
profiles (0.02 µM [P<.001]; 0.1 µM [P=.005]; 0.33 µM [P<.001]; 1.65 µM [P<.001]; 6.25 µM
[P<.001]; 25.02 µM [P<.001]; Figure 15b). Similar trends were seen with the “on-age” and “offage” scores. Compared with vehicle-only controls, the “on-age” T-cell score significantly shifted
in the young direction after treatment with disulfiram (0.02 µM [P=.003]; 0.1 µM [P=.11]; 0.33 µM
[P<.001]; 1.65 µM [P<.001]; 6.25 µM [P<.001]; 25.02 µM [P<.001]; Figure 15c). The “off-age”
score also had a significant effect in the samples exposed to concentrations of disulfiram above
0.33 µM (0.02 µM [P=.26]; 0.1 µM [P=.44]; 0.33 µM [P<.001]; 1.65 µM [P=.008]; 6.25 µM
[P=.003]; 25.02 µM [P=.01]; Figure 15c).
Altogether, these beneficial shifts in age-related phenotypes demonstrate the strong
potential of disulfiram for treating dysfunction in the old viral immune response.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 14. Cytokine levels from the supernatant of rVSV-ΔG-mCherry-exposed (at 10× MOI)
PBMCs obtained from three old donors and treated with different concentrations of disulfiram.
Asterisks indicate statistical significance (via two-tailed t test) relative to vehicle-only control
cells: *P<.05; **P<.001; ***P<.0001. IL, interleukin; MCP1, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1;
MOI, multiplicity of infection; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; TNF, tumor necrosis
factor.

35

Figure 15. PBMCs were obtained from three old donors and treated with different concentrations of disulfiram. The P values for each
donor were combined using the Fisher’s combined probability method. (a) Reticularity measurement of mitochondria (b) and aging
scores in T cells. Horizontal bars represent the distribution of vehicle-only controls from young (yellow) and old (purple) donors; the
solid line represents the median and the lower and upper dashed lines represent the 25th and 75th quartiles, respectively. The line
graph represents the median and 95% CI for treated cells, with statistical significance relative to vehicle-only control cells indicated
by asterisks. (c) On-age and off-age scores for T cells treated with either disulfiram or dimethyl fumarate. Distributions for young and
old control (vehicle only) cells are plotted using a Gaussian kernel density estimation. Statistical significance (via two-tailed t test)
relative to vehicle-only control cells is indicated by the following: *P<.05; **P<.001; ***P<.0001.
36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DISCUSSION
Aging is the most critical risk factor for morbidity, mortality, and progression of severe infectious
disease.21,60-62 While the COVID-19 pandemic has drawn attention to the vulnerability of older
adults, the heightened risk faced by these patients is not limited to this pandemic.63 Older adults
face an increased risk of death from seasonal influenza and sepsis, and the ever-increasing
aging population across the globe presents a challenge to protect this at-risk population. To help
address this challenge, we developed a system that produces a multi-phenotype aging profile
by combining high-throughput lab automation and machine learning algorithms. This is a novel
way to study immune cell responses to viral infection that allows for the rapid characterization of
these responses in multiple dimensions (eg, cell composition, cell-to-cell interactions, cellular
features, cytokine production, and hidden complexities) and enables us to screen for
compounds that can have an impact on how immune systems of older patients respond to viral
infections.
There were some limitations to our approach. First, we could not differentiate between
dead cells and those infected with rVSV given their morphological similarities. To resolve this,
we grouped these cells into one class called “dead cells and infected monocytes.” Although we
were still able to identify multiple significant effects, future work will focus on building more
granular cell types that differentiate between infected cells and cells that died from apoptosis,
pyroptosis, or other cell death pathways. In addition, the presence of dead cells could have
impacted the compositional readouts. Since our in vitro system cannot naturally add or replenish
cells, most changes in composition are driven by dying and nonadherent cells rather than cell
trafficking, proliferation, or differentiation. Additionally, Cell Painting Palette 2 had significant
overlapping fluorescent signals in the wavelengths between 550nm–610nm. We chose to
combine MitoTracker Orange (554/576 ex/em) and mCherry (578/610 ex/em) into a single panel
given the lack of infection in cell types other than monocytes. While mCherry generated a
37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

distinct morphological phenotype upon expression after infection, the strength of this mCherry
signal covered the MitoTracker signal in alive but infected cells.
Another limitation is the potential for confounders to unknowingly bias our machine
learning models. A significant amount of our top compounds saw a compositional shift which
was in the opposite direction of a young phenotype. For many of these compounds, dead cells
and infected monocytes significantly increased while T cells significantly decreased. We
hypothesized that this increase was mostly due to cells undergoing compound induced
apoptosis then being labeled as dead cells and infected monocytes. While our T-cell machine
learning aging models were not trained or evaluated on cells from this class, the ability of these
models to capture subtle trends from high dimensional data leaves them vulnerable to bias by
technical effects. This requires special tooling and attention to ensure known confounders, such
as plate, donor, and batch effects, are not biasing the models and that proper awareness is
brought to new potential confounders. The many features in our multi-phenotype aging profile
allow us to broadly profile compound effects leading to the identification of some features, such
as apoptosis, which could be potential confounders. We do not know if an increase in apoptosis
impacted the model or whether the impact would be a negative artifact rather than a real
beneficial aging phenotype. One hypothesis is that the increase in apoptosis caused differential
cytokine release which induced an early stimulation of the innate immune system so that it was
more prepared to mount a better viral response and resolution.64 More work is needed to test
these results for specific mechanistic hypotheses and in vivo efficacy.
Despite these limitations, we conducted a successful screen on 3428 bioactive
compounds. Through this screen, we identified leading candidates for treatment of severe
infection by assigning scores to many features within our aging profile based on their relevance
to immune aging and COVID-19 cytokine pathology. Within the top 10 ranked compounds from
our screen, disulfiram, a long-used therapy for patients with alcohol dependency, and the
38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

diterpenoid triptonide, obtained from a woody vine commonly found in Eastern and Southern
China, were two interesting compounds that robustly rejuvenated aspects of the viral immune
response in old rVSV-exposed PBMCs. The reported anti-inflammatory mechanisms of
triptonide in combination with findings from our study indicate that this compound shows
promise for dysfunctional aging immune responses. However, additional research is needed to
ensure its safety before use in humans for aging-related indications. Tripterygium compounds
have demonstrated liver and genital toxicity in animal models.65 While the toxicity of triptonide
may make it unsuitable for the clinic, further understanding of its mechanisms could inform a
search for similar compounds that would be more suitable for human therapeutic use. Further
studies are in progress to better understand the mechanisms by which triptonide modulates
immune cells in the hope to identify specific compounds that target similar age-related
mechanisms.
In contrast to triptonide, disulfiram has over 60 years of clinical use in humans. It has
been used as an alcohol aversion therapy through its inhibition of aldehyde dehydrogenase.56,66
Over these 6 decades, disulfiram has an established and well-understood safety profile with no
significant evidence of clinical toxicity in the absence of ethanol.66 Our multi-phenotype aging
profile of disulfiram demonstrated significant anti-inflammatory and rejuvenating effects. It
reduced the proinflammatory cytokines MCP1, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNFα, and rejuvenated several
other features in our aging profile such as T-cell age score, viral load response, and
mitochondrial morphology. These mechanisms could be related to the recently discovered
ability of disulfiram to block the final step in inflammasome–mediated pyroptosis and cytokine
release.67 Disulfiram blocks gasdermin D (GSDMD), a pore-forming protein that plays a critical
role in the terminal step of inflammasome-mediated pathways by facilitating the release of
proinflammatory cytokines.68-70 Cleaved GSDMD similarly creates pores on the cell membrane
of neutrophils to allow for the release of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), a process known

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

as NETosis.71,72 Both of these mechanisms make disulfiram an attractive treatment for
hyperinflammatory infections such as COVID-19, Acute Respiratory Disease Syndrome
(ARDS), and sepsis.58,73,74 Disulfiram has already been shown to protect mice from lethal
lipopolysaccharide-induced septic shock.67 There is mounting evidence that targeting NETosis
and inflammasome activation could be a potential treatment for severe COVID-19. Markers in
the sera of patients with severe COVID-19 indicate the presence of NETs, and an autopsy of a
lung specimen from a patient with COVID-19 showed extensive neutrophil infiltration.75,76 In
addition, proinflammatory cytokines in patients with severe COVID-19 were significantly higher
than in moderate cases.77 This includes elevated levels of IL-1β which is typically a result of
inflammasome activation.78 Given the evidence of NETosis and inflammasome-mediated
pyroptosis in severe COVID-19 pathogenesis, blocking the terminal step of both of these
pathways by inhibiting GSDMD pore formation via disulfiram could provide substantial clinical
benefit. In addition to improving host immune responses, disulfiram may have antiviral effects
on SARS-CoV-2. Indeed, disulfiram has been shown to inhibit papain-like proteases of deadly
coronaviruses such as Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) and SARSCoV-1, which may disrupt the replication and IFN suppression mechanisms of these viruses.79-81
Disulfiram was shown to inhibit the main protease of SARS-CoV-2 by demonstrating high
inhibitory concentration values but the direct inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 viral replication by
disulfiram has yet to be demonstrated.79 Recently, a clinical trial was initiated at the University of
San Francisco to test how three days of disulfiram treatment changes adverse events, disease
severity, SARS-COV-2 viral load, and inflammatory cytokine production in patients with early
COVID-19 (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04485130).
We plan to test the most promising and safe compounds discovered by our multiphenotype aging profile of viral infection for their ability to impact clinical care in sepsis,
influenza, ARDS, and COVID-19. At the same time, we hope to further develop our system by
building the capability to generate aging profiles of other age-related diseases such as
40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

autoimmune conditions, cancer, and vaccine responses. If successful, our current and future
work could be used to improve the health of many older adults.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Ethics and Donors
All study protocols were evaluated and approved by the WCG Institutional Review Board, and
all donors provided informed consent. Eighty-nine healthy donors underwent screening at the
Discovery Life Sciences Donor Clinic (Huntsville, AL). No donors were excluded based on
comorbidities, alcohol use, smoking, or current medication.
Sample Collection and Cell Isolation
Whole blood was collected into EDTA tubes and then diluted with an equal volume of
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) + 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and layered over Ficoll using
SepMate™-50 tubes (STEMCELL Technologies Inc., Vancouver, Canada). Cells were
centrifuged at 1200×g for 10 min at room temperature, and the top plasma layer was removed.
PBMCs were collected, washed with PBS + 2% FBS, and counted using acridine
orange/propidium iodide using a Cellometer® Vision CBA (Nexcelom Bioscience, Lawrence, MA,
USA). PBMCs were cryopreserved in CryoStor® CS10 (BioLife Solutions, Bothell, WA, USA),
frozen using CoolCell® FTS30 freezing containers (BioCision, San Rafael, CA, USA), and stored
in the liquid nitrogen vapor phase until use.
Specific cell types were isolated from the PBMC fraction using the following kits
(STEMCELL Technologies Inc.) per manufacturer’s recommendations: EasySepTM Human T
Cell Enrichment Kit (T cells); EasySepTM Human B Cell Enrichment Kit (B cells); EasySepTM
Human NK Cell Enrichment Kit (NK cells); and EasySepTM Human Monocyte Enrichment Kit
(monocytes). T cells (CD3+), B cells (CD19+), NK cells (CD56+), and monocytes (CD14+) were
isolated based on their customarily defined cell surface markers. Isolated cells were counted
41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

using acridine orange/propidium iodide on a Cellometer Vision CBA and then cryopreserved as
described above.
Assay Plate Layout
Each 384-well plate assay layout was designed to account for potential bias in experimental
conditions due to plate location; conditions were plated such that every condition was included
in every row or column. To generate data on isolated cell types, T cells, monocytes,
macrophages, dendritic cells, B cells, NK cells, and PBMCs were evaluated as separate
conditions. To evaluate effects due to viral load, we plated unexposed cells and cells exposed at
0.1×, 1×, and 10× MOI as different conditions (described below). To analyze differences
between age groups, we plated 48 individual donors per assay plate, with 8 replicates per
donor. Two plates were required to evaluate all donors. Donors were stratified by age group
(≤35 vs ≥60 years). The age groups were considered as separate conditions such that the
interspersed plating resulted in a balance between young and old donors across all plate
locations.
Thawing and Plating Cells
Cells were thawed from the gas phase of liquid nitrogen by immersing the cryotube in a 37 °C
water bath until a thin layer of ice was present. The cells were transferred to 10 mL of
prewarmed culture medium (refer to Supplemental Methods for all media recipes) and
immediately centrifuged for 10 min at 138×g. The cell pellet was gently washed with 10 mL of
culture medium, resuspended in cold plating medium at a density of 4×105 cells/mL, and 25 µL
were added to the assay plate (filled with 15-µL prewarmed plating medium) using a 96-well
dispensing head to achieve a final cell density of 10,000 cells per well. Cells were kept cool
during the entire plating process. Assay plates were centrifuged for 1 min at 138×g and

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

incubated for 30 min at 37 °C with 5% CO2 to allow for cell adhesion to the plastic surface of the
assay plate.
Vesicular Stomatitis Virus and Compound Exposure
After 30-min cell adhesion, 10 µL of 5× trigger medium (including rVSV-ΔG-mCherry, DMSO,
test compound, and FBS) was added to the assay plate using a 384-well pipetting head to
achieve a final concentration of rVSV-ΔG-mCherry at different MOIs, 0.1% DMSO, 10% FBS,
and 0.33 µM or 5.3 µM compound concentration. The assay plate was centrifuged for 1 min at
138×g and incubated for 24 h at 37 °C with 5% CO2.
Live Cell Staining, Fixation, and Painting
After 24 h, cell supernatant was removed and evaluated to determine cytokine levels using the
FirePlex®-HT assay system (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA; described below). To label
mitochondria in live cells for Cell Painting Palette 2, 50 µL/well of prewarmed 125 nM cellpermeant MitoTracker® solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was added to
the assay plate and incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2. After 30 min incubation, cells were
washed 2× with 50 µL/well prewarmed culture medium. Cells were fixed through replacing 25 µL
of the culture medium with 25 µL of prewarmed formaldehyde solution in culture medium (8%
v/v). For Cell Painting Palette 1, cells were fixed adding 50 µL of formaldehyde solution in PBS
(4% v/v) directly after removal of cell supernatant. Cells were incubated at room temperature for
20 min before washing 3× with 50 µL/well PBS. Cells were then permeabilized with 50 µL/well
permeabilization buffer (Supplemental Methods) for 5 min, then washed with 50 µL/well PBS.
Block buffer (50 µL/well; Supplemental Methods) was added to each well, and the assay plate
was incubated for 1 h at room temperature.
For the cell painting assay, Cell Painting Palette 1 or 2 (Supplemental Methods) was set
up in block buffer. The palette was similar to the cell painting assay described by Bray et al.28

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Block buffer was removed from the cells and 25 µL/well of the CPMM palette was added. After
an overnight (~18 h) incubation at 8 °C, the assay plate was washed 4× with 50-µL/well PBS/
Antibiotic Antimycotic and subjected to image acquisition. The plate was stored under
refrigerated conditions for further use.
Imaging
Image acquisition was conducted on an Operetta CLSTM high-content analysis system
(PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA) with binning 1, using a 40× water immersion objective in wide-field
mode with Z-stack of 4 planes and distance steps of 1.0 µm. Four to 16 fields of view and six
channels were captured.
Cytokine Detection
Cytokine levels in the cellular supernatant were evaluated using the FirePlex-HT assay system
with the Human Cytokines FirePlex-HT Panel 1 (ab234897; Abcam). FirePlex-HT
immunoassays quantify up to 10 protein analytes per sample from low sample inputs in 384-well
plate format. The following cytokines were evaluated: IFNγ, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10,
IL-17A, MCP1, and TNFα.
Flow Cytometry
Cells were plated as described above at a cell density of 1.5×105 cells/cm2 in 24-well microtiter
plates and incubated for 24 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2 All cells, including the floating cells, were
harvested by adding 1 mL PBS/EDTA (1 mM) and incubating for 5 min at 37 °C before being
transferred to a round-bottom flow cytometry tube. All remaining steps were carried out with the
cells either kept on ice or at 4 °C. Cells were washed once with 5 mL of cold FACS buffer
(Supplemental Methods) and centrifuged at 216×g for 10 min, then stained with 100-µL antibody
mix for 45 min protected from light. Cells were washed 2× with 5-mL FACS buffer, resuspended
in 0.5-mL PBS, passed through a cell strainer, and analyzed using a FACSAriaTM I cell sorter
44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). For VSV-treated experiments,
monocytes were defined by medium to high forward scattered light (FSC) and side scattered
light (SSC) morphology and CD11c+ CD14+. NK cells were defined by low FSC/SSC CD3–
CD56+, and T cells were defined by low FSC/SSC and CD3+. Within each defined cellular
population, infected cells were segregated by mCherry+ signal. Similar gating structures were
used for initial identification of cellular subsets in the absence of VSV infection, with the addition
of CD19+ FSC/SSC low events defined as B cells (see Supplemental Figure 1).
Image Processing
Initial data preprocessing was structured as a directed acyclic graph, with image transformation
at each step in the graph execution; transformed images were passed along as inputs to the
next step. For the first step, the input images, acquired as multiple confocal Z-layers per field of
view, were projected onto a single field of view by taking the maximum value of each pixel
across all Z-layers for a given field. The projected images were saved both at the original source
resolution and at a down-sampled half-resolution. For each channel, an illumination correction
function was computed using the half-resolution images and then applied to the full-resolution
and half-resolution images to generate illumination-corrected versions of the images.82 For each
channel, the mean and standard deviation of the pixel value distributions were computed over
the projected images. The full-resolution and half-resolution images were then z-score
normalized using these precomputed means and standard deviations of the plate for each
channel to generate pre-normalized versions of the images.
Feature Generation
Using the normalized images, the data processing method continued to feature generation. A
CellProfiler pipeline was generated by parameterizing on the relevant palette, magnification, and
cells used for the experiment.83 CellProfiler uses the locations of each cell to generate over 700
features per cell, including cell morphology, stain intensity, stain texture, stain granularity, and
45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

stain colocalization across channels. The CellProfiler pipeline was run over the full-resolution,
illumination-corrected images to segment and generate thousands of image- and cell-level
features. The location of each cell and nucleus on the plate, as well as a TIFF-based mask for
each, was extracted from the CellProfiler output and converted to a format amenable to
downstream processing. Pretrained convolutional neural networks were then used to extract
single-cell deep-learning embeddings for every cell detected by CellProfiler in every channel.
Embeddings were generated at multiple output layers in the pretrained model and then
concatenated to create a single embedding vector for each cell that includes 3840 features. The
individual cells were fed to the model using 88px single cell crops taken from the prenormalized
2160×2160 pixel images. For specific steps in the CellProfiler pipeline, please refer to the
Supplemental Methods.
Quality Control
Every image, and each cell within the image, was run through a semi-automated quality control
process. The image metrics computed by CellProfiler were visualized and analyzed per plate to
identify technical artifacts that arose from issues such as location, operator error, and poor
sample quality (Supplemental Figure S4). Each plate was reviewed by an operator to check for
quality across cell count, intensity, blur, focus, and outlier metrics. Plates that had strong
negative or positive correlations between quality control metrics and plate location were marked
for further review. These metrics were used to flag problematic issues, refine assay protocols,
and inform interpretation of results, but at this point were not used to exclude data in an
automatic fashion.
Spatial Point Pattern Analysis
The individual cell points detected by CellProfiler were analyzed using spatial point pattern
analysis. This modeling provides a statistical basis for understanding the effect of different
conditions on how cells spatially interact (clustering or inhibitory) with other cells. After
46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

processing, individual fields were treated as unique spatial windows. The point locations of
individual cells were marked with labels within these windows, effectively translating an image of
a field to a marked point pattern. A data set was then constructed using these marked point
patterns, relevant spatial covariates (eg, relative field location), and global covariates (eg, donor
identification and well condition). This marked point pattern data set was used to model the
underlying point pattern process. Spatial point patterns of individual fields were modeled with
non-Poisson multitype point interactions for specific cell types. From these individual point
pattern models, cell-to-cell interaction parameters for specific label-to-label interactions (eg, T
cell to macrophage) were calculated for each field for subsequent analysis. Spatial point
patterns of a selection of fields were modeled using replicated spatial point pattern modeling. An
additional series of stepwise replicated point pattern models with non-Poisson multitype point
interactions were constructed to analyze point pattern interactions of different cell types with
respect to conditions of interest. The replicated point pattern models could include a number of
global and spatial covariates to model heterogeneous and homogeneous point patterns, varying
interaction parameters describing interpoint interactions, and interactive interaction parameters
describing the relationship of conditions of interest and cell-to-cell interactions. Interaction
scores <1 indicated decreased clustering while interaction scores >1 indicated increased
clustering. This modeling provides evidence of whether or not the conditions of interest alter the
cell-to-cell interactions of targeted labels (eg, monocyte to monocyte and T cell to macrophage),
as well as how cell-to-cell interactions change with these conditions (eg, T cells exhibiting
increased clustering with macrophages under a given condition).
Classification
We used the embeddings and features created to train classifiers that predicted whether an
immune response was indicative of a young or old immune system. Data-generation methods
were optimized to reduce bias by using balanced plate layouts, robust quality control processes,
47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

automated liquid handling, and a large, diverse number of samples. Embeddings were
generated for each single cell and then aggregated by taking the median of all cells within a field
of view. We trained the classification models on these field-level embeddings using XGBoost,
an implementation of gradient-boosted decision trees.72 As described in the Results, we
performed stratified four-fold cross-validation, ensuring that each fold had equal proportions of
young and old donors, and that each donor appeared in only one-fold.

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Acquisition of data was provided by Assay.Works GmbH (Regensburg, Germany), funded by
Spring Discovery. Sample collection and processing was provided by Discovery Life Sciences
(Huntsville, AL, USA), funded by Spring Discovery. Medical writing and/or editorial assistance
was provided by Rebecca Brady, PhD, of The Lockwood Group (Stamford, CT, USA), funded by
Spring Discovery Inc.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Experimental conception and design: Brandon White, Ben Komalo, Lauren Nicolaisen, Matt
Donne, Charlie Marsh, Rachel M. DeVay, An M. Nguyen, Wendy Cousin, Jarred Heinrich,
William Van Trump, Colin J. Fuller, Laura Haynes, George Kuchel, Jorg Goronzy, Tamas Fulop,
Diane Heiser, Ralf Schwandner, Christian Elabd, Ben Kamens. Data acquisition: Brandon
White, Matt Donne, William Van Trump, Tempest Plott, Dat Nguyen, Daniel Chen, Delia Bucher,
Sabine Tyrra, Ralf Schwandner. Data analysis: Brandon White, Ben Komalo, Lauren
Nicolaisen, Charlie Marsh, Rachel M. DeVay, An M. Nguyen, Wendy Cousin, Jarred Heinrich,
Diane Heiser. Data interpretation: Brandon White, Ben Komalo, Lauren Nicolaisen, Charlie
Marsh, Rachel M. DeVay, An M. Nguyen, Wendy Cousin, Jarred Heinrich, Colin J. Fuller, Laura
Haynes, George Kuchel, Jorg Goronzy, Anis Larbi, Tamas Fulop, Diane Heiser, Ralf
Schwandner, Christian Elabd. Software creation: Ben Komalo, Lauren Nicolaisen, Charlie
Marsh, Jarred Heinrich, Colin J. Fuller. Supervision of research: Brandon White, Ralf
Schwandner, Christian Elabd, Ben Kamens. Drafting and editing the manuscript: Brandon
White. All authors revised and approved the final manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
Brandon White, Ben Komalo, Lauren Nicolaisen, Matt Donne, Charlie Marsh, Rachel M. DeVay,
An M. Nguyen, Wendy Cousin, Jarred Heinrich, William Van Trump, Tempest Plott, Colin J.
49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fuller, Dat Nguyen, Daniel Chen, Christian Elabd, and Ben Kamens are employees of, and
have an equity interest in, Spring Discovery. Brandon White, Ben Komalo, Lauren Nicolaisen,
Charlie Marsh, An M. Nguyen, Wendy Cousin, Christian Elabd, and Ben Kamens are coinventors on patents filed for this work and pending to Spring Discovery. Laura Haynes and Jorg
Goronzy report grants from NIH. Laura Haynes, George Kuchel, Jorg Goronzy, Anis Larbi, and
Ralf Schwandner report personal fees from Spring Discovery. Anis Larbi is the co-founder of
Yobitrust. Ralf Schwandner is the founder and CEO of Assay.Works GmBH. Delia Bucher,
Sabine Tyrra, Tamas Fulop, and Diane Heiser have nothing to disclose.

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.

Fulop T, Larbi A, Witkowski JM, et al. Aging, frailty and age-related diseases.
Biogerontology. 2010;11(5):547-563.
Fulop T, Larbi A, Dupuis G, et al. Immunosenescence and inflamm-aging as two sides of
the same coin: friends or foes? Front Immunol. 2017;8:1960.
Hearps AC, Martin GE, Angelovich TA, et al. Aging is associated with chronic innate
immune activation and dysregulation of monocyte phenotype and function. Aging Cell.
2012;11(5):867-875.
Salimi S, Shardell MD, Seliger SL, Bandinelli S, Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L. Inflammation
and trajectory of renal function in community-dwelling older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc.
2018;66(4):804-811.
Britanova OV, Putintseva EV, Shugay M, et al. Age-related decrease in TCR repertoire
diversity measured with deep and normalized sequence profiling. J Immunol.
2014;192(6):2689-2698.
Ferrando-Martinez S, Ruiz-Mateos E, Hernandez A, et al. Age-related deregulation of
naive T cell homeostasis in elderly humans. Age (Dordr). 2011;33(2):197-207.
Gavazzi G, Krause K-H. Ageing and infection. Lancet Infect Dis. 2002;2(11):659-666.
Tan Q, Heijmans BT, Hjelmborg JV, Soerensen M, Christensen K, Christiansen L.
Epigenetic drift in the aging genome: a ten-year follow-up in an elderly twin cohort. Int J
Epidemiol. 2016;45(4):1146-1158.
Zhou X, McElhaney JE. Age-related changes in memory and effector T cells responding
to influenza A/H3N2 and pandemic A/H1N1 strains in humans. Vaccine.
2011;29(11):2169-2177.
Goronzy JJ, Weyand CM. Successful and maladaptive T cell aging. Immunity.
2017;46(3):364-378.
Thome JJ, Grinshpun B, Kumar BV, et al. Longterm maintenance of human naive T cells
through in situ homeostasis in lymphoid tissue sites. Sci Immunol. 2016;1(6).
Franceschi C, Salvioli S, Garagnani P, de Eguileor M, Monti D, Capri M.
Immunobiography and the heterogeneity of immune responses in the elderly: a focus on
inflammaging and trained immunity. Front Immunol. 2017;8(8):982.
Istituto Superiore di Sanità. Age specific mortality rates COVID-19. 2020. Accessed May
5, 2020. https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/bollettino/Bollettino-sorveglianzaintegrata-COVID-19_30-marzo-2020.pdf.
Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology Team. The
epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases
(COVID-19) in China. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2020;41(2):145-151.
Docherty AB, Harrison EM, Green CA, et al. Features of 16,749 hospitalised UK patients
with COVID-19 using the ISARIC WHO Clinical Characterisation Protocol. Preprint.
Posted online April 28, 2020. medRxiv 2020.2004.2023.20076042.
doi:10.1101/2020.04.23.20076042
Akbar AN, Gilroy DW. Aging immunity may exacerbate COVID-19. Science.
2020;369(6501):256–257.
Group RC, Horby P, Lim WS, et al. Dexamethasone in Hospitalized Patients with
COVID-19–Preliminary Report. N Engl J Med. 2020.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Estimates of deaths associated with
seasonal influenza–United States, 1976–2007. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2010;59(33):1057-1062.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Disease burden of influenza. 2020.
Accessed May 5, 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden/index.html.
51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Provisional death counts for coronavirus
disease (COVID-19): daily updates of totals by week and state. 2020. Accessed May 15,
2020. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/covid19/index.htm.
Rhee C, Dantes R, Epstein L, et al. Incidence and trends of sepsis in US hospitals using
clinical vs claims data, 2009-2014. JAMA. 2017;318(13):1241-1249.
Haas LEM, van Dillen LS, de Lange DW, van Dijk D, Hamaker ME. Outcome of very old
patients admitted to the ICU for sepsis: a systematic review. Eur Geriatr Med. 2017;8(56):446-453.
de Marcken M, Dhaliwal K, Danielsen AC, Gautron AS, Dominguez-Villar M. TLR7 and
TLR8 activate distinct pathways in monocytes during RNA virus infection. Sci Signal.
2019;12(605):eaaw1347.
Lund JM, Alexopoulou L, Sato A, et al. Recognition of single-stranded RNA viruses by
Toll-like receptor 7. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101(15):5598-5603.
Wu PH, Gilkes DM, Phillip JM, et al. Single-cell morphology encodes metastatic
potential. Sci Adv. 2020;6(4):eaaw6938.
Marklein RA, Lam J, Guvendiren M, Sung KE, Bauer SR. Functionally-relevant
morphological profiling: a tool to assess cellular heterogeneity. Trends Biotechnol.
2018;36(1):105-118.
Prasad A, Alizadeh E. Cell form and function: interpreting and controlling the shape of
adherent cells. Trends Biotechnol. 2019;37(4):347-357.
Bray MA, Singh S, Han H, et al. Cell Painting, a high-content image-based assay for
morphological profiling using multiplexed fluorescent dyes. Nat Protoc. 2016;11(9):17571774.
Brodin P, Jojic V, Gao T, et al. Variation in the human immune system is largely driven
by non-heritable influences. Cell. 2015;160(1-2):37-47.
Brodin P, Davis MM. Human immune system variation. Nat Rev Immunol.
2017;17(1):21-29.
Vabret N, Britton GJ, Gruber C, et al. Immunology of COVID-19: current state of the
science. Immunity. 2020;52(6):910-941.
Wolchok JD, Vardhana SA. The many faces of the anti-COVID immune response. J Exp
Med. 2020;217(6):e20200678.
Tay MZ, Poh CM, Renia L, MacAry PA, Ng LFP. The trinity of COVID-19: immunity,
inflammation and intervention. Nat Rev Immunol. 2020;20(6):363-374.
Merad M, Martin JC. Pathological inflammation in patients with COVID-19: a key role for
monocytes and macrophages. Nat Rev Immunol. 2020;20(6):355-362.
Katzman SD, O'Gorman WE, Villarino AV, et al. Duration of antigen receptor signaling
determines T-cell tolerance or activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2010;107(42):18085-18090.
Canna SW, de Jesus AA, Gouni S, et al. An activating NLRC4 inflammasome mutation
causes autoinflammation with recurrent macrophage activation syndrome. Nat Genet.
2014;46(10):1140-1146.
Vladimer GI, Snijder B, Krall N, et al. Global survey of the immunomodulatory potential
of common drugs. Nat Chem Biol. 2017;13(6):681-690.
Drewry AM, Samra N, Skrupky LP, Fuller BM, Compton SM, Hotchkiss RS. Persistent
lymphopenia after diagnosis of sepsis predicts mortality. Shock. 2014;42(5):383-391.
Warny M, Helby J, Nordestgaard BG, Birgens H, Bojesen SE. Lymphopenia and risk of
infection and infection-related death in 98,344 individuals from a prospective Danish
population-based study. PLoS Med. 2018;15(11):e1002685.
Aggarwal S, Gollapudi S, Gupta S. Increased TNF-α-induced apoptosis in lymphocytes
from aged humans: changes in TNF-α receptor expression and activation of caspases. J
Immunol. 1999;162:2154-2161.
52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.

Gupta S, Bi R, Kim C, Chiplunkar S, Yel L, Gollapudi S. Role of NF-kappaB signaling
pathway in increased tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced apoptosis of lymphocytes in
aged humans. Cell Death Differ. 2005;12(2):177-183.
Diao B, Wang C, Tan Y, et al. Reduction and functional exhaustion of T cells in patients
with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Preprint. Posted online February 20, 2020.
medRxiv 2020.2002.2018.20024364. doi:10.1101/2020.02.18.20024364.
Zhang X, Tan Y, Ling Y, et al. Viral and host factors related to the clinical outcome of
COVID-19. Nature. Published online May 20, 2020. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2355-0.
Naik PP, Praharaj PP, Bhol CS, et al. Mitochondrial heterogeneity in stem cells. Adv Exp
Med Biol. 2019;1123:179-194.
McGuire PJ. Mitochondrial dysfunction and the aging immune system. Biology (Basel).
2019;8(2):26.
Desdín-Micó G, Soto-Heredero G, Aranda JF, et al. T cells with dysfunctional
mitochondria induce multimorbidity and premature senescence. Science.
2020;368(6497):1371-1376.
Qiu D, Kao PN. Immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory mechanisms of triptolide, the
principal active diterpenoid from the chinese medicinal herb Tripterygium wilfordii Hook.
f. Drugs R&D. 2003;4(1):1-18.
Yang W, Chen X, Li Y, Guo S, Wang Z, Yu X. Advances in pharmacological activities of
terpenoids. Natural Product Communications. 2020;15(3).
Wan Z, Chen X. Triptolide inhibits human immunodeficiency virus type 1 replication by
promoting proteasomal degradation of Tat protein. Retrovirology. 2014;11:88.
Qiu D, Zhao G, Aoki Y, et al. Immunosuppressant PG490 (triptolide) inhibits T-cell
interleukin-2 expression at the level of purine-box/nuclear factor of activated T-cells and
NF-kB transcriptional activation. J Biol Chem. 1999;274(19):13443-13450.
He L, Liang Z, Zhao F, Peng L, Chen Z. Modulation of IL-37 expression by triptolide and
triptonide in THP-1 cells. Cell Mol Immunol. 2015;12(4):515-518.
Matta R, Wang X, Ge H, Ray W, Nelin LD, Liu Y. Triptolide induces anti-inflammatory
cellular responses. Am J Transl Res. 2009;1(3):267–282.
Buck Michael D, O’Sullivan D, Klein Geltink Ramon I, et al. Mitochondrial dynamics
controls t cell fate through metabolic programming. Cell. 2016;166(1):63-76.
Yang Y, Liu Z-h, Tolosa E, Yang J-w, Li L-s. Triptolide induces apoptotic death of T
lymphocyte. Immunopharmacology. 1998;40(2):139-149.
Kragh H. From disulfiram to antabuse: the invention of a drug. Bull Hist Chem.
2008;33(2):82-88.
Stokes M, Abdijadid S. Disulfiram. Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing; 2020.
Deng W, Yang Z, Yue H, Ou Y, Hu W, Sun P. Disulfiram suppresses NLRP3
inflammasome activation to treat peritoneal and gouty inflammation. Free Radic Biol
Med. 2020;152:8-17.
Pandeya A, Li L, Li Z, Wei Y. Gasdermin D (GSDMD) as a new target for the treatment
of infection. Medchemcomm. 2019;10(5):660-667.
Cen D, Gonzalez RI, Buckmeier JA, Kahlon RS, Tohidian NB, Meyskens Jr. FL.
Disulfiram induces apoptosis in human melanoma cells: a redox-related process. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2002;1:197–204.
Christensen KL, Holman RC, Steiner CA, Sejvar JJ, Stoll BJ, Schonberger LB. Infectious
disease hospitalizations in the United States. Clin Infect Dis. 2009;49(7):1025-1035.
Nasa P, Juneja D, Singh O. Severe sepsis and septic shock in the elderly: an overview.
World J Crit Care Med. 2012;1(1):23-30.
van Asten L, van den Wijngaard C, van Pelt W, et al. Mortality attributable to 9 common
infections: significant effect of influenza A, respiratory syncytial virus, influenza B,
norovirus, and parainfluenza in elderly persons. J Infect Dis. 2012;206(5):628-639.
53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.

Koff WC, Williams MA. Covid-19 and immunity in aging populations — a new research
agenda. N Engl J Med. Published online April 17, 2020. doi:10.1056/NEJMp2006761.
Lucas M, Stuart LM, Savill J, Lacy-Hulbert A. Apoptotic cells and innate immune stimuli
combine to regulate macrophage cytokine secretion. J Immunol. 2003;171(5):26102615.
Zhang Z, Zheng Q, Han J, et al. The targeting of 14-succinate triptolide-lysozyme
conjugate to proximal renal tubular epithelial cells. Biomaterials. 2009;30(7):1372-1381.
Malcolm R, Olive MF, Lechner W. The safety of disulfiram for the treatment of alcohol
and cocaine dependence in randomized clinical trials: guidance for clinical practice.
Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2008;7(4):459-472.
Hu JJ, Liu X, Xia S, et al. FDA-approved disulfiram inhibits pyroptosis by blocking
gasdermin D pore formation. Nat Immunol. 2020;21(7):736-745.
He WT, Wan H, Hu L, et al. Gasdermin D is an executor of pyroptosis and required for
interleukin-1β secretion. Cell Res. 2015;25(12):1285-1298.
Liu X, Zhang Z, Ruan J, et al. Inflammasome-activated gasdermin D causes pyroptosis
by forming membrane pores. Nature. 2016;535(7610):153-158.
Shi J, Zhao Y, Wang K, et al. Cleavage of GSDMD by inflammatory caspases
determines pyroptotic cell death. Nature. 2015;526(7575):660-665.
Sollberger G, Choidas A, Burn GL, et al. Gasdermin D plays a vital role in the generation
of neutrophil extracellular traps. Sci Immunol. 2018;3(26):eaar6689.
Chen KW, Monteleone M, Boucher D, et al. Noncanonical inflammasome signaling
elicits gasdermin D-dependent neutrophil extracellular traps. Sci Immunol.
2018;3(26):eaar6676.
Yap JKY, Moriyama M, Iwasaki A. Inflammasomes and pyroptosis as therapeutic targets
for COVID-19. J Immunol. Published online June 3, 2020.
doi:10.4049/jimmunol.2000513.
Homsy E, Das S, Consiglio P, et al. Circulating gasdermin-d in critically ill patients. Crit
Care Explor. 2019;1(9):e0039.
Barnes BJ, Adrover JM, Baxter-Stoltzfus A, et al. Targeting potential drivers of COVID19: neutrophil extracellular traps. J Exp Med. 2020;217(6):e20200652.
Zuo Y, Yalavarthi S, Shi H, et al. Neutrophil extracellular traps in COVID-19. JCI Insight.
2020;5(11).
Chen G, Wu D, Guo W, et al. Clinical and immunological features of severe and
moderate coronavirus disease 2019. J Clin Invest. 2020;130(5):2620-2629.
Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel
coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet. 2020;395(10223):497-506.
Jin Z, Du X, Xu Y, et al. Structure of Mpro from SARS-CoV-2 and discovery of its
inhibitors. Nature. 2020;582(7811):289-293.
Lin MH, Moses DC, Hsieh CH, et al. Disulfiram can inhibit MERS and SARS coronavirus
papain-like proteases via different modes. Antiviral Res. 2018;150:155-163.
Matthews K, Shäfer A, Pham A, Frieman M. The SARS coronavirus papain like protease
can inhibit IRF3 at a post activation step that requires deubiquitination activity. Virol J.
2014;11:209.
Singh S, Bray MA, Jones TR, Carpenter AE. Pipeline for illumination correction of
images for high-throughput microscopy. J Microsc. 2014;256(3):231-236.
McQuin C, Goodman A, Chernyshev V, et al. CellProfiler 3.0: next-generation image
processing for biology. PLoS Biol. 2018;16(7):e2005970.

54

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

55

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURES

Supplemental Figure S1. Representative flow plots for cell composition discrimination. Events
were first gated on FSC/SSC profile to distinguish dead cells and debris from live myeloid and
live lymphoid cells. Myeloid morphology cells were then stratified by CD14 and CD11c
expression to distinguish monocytes (CD14+). Lymphoid cells were first stratified by CD3 and
CD19 expression to distinguish T cells (CD3+) and B cells (CD19+). Double-negative cells from
the lymphoid morphology fraction were used to distinguish NK cells (CD3– CD19– CD56+).

56

Supplemental Figure S2. Cytokine levels from the supernatant of PBMCs obtained from 89 old and young donors and exposed to
rVSV-ΔG-mCherry at 1× MOI. IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; MCP, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1; MOI, multiplicity of infection;
PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; rVSV-ΔG-mCherry, recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus expressing a red fluorescent
construct; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

57

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure S3. (a) Spatial Kolmogorov-Smirnov plot to identify inconsistencies with a
homogeneous Poisson distribution. (b) Significant departures from the expected distribution
(homogeneous) would indicate a heterogeneous distribution that is not independent of the
spatial landscape. CSR, complete spatial randomness.

58

Supplemental Figure S4. Power log-log metrics computed on the Hoechst channel for (a) a plate that passed quality control and (b)
a plate flagged for quality control due to technical artifacts.

59

Supplemental Figure S5. Replicate experiment measuring cytokine levels from the supernatant of rVSV-ΔG-mCherry-exposed (at
10× MOI for 24 h) PBMCs obtained from 89 donors from young and old adult populations.

60

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Table S1. Cell Painting Palette 1
Channel

Label

Excitation (nm)

Emission (nm)

Stain

1

Brightfield

Transmission

655–760

2

Hoechst 33342

355–385

430–500

Hoechst

3

Alexa 488

460–490

500–550

Wheat germ agglutinin

4

Texas Red

530–560

570–650

Phalloidin

5

Alexa 633

615–645

655–705

Concanavalin A

61

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Table S2. Cell Painting Palette 2
Channel

Label

Excitation (nm)

Emission (nm)

Stain

1

Brightfield

Transmission

655–760

2

Hoechst 33342

355–385

430–500

Hoechst

3

Alexa 488

460–490

500–550

Wheat germ agglutinin

4

MitoTracker Orange

530–560

570–650

MitoTracker/mCherry

5

Alexa 633

615–645

655–705

Concanavalin A

6

Alexa 700_narrow

650–675

685–760

Phalloidin iFluor700

62

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Table S3. Demographics of Sample Donors
Young population
(N=49)

Old population (N=40)

26.4 (5.9)

68.2 (7.4)

27.0 (19–35)

65.5 (60–86)

85.6 (22.7)

76.9 (17.5)

81.8 (52.3–186.4)

72.0 (51.4–87.7)

Sex, male, n (%)

13 (26.5)

17 (42.5)

White, n (%)

32 (65.3)

37 (92.5)

No comorbidities, n (%)

26 (53.1)

6 (15.0)

1.1

2.4

Hypertension

2 (4.1)

17 (42.5)

Gastroesophageal reflux

4 (8.2)

9 (22.5)

Seasonal allergies

9 (18.4)

7 (17.5)

Anxiety

9 (18.4)

5 (12.5)

0

6 (15.0)

1.5

3.8

Current use

23 (46.9)

20 (50.0)

Previous use

3 (6.1)

2 (5.0)

No history

22 (44.9)

18 (45.0)

Unknown

1 (2.0)

—

Current use

4 (8.2)

8 (20.0)

Previous use

4 (8.2)

8 (20.0)

41 (83.7)

24 (60.0)

Age, y
Mean (SD)
Median (range)
Weight, kg
Mean (SD)
Median (range)

Number of comorbidities,a mean
Common comorbidities,b n (%)

High cholesterol
Number of medications, mean
Alcohol use, n (%)

Tobacco use, n (%)

Never used

63

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Viral status, negative, %
Hepatitis B virus

100.0

100.0

Hepatitis C virus

100.0

100.0

HIV

100.0

100.0

a

Donors could have more than one comorbidity.

b

Incidence of ≥15% in either population.

64

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SUPPLEMENTAL METHODS
CellProfiler Pipeline
1. Segmenting the nuclei using the Hoechst channel, via Otsu or minimum cross entropybased thresholding
2. Segmenting the cell membrane using an appropriate channel, via minimum cross
entropy-based thresholding
3. Computing, over both the nuclei and cell membranes, a set of features to capture:
a. The size and shape of the objects of interest
b. The texture of the objects of interest, across all channels
c. The stain colocalization of the objects of interest, across all pairs of channels
d. The granularity of the objects of interest, across all channels
e. The intensity of the staining of the objects of interest, across all channels
f.

The intensity distribution of the staining of the objects of interest, across all
channels

g. A TIFF-based mask of the object
4. Computing, over the entire field of view:
a. The intensity of the staining, across all channels
b. The image correlation, power log-log slope, and other quality control metrics,
across all channels
Materials and Equipment

65

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Name

Source

Product Number

RPMI 1640 w/o glutamine

Fisher Scientific

31870-025

FBS Gibco Value-FBS

Fisher Scientific

10270098, LOT:
42F6590K

HEPES

PAN-Biotech

P05-01100

Pen/Strep: 10,000 units

Gibco

15140-122

L-Glutamine, 200 mM

Fisher Scientific

K0302

Na-Pyruvate, 100 mM

Sigma

S8636

Vitamins, 100×

Sigma

M6895

Non-essential AA, 100×

Sigma

M7145

2-Mercaptoethanol 50 mM

Fisher Scientific

31350-010

Formaldehyde (FA)

Fisher Scientific

F/1501/PB15

PBS: DPBS (w/o Ca2+, Mg2+)

PAN-Biotech

P04-36500

96-well MasterBlock PP 2 mL

Greiner BioOne

780271

Assay Plate – 384-well high content
imaging, low base

Corning

4518

Dilution Plate – 384-well small
volume plate

Greiner BioOne

784201

Supernatant Plate - 384-well small
volume plate

Greiner BioOne

784201

24-well plate

Greiner BioOne

662160

15-mL tubes

Greiner BioOne

188271

66

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

50-mL tubes

Greiner BioOne

227261

Polystyrene round-bottom tube

Falcon

352008

PBS: DPBS (w/o Ca2+, Mg2+)

PAN-Biotech

P04-36500

BSA

Merck

1.12017.0100

Fish gelatin

Sigma

G7041

Antibiotic/antimycotic

Gibco

15240-062

Triton X-100

Roth

3051.3

Human serum, normal, 100 mL

Sigma- Aldrich

S1-100ML, LOT: 3280083

VSV-ΔG-mCherry (8×108 IFU/mL)

Creative Biogene

CBGAB0617-2
Lot: 011020VB

Wheat germ agglutinin, Alexa
Fluor™ 488 conjugate

Invitrogen

W11261

Concanavalin A, Alexa Fluor™ 633
conjugate

Invitrogen

C21402

MitoTracker orange CMTMRos

Invitrogen

M7510

Phalloidin-iFluor 700 conjugate

AAT Bioquest

23129
Lot: 239050

Texas Red™-X Phalloidin

Invitrogen

T7471

Hoechst 33342

Invitrogen

62249

APC-H7_MouseAntiHuman_CD3,
Lot 9172768

BD

560176

67

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

PE_MouseAntiHuman_CD19, Lot
9156749

BD

555413

BB515MouseAntiHuman_CD56, Lot
9309302

BD

564488

BB700 Mouse Anti-Human CD11c,
Lot 9350423

BD

748270

APC_MouseAntiHuman_CD14, Lot
9010704

BD

555399

AA, amino acid; BSA, bovine serum albumin; Ca, calcium; DPBS, Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline;
FBS, fetal bovine serum; IFU, infectious units; Mg, magnesium; Na, sodium; VSV-ΔG-mCherry, vesicular
stomatitis virus expressing a red fluorescent construct.

Specialized Materials and Equipment
Type

Name, vendor

Felix - 384-well liquid handler

Cybi-Felix w/ 384-well head, Analytik Jena

Echo550

Labcyte

Operetta CLS

PerkinElmer

FACS

FACS AriaI Sorter, Becton Dickinson

Multichannel dispenser

Multidrop Combi, Thermo Fisher Scientific

Plate shaker

Oribital shaker GLF, digital 3017

Centrifuge

Thermo Multifuge 3L-R

Bioactive library

Assay.Works

FACS, fluorescence-activated cell sorting.

68

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Recipes
Stock solution

Preparation

Storage; usage

MitoTracker orange
CMTMRos

Dissolved in DMSO to 1 mM

Stored at –20 °C

Wheat germ agglutinin, Alexa
Fluor™ 488 conjugate 5 mg

Dissolved in PBS to 1
mg/mL

Single use stored at –20 °C

Concanavalin A, Alexa
Fluor™ 633 conjugate

Dissolved in 0.1-M sodium
bicarbonate (pH 8.3) to 1
mg/mL

Single use stored at –20 °C

Phalloidin-iFluor 700
conjugate Lot 239050

Dissolved in 30-µL DMSO to
1000×

Stored at –20 °C

Texas Red™-X Phalloidin

Dissolved in 1.5 mL
methanol to 200 units/mL

Stored at –20 °C

rVSV-ΔG-mCherry

8×108 IFU/mL

Stored at –80 °C

Bioactive library

10 mM in DMSO

IFU, infectious units; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; rVSV-ΔG-mCherry, recombinant vesicular
stomatitis virus expressing a red fluorescent construct.

Culture medium
Component

Concentration

RPMI 1640

Base medium

FBS

10%

HEPES

25 mM

69

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

L-Glutamine, 200 mM

2 mM

Na-Pyruvate, 100 mM

1 mM

Vitamins, 100×

0.4×

Non-essential AA, 100×

1×

2-Mercaptoethanol 50 mM

50 µM

Pen/Strep: 10,000 units

0.5×

AA, amino acid; FBS, fetal bovine serum; Na, sodium.

Plating medium
Component

Concentration

RPMI 1640

Base medium

HEPES

25 mM

L-Glutamine, 200 mM

2 mM

Na-Pyruvate, 100 mM

1 mM

Vitamins, 100×

0.4×

Non-essential AA, 100×

1×

2-Mercaptoethanol 50 mM

50 µM

Pen/Strep: 10,000 units

0.5x

AA, amino acid; FBS, fetal bovine serum; Na, sodium.

5× Trigger mediuma

70

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Component

Concentration

FBS Gibco Value-FBS

50%

rVSV-ΔG-mCherry

50× MOI (1×107 IFU/mL)

DMSO

0.5% (accounting for compound DMSO)

FBS, fetal bovine serum; IFU, infectious units; MOI, multiplicity of infection; rVSV-ΔG-mCherry,
recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus expressing a red fluorescent construct.
a

Medium is filtered using 0.2-µm filter cups to eliminate precipitates present in the FBS.

Block buffera
Component

Concentration

PBS

1× supplemented with:

BSA

2% (w/v)

Fish gelatin

0.2% (w/v)

Antibiotic/antimycotic

1% (v/v) (1:100)

Human serum, normal

5% (v/v) (1:20)

BSA, bovine serum albumin; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline.
a

Buffer is sterile filtered and frozen in aliquots.

Wash buffer
Component

Concentration

PBS

1× supplemented with:

Antibiotic/antimycotic

1% (v/v) (1:100)

PBS, phosphate-buffered saline.

71

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cell Painting Palette 1a

a

Component

Dilution

Wheat germ agglutinin, Alexa Fluor™ 488 conjugate

1:2,000

Texas Red™-X Phalloidin

1:400

Concanavalin A, Alexa Fluor™ 633 conjugate

1:200

Hoechst 33342

1:10,000

Diluted in block buffer.

Cell Painting Palette 2a

a

Component

Dilution

Wheat germ agglutinin, Alexa Fluor™ 488 conjugate

1:2,000

Phalloidin iFluor 700 prediluted stock (1:10 in DMSO)

1:10,000

Concanavalin A, Alexa Fluor™ 633 conjugate

1:200

Hoechst 33342

1:10,000

Diluted in block buffer.

FACS buffer
Component

Concentration

DPBS

Supplemented with

Human serum

5%

DPBS, Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline; FACS, fluorescence-activated cell sorting.

72

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FACS antibody mix
Component

Volume

FACS buffer

100 µL

APC-H7_MouseAntiHuman_CD3, Lot 9172768

2.5 µL

PE_MouseAntiHuman_CD19, Lot 9156749

10 µL

BB515MouseAntiHuman_CD56, Lot 9309302

2.5 µL

BB700 Mouse Anti-Human CD11c, Lot 9350423

2.5 µL

APC_MouseAntiHuman_CD14, Lot 9010704

10 µL

FACS, fluorescence-activated cell sorting.

General Experimental Notes
●

Fetal bovine serum (FBS) was heat inactivated at 56 °C for 30 min before use and
stored frozen in small aliquots. An aliquot was thawed for each prepared bottle of
medium

●

Medium was prepared fresh on the day of plating

●

Trigger medium was filtered to eliminate precipitations in FBS

●

Unless indicated, 5-mL serological pipettes were used throughout the protocol to
minimize cell death

●

5× Trigger medium contained 5× DMSO, 5× rVSV-ΔG-mCherry, 5× test compound, and
5× FBS to obtain a final DMSO concentration of 0.1%, rVSV-ΔG-mCherry at 10× MOI,
0.33 µM or 5.3 µM compound, and 10% FBS

●

All centrifugation steps were performed at room temperature (22 °C)

73

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.223875; this version posted July 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

●

Thawing and wash steps were performed with warm culture medium (37 °C)

74

