bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Complex Systems Analysis Informs on the Spread of COVID-19

Xia Wang1, Dorcas Washington2, Georg F. Weber3*
1

University of Cincinnati Department of Mathematical Sciences, Cincinnati, OH, USA
2
3

University of Cincinnati Health Science Library, Cincinnati, OH, USA

University of Cincinnati Academic Health Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA

* send correspondence to: Georg F. Weber, James L. Winkle College of Pharmacy, University of
Cincinnati, 231 Albert Sabin Way, OH 45267-0514. E-mail: georg.weber@uc.edu, phone 513558-0947.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract
The non-linear progression of new infection numbers in a pandemic poses challenges to
the evaluation of its management. The tools of complex systems research may aid in attaining
information that would be difficult to extract with other means. To study the COVID-19 pandemic,
we utilize the reported new cases per day for the globe, nine countries and six US states through
October 2020. Fourier and univariate wavelet analyses inform on periodicity and extent of change.
Evaluating time-lagged data sets of various lag lengths, we find that the autocorrelation function,
average mutual information and box counting dimension represent good quantitative readouts for
the progression of new infections. Bivariate wavelet analysis and return plots give indications of
containment versus exacerbation. Homogeneity or heterogeneity in the population response,
uptick versus suppression, and worsening or improving trends are discernible, in part by plotting
various time lags in three dimensions. The analysis of epidemic or pandemic progression with the
techniques available for observed (noisy) complex data can aid decision making in the public
health response.
Keywords
COVID-19, epidemiology, new infections, complex systems, autocorrelation, fractal dimension,
average mutual information, wavelet analysis

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Introduction
The spread of infectious diseases depends on pathogen factors (virulence), host factors
(immunity), and – on the population level – on countermeasures taken by the community. Such
measures cover a broad spectrum of possible engagements, and they may be highly
consequential for the course of an epidemic or a pandemic [1]. The analysis of acute infectious
progression in a society is critical for gauging the effectiveness of public health responses, but it
is made difficult through the non-linear nature of the underlying process. Conventional
approaches of reductionist research or common linearization techniques are not meaningfully
applicable.
Various strategies have been employed to account for the complexity of infectious
propagation. The spread of COVID-19 has been modeled with machine learning [2], networks of
compartments [3] and cellular automata [4]. Power laws have been inferred [5]. Such
investigations are of value, even though they are inevitably based on idealizing assumptions. In
addition to modeling approaches, the analysis of actually observed data is of critical importance.
The numbers in such data sets are noisy, and they are eminently non-linear (also described as
“complex data” or “observed chaotic data” [6]). Complex systems research has made techniques
and algorithms available to extract information from observed non-linear data series.
The manifestations of the COVID-19 pandemic have varied widely among geographic
areas, when compared across countries [3,7,8] as well as across US states [9], depending on
when the virus reached them, what the population characteristics were at the time of onset, and
what actions were taken in response to the infectious spread. Here, we set out to investigate
underlying patterns. We apply basic tools of complex systems research to compare the spread of
COVID-19 in distinct countries, characterized by their varying approaches to the pandemic, from
its beginning stages through early or late October 2020. Further, we compare various regions
within the USA, which has left major decisions to the individual states. Patterns are discernible in
Fourier and wavelet analyses. Order can be detected in time-lagged plots. Therefrom, quantitative
measurements are obtainable, including autocorrelation, average mutual information, fractal
dimension, and embedding dimension, which inform on the pandemic progression.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Methods
Source data: Here we analyze the new infections per day, either as absolute numbers or as rates
per 10,000 inhabitants. The source data utilized for the present analysis came from Bing COVID19 Tracker (www.bing.com/covid).
Fourier spectrum and univariate wavelet analysis: Fourier analysis evaluates the spectral density
by relative numbers of new infections (case rates per 10,000 inhabitants) versus frequency or
versus period. Wavelet analysis does not assume stationarity in the time-series. Thus, it allows
the study of localized periodic behavior. In particular, we look for regions of high-power in the
frequency-time plot. The calculations for wavelet analyses of new infections were done in R. In
WaveletComp, the null hypothesis, that there is no periodicity in the series, is tested via p-values
obtained from simulation, where the model to be simulated can be chosen from a range of options
[10]. The algorithm analyzes the frequency structure of uni- or bivariate time series using the
Morlet wavelet. The time series to be analyzed was standardized, after detrending, in order to
obtain a measure of the wavelet power, which is relative to unit-variance white noise and directly
comparable to results of other time series. Detrending is accomplished using polynomial
regression. Where indicated, all graphs are normalized to the same y-axis scale.
Bivariate wavelet analysis: We conducted bivariate analysis of lagged data (t versus t+7 or t+14
or t+21) for joint periodicity. The concepts of cross-wavelet analysis provide tools for comparing
the frequency contents by two time series as well as for drawing conclusions about their
synchronicity at certain periods and across certain ranges of time. While cross-wavelet power
corresponds to covariance in the time domain, wavelet coherence is a time-series measure similar
to correlation. Two waves are coherent if they have a constant relative phase. The bivariate
analysis results include the cross-wavelet power plot, the wavelet coherence plot, the average
power plot and the phase difference image. The cross-wavelet power and coherence plot contain
arrows showing the area of significant joint periods (significance level = 0.05). The direction of
these arrows indicating the direction of phase differences. Up-right pointing arrows indicate that
the two series are in phase and x(t) series leads, while down-right pointing arrows indicate the
two series are in-phase and x(t+n) series leads. Similarly, up-left pointing arrows express that the
two series are out of phase and x(t+n) series leads, while down-left pointing arrows express that
the two series are out of phase and x(t) series leads. The arrows are only plotted within white
contour lines indicating significance at the 10% level. A more explicit global view of the phase
difference can be produced with (π/2, π) and (-π, - π /2) for out of phase and (-π /2, π /2) for in-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

phase. The time-averaged cross-wavelet power provides a summarized view on the shared
periods, the corresponding power and the statistical significance. Cross-wavelet plots may mark
areas significant due to one series swinging widely, rather than two series sharing a joint period.
To avoid this false positive readout, it is more appropriate to examine wavelet coherence plots,
like the coefficient of correlation. It has a value range between 0 and 1 and it shows statistical
significance only in areas where the two series actually share jointly significant periods.
Return plots: From the total numbers of new infections, we generated return plots with increasing
lags, plotting daily changes x(t+1), …, x(t+7) versus x(t) and weekly changes x(t+14), …, x(t+49)
versus x(t). Short time lags tend to cluster around the 45o angle, whereas increasing time delays
reveal the structure of the oscillations. When graphed in 3 dimensions, these diagrams can aid in
reconstructing the underlying attractor.
Autocorrelation: A time series sometimes repeats patterns or has other properties, whereby
earlier values display some relation to later values. The autocorrelation statistic (serial correlation
statistic) measures the degree of that affiliation as it refers to linear dependence. The magnitude
of its dimensionless number reflects the extent of similarity. The formula for autocorrelation Rm is
comprised of terms for autocovariance and variance
𝑎𝑢𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 =

𝑎𝑢𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒
𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒

1 N―m
∑t=1 (𝑥𝑡 ― 𝑥)(𝑥𝑡+𝑚 ― 𝑥)
𝑁
𝑅𝑚 =
1 N
∑ (𝑥 ― 𝑥)2
𝑁 t=1 𝑡
Autocorrelation coefficients range from -1 to +1, with +1 indicating perfect synchrony and -1
reflecting exact mirror images. An absence of any correlation yields Rm = 0.
Box counting dimension: The dimension of a fractal is best described as a non-integer. The
dimension is a quantitative measure for the evaluation of geometric complexity by objects. A
general relationship assumes
𝑑𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ∝

log (𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠)
1
log (
)
𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑒 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒

Here, the characteristic of dimension is that it specifies the rate, at which the number of increments
varies with scale size. We calculated the box counting dimension after binning into 16 x 16
squares of 2-dimensional return plots with various lags.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Average mutual information: The average mutual information (ami) represents a non-linear
correlation function, which indicates how much common information is shared by the
measurements of x(t) and x(t+n). The average mutual information was calculated with the mutual
function R package tseriesChaos. It estimates the mutual information index for a specified number
of lags. The joint probability distribution function is estimated with a simple bi-dimensional density
histogram.
Embedding dimension: Here by R package nonlinearTseries, we first use the timeLag function to
decide the optimal time lag 𝜏 based on the average mutual information and then by the
estimateEmbeddingDim function to assess the optimal embedding dimension m. Then the optimal
set of regressors related to x(t) is x(t- 𝜏), …, x(t-(m-1) 𝜏), x(t- m 𝜏).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Results
1. Comparison across Countries
Across countries, a wide spectrum of measures was taken to curb the spread of SARSCoV2. This resulted in a range of very different progression curves when graphing the numbers
of new infections over time (Figure 1). India, Brazil, Sweden, Italy and the United States have
been considered as hard-hit for their own internal reasons. France, Germany, over a long period
Poland, and South Korea had tighter control and a less aggressive spread. All curves display
close to linear ramp-up phases, followed by more or less irregular oscillations. The levels of
success at suppressing the new infection rates diverged among countries, and several are
experiencing a second peak.
Wavelet methodology aids in studying periodic phenomena in time series, particularly in
the presence of potential frequency changes over time. For cross-country evaluations, all graphs
were plotted on the same scale (Figure 2A). Each country was also plotted on its own scale
(Figure 2B). The univariate analysis of the time course for the countries under study shows
prominence of the recent upswing in France (heat intensity on the right margin of the graph). By
contrast, there is comparatively more successful management by Italy, Germany, Poland and
South Korea through October 2020. India, Brazil, Sweden, and the United States display cyclical
fluctuations of various durations, none of which have been contained. A period of 7 days is
prominent in the fluctuations of most countries, which may reflect real cyclicity or weekly reporting
habits. The worldwide data are displayed in Figure S1.
For cross-country comparisons, we converted the new infection total numbers to new
infection rates by relating them to 10,000 members of the population (Figure 3A). Similarly,
complex systems can be analyzed with Fourier analysis. We first plotted Fourier power spectra
versus frequency for the rates of new infections (Figure 3B). Spectral density range (high in Brazil,
low in South Korea) and frequency distribution provide a readout for infectious spread. The
spectral density of the normalized rates (identically scaled y-axes) (Figure 3C) confirmed good
management of the pandemic spread in Germany, Poland, and South Korea (and to some degree
in Italy). Despite the progressive increase in the numbers of infections in India, on a population
basis, control has apparently not been lost through October 2020. By contrast, the power spectra
for Brazil, Sweden, and France are reflective of potentially adverse developments. The United
States display an anomaly with a periodic behavior that has a prominent cycle around 100 days.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

To gain a better understanding of the dynamics, with which disease spread occurs, we
investigated progressive numbers of new infections in comparison to their increasing time lags.
This approach may reveal periodicities or aid in the visualization of attractors. Expectedly, short
time delays were associated with little change. With a lag time of about 7 days onward, distinct
patterns emerged among countries. According to bivariate wavelet analysis for time-delayed data
series (including the cross-wavelet power plot, wavelet coherence plot, average power plot and
phase difference image), Italy, Germany and South Korea shared significantly joint periods of 12 months in the comparison x(t) versus x(t+7). South Korea has comparatively high power and
significant shared periods around 3 weeks at the early stage and later the significant shared
periods are also 1-2 months. The remaining countries all have segments of shorter periods
(around 7 days) and longer periods shared. For India, Brazil, France, USA and Poland, the shared
7-day period only appear significant in the later part of the series. Similar results are observed in
the analyses for x(t) versus x(t+14) and x(t) versus x(t+21). The phase difference plots show that
in the shared longer periods, x(t) are mostly in phase with x(t+7), while they gradually become out
of phase in x(t) versus x(t+14) and x(t) versus x(t+21), thus making longer lags more
discriminating and informative (Figure 4A and Figure S2A,B). A reduction in cross-wavelet power
levels is apparent in Italy, Germany and South Korea. Poland and France are experiencing recent
increases. India, Brazil and the USA have had protracted periods of high cross-wavelet power
levels. Containment is associated with longer periodicity in the distribution of cross-wavelet power.
This is the case for South Korea, Germany and Italy. High cross-wavelet power around a
periodicity of 7 days is reflective of poor control.
To generate informative return plots, we utilized 3 dimensions, which allows for the
visualization of two lags from x(t) (or a from a later start point) and may reveal the pattern of an
attractor. In this depiction, a rapid increase or decrease in new infections is reflected in a closeto straight line, oscillations generate a near-toroid attractor, while successful management shrinks
the torus and moves it closer to the origin. Initially, we evaluated multiple time delays. Most
discriminating were x(t)/x(t+7)/x(t+14), x(t+3)/x(t+7)/x(t+14), and x(t+5)/x(t+14)/x(t+28) (Figure
4B). The progressive increase in new cases over the time period in India is reflected in a
predominantly linear curve on each scale. The wide fluctuations in Brazil generate a largely
disordered appearance. Disorder is also apparent in Sweden. France initially managed the
pandemic well, but is experiencing a dramatic upswing, which obscures order. Cyclical patterns,
suggesting the outlines of attractors, are apparent in USA, Italy, Germany, and South Korea
(where most data points are concentrated near the origin). Poland initially displayed a well-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

contained attractor, but the recent substantial upswing in new infections is reflected in a linear
progression from there (for separate analyses of the two phases, see Figure S3). We also
calculated the embedding dimensions for the lagged data (Figure 4C). Germany has the highest
embedding dimension of 10, followed by Poland with 9. Several countries have an embedding
dimension of 7, including Brazil, Sweden, USA and South Korea. Italy and France have the
embedding dimension equal to 5. India is unusual due to its longer lag period of 24 days. When
the lag period is set at 7 days, the embedding dimension of India is also equal to 7. For the
worldwide data, the calculated embedding dimension is 7 with a time lag of 1 (not shown).
The autocorrelation of two data strings with short time lags is expected to be high
(approaching 1.0) because there is little opportunity for dramatic change (high infection rates on
day t likely produce similarly high numbers on the consecutive day t+1, while low numbers are
followed by few new infections on the next day). Autocorrelation may remain high for extended
lags in the initial ramp-up and at the oscillatory stage, depending on the regularity of the
fluctuations. A society that succeeds in curbing the disease spread will leave the highly correlated
initial ramp-up and consecutive oscillatory phases, thus displaying a gradual decrease in values
at the longer lags. The decline in the autocorrelation numbers of progressively lagged data by
country appeared to be reflective of the stringency, with which the pandemic was addressed
(Figure 5A). From a lag of 6 onward, Poland and South Korea have substantially declining values
(although due to the recent steep upswing in new infections, Poland deviates from the trend at
very long lags), Germany shows a dramatic lowering at a lag of 21 and above. By contrast, India
and Brazil stay uniformly high. So do the global numbers, which are inherently heterogeneous.
The average mutual information reflects information shared by the measurements of x(t)
and x(t+n). Expectedly, it declines with increasing lag. Poland starts with a relatively low value
(1.15 at t versus t+1) and shows a rapid decrease with longer lag. It then stays around at a low
level of 0.15 from lags of 21 to 49 days. France displays a gradually decreasing trend with the
average mutual information starting at 1.60 and ending at 0.34 at the lag of 49 days. India shows
a similar pattern as France but with much higher average mutual information (due to the constant
uptick in numbers), ranging between 2.61 and 1.37. Four other countries, including Germany,
USA, Sweden and Brazil, all express relatively flat average mutual information values, staying
around levels of 2.20 for the USA and Brazil, 1.5 for Germany, and 1.3 for Sweden. Reflecting
progressively improved control, Italy and South Korea also have decreasing trends, but much
flatter at 1.96-1.36 for Italy and 1.26 to 0.66 for South Korea, respectively (Figure 5B).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

A rapid increase in new infections is reflected in a small fractal dimension (practically
approximated by the box counting dimension with values between 1 and 2) of the 2-dimensional
return plots with progressive lags. Intermediate phases are characterized by higher fractal
dimensions (approaching 2), depending on the nature of the oscillations. Conversely, successful
management through the reduction in new infections should be reflected in a contraction of the
attractor on the return plot, which is assessable through the box counting dimension. A trend is
displayed in the comparisons from shorter to longer lag periods. Distinct management strategies
across different countries generate a heterogeneous pattern worldwide, rendering the fractal
dimension high regardless of the lag in x(t+n) versus x(t) plots. Steep increases in new infections
(Poland, India) have dimensions close to 1. Intermediate phases are characterized by higher
numbers. Successful fights against the pandemic (South Korea) are causative for declining size
dimensions with increasing lag (Figure 5C).
2. Comparison across US States
Within the USA, individual states have encountered a rather wide range of progression
phenotypes in the spread of new COVID-19 infections (Figure 6). This is due to variations in
international connectedness and population density (reflected in the early peaks in the
Northeastern states New York and Massachusetts), holiday travel (Florida), policy decisions and
other factors.
Wavelet analysis of new infections (one scale across all states) shows good control (right
side of the graph) after initial affliction (left area) for Massachusetts and New York, which having
had early spikes in new infections have achieved good success in containment. Through the
observation period, control has not been maintained in Ohio. The periodicity in individual states
(each on their own scales) is poorly defined, except for Florida and Ohio, where 7 days yield a
prominent signal (Figure 7A,B).
We normalized the new infection numbers to rates by relating them per 10,000 inhabitants
(Figure 8A). Figure 8B shows the periodogram for the 6 states under investigation with
frequencies between 0 and 0.10 (the graph is almost flat for the higher frequencies). There exist
clear heterogeneous patterns in the comparison among these states. New York and
Massachusetts display steadily decreasing spectral density values from the longest period to
around 1-2 weeks (corresponding to a frequency range around 0.07-0.14). Florida and Texas

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

share similar patterns with a few low spikes in their periodograms after the first 3 highest ones.
The graph for California flattens out after the lowest three frequencies, with the longest period
(the whole series) having the highest value. Ohio’s pattern is quite unique with fluctuating values
from the longest periods through around 5-6 weeks. The Fourier power spectrum for the infection
rates (Figure 8C) indicates similar periodic patterns as in the periodograms of Figure 8B. These
patterns are less prominent due to the adjustment to the same y-axis scale (the scale reflects the
magnitude of the positive rates, the shape shows the evolution of the disease).
We conducted bivariate wavelet analysis on the time-lagged data (Figure 9A and Figure
S4). The shared synchronicity segments between x(t) and x(t+n) can be grouped into shorter
periods (around 7 days) and longer periods (approximately 3 weeks, 1 month, 2 months). New
York does not display substantial joint short periods. Ohio and Texas mainly have correlation at
the end of the series around the 7-day period. Massachusetts experiences joint periodicity around
the 7-day period at the early stage of the series. Florida and California have joint periods in the
middle of the observation time frame. The levels of average cross-wavelet power are higher in
states with poor control (x-axes scales for Florida, Ohio). The peak power shifts toward higher
periodicity with improved control (y-axes scales for New York, Massachusetts). The return plots
in 3 dimensions, utilizing the same time lags as for the countries, seemed to reflect contraction of
the attractor in Massachusetts, cyclicity in New York, Florida and California, no containment in
Texas, and an ejecting diagonal in Ohio which may reflect exacerbation (Figure 9B). The
embedding dimensions varies among states, such that the most contained states (New York,
Massachusetts) have the lowest embedding dimension (Table 1).
The autocorrelation for return plots of increasing lags show a progressive decline in the
numbers of New York and Massachusetts, which implemented strong containment measures
after having been afflicted early. The values decline less steeply for Texas and California. Ohio
displays an anomaly with increasing values for very long lags. The state, while not heavily afflicted
on a per capita basis, never achieved containment, only a stationary level, and has since
experienced another wave (Figure 10A). Up to a maximum lag of 49 days, the average mutual
information for the 6 US states under study ranges between 1.0 and 2.0. Overall, all states show
a slightly decreasing pattern except for California, which is relatively leveled at a value of 2.0
(Figure 10B). Unexpectedly, the box counting dimension (Figure 10C) is less discerning than it
was for the evaluation across countries. This may be due to the much lower power conveyed by
smaller population sizes.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Discussion
In the present investigation we find that the analysis tools for observed complex data can
aid in the interpretation of pandemic spread across communities. Difficulties in analyzing the nonlinear patters of infectious disease spread may be tamed by applying the tools of complex systems
research. The approach can reveal patterns, where a simple time course of new cases does not.
Further, non-linear analysis allows the study into various facets of the process, depending on
whether the starting data are new cases, hospitalizations, deaths or other readouts. Maps can be
generated and evaluated for their fractal dimensions [11]. The operational approximation of
Lyapunov exponents may be meaningful, although they were largely uninformative for the present
study (Supplemental Figure S5).
Among the countries analyzed, South Korea has had the most successful control of the
pandemic spread according to low intensity in univariate wavelet analysis, low spectral density
range in Fourier analysis, low spectral density of the normalized rates, a reduction in crosswavelet power levels according to bivariate wavelet analysis and longer periodicity in the
distribution of cross-wavelet power. Further, declining box counting dimensions, autocorrelation
values with increasing time lag, and decreasing trends (at a low slope) in average mutual
information confirm containment. Cyclical patterns in return plots, suggesting the outlines of
attractors, are apparent and most data points are concentrated near the origin of the graph.
Germany exhibited good management through October 2020 according to univariate wavelet
analysis, spectral density in the power spectrum of the normalized rates, a reduction of crosswavelet power levels in bivariate wavelet analysis, longer periodicity in the distribution of crosswavelet power, a dramatic lowering of autocorrelation values at a lag of 21 and above, and
relatively flat average mutual information values, staying around levels of 1.5. Cyclical patterns in
return plots suggest the outlines of an attractor. Good control by Italy consecutive to the early
impact and through October 2020 is reflected in low intensity and fluctuation when applying
univariate wavelet analysis, in a reduction of cross-wavelet power levels for bivariate wavelet
analysis of time-delayed data, longer periodicity in the distribution of cross-wavelet power, and
decreasing trends (at a low slope) in average mutual information. Cyclical patterns in return plots,
suggesting the outlines of an attractor, are apparent. Poland had two distinct phases. By
univariate wavelet analysis and density in the power spectrum of normalized rates, there was
indication of good management through October 2020. According to bivariate wavelet analysis
for time-delayed data series and return plots, the recent substantial upswing in new infections is
reflected, which also results in box counting dimensions close to 1. From a lag of 6 onward, Poland

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

has substantially declining autocorrelation values, although due to the recent steep upswing in
new infections, the trend reverses at very long lags. The average mutual information starts with a
relatively low value (1.15 at t versus t+1) and shows a rapid decrease with longer lag, staying
level from lags of 21 to 49 days. In the United States, univariate wavelet analysis displays cyclical
fluctuations of various durations, none of which have been contained. According to bivariate
wavelet analysis for time-delayed data series, there have been protracted periods of high crosswavelet power levels. Cyclical patterns in return plots, suggesting the outlines of attractors, are
apparent. The USA expresses relatively flat average mutual information values, staying around
levels of 2.20. In France, univariate wavelet analysis of the time course shows prominence of the
recent upswing (heat intensity on the right margin of the graph), the power spectrum is reflective
of potentially adverse developments. The second wave of infections is apparent in bivariate
wavelet analysis and in the obscured order in return plots. France displays a gradually decreasing
trend of average mutual information. India expresses cyclical fluctuations of various durations in
univariate wavelet analysis, none of which have been contained. On a population bases, the
spectral density suggests that control has not been lost through October 2020. Bivariate wavelet
analysis shows protracted periods of high cross-wavelet power levels, return plots reflect the
progressive increase in new cases over the time period in a predominantly linear curve on each
scale, box counting dimensions are close to 1, and autocorrelation values stay uniformly high with
increasing time lag. India displays a gradually decreasing trend of average mutual information.
Brazil experiences cyclical fluctuations of various durations in univariate wavelet analysis, none
of which have been contained. By Fourier analysis, the spectral density range is high. The power
spectrum is indicative of potentially adverse developments. According to bivariate wavelet
analysis, there have been protracted periods of high cross-wavelet power levels. In return plots,
the wide fluctuations generate a largely disordered appearance. The autocorrelation values stay
uniformly high. Brazil expresses relatively flat average mutual information values, staying around
levels of 2.20. Sweden shows cyclical fluctuations of various durations in univariate wavelet
analysis, none of which have been contained. The power spectrum is reflective of potentially
adverse developments. In return plots, disorder is apparent. Sweden expresses relatively flat
average mutual information values.
Prima facie, the curves of new infections versus time for three Western European
countries, France, Italy, and Germany, appear similar. Complex systems analysis reveals the
upswing in France to be much more perilous than the increases in the curves of new infections
by the other two countries. The management of infectious spread also requires improvements in

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

the United States, Sweden and Brazil. The selection of the observation period can dramatically
influence the results. Poland was initially very successful in containing the pandemic, but then
experienced a substantial upswing. Analyzing these two phases individually or in conjunction
yields very different data sets, which inform about distinct aspects of the infectious progression.
The fluctuations of new infections in an epidemic or a pandemic pose challenges to the
evaluation whether a decline reflects true containment (“rounding the corner”) or just the calm
before another wave. The readouts of non-linear systems analysis can aid in making such a
distinction. A complex occurrence that experiences containment will strive toward a point attractor
in phase space and move toward the origin. Such a progression is represented in a declining
fractal dimension, and the transition from fluctuations (often associated with a torus attractor)
toward limitation of new cases is expected to reduce the autocorrelation.
One constraint of complex systems analysis is the need for large data sets. In this regard,
the availability of about 230 data points (daily new cases March through October 2020) for each
geographic area in this study is somewhat low. The robustness of pertinent studies increases with
larger data sets over time. Reporting errors could have a non-trivial impact, and may be reflected
in the frequent occurrence of a peak at 7 days in the spectral analysis (possibly indicating weekly
totals). This problem can be addressed by utilizing moving averages. The homogeneity or
heterogeneity in management by the community under study determines the noise level. The
worldwide numbers of new infections have a lot of background due to varying patterns across
countries.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgements
GFW is supported by NIH grant CA224104.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References
[1] Christakis NA. Apollo’s Arrow: The Profound and Enduring Impact of Coronavirus on the Way
We Live. New York (Hachette Book Group) 2020.
[2] Mehta M, Julaiti J, Griffin P, Kumara S. Early Stage Machine Learning–Based Prediction of
US County Vulnerability to the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Machine Learning Approach. JMIR Public
Health and Surveillance 2020;6: e19446.
[3] Wang K, Ding L, Yan Y, Dai C, Qu M, Jiayi D, Hao X. Modelling the initial epidemic trends of
COVID-19 in Italy, Spain, Germany, and France. PLoS ONE 2020;15:e0241743.
[4] Bin S, Sun G, Chen C-C. Spread of Infectious Disease Modeling and Analysis of Different
Factors on Spread of Infectious Disease Based on Cellular Automata. Int J Environ Res Public
Health 2019;16:4683.
[5] Blasius, B. Power-law distribution in the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases. Chaos
2020;30:093123.
[6] Abarbanel HDI. Analysis of Observed Chaotic Data. Switzerland (Springer Nature) 1995.
[7] Chakraborty I, Maity P. COVID-19 outbreak: Migration, effects on society, global environment
and prevention. Science of the Total Environment 2020;728:138882.
[8] Bertacchini F, Bilotta E, Pantano PS. On the temporal spreading of the SARSCoV-2. PLoS
ONE 2020;15:e0240777.
[9] White ER, Hébert-Dufresne L. State-level variation of initial COVID-19 dynamics in the United
States. PLoS ONE 2020;15:e0240648.
[10] Roesch A, Schmidbauer H. WaveletComp: Computational Wavelet Analysis. R package
version 1.1. 2018. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=WaveletComp
[11] Păcurar C-M, Necula B-R. An analysis of COVID-19 spread based on fractal interpolation
and fractal dimension. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 2020;139,110073.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Tables and Figures
Figure 1: Time-Course of Disease Spread by Country. Numbers of new cases, x(t), per day
versus time (t, indicating the date). Shown are the curves for (top to bottom, left to right) the globe,
India, Brazil, Sweden, Italy, USA, France, Germany, Poland, and South Korea. Note the different
scales of the y-axes.
Figure 2: Univariate Wavelet Analysis. Cross-Wavelet Power Spectrum in the Time-Period
Domain. The x-axis (index) displays the time progression, whereas the y-axis depicts the length
of the period. White contour lines indicate significance of periodicity on the 0.1 level for probability
of error. Lines represent the ridge of cross-wavelet power. The color bar reveals the power
gradient. A) All countries on the same scale. B) Each country on its own scale.
Figure 3: Fourier Analysis. A) New Infection Rates. Daily reported new numbers of infections
divided by 10,000 inhabitants. The x-axis shows the calendar date. B) Power Spectrum. Fourier
power spectra versus frequency for. new infections per 10,000 inhabitants per day in each of 9
countries. C) Normalized Power Spectrum. Spectral density (y-axis) versus period (in days) for
infection rates per 10,000 inhabitants (x-axis). The curve shows the smoothed spectral density
estimates. All y-axes have the same scale.
Figure 4: Time-Lagged Data Analysis. A) Bivariate Wavelet Analysis. Shown are crosswavelet power plot, wavelet coherence plot, average power plot and phase difference image (from
left to right in each row) Time-lagged data were used for x(t)/x(t+14) (for the lags x(t)/x(t+7) and
x(t)/x(t21) see Figure S2). White contour lines indicate significance for joint periodicity, black
arrows depict the phase difference in the areas with significant joint periods. The solid red dots
on the average power plot (the third from the left) depict significant joint periods at a probability of
error of 0.1. Where shown, the color bars reveal the ranges of cross-wavelet power levels. B)
Return Plots in 3 Dimensions. Time-lagged return plots in 3 dimensions are shown, from left to
right, for x(t)/x(t+7)/x(t+14), x(t+3)/x(t+7)/x(t+14), and x(t+5)/x(t+14)/x(t+28). Each country of
interest has its own row. C) Embedding Dimension. The plots show how Cao’s algorithm uses
2 functions in order to estimate the embedding dimension from the time series (the E1(d) and
E2(d) functions), where d denotes the dimension.
Figure 5: Readouts of Complexity for Lagged Data on COVID-19 Spread by Country. A)
Autocorrelation. Bar graph of the autocorrelation in COVID-19 spread with each bar color

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

representing a different country. The selected time lags are indicated on the x-axis, all are
calculated versus x(t). B) Average Mutual Information. Bar graph of average mutual information
in COVID-19 spread with each bar color representing a different country. The selected time lags
as indicated on the x-axis are all calculated versus x(t). C) Fractal Dimensions. Box counting
dimensions are calculated for 2-dimensional return plots of increasing lags, x(t+7) versus x(t)
through x(t+35) versus x(t). 9 countries are evaluated, and the worldwide numbers are shown on
the left. Poland is represented twice, over the entire evaluation period through 12 October 2020
(which contains a steep incline) and over the shorter phase of containment through 18 September
2020 (cont. = contained period).
Figure 6: Time-Course of Disease Spread for Individual US States. Numbers of new cases,
x(t), per day versus time (t, indicating the date). Shown are the curves for (top to bottom, left to
right) Massachusetts, New York, Florida, Texas, California, and Ohio.
Figure 7: Univariate Wavelet Analysis. Wavelet power spectrum in the time-period domain.
Contour lines indicate significance of periodicity with 0.1 significance level. Black lines indicate
the ridge of wavelet power. The color bar reveals the power gradient. A) All states on the same
scale. B) Each state on its own scale.
Figure 8: Fourier Analysis. A) New infection Rates. Daily reported new numbers of infections
divided by 10,000 inhabitants (infection rates). The x-axis shows the calendar date. B) Power
Spectrum. Periodogram plot on the series of the new infection rates. The x-axis is the frequency
(per day) and the y-axis represents the spectral density. The y-axis ranges vary among graphs.
C) Normalized Power Spectrum. Spectral density versus period (in days) for infection rates. All
y-axes have the same scale.
Figure 9: Time-Lagged Data Analysis by US State. A) Bivariate Wavelet Analysis. Shown
are cross-wavelet power plot, wavelet coherence plot, average power plot and phase difference
image (from left to right on each row) Time-lagged data were used for x(t)/x(t+14) (for the lags
x(t)/x(t+7) and x(t)/x(t21) see Figure S4). White the contour lines indicate significance of joint
periodicity, black arrows indicate the phase difference in the areas with significant joint periods.
The solid red dots on the average power plot (the third from the left) reflect significant joint periods
at a significance level of 0.1. B) Return Plots in 3 Dimensions. Time-lagged return plots in 3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

dimensions are shown, from left to right, for x(t)/x(t+7)/x(t+14), x(t+3)/x(t+7)/x(t+14), and
x(t+5)/x(t+14)/x(t+28). Each state under investigation has its own row.
Figure 10: Readouts of Complexity for Time-Lagged Data by U.S. State. 6 US states have
been evaluated. A) Autocorrelation. Bar graph of the autocorrelation in COVID-19 spread with
each bar color representing a different US state. The selected time lags are indicated on the xaxis, all are calculated versus x(t). B) Average Mutual Information. Bar graph of average mutual
information in COVID-19 spread with each bar color representing a different state. The selected
time lags are indicated on the x-axis, all are calculated versus x(t). C) Fractal Dimensions. Box
counting dimensions are calculated for 2-dimensional return plots of increasing lags, x(t+7) versus
x(t) through x(t+35) versus x(t).
Table 1: Embedding Dimension for Time-Lagged Data by U.S. State. Embedding dimensions
were calculated according to Cao’s algorithm, which uses 2 functions in order to estimate the
embedding dimension from the time series. The table shows the calculated time lags and
embedding dimensions for each U.S. state under study.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplement

Figure S1: Power Spectrum and Univariate Wavelet Analysis for Worldwide New
Cases. A) Wavelet analysis and model fit (minimum power level: 0, significance level: 0.05,
only coi: false, only ridge: false). B) Fourier analysis.
Figure S2: Bivariate Wavelet Analysis by Country. The graphs represent cross-wavelet power
plot, wavelet coherence plot, average power plot and phase difference image (from left to right on
each row) Time-lagged data were used for x(t)/x(t+7) (A) and x(t)/x(t21) (B). White contour lines
depict joint significance of periodicity. Black arrows reflect the phase difference in the areas with
significantly joint periods. The solid red dots on the average power plot (the third from the left)
indicate significantly joint periods at a probability of error 0.1. The color bars reveal the crosswavelet power levels.
Figure S3: Return Plots in 3 Dimensions for Poland. New infections per day. Top) Entire
Observation Period. 10th March 2020 through 7th November 2020. Middle) Contained Phase.
Partial time frame through 18th September 2020. Bottom) Exacerbating Phase. Partial time
frame from 1st September 2020.
Figure S4: Bivariate wavelet analysis by US state. The graphs display cross-wavelet power
plot, wavelet coherence plot, average power plot and phase difference image (from left to right on
each row) Time-lagged data were used for x(t)/x(t+7) (A) and x(t)/x(t21) (B). White contour lines
indicate significance of joint periodicity. Black arrows indicate the phase difference in the areas
with significantly joint periods. The solid red dots on the average power plot (the third from the
left) indicate significance at a level of 0.1.
Figure S5: Evolution of Lyapunov exponents over time. For a discrete mapping x(t+1) = F(x(t))
we calculate the local expansion of the flow by considering the difference of 2 trajectories. The
Lyapunov characteristic exponent can be approximated as
𝜆 ≈ ln (|𝑥𝑛+1 ― 𝑦𝑛+1|/|𝑥𝑛 ― 𝑦𝑛|)
for

2

points

xn,yn

close

to

each

other

on

the

trajectory

[https://www.math.tamu.edu/~mpilant/math614/Matlab/Lyapunov/LorenzSpectrum.pdf].

The

changes of Lyapunov exponents are presented for the return plots of lags x(t+6) versus x(t),
x(t+14) versus x(t), x(t+21) versus x(t), and x(t+35) versus x(t). A) Countries. Shown are ranges
over 250 days. B) US States. Shown are ranges over 200 days. Mass. = Massachusetts.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.06.425544; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

