bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Genome Scale-Differential Flux Analysis reveals deregulation of lung
cell metabolism on SARS Cov2 infection
Piyush Nanda1, Amit Ghosh2,3*
1

Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal,
India-721302

2

School of Energy Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,
West Bengal, India-721302
3

P.K. Sinha Centre for Bioenergy and Renewables, Indian Institute of Technology
Kharagpur, West Bengal, India-721302

*Corresponding author:
Dr. Amit Ghosh
Assistant Professor
School of Energy Science & Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Kharagpur 721302, West Bengal, India
Email: amitghosh@iitkgp.ac.in
Ph: +91-3222-260804
Author Contributions
P.N. and A.G. designed the research; P.N. performed the research and calculations; P.N.
and A.G. analyzed the data. P.N. and A.G. wrote the paper.
Competing Interest Statement: No competing interests.
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic is posing an unprecedented threat to the whole world. In this
regard, it is absolutely imperative to understand the mechanism of metabolic
reprogramming of host human cells by SARS Cov2. A better understanding of the
metabolic alterations would aid in design of better therapeutics to deal with COVID-19
pandemic. We developed an integrated genome-scale metabolic model of normal human
bronchial epithelial cells (NHBE) infected with SARS Cov2 using gene-expression and
macromolecular make-up of the virus. The reconstructed model predicts growth rates of
the virus in high agreement with the experimental measured values. Furthermore, we
report a method for conducting genome-scale differential flux analysis (GS-DFA) in
context-specific metabolic models. We apply the method to the context-specific model
and identify severely affected metabolic modules predominantly comprising of lipid
metabolism. We conduct an integrated analysis of the flux-altered reactions, host-virus
protein-protein interaction network and phospho-proteomics data to understand the
mechanism of flux alteration in host cells. We show that several enzymes driving the
altered reactions inferred by our method to be directly interacting with viral proteins and
also undergoing differential phosphorylation under diseased state. In case of SARS Cov2
infection, lipid metabolism particularly fatty acid oxidation and beta-oxidation cycle
along with arachidonic acid metabolism are predicted to be most affected which confirms
with clinical metabolomics studies. GS-DFA can be applied to existing repertoire of
high-throughput proteomic or transcriptomic data in diseased condition to understand
metabolic deregulation at the level of flux.
Keywords
Genome-scale metabolic model, Flux Sampling, Virus-Host integrated model, SARS
Cov2, Multi-omics integration

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
In several disease conditions, metabolic reprogramming serves as the epicenter for loss of
homeostasis in the host cell(1–4). Metabolism allocates biochemical resources to the
cellular machinery. Disease progression either caused by internal disturbances in host cell
or attack by pathogenic intruders require reallocation of biochemical resources(5, 6).
Apart from resource synthesis, metabolism has also been shown to reciprocally interact
with other molecular events like epigenetic modifications and gene regulation(7–10). The
role of metabolism in several high incidence diseases like cancer(11, 12),
tuberculosis(13) and neuronal disorders(14) have been elucidated in fine details with the
advent in high-throughput technologies to study metabolites and underlying reactions.
Therefore, technological and methodological development in understanding metabolic
states of cells will help us in gaining better understanding of disease mechanisms and
strategies to design better therapeutics.
In the context of the current COVID-19 pandemic, several reports highlight the
deregulation of multiple metabolic pathways in the host cell in response to SARS Cov2
infection(15–17). Cases of altered lipid metabolism is observed in patients who were
infected with SARS Cov between 2002 and 2003, 12 years after their recovery.
Moreover, reports of altered tryptophan and lipid metabolism has been elucidated in
clinical samples of COVID-19 patients. Understanding the metabolic alterations at a
genome-scale will help us in gaining deeper insights into the mechanism of pathogenesis
beyond immunological effects. With increasing evidence on the importance of
metabolism in disease biology in particular the current COVID-19, it has become
imperative to develop technologies to probe into activities of reactions that underlie
metabolic pathways. Flux, which is defined as the reaction rate per unit biomass, directly
reflects on the homeostatic balance of the cell. Disturbance of cellular homeostasis due to
pathogenic intruders is clearly reflected in alterations in metabolic pathways. In this
regard, Genome-Scale Metabolic Models (GEMs) have been leveraged to understand flux
distributions(18–20) using tools like Flux Balance Analysis (FBA). Through years,
GEMs of human cell lines have been used for understanding progression of disease, hostpathogen interactions and up to neurological disorders. Algorithms like GIMME, iMAT,
MBA, INIT/tINIT have enabled us to incorporate gene expression or proteomics data into
the model (GEMs) and hence furnishing tissue or cell or condition specific GEMs(21).
This enables us to enlist reactions which are differentially altered between normal and
diseased state. Highly curated Human GEMs like Recon3D(22) and HumanGEM(23)
have incorporated finer details about the human metabolism. They have been validated
under multiple experimental conditions and have shown to be representative of the
human metabolism in both normal and diseased conditions.
Despite the advancement in metabolic modeling, most of the work has focused on
elucidating altered reactions based on differentially incorporated reactions in conditionspecific metabolic models. Such an approach, allows us to map the effects on gene
expression or enzyme production on reactions qualitatively. Our ability to find the degree
of alterations at the level of fluxes in such context specific models will enable us to
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

understand the activities of different pathways in the cell. Fluxes are a consequence of
interactions between several reactions, the structural features of the metabolic pathways
and the nutrient uptake rates(24). Limited analysis has been done to leverage the power
of metabolic flux analysis to probe into differences in fluxes between diseased and nondiseased state. The altered reactions calculated using the differences in flux would also
enable us to conduct enrichment analysis of pathways and pin point specific metabolic
modules altered between two conditions i.e. normal and diseased. Although
computational methods exists to infer metabolic changes using relative gene
expression(25) or transcriptome data(26) data but none infer differences at the level of
flux directly. FBA, while being a powerful tool in microbial systems biology, requires a
strict objective function such as specific growth rate(27). This restricts its usage in the
case of GEMs of higher eukaryotes where it’s difficult to define single cellular
objectives. Approaches like Flux Variability Analysis (FVA)(28) and flux sampling(29)
alleviate this problem by allowing us to obtain the limits of the solution space. These
tools have not been put into a statistical framework to allow us to conduct differential
flux analysis and pathway enrichment studies as we do for gene expression.
While such steady state approaches, allows us to predict reaction fluxes under given
conditions, it doesn’t speak much about the mechanism of flux regulation. To understand
the regulation of reactions, it becomes imperative to conduct integrative analysis of
metabolic flux analysis with other omics approaches. Omics datasets such as proteinprotein interaction networks and phosphorylation variations can help us in inferring the
prospective causative factors behind alterations in metabolic flux. Therefore, our ability
to develop pipelines for integrated analysis of drivers (alterations in post-translational
modifications of enzymes) and effects (fluxes) will enable us to obtain better insights into
disease mechanisms.
In this study, we developed a Genome-Scale Differential Flux Analysis (GS-DFA) that
leverages flux sampling and stringent statistical framework to report affected metabolic
modules in diseased conditions. We developed a context-specific integrated GEM of
SARS Cov2 infected NHBE cells leveraging the publicly available gene expression data.
We apply the GS-DFA to the context specific GEM of normal human lung cells or tissues
(NHBE and Lung Biopsy) and SARS Cov2 infected human lung cells. We show that
several expected pathways are affected and significant number of altered pathways have
associations with viral proteins through PPIs or/and altered phosphorylation landscape.
Several pathways such as fatty acid oxidation, fatty acid biosynthesis and amino acid
metabolism is affected in diseased state. Such pathways are also associated with the
production of immune-regulatory molecules like Leukotriene and Prostaglandins which
mediate cell-to-cell signaling and inflammatory response management(30). SARS Cov2
proteins interacts with multiple enzyme subunits driving the reactions we enlisted to be
differentially altered. This indicates a mechanism by which the virus possibly reprograms
the metabolism of the host cell in order to facilitate its growth and survival.
Results

Stoichiometric model of SARS Cov2 biomass
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Flux balance analysis requires a biomass equation which would serve as an objective
function for the underlying linear optimization problem(24). The biomass equation
describes the accurate stoichiometry of the biological system in question based on the
molecular make up of its constituent proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates and lipids. We
sought to define a similar biomass equation for SARS Cov2. Integrating the same into the
genome-scale metabolic model of the human lung cells would allow us to analyze the
host-virus metabolic interaction. Each virus particle comprises of a single stranded
positive sense RNA, proteins at the membrane and in complex with the RNA,
carbohydrates studded on some of the membrane proteins and a lipid bilayer(31) (Figure
1A). Leveraging the recent literature data on copy number of the macromolecules and
their chemical composition, we constructed a virus biomass objective function (or
biomass equation)-Cov2VBOF. We used spike-protein copy number per virion as a basis
to calculate the absolute copy number of proteins on the virus leveraging proteomics
datasets. Here, the fractional molecular contribution of each amino acid was calculated
solely from the copy number of proteins and their amino acid composition (Figure 1B).
Similarly, we used information on translational efficiency over the viral genome(32) and
the absolute copy number of the proteins, to calculate the mRNA levels resulting from
the viral genome. Several studies show the low GC content of the virus is intrinsically
linked to a strategy to avoid recognition by the innate immune system. Particularly, ZAP
proteins recruit themselves to CpG enriched regions and trigger host machinery to
degrade the viral genome(33). We therefore observe a lower fraction of GC in the SARS
Cov2 genome and the corresponding transcriptome (Figure 1C).
Phosphatidylcholine and Phosphatidylethanolamine occupied the highest lipid molar
fraction in the membrane whereas cholesterol occupied the lowest molar fraction (Figure
1D). The biomass equation has 44 biomass components including all 20 amino acids, 4
nucleotides, lipid and cholesterol, carbohydrates along with ATP required for
polymerization of the macromolecules. N-Acetyl Glucosamine (NAG) is a molecular
coating on the Spike protein of SARS Cov2 which allows the virus to mask the potential
epitopes against which the host cell can develop anti-bodies(34). The SARS Cov2
infection causes activates the NAG biosynthesis pathway in order to meet the viral
demands. To show the importance of biomass precursors towards fitness of the virus, we
conducted a biomass sensitivity analysis. Here, we tried to capture the effect of small
fluctuations (~10%) in coefficient of biomass precursor on the specific growth rate
prediction by FBA (Figure 1E and Figure S4). We show that the nucleotides (highest),
lipids and NAG (lowest but non-zero) affect the specific growth rate the most. Such an
analysis allows us to rank the biomass precursors based on their relative importance on
the fitness. As a significant fraction (Figure 1D) of SARS Cov2 biomass is based on its
nucleic acid, it is likely that fluctuations in their components will affect the growth rate
the most. The components of lipid membrane also affect the growth rate of the virus
significantly as unlike amino acids, they are de novo synthesized in the host cell.
Similarly, N-acetylglucosamine is synthesized de novo to serve as a carbohydrate coating
on the surface proteins of SARS Cov2. This analysis allows us to understand the biomass
components of SARS Cov2 whose variation might affect the growth rate of SARS Cov2
severely.
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We further integrated the Cov2VBOF into the context specific models of NHBE cells in
infected state. We showed the Cov2VBOF helps in accurately simulating the growth
kinetics of the virus upon infection. By varying the coefficient of each precursor by 50%
(an extreme variation), we were able to show the predicted growth rate shows no
significant difference with the experimental reported growth rates of the virus (p>0.05, ttest) (Figure 2C). As several different methods were used to measure the experimental
growth rate(35) in literature, the constructed biomass equation for SARS Cov2 confirms
with the realistic chemical composition of the virus.
Integration of transcriptomic profile in Human GEM
In the case of mammalian cells, it becomes particularly important to constrain the
reactions in the generalized HumanGEM metabolic model based on expression levels in
the cells to define the metabolic model of a given cell type. This eliminates reactions that
are lowly expressed in the specific cell/tissue while keeping reactions having high
expression or are required for basic metabolic functionality. We used task based INIT(36)
(Integrative Network Inference for Tissues) to define NHBE cell and Lung Biopsy
context specific metabolic models with and without viral infection. The TPM normalized
gene expression data(37) (Figure 2A) was integrated into the model as described in
material and methods. The NHBE background context specific metabolic models were
named as iNHBE and iNHBECov2 for normal NHBE and infected NHBE respectively.
Similarly, the lung biopsy specific metabolic models were named iLungsTissue and
iLungsTissueCov2. Majority of altered reactions in infected NHBE cells (iNHBECov2)
compared to normal NHBE (iNHBE) belonged to arachidonic acid metabolism, fatty acid
oxidation, fatty acid activation and few amino acid biosynthesis pathways of arginine,
proline and tyrosine (Figure 2D). Deregulation of arachidonic acid metabolism has been
reported earlier to be associated with coronavirus infection. Linoleic acid to arachidonic
acid metabolism axis is one of the most perturbed reactions as reported through
metabolomics analysis of HCov-229E infected cells(38). We also observe a perturbation
in Leukotriene pathways between the iNHBE and iNHBECov2 cells (Figure 2D).
Arachidonic acid is the precursor for the production of leukotrienes and prostaglandins
through oxidation(30). Leukotrienes are also important cell signaling molecules which
are involved in both autocrine and paracrine signaling(30). More particularly,
leukotrienes are important class of molecules that have chemotactic action of migrating
immune cells. Prostaglandins are mediators of inflammatory responses in the cell(30).
Similarly, between iLungsTissue and iLungsTissueCov2, apart from pathways affected as
in the case of NHBE, we observed differences in reactions belonging to carnitine shuttle
(endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria), glycerolipid and sphingolipid metabolism
(Figure 2D). There were also differences in several amino acid metabolism pathways of
glycine, serine, alanine and aspartate. The differences in prediction of affected reactions
in the case of NHBE cell context specific GEMs and Lung Biopsy context specific GEMs
could be due to the heterogeneity of tissue samples. The affected reactions in the case of
lung tissue biopsy presents the metabolic alterations at the level of tissue resulting from
metabolic interactions among the constituent cell types. NHBE cells are laboratory
adapted epithelial lung cells and the context specific GEMs corresponding to cellular
level response to the infection. We further compared the context specific GEMs of NHBE
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cells and the lung tissue biopsy to elucidate fundamental differences in metabolic state
both in infected and uninfected conditions. We used Hamming distance as a proxy for
quantifying the differences in the metabolic architecture of the context specific models
(Figure 2B). Carnitine shuttle pathway, which activates fatty acids and transports them
for fatty acid beta-oxidation, is a major affected pathway in the case of lung tissue biopsy
of infected patients compared to normal (Figure 2B). This pathway is not particularly
observed to be an affected pathway in the case of NHBE cells. We hypothesize the
differences might be due to metabolic interactions at the level of tissue and contribution
of heterogeneous cell types.
The Cov2VBOF was leveraged to measure the specific growth rate of the virus in the
context specific model of the infected NHBE cell. We used Flux Balance Analysis (FBA)
on the context specific model constrained by HAM media using Cov2VBOF as an
objective function. We repeated the FBA for several perturbations in the Cov2VBOF (to
account for effect of uncertainty in biomass composition on growth rate) and small
alterations in the uptake rates of nutrient in the infected conditions (Accounting for effect
of uncertainties in uptake rates of media components). We compared the predicted
specific growth rate to the experimental growth rate as reported in earlier(39). We could
find no significant differences between the predicted and experimental growth rate
(p>0.05, t-test) (Figure 2C). This is a strong evidence for the validity of the constructed
virus biomass objective function.
Furthermore, we tried to capture the effect of specific uptakes rates (mmol/gdw/hr) of
nutrients on the fitness of the virus in infected cells through phenotypic phase plane
analysis. Such an analysis allows to visualize the effects of alterations in uptake rates
(Phenotype 1) on the growth of the virus i.e. fitness (Phenotype 2) (Figure S1). It was
interesting to note that increased uptake rates of arginine severely affects the fitness of
the virus while it supplements the growth of the normal NHBE cells (Figure 2E). We also
noted the effect of decreased uptake of lysine and glutamate on the reduction in fitness of
the virus (Figure 2E). Amino acid transport in the cells are mostly driven by facilitated
diffusion through transporters. Therefore, the concentration of amino acids in the cellular
environment would dictate the uptake rate of amino acids. Similar approach of
supplementing or depleting amino acids have been used as therapeutic option for treating
of cancer and other diseases(40).
Context specific metabolic models of NHBE cells and lung biopsy helped us to catalogue
altered metabolic reactions between normal and infected condition. The network
properties of the metabolism and the gene-protein-reaction association captured by the
HumanGEM model combined with the gene expression data allowed us to analyze
altered metabolic phenotypes in diseased state. These models can be further leveraged to
reveal more biological insights into the metabolic state of the diseased cell using
powerful tools of metabolic flux or network analysis.
Differential Flux Analysis for hunting altered reactions in SARS Cov2 infected cell

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Integration of gene expression data into the highly curated HumanGEM pruned nonessential reactions while enriching important reactions. This helped us to generate context
specific models of normal and diseased cells. We further aimed at understanding the
alterations in metabolic flux in an infected cellular state. Such an analysis would pinpoint
specific reactions which show altered behavior in diseased state. While inferring altered
metabolic pathways have been conventionally done using differential gene expression
analysis, we show the limitations of such analysis. The presence of either isozymes
(multiple enzymes having same function) or multi-subunit complex (multiple subunits
contributing collectively towards a function) makes it difficult to infer the effects of
altered gene expression on metabolism(21). It is very well known that alterations in levels
of enzyme facilitating the rate limiting step can lead to changes in flux distributions in the
downstream reactions. In a hypothetical scenario (Figure 3A), we can see only the
alterations in the expression of Gene A is sufficient to change the flux through Reaction 1
which further pushes the flux through Reaction 2. This is irrespective of changes in
expression levels of Gene C and D. Therefore, to enlist affected reactions or pathways, it
is imperative to enumerate the flux distributions and conduct a differential flux analysis
on it.
Metabolic flux analysis allows us to understand the flux distribution in a model under a
given set of condition. While tools like FBA enable us to obtain possible flux values for
reactions throughout the metabolic model, it doesn’t guarantee uniqueness of the solution
and necessitates an objective function(21). Flux variability analysis and flux sampling
allow us to capture the extent of the flux solution space(28). Hence, the information of
the solution space can be used to understand the quantitative features of metabolic
phenotypes. We were further interested in comparing the flux solution spaces between
two conditions (normal vs. diseased) and highlight reactions that have altered flux. But
given the lack of precision in metabolic flux analysis, stringent statistical filtering is
important for such an analysis.
Flux sampling allows us to screen through all the possible flux values and generate a
probability distribution of the values that a given reaction can undertake(29). This can be
directed for comparing the flux values distribution between a normal states vs. diseased
states. We developed a pipeline (Figure 3B) that takes the context specific models of
NHBE and Lung Biopsy samples in both normal and diseased state, performs a
differential flux analysis to reveal altered reactions. The pipeline leverages KolmogorovSmirnov test to compare the flux probability distribution for given reactions between two
conditions. The altered reactions having statistical significant differences in the
distributions and a high fold change (F.C. cutoff ~ Flux 1 is 10 times Flux 2) are used for
reaction enrichment analysis among the metabolic subsystems present in the model.
For NHBE cell context specific models i.e. iNHBE and iNHBECov2, beta-oxidation of
di-unsaturated fatty acids (mitochondria), fatty acid oxidation, fatty acid activation,
carnitine shuttle pathway (mitochondria and cytosol), arachidonic acid metabolism, fatty
acid elongation and few amino acid biosynthesis pathway were severely altered between
the normal vs. diseased state (Figure 4A and 4B). Majority of the altered reactions
belonged to fatty acid oxidation pathway. Arachidonic acid metabolism, which has been
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

earlier reported to be one of the severely altered reactions in HCov-229E, also showed
altered flux for several reactions(38). Beta-oxidation of fatty acid has also been discussed
to play a significant role in the progress of the infection(41). There were several
differences in beta-oxidation pathways of di-unsaturated and even-chain fatty acid. Of the
amino acid biosynthesis pathways, aromatic amino acid pathway (Phenylalanine,
Tyrosine and Tryptophan) was altered at the level of flux between normal and diseased
state. Interestingly tryptophan metabolism has been reported to be altered during SARS
Cov2 infection through metabolomics studies(15). Alterations in tryptophan metabolism
has been implicated in several viral diseases in previous studies and has been proposed as
an important therapeutic target. Kynurenine, which is a product derived from tryptophan
by the activity of IDO1 (indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase 1), is an important immuneregulatory molecule. Defects in IDO1 has been shown to be correlated to IL6 induced
inflammation in cells(15). There is also significant alterations in nucleotide metabolism.
This could results from high demand for RNA synthesis in the host to support the
complicated transcriptional readout in the virus and the synthesis of the ssRNA while
suppressing the DNA synthesis. Disturbance of arachidonic acid metabolism is very
clearly observed through differential flux analysis. An increased activity of carnitine
shuttle responsible for fatty acid beta-oxidation is also observed in the altered reactions.
Several pathways highlighted in this analysis are also the ones which are heavily
implicated for progression of diseases of RNA virus if not exactly SARS Cov2. They
could serve as potential therapeutic targets. While metabolic flux analysis highlights
reactions that are altered based on their flux value distribution, it doesn’t give us any
information about the molecular mechanistic principles driving such changes. Thus, it
becomes imperative to leverage other ‘layers’ of omics data to understand the molecular
modifications on enzymes leading to reduced or enhanced capacity for flux.
Protein-Protein interactions and altered phosphorylation potentially mediate
metabolic changes
It has been reported earlier that most RNA viruses modulate the metabolism and
physiology of the host cell through post-translational modifications rather than
transcriptional changes(42). We were therefore interested to check if the enzymatic
complex driving the reactions affected at the level of flux in diseased state are posttranslationally modified. We leveraged the data on binary protein interaction network
between host and SARS Cov2 proteins(43), and differential phosphorylation(44) dataset
for this purpose. In our proposed model, we suspect several viral proteins interact with
metabolic machinery of the host cell and press changes either through i) Allosteric
modifications ii) Phosphorylation/Dephosphorylation induced effects (Figure 4C). We
did a cross interaction analysis between the altered metabolic pathways and the posttranslational modifications (Figure 4D and 4E). Surprisingly, several proteins interaction
networks existed between the viral proteins and the enzymes involved in fatty acid
oxidation, beta-oxidation of even chain fatty acids, nucleotide metabolism and
sphingolipid metabolism. These are some of the severely affected pathways highlighted
through our differential flux analysis. Furthermore, overlaying the differential
phosphorylation dataset on our metabolic flux analysis, revealed several reactions
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

belonging to beta-oxidation of fatty acids (peroxisomal), fatty acid elongation and
omega-3 fatty acid metabolism have modified phosphorylation state between the normal
and diseased condition (Figure 4E).
This directly indicates the modification of host metabolism induced by the viral proteins
through post-translational modification. We also acknowledge the presence of
complicated pathways of modifications through host signaling pathways which we might
have missed in our analysis. Phosphorylation and allosteric modification are two
significant pathways through which metabolic machinery is regulated at the posttranslational level. Inhibitors against the viral proteins mediating such molecular
modifications can be used as a therapeutic option to restore metabolic homeostasis in the
cell. Nevertheless, fatty acid metabolism appears to be one of the most affected pathways
in the host which can be targeted for therapy.
Discussion
In this study, we propose a computational method for conducting a differential flux
analysis of metabolism at a genome-scale. This method allowed us to identify altered
reactions in the metabolic network of NHBE cells infected with SARS Cov2 virus. This
method comprises of a stringent statistical framework which enables us to filter out
reactions which occur by chance due to the fundamental behaviour of linear optimization
problems. This method is independent of objective function used and hence can be
leveraged for understanding the metabolic flux alterations under given set of conditions
in the case of mammalian cells.
Here, we leveraged flux sampling method ACHR (Artificial Coordinate Hit and Run)(29)
to sample the flux solution space constrained by thermodynamic bounds and structure of
the metabolic network. It is important to understand alternative methods like Flux
Variability Analysis(28), which also helps us to probe into the differences in flux
distribution in two conditions, assume a uniform distribution of fluxes across the solution
space. This assumption makes it useful in allowing us to infer the maximum and
minimum flux that a given reaction network can undertake in a given condition.
Nevertheless, it fails to consider the likelihood of the actual flux distribution. This adds
up to the limitations in inferring precise flux values from genome-scale metabolic
reconstructions. Flux sampling analysis by the virtue of random sampling under
metabolic and thermodynamic constraints(29, 45), furnishes a probability distribution
function for the fluxes in their respective solution space. Thus, we can use statistical tests
to obtain confidence intervals of the fluxes and compare them across multiple conditions.
This would not have been otherwise possible if we assumed a uniform distribution of flux
values in the solution space.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test compares between the probability distribution of fluxes across
several conditions and highlight metabolic modules that are altered. Furthermore, we use
multiple-hypothesis testing to ensure the reported significances don’t contain false
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

positives. The enriched set of reactions are further subjected to hypergeometric
enrichment test for metabolic subsystems in the model. This is to make sure the reported
pathways that are affected are not due to chance. Using this method, we find that several
metabolic subsystems affected between diseased and normal state belong to fatty acid
pathway in the case of SARS Cov2. Interestingly, there are already several reports which
point at the severe deregulation in fatty acid metabolism confirmed at the level of clinical
surveys under controlled trails and metabolomics studies(15, 38, 46). In our analysis, we
inform pathways such a fatty acid oxidation, arachidonic acid metabolism and betaoxidation cycles to be severely affected apart from deregulations in amino acid and
nucleotide metabolism pathways. The role of beta-oxidation in promoting viral
pathogenesis has already been reported in several studies and we believe this could be
important for therapeutic design(41). Similarly, disturbances in arachidonic acid
metabolism through the linoleic acid-arachidonic acid metabolism axis has been reported
to be a hallmark of coronavirus infection(38).
Fatty acid are not only important energy precursors which might be expended by the
virus to grow rapidly but also the biochemical precursor for several important signalling
molecules. Leukotriene biosynthesis which begins from the oxidation of arachidonic acid
has also been inferred to be one of the affected pathways between diseased and normal
state. Leukotriene is an important autocrine and paracrine signalling molecule which
allows cells to attract immune cells when abnormalities arise is homeostatic state of the
cells(30). It is possible that SARS Cov2 strategically interferes with such a signalling
pathway by deregulating the biosynthesis pathway for the constituent signalling
molecules. We were further interested in understanding how these metabolic changes are
imparted on the normal cell by the virus. Metabolic fluxes are always under stringent
regulation by the post-translational modifications or allosteric changes in the driver
enzyme in shorter time-scales and by transcriptional regulation in longer time-scales.
When SARS Cov2 infects the host cell, it is possible that viral proteins interfere with
such regulatory controls and this allows the virus to reprogram the metabolism of the
cells. A protein-protein interaction network between SARS Cov2 virus and the host cells
has been published recently. We leveraged the same to check if the interactions of viral
proteins with host proteins are enriched in the set of reactions we inferred from
differential flux analysis. Surprisingly, we found several protein interactions and also
phosphorylation changes in the enzymes subunits that are associated with altered flux. To
infer the impact of protein interactions and phosphorylation on the enzyme functions, we
used the Boolean relation between the enzyme subunits and the resulting functionality.
We consider this method to be a significant advancement in the field of metabolic flux
analysis. This would allow us to probe into differences in flux apart from differences in
network structure among several conditions. This would help us to design experiments to
measure the effects of infections on specific metabolic modules in the cell. Such an
analysis along with other multi-omics datasets like metabolomics, phospho-proteomics
and interactomics will allow us to understand the molecular mechanistic principles of
infections. Integration of multi-omics data is expected to reveal several mechanistic
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

phenomena of diseases and will help us design better therapeutics leveraging the power
of systems biology.
Materials and Methods
The workflow for the construction of SARS Cov2 viral biomass equation is mentioned in
SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods. The procedure for building the context specific
models of normal and SARS Cov2 infected NHBE and Human Lung cells is described in
SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods. The pipeline for conducting the GS-DFA is also
described in SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods. The integrated analysis of
phosphor-proteomics and virus-host protein-protein interactions is mentioned in SI
Appendix, SI Materials and Methods.
Data availability: All the data generated in this study has been provided in SI appendix,
Dataset S1-S2. All the codes used for the analysis is available on GitHub
(https://github.com/piyushnanda-sysbio/GS-DFA.git).
Acknowledgments
Authors are thankful to Department of Science and Technology (Grant No.
ECR/2016/001096), Department of Biotechnology (Grant No. BT/RLF/Reentry/06/2013) and Scheme for Promotion of Academic and Research Collaboration
(SPARC), MHRD, Govt. of India (Grant No. SPARC/2018-2019/P265/SL).
References
1.

B. H. Goodpaster, L. M. Sparks, Metabolic Flexibility in Health and Disease. Cell Metab.
25, 1027–1036 (2017).

2.

E. Holmes, I. D. Wilson, J. K. Nicholson, Metabolic Phenotyping in Health and Disease.
Cell 134, 714–717 (2008).

3.

P. Kandasamy, G. Gyimesi, Y. Kanai, M. A. Hediger, Amino acid transporters revisited:
New views in health and disease. Trends Biochem. Sci. 43, 752–789 (2018).

4.

E. Tzika, T. Dreker, A. Imhof, Epigenitics and metabolism in health and disease. Front.
Genet. 9 (2018).

5.

L. Yang, J. T. Yurkovich, Z. A. King, B. O. Palsson, Modeling the multi-scale mechanisms
of macromolecular resource allocation. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 45, 8–15 (2018).

6.

C. Zhang, Q. Hua, Applications of genome-scale metabolic models in biotechnology and
systems medicine. Front. Physiol. 6 (2016).

7.

S. L. Berger, P. Sassone-Corsi, Metabolic signaling to chromatin. Cold Spring Harb.
Perspect. Biol. 8, 1–23 (2016).

8.

S. Trefely, C. D. Lovell, N. W. Snyder, K. E. Wellen, Compartmentalised acyl-CoA
metabolism and roles in chromatin regulation. Mol. Metab. 38, 100941 (2020).

9.

S. Sivanand, I. Viney, K. E. Wellen, Spatiotemporal Control of Acetyl-CoA Metabolism in
Chromatin Regulation. Trends Biochem. Sci. 43, 61–74 (2018).

10.

I. Martínez-Reyes, N. S. Chandel, Mitochondrial TCA cycle metabolites control physiology

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and disease. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–11 (2020).
11.

M. Neagu, et al., Inflammation and metabolism in cancer cell—mitochondria key player.
Front. Oncol. 9 (2019).

12.

F. Hirschhaeuser, U. G. A. Sattler, W. Mueller-Klieser, Lactate: A metabolic key player in
cancer. Cancer Res. 71, 6921–6925 (2011).

13.

B. M. Cumming, K. W. Addicott, J. H. Adamson, A. J. C. Steyn, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis induces decelerated bioenergetic metabolism in human macrophages. Elife 7
(2018).

14.

V. R. Muddapu, S. A. P. Dharshini, V. S. Chakravarthy, M. M. Gromiha,
Neurodegenerative Diseases – Is Metabolic Deficiency the Root Cause? Front. Neurosci.
14 (2020).

15.

T. Thomas, et al., COVID-19 infection alters kynurenine and fatty acid metabolism,
correlating with IL-6 levels and renal status. JCI Insight 5 (2020).

16.

A. Renz, L. Widerspick, A. Dräger, D. Dräger, FBA reveals guanylate kinase as a potential
target for antiviral therapies against SARS-CoV-2. 1–11 (2020).

17.

M. Abu-Farha, et al., The role of lipid metabolism in COVID-19 virus infection and as a
drug target. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (2020).

18.

S. Chandrasekaran, N. D. Price, Probabilistic integrative modeling of genome-scale
metabolic and regulatory networks in Escherichia coli and Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107, 17845–17850 (2010).

19.

N. C. Duarte, et al., Global reconstruction of the human metabolic network based on
genomic and bibliomic data. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104, 1777–1782 (2007).

20.

O. Folger, et al., Predicting selective drug targets in cancer through metabolic networks.
Mol. Syst. Biol. 7 (2011).

21.

S. Opdam, et al., A Systematic Evaluation of Methods for Tailoring Genome-Scale
Metabolic Models. Cell Syst. 4, 318-329.e6 (2017).

22.

E. Brunk, et al., Recon3D enables a three-dimensional view of gene variation in human
metabolism. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 272–281 (2018).

23.

J. L. Robinson, et al., An atlas of human metabolism. Sci. Signal. 13, 1–12 (2020).

24.

J. D. Orth, I. Thiele, B. O. Palsson, What is flux balance analysis? Nat. Biotechnol. 28,
245–248 (2010).

25.

V. Pandey, N. Hadadi, V. Hatzimanikatis, Enhanced flux prediction by integrating relative
expression and relative metabolite abundance into thermodynamically consistent
metabolic models. PLoS Comput. Biol. 15 (2019).

26.

K. Yizhak, T. Benyamini, W. Liebermeister, E. Ruppin, T. Shlomi, Integrating quantitative
proteomics and metabolomics with a genome-scale metabolic network model.
Bioinformatics 26 (2010).

27.

A. Mardinoglu, F. Gatto, J. Nielsen, Genome-scale modeling of human metabolism - a
systems biology approach. Biotechnol. J. 8, 985–996 (2013).

28.

R. Mahadevan, C. H. Schilling, The effects of alternate optimal solutions in constraintbased genome-scale metabolic models. Metab. Eng. 5, 264–276 (2003).

29.

S. Bordel, R. Agren, J. Nielsen, Sampling the solution space in genome-scale metabolic
networks reveals transcriptional regulation in key enzymes. PLoS Comput. Biol. 6, 16
(2010).

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

30.

C. D. Funk, Prostaglandins and leukotrienes: Advances in eicosanoid biology. Science
(80-. ). 294, 1871–1875 (2001).

31.

Y. M. Bar-on, A. Flamholz, R. Phillips, R. Milo, SARS-CoV-2 ( COVID-19 ) by the
numbers. Elife (2020).

32.

N. Irigoyen, et al., High-Resolution Analysis of Coronavirus Gene Expression by RNA
Sequencing and Ribosome Profiling. PLoS Pathog. 12 (2016).

33.

X. Xia, Extreme Genomic CpG Deficiency in SARS-CoV-2 and Evasion of Host Antiviral
Defense. Mol. Biol. Evol. 37, 2699–2705 (2020).

34.

A. C. Walls, et al., Glycan shield and epitope masking of a coronavirus spike protein
observed by cryo-electron microscopy. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 23, 899–905 (2016).

35.

N. S. Ogando, et al., SARS-coronavirus-2 replication in Vero E6 cells: Replication kinetics,
rapid adaptation and cytopathology. J. Gen. Virol. 101, 925–940 (2020).

36.

R. Agren, et al., Reconstruction of genome-scale active metabolic networks for 69 human
cell types and 16 cancer types using INIT. PLoS Comput. Biol. 8 (2012).

37.

D. Blanco-Melo, et al., Imbalanced Host Response to SARS-CoV-2 Drives Development
of COVID-19. Cell 181, 1036-1045.e9 (2020).

38.

B. Yan, et al., Characterization of the lipidomic profile of human coronavirus-infected cells:
Implications for lipid metabolism remodeling upon coronavirus replication. Viruses 11
(2019).

39.

D. Bojkova, et al., Proteomics of SARS-CoV-2-infected host cells reveals therapy targets.
Nature 583, 469–472 (2020).

40.

J. S. Kang, Dietary restriction of amino acids for Cancer therapy. Nutr. Metab. 17 (2020).

41.

J. S. Ayres, A metabolic handbook for the COVID-19 pandemic. Nat. Metab. 2, 572–585
(2020).

42.

G. A. Gualdoni, et al., Rhinovirus induces an anabolic reprogramming in host cell
metabolism essential for viral replication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 115, E7158–
E7165 (2018).

43.

D. E. Gordon, et al., A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug
repurposing. Nature 583, 459–468 (2020).

44.

M. Bouhaddou, et al., The Global Phosphorylation Landscape of SARS-CoV-2 Infection.
Cell 182, 685-712.e19 (2020).

45.

J. Schellenberger, B. Palsson, Use of randomized sampling for analysis of metabolic
networks. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 5457–5461 (2009).

46.

Q. Wu, et al., Altered Lipid Metabolism in Recovered SARS Patients Twelve Years after
Infection. Sci. Rep. 7 (2017).

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure captions:
Figure 1 Reconstruction of biomass equation (VBOF) of SARS Cov2 virus from its
stoichiometric make-up. (A) The stoichiometry of various proteins, nucleic acid and their
locations in the SARS Cov2 virus. The molar composition of constituent molecules in
lipid fraction (B), nucleic acid (C) and proteins (D). PC-Phosphatidylcholine; PEPhosphatidylethanolamine; PS-Phosphatidylserine; PI-Phosphatidylinositol; SMSphingomyelin; CS-Cholesterol. (E) Sensitivity analysis of growth rate of SARS Cov2
with respect to coefficient (fractional composition) of biomass precursor. The coefficients
are varied by ±10% and y-axis shows growth rates simulated by Flux Balance Analysis
(FBA).
Figure 2 Generation of context-specific models of SARS Cov2 infected cells and normal
cells using gene-expression data and tINIT algorithm. (A) The distribution of TPM
normalized gene expression in Mock NHBE cells, SARS Cov2 infected NHBE cells,
Normal Lung Tissue (From Biopsy) and Infected Tissue (From Biopsy). (B) The
Hamming distance between all the generated context specific models based on the
differences in reactions in the model. (C) The agreement of model simulated specific
growth rate of the virus with the experimental reported specific growth rate. n.s. stands
for non-significant differences as estimated by t-test. (D) The pathways over-represented
while comparison between models. The reactions over-represented in each comparison
are present exclusively in one of the models. (E) The robustness of specific growth rate of
SARS Cov2 with respect to changes in specific uptake rates of arginine, lysine and
glutamate. Refer to Figure S3 for robustness analysis with respect to specific uptake rates
of all nutrients.
Figure 3 Genome-Scale Differential Flux Analysis (GS-DFA) for finding the metabolic
alterations at the level of flux. (A) Boolean relation between activity of enzymes and the
gene encoding the proteins in the complex makes the prediction of flux from expression
difficult. Gene A and Gene B encodes subunits of the enzyme which catalyzes ‘Reaction
1’. Gene C and Gene D encode two alternative isozymes which catalyzes ‘Reaction 2’.
The width of the arrow for ‘Reaction 1’ and ‘Reactions 2’ represents the level of flux.
The black arrow in the bottom panel of (A) moves from driver to affected reaction. (B)
The pipeline for GS-DFA beginning from RNA-seq of infected and normal cell line,
followed by construction of context specific models, flux sampling, reaction filtering and
over-representation analysis of pathways. The ‘star’ symbol indicates a multiple
hypothesis correction step through Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate. A twosample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is used to differentiate between the probability
distribution of flux between diseased and non-diseased state.
Figure 4 GS-DFA reveals altered pathways in infected cells and post-translational
modifications in infected cells are enriched in altered reactions. (A) The volcano-plot for
log10(flux change) vs –log10(p-value) for altered reactions. The flux change is calculated
as described in materials and methods. (B) Enriched pathways (subsystems) in the SARS
Cov2 infected NHBE cells as revealed by GS-DFA analysis. The presented reactions
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402404; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

have flux change (as described in materials and methods) greater than 0.82 and have
adjusted p-value less than 0.05 (C) The prospective mechanism of flux regulation by
post-translational modification or allosteric effects on enzymes mediated by viral
proteins. (D) The enrichment of differentially phosphorylated enzymes and enzymes
interacting with viral proteins in the set of altered reactions identified by GS-DFA. (E) A
pathway wise description of (D) with the flux changes of the constituent altered reactions
in the pathways along with the number of such reactions affected by differential
phosphorylation and protein-protein interactions with viral proteins.

16

Figure 1
(A)

S Protein (~100 copies)

(D)

M Protein (~2000 copies)

E Protein (~20 copies)
ssRNA (+) (1 copy=30 kb)
Lipid Bilayer

(E)
N Protein (~1000 copies)

(B)

(C)

Figure 2
(A)

(D)

Uninfected NHBE – UN
Infected NHBE – IN
Uninfected Biopsy – UB
Infected Biopsy – IB

vs.

(B)

(C)

n.s.

(E)

UN

UB

UN

UB

UB

UN

IN

IB

IB

IN

UN

IB

Figure 3
(A)

(B)

Beta-oxidation
Leucine Metabolism
Glycolysis
TCA Cycle
Pentose Phosphate
Leukotriene
Carnitine Shuttle

Normal
Infected
Indicates a
Multiple
Hypothesis
Correction

Infected

Normal

V – Protein
R - Reaction

(B)

High Flux
Low Flux

Phos.

non-Phos.

38

257

313

6588

P-value = 1.82 x 10-8

Phosphorylation

(E)

Log10(Flux Change)

Flux Change

non-altered altered

(D)

(C)

non-altered altered

Figure 4
(A)

PPI

non-PPI

25

270

91

6820

P-value = 3.67 x 10-12

Human-SARS Cov2 PPI

