bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.006197; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

In-Silico evidence for two receptors based strategy of SARS-CoV-2
Edoardo Milanetti∗† ,1, 2 Mattia Miotto∗ ,1, 2 Lorenzo Di Rienzo∗ ,2
Michele Monti,3, 4 Giorgio Gosti,2 and Giancarlo Ruocco1, 2
1
Department of Physics, Sapienza University, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185, Rome, Italy
Center for Life Nanoscience, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Viale Regina Elena 291, 00161, Rome, Italy
3
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute for Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona
4
RNA System Biology Lab, Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies,
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163, Genoa, Italy
2

We propose a novel numerical method able to determine efficiently and effectively the relationship
of complementarity between portions of protein surfaces. This innovative and general procedure,
based on the representation of the molecular iso-electron density surface in terms of 2D Zernike
polynomials, allows the rapid and quantitative assessment of the geometrical shape complementarity
between interacting proteins, that was unfeasible with previous methods. We first tested the method
with a large dataset of known protein complexes obtaining an overall area under the ROC curve
of 0.76 in the blind recognition of binding sites and then applied it to investigate the features
of the interaction between the Spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 and human cellular receptors. Our
results indicate that SARS-CoV-2 uses a dual strategy: its spike protein could also interact with
sialic acid receptors of the cells in the upper airways, in addition to the known interaction with
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2.

I.

INTRODUCTION

At the time of writing, the new coronavirus, also known
as SARS-CoV-2, which causes Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome [1, 2], has caused approximately the death of
approximately 17000 and the infection of 390000 people.
The COVID-19 outbreak represents a serious threat to
public health [3], and the World Health Organization officially declared it a pandemic.
To date 7 coronavirus strains are known to infect humans and no approved therapies or vaccine against them
are available [3].
In the past two decades, in addition to SARS-CoV-2,
two other β-coronavirus have caused three of the most severe epidemics worldwide: SARS-CoV [4, 5] and MERSCoV [6] which respectively cause the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), and the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS).
The characteristics of the interactions between these
viruses and the human cell receptors are being carefully
studied to shed light on both diffusion speed and mortality rate differences between SARS-CoV-2 and the others,
with special regard to SARS-CoV.
Indeed, SARS-CoV spread across 26 countries in six
continents and caused a total of 8,096 cases and 774
deaths (9.6%) [7], with an incubation period of 1 to 4
days [8]. On the other side, it has been demonstrated
that the latency of SARS-CoV-2 varies from 3-7 days on
average, up to 14 days [2]. Thus, the average latency of
SARS-CoV-2 is slightly longer than that of SARS-CoV
[7]. Moreover, it is estimated from epidemiological data
that individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 are conta-

∗ The

authors contributed equally to the present work.
author: edoardo.milanetti@uniroma1.it

† Corresponding

gious from the beginning of the incubation period and
that between the incubation period and the end of the
infection each infected individual transmits the infection
to about 3.77 other people [9].
SARS-CoV-2, similarly to SARS-CoV and MERSCoV, attacks the lower respiratory system, thus causing
viral pneumonia. However, this infection can also affect
the gastrointestinal system, heart, kidney, liver, and central nervous system [2, 10, 11].
To face the emergency of this epidemic it is essential
to shed light on the interaction mechanisms between the
virus and the human cell receptors.
It is well characterized how SARS-CoV infection is
mediated by the high-affinity interactions between the
receptor-binding domain (RBD) of the spike (S) glycoprotein and the human-host Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor [12–14]. The spike protein is
located on the virus envelope and promotes the attachment to the host cell and the fusion between the virus
and the cellular membrane. [15, 16].
Recently, it has also been proven that several critical
residues in SARS-CoV-2’s RBD provide favorable interactions with human ACE2, consistent with SARS-CoV2’s capability to infect the cell [17, 18]. On the experimental side, it has also been confirmed by in vivo experiments that SARS-CoV-2’s entry is mediated by lung cell
Ace2 receptors [19]. More importantly, the structure of
the spike-Ace2 receptor complex has been recently determined by Crio-em [20]. In conclusion, it is now understood that SARS-CoV-2 binds to the ACE2 receptor to
infect the host cell using its spike protein’s RBD, even if it
had most likely evolved from SARS-CoV independently
[21].
Since the ACE2 molecule is known to be a human entry
receptor, the understanding of the molecular mechanisms
of interaction between the ACE2 receptor and the spike
protein of the virus can be a key factor designing new

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.006197; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

drug compounds. With this aim, computational methods
based on both sequence and structure studies of proteins
represent a powerful tool [22].
Indeed, the development of effective computational
methods for predicting the binding sites of proteins can
improve the understanding of many molecular mechanisms [23–25]. Several methods to analyze protein interaction have used protein surface information [26–29].
A very promising strategy to study molecular interaction is to determine, using deep learning methods,
chemico-physical features of the molecular surface [25].
This method allows to efficiently detect binding sites but
it, unfortunately, has the drawbacks of any other deep
learning approach: it requires the definition and training
of several parameters and the creation of a sufficiently
large training and test database. This method also requires the analysis of all possible orientations and relative
positions of the binding sites.
In this work, we present a new and general method to
efficiently describe the shape of molecular surfaces and
apply it to study the interactions between spike proteins
and the corresponding receptors involved in the SARSCoV, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2 infection mechanisms.
The method proposed here, for the first time, describes
regions of a molecular surface with the 2D Zernike formalism. Indeed, each local patch of a 3D protein molecule
can be represented as a surface on a 2D square grid, while
retaining both distance and angular information with respect to a specific reference system. Applying the Zernike
expansion we compute - completely unsupervised - numerical descriptors that summarize the patch geometry
and we use them to compute the structural similarity
between any two patches. The Zernike descriptors are
rotationally invariant, ensuring to the method an high efficiency and a low computational cost since it avoids the
necessity of any preliminary structure orientation. Overall, these operations substantially reduce the search space
dimensionality, thus allowing our method to be able to
explore several more protein regions compared to previous methods.
We first apply the method to a large dataset of proteinprotein complexes (Protein-Protein Dataset), where we
test the ability of our method to detect interacting regions from non-interacting regions with the use of our
definition of complementarity. Our method recognizes
interactions in the large Protein-Protein Database with
good precision. Furthermore, thanks to the low computational cost of building an invariant description, we can
blindly sample the entire surfaces of 2 interacting proteins, and retrieve their binding sites.
Then, we use our formalism to study the interaction between the spike protein and its membrane receptors, comparing SARS-Cov-2 with both SARS-COV and
MERS. We demonstrate that the actual region of binding
between spike protein and ACE2 human - both in SARSCoV and SARS-CoV-2 - have a higher complementarity
with respect to other randomly sampled exposed receptor

2

regions.
Furthermore, we also analyze in detail the structural
properties of the MERS spike protein which, like several other proteins belonging to coronaviruses family,
can interact with sialic acids [30]. Among other coronaviruses, the bovine coronavirus (BCoV), and the two human coronaviruses OC43 and HKU1 employ sialoglycanbased receptors with 9-O-acetylated sialic acid (9-OAc-Sia) as key component [31]. These viruses bind
to cell surface components containing N-acetyl-9-Oacetylneuraminic acid and this interaction is essential
for the initiation of an infection [32]. In particular, we
propose here a possible alternative mechanism of SARSCoV-2 cellular infection, through spike protein interaction with sialic acid receptors of the upper airways, similarly to what has been shown for the MERS spike protein
[33]. We indeed highlight that a surface region in the Nterminal domain of SARS-CoV-2 spike is very similar to
the MERS spike sialic acid-binding region, and present
a compatible charge. These observations suggest that
these two pockets potentially share an analogous function. This second infection mechanism for SARS-CoV-2
could explain its high diffusion speed.

II.

RESULTS

In the last decade, the 3D Zernike formalism has been
widely applied for the characterization of molecular interactions [29, 34–36]: in this work, we adopted a new representation, based on the 2D Zernike polynomials, which
allows the quantitative characterization of protein surface regions. As shown in Fig.1, our computational protocol associates to each molecular patch an ordered set
of numbers (the expansion coefficients) that describes its
shapes.
Through this compact description, it is possible to
both analyze the similarity between 2 different regions
- suggesting, for example, a similar ligand for 2 binding
regions - and to study the complementarity between 2
interacting surfaces.
To validate this method, we firstly collected a large
structural dataset of protein-protein complexes and we
characterize their binding sites through 2D Zernike. We
test the method ability to recognize the higher complementarity observed between pairs of interacting surfaces
compared to the lower complementarity found when the
2 surfaces are non-interacting.
We thus analyze in detail the interactions of the
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein with its membrane receptors,
comparing SARS-CoV-2 properties with SARS-CoV and
MERS-CoV.

Binding regions unsupervised recognition

We selected a structural dataset, composed of about
4500 experimentally determined protein-protein com-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.006197; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

b

a

r

3

c

θmax = 45∘
C

d
g

f

e

FIG. 1: Computational protocol for the characterization of each surface region and the blind identification of
the binding sites. a) Molecular solvent-accessible surface of a protein (in blue) and example of patch selection (red sphere).
b) The selected patch points are fitted with a plane and reoriented in such a way that the z-axis passes through the centroid
of the points and is orthogonal to the plane. A point C along the z-axis is defined, such as that the largest angle between the
perpendicular axis and the secant connecting C to a surface point is equal to 45o . Finally, to each point, its distance, r with
point C is evaluated. c) Each point of the surface is projected on the fit plane, which is binned with a square grid. To each
pixel, the average of the r values of the points inside the pixel is associated. d) The resulting 2D projection of the patch can
be represented by a set of 2D Zernike invariant descriptors. e-f ) Given a protein-protein complex (PDB code: 3B0F, in this
example), for each surface vertex we select a patch centered on it and compute its Zernike descriptors. To blindly identify the
two binding sites, each sampled patch is compared with all the patches of the molecular partner and each vertex is associated
with the minimum distance between its patch and all the patches of the molecular partner is associated with. g) A Smoothing
process of the surface point values is applied to highlight the signal in the regions characterized mostly by low distance values
(high shape complementarity).

plexes, from a recent paper that presented a state of the
art patch recognition computational method [25].
For each complex, we have selected the interacting
regions and we have characterized them with the 2D
Zernike invariant descriptors. Therefore, each binding
site is associated with a one-dimensional vector, allowing
us to easily compare the shape of protein regions with
the euclidean distance between their Zernike descriptors.
Two regions are complementary when they are characterized by a low distance between their corresponding

Zernike vectors[34].
To test the ability of the method to recognize two interacting regions, we have compared how much the distance
between the Zernike descriptors (see Methods) of a pair
of interacting binding sites is smaller than the distances
between random patches. In particular, we define the
random patch set as the set of 2000 patches randomly
extracted from the 20 biggest protein of the dataset (100
patches for each protein). For each protein-protein complex, we define the real distance as the distance between

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.006197; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

the interacting surfaces, while the random ones are the
values observed in the comparisons between the binding
site of one protein and the random patch set.
Our unsupervised method has an excellent ability in
recognizing the binding regions with respect to random
patches with an Area Under the ROC Curve of 0.76.
Note that the state of art supervised method described in
[25], when only shape descriptors are considered, achieves
an AUC of 0.68 with patches of comparable sizes, meaning that our approach clearly overcome such performances in shape complementarity recognition.
Furthermore, the much lower computational time
needed for the calculation of the 2D Zernike descriptors
allows an extensive sampling of the surfaces of a pair
of proteins in complex. Centering on each surface point
a molecular patch, we generate for each protein a very
high number of Zernike descriptors. Comparing all the
patches of the two proteins, we label each surface point
with the binding propensity, which is the maximum complementarity recorded between the Zernike descriptors of
the patch and all the others belonging to the molecular
partner surface. The real binding region is expected to
be demarcated and mostly composed of elements with
high complementarity. To make the binding region high
complementarity more evident, we smooth the signal by
attributing to each vertex of the surface the average value
of the vertices closer than 6 Å to it (see Method).
As an example in Fig.1 we report the result of this
method for a specific case (PDB code: 3B0F), where this
procedure clearly identifies the binding regions of the two
proteins. For a subset of 20 protein-protein complexes the smallest in terms of the number of surface vertices -,
we perform a blind search of the interacting regions. The
results are very promising, since the average value of the
AUC of the corresponding ROC is 0.65, with fourteen
out of forty proteins having an AUC higher than 0.70.

Comparison between the complementarity of the
SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 spike protein with the
human ACE2 receptor

The excellent and very promising results found in the
large dataset encouraged us to investigate the pressing
problem of the coronavirus interaction with the host cell.
We first analyzed the shape complementarity between the
spike proteins of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 in complex with human ACE2 receptor [12, 20]. It is interesting to notice that the contact between spike and ACE2
receptor both for SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 occurs
in two separate interacting regions (see Fig. 2), meaning
that we need to investigate the two interacting regions
separately. When comparing the two raw distances, we
found that ACE2-SARS-CoV distance is smaller than the
ACE2-SARS-CoV-2 one, even if for both complexes the
complementarity is much higher than the one would find
in other random regions of the complexes (see Figure 2).
Note that for an appropriate comparison, we need to de-

4

fine a suitable ensemble of random patches. Indeed, the
random regions are sampled from the molecular surface
of the spike protein imposing that the center of the two
patches has the same distance as the binding region observed in the experimental complex. Then, both the real
spike binding region and the ensemble of 1000 sampled
regions are compared with the receptor binding sites.
The results of this analysis are shown in Fig. 2. We
show the distance distribution of the random regions and
we report the distance between the real binding regions,
both for the Ace2-SARS-CoV and Ace2-SARS-CoV-2
complex. As the method works in recognizing interacting patches, real binding regions show a higher complementarity (lower distance) than the randomly sampled
regions.
Furthermore, this analysis shows that the ACE2 receptor has a slightly higher shape complementarity with
SARS-CoV than with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. However, the results are quite comparable among them, in
accordance with experimental data [3].

Identification of another possible binding region of
the SARS-Cov-2 spike

Although it is currently known that the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 binds to the ACE2 receptor of host
cells [18, 37], the investigation of possible other infection
mechanism is a key factor in the study of this disease.
Specifically, in this work [19] the authors underline the
necessity to elucidate whether SARS-Cov-2 spike protein
could have acquired the ability to bind with sialic acid
as MERS-CoV does. It has been recently shown that
besides the usual receptor (dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 receptor), MERS-CoV spike protein interacts with sialic acid
molecules [33] using a well-identified pocket in the Nterminal region of the protein. This makes the virus able
to interact with high airways and then reach the low airway cells [38].
The recognition between spike and sialic acids occurs
via a conserved groove which plays a key role for S
MERS-CoV-mediated attachment to sialosides and entry into human airway epithelial cells [33].
Since the interaction of MERS-CoV spike and the sialic
acids is caused mainly by hydrogen bonds and shape complementarity [39], our method is particularly suitable to
find on the SARS-CoV-2 spike surface a region similar to
the one involved in binding of the sialic acid in MERSCoV spike.
Using the experimental structure of MERS-CoV spike
and sialic acid molecules complexes [33], we extract its
binding region and we describe it through Zernike descriptors. Then we sample the corresponding domains
of both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 spike, building a
molecular patch on each surface point and characterizing it with its corresponding Zernike descriptors. Each
region sampled from the spike proteins of these 2 viruses
is then compared with the MERS-CoV spike binding re-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.006197; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

a1

Sars-Cov

a2

b1

Sars-Cov-2

5

b2

Spike protein

Spike protein

ACE2 receptor

ACE2 receptor

a3

a4

a5

b3

b4

b5

FIG. 2: Comparison between the binding regions of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 spike protein with human
ACE2. a1,2) Patch projections in the unitary circle for the two binding regions of Sars-Cov spike protein. a3,4) Patch
projections in the unitary circle for the binding regions of the human ACE2 receptor. a5) Distance distribution between ACE2
binding sites and randomly selected patches on the S spike protein of SARS-Cov. Decoys patches are sampled taking two
random regions separated by the same distance measured in the experimental structure. The red dotted line represents the
distance between the real ACE2 and S spike’s patches. b) The same as a) but for the binding site of SARS-Cov-2 and the human
ACE2 receptor. The real distances are in the 1st and 5th percentiles of the distributions for SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2
respectively.

gion, looking for a similar region that can mediate interaction with a similar ligand.
In Fig. 3, we show the results of this analysis. In particular, selecting the region most similar to the MERS-CoV
binding site we identified one region for both SARS-CoV
and SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.
Interestingly the best region of SARS-Cov-2 spike exhibits a higher similarity than the pocket selected by the
SARS-CoV spike. We moreover calculate the electrostatic potential of the involved surfaces with eF-surf webserver [40]. As shown in Fig. 3, in cartoon representation,
the region found in the molecular surface of the SARSCoV-2 spike is very similar to the MERS spike region
interacting with sialic acid, both in terms of shape and
electrostatic similarity. Differently, the region identified

in the SARS-CoV spike exhibit an electrostatic clearly
dissimilar from the sialic binding site in the MERS-CoV
spike, making very unlikely the interaction with sialic
acid in that region.
In addition, in Fig.4, we propose a multiple sequence
alignment - with software Clustal Omega[41] - between
the three spike proteins.
Importantly the proposed SARS-CoV-2 binding site,
besides being structurally in a surface region bordering
the corresponding MERS pocket, is composed of a set of
consecutive residues (sequence number 73-76) constituting an insertion in respect to SARS-CoV spike sequence.
Thus, this insertion in the A-domain of the spike protein
could confer to SARS-CoV-2 the capability of infecting
human cells in a dual strategy, making possible the high

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.006197; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

diffusion speed of this virus.

III.

DISCUSSION

A blind prediction of the interaction regions between
molecules is still an open challenge, despite the great
steps that have been made. However, the need for fast
and reliable theoretical and computational tools, capable
to guide and speed-up experiments, becomes especially
important when we face emergencies like the present one.
Emergency caused by the novel SARS-CoV-2 human infection is spreading with an impressive rate, such that the
World Health Organization officially declared it a pandemic.
Indeed, the last few months have seen extensive studies
about the virus-host interactions focusing in particular
on the various stages of the cell internalization mechanism. Recent works found that, in analogy with the
case of SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2 uses too its spike protein to bind to ACE2 receptors, mostly associated in the
lower respiratory ways. Further experimental investigations highlighted a comparable receptor binding affinity
between the novel coronavirus and the older SARS-CoV,
even if the binding regions display a certain degree of
variability [21]. The modest difference in binding affinity
seems insufficient to explain the higher human-human
transmission rate with respect to SARS-CoV and the
overall sequence variability suggest that SARS-CoV-2
may have optimized in other directions, such as in acquiring the ability of binding to other receptors [19].
In this work, we present a new fast computational
method that compactly summarizes the morphological
properties of a surface region of a protein. Testing the unsupervised method on a large dataset of protein-protein
interactions, we proved its excellent ability to correctly
recognize the high shape complementarity occurring between interacting surfaces. Analyzing the newly available
experimental structures of SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein in
complex with human ACE2, we found that the binding region presents indeed a comparable (slightly slower)
shape complementarity with the analogous complex of
SARS-CoV. Such a minimal difference enforces the hypothesis that the apparent higher fitness of SARS-CoV-2
should lie elsewhere.
In particular, looking at other members of the large
coronavirus family, one finds that many members developed the ability to bind to two distinct receptors,
with one binding site in the C-terminal domain of the
S-protein that generally binds protein-like receptors (like
ACE2 for SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2) and the other
situated in the N-terminal region, usually able to bind
to sugar-like receptors. In particular, MERS-CoV has
been found able to bind to sialic acid receptors both in
camel, human and bat cells. Applying our method to the
sialic acid-binding region, which has been recently determined experimentally in MERS-CoV, we have found an
exceptionally similar region in the corresponding region

6

of the SARS-CoV-2 spike. This region, similar in structure to the MERS-CoV correspondent one and absent in
SARS-CoV (see Figure 4), could be able to mediate a
low-affinity but high-avidity interaction with sialic acid.
Interestingly, the sequence variability of the spike protein, recently studied considering SARS-CoV-2 sequences
belonging to 62 different strains [42], shows a high conservation level of the ACE2 binding site while the highest
variability is located in the region that we indicate here
to be potentially involved in sialic acid biding: this evidence confirm the importance of this region in regulating
host-cell infection [43].
In conclusion, we propose that this dual cell entry
mechanism can explain the high diffusion speed this virus
exhibits and we strongly encourage a more accurate investigation of this observation.

IV.
A.

METHODS
Datasets

Protein-Protein Dataset

A dataset of protein-protein complexes experimentally
solved in x-ray crystallography is taken from [25].
We only selected pair interactions regarding chains
with more than 50 residues. The Protein-Protein dataset
is therefore composed of 4634 complexes.

Experimental protein structures

• Complex between SARS-CoV spike protein and human ACE receptor: PDB code 6ACJ.
• Complex between SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and
human ACE receptor: PDB code 6M17.
• Complex between MERS spike protein and sialic
acid: PDB code 6Q07.
• Unbound SARS-CoV spike protein:
6CRV.

PDB code

• Unbound SARS-CoV-2 spike protein: modeled by
I-TASSER server [44].

B.

Computation of molecular surfaces

We use DMS [45] to compute the solvent accessible
surface for all proteins structure, given their x-ray structure in PDB format [46], using a density of 5 points per
Å2 and a water probe radius of 1.4 Å. The unit normals
vector, for each point of the surface, was calculated using
the flag −n.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.006197; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

7

a

MERS-Cov

b

SARS-Cov-2

c

SARS-Cov

FIG. 3: Identification of a SARS-CoV-2 spike region very similar to the sialic acid-binding site on MERS-CoV
spike. a) From left to right, projected region of the real interaction between MERS-CoV and sialic acid, electrostatic potential
surface in the same region and cartoon representation of the MERS-CoV spike protein with highlighted the binding site. b)
Putative sialic acid-binding region on SARS-CoV-2 as predicted by our Zernike-based method. From left to right, the projected
region of putative interaction between SARS-CoV and sialic acid, electrostatic potential surface, and cartoon representation of
the SARS-CoV spike protein with highlighted the binding site. c) Same as b) but for SARS-CoV spike protein.

C.

Patch selection and space reduction

Given a molecular surface described as a set of point
in a three-dimensional Cartesian space, and a region of
interest on this surface, we define a surface patch, Σ as
the intersection of the region of interest and the surface.
In principle, the region of interest can have an arbitrary
shape, in this work we chose to use a spherical region
having radius Rs = 6Å and one point of the surface as
the center (see Figure 1a). Once the patch is selected,
we fit a plane that passes through the points in Σ, and

we reorient the patch in such a way to have the z-axis
perpendicular to the plane and going through the center of the plane. Then given a point C on the z-axis we
define the angle θ as the largest angle between the perpendicular axis and a secant connecting C to any point
of the surface Σ. C is then set in order that θ = 45◦ . r
is the distance between C and a surface point. We then
build a square grid, and we associate each pixel with the
mean r of the points inside it. This 2D function can be
expanded in the basis of the Zernike polynomials: the
norm of the coefficients of this expansion constitute the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.006197; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

a

MERS-Cov
SARS-Cov-2

8

b

SARS-Cov

MERS-Cov
SARS-Cov-2

SARS-Cov

MERS-Cov
SARS-Cov-2

SARS-Cov

MERS-Cov
SARS-Cov-2

SARS-Cov

c

MERS-Cov
SARS-Cov-2

SARS-Cov

MERS-Cov
SARS-Cov-2

SARS-Cov

MERS-Cov
SARS-Cov-2

SARS-Cov

FIG. 4: Sequence and structure comparison of the N-terminal region of MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2 and SARSCoV. a) A multiple sequence alignment between the MERS-CoV, the SARS-CoV and the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein sequence.
b) Structural comparison between MERS-CoV and SARS-Cov-2 A-domain. The sialic acid binsing site for MERS-Cov spike and
the proposed binding site on SARS-Cov-2 spike are highlighted. c) Structural comparison between SARS-CoV and SARS-Cov-2
A-domain. The proposed binding site on SARS-Cov-2 has no correspondence in SARS-CoV structure.

Zernike invariant descriptors, which are invariant under
rotation in the space. In the next section, we provide a
brief summary of the main features of the Zernike basis.
There are several good reviews, like [47] that offer more
detailed discussions. A schematic representation of the
procedure is shown in Figure 1b-d.

where the radial part for a certain couple of indexes, n
and m, is given by

n−m
2

Rnm (r) =

X
k=0

D.

2D Zernike polynomials and invariants

f (r, φ) =

cnm Znm

(1)

n=0 m=0

with

cnm =

(n + 1)
hZnm |f i =
π
Z
Z 2π
(n + 1) 1
∗
=
drr
dφZnm
(r, φ)f (r, φ).
π
0
0

(2)

being the expansion coefficients. The Zernike polynomials are complex functions, composed by a radial and
an angular part,
Znm = Rnm (r)eimφ .

(4)

In general, for each couple of polynomials, one finds
that

Given a function f (r, φ) (polar coordinates) defined
inside the region r < 1 (unitary circle), it is possible to
represent the function in the Zernike basis as
∞ m=n
X
X

(−1)k (n − k)!
 n−k
 rn−2k
k! n+k
−
k
!
−
k
!
2
2

(3)

hZnm |Zn0 m0 i =

π
δnn0 δmm0
(n + 1)

(5)

which ensures that the polynomials can form a basis
and knowing the set of complex coefficients, {cnm } allows
for a univocal reconstruction of the original image (with
a resolution that depends on the order of expansion, N =
max(n)). We found that N = 20, which corresponds to
a number of coefficients of 121, allows for a good visual
reconstruction of the original image.
By taking the modulus of each coefficient (znm =
|cnm |), a set of descriptors can be obtained which have
the remarkable feature of being invariant for rotations
around the origin of the unitary circle.
The shape similarity between two patches can then
be assessed by comparing the Zernike invariants of their
associated 2D projections. In particular, the similarity
between patch i and j is measured as the Euclidean dis-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.006197; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

tance between the invariant vectors, i.e.
v
uM =121
u X
dij = t
(zik − zjk )2

(6)

k=1

E.

Evaluation of similarity and complementarity

When comparing patches, the relative orientation of
the patches before the projection in the unitary circle
must be evaluated. Intuitively, if we search for similar
regions we must compare patches that have the same orientation once projected in the 2D plane, i.e. the solventexposed part of the surface must be oriented in the same
direction for both patches, for example as the positive
z-axis. If instead, we want to assess the complementarity
between two patches, we must orient the patches contrariwise, i.e. one patch with the solvent-exposed part
toward the positive z-axis (‘up’) and the other toward
the negative z-axis (‘down’).

F.

9

lows for a vast screening of couples of surfaces to look for
both similar and also complementary regions. In order
to identify the binding region given a couple of proteins,
we can associate to each point of one surface a vector of
Zernike invariants associate to the ‘up’ patch having that
point as center and another set of invariants to each point
of the other surface ( with ‘down’ orientation). Then
for each point i of say, protein 1, we can compute the
Euclidean distance with all the points of the other surface associated with protein 2 and associate to point i
the minimum found distance and vice-versa for protein
2 (see Figure 1e-f). A smoothing process of the surface
point values is applied in order to highlight the signal in
the regions characterized mostly by low distance values
(high shape complementarity).

Acknowledgment

Blind search of binding sites

The velocity of the procedure that from a patch in the
3D surface produces the set of invariant descriptors, al-

The authors would like to thank Prof. Gian Gaetano
Tartaglia for very helpful discussions.

[1] C. Huang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Ren, J. Zhao, Y. Hu,
L. Zhang, G. Fan, J. Xu, X. Gu, et al., The Lancet 395,
497 (2020).
[2] N. Zhu, D. Zhang, W. Wang, X. Li, B. Yang, J. Song,
X. Zhao, B. Huang, W. Shi, R. Lu, et al., New England
Journal of Medicine (2020).
[3] A. C. Walls, Y.-J. Park, M. A. Tortorici, A. Wall, A. T.
McGuire, and D. Veesler, Cell (2020).
[4] C. Drosten, S. Günther, W. Preiser, S. Van Der Werf,
H.-R. Brodt, S. Becker, H. Rabenau, M. Panning,
L. Kolesnikova, R. A. Fouchier, et al., New England journal of medicine 348, 1967 (2003).
[5] T. G. Ksiazek, D. Erdman, C. S. Goldsmith, S. R. Zaki,
T. Peret, S. Emery, S. Tong, C. Urbani, J. A. Comer,
W. Lim, et al., New England journal of medicine 348,
1953 (2003).
[6] A. M. Zaki, S. Van Boheemen, T. M. Bestebroer, A. D.
Osterhaus, and R. A. Fouchier, New England Journal of
Medicine 367, 1814 (2012).
[7] J. Xu, S. Zhao, T. Teng, A. E. Abdalla, W. Zhu, L. Xie,
Y. Wang, and X. Guo, Viruses 12, 244 (2020).
[8] J. Lessler, N. G. Reich, R. Brookmeyer, T. M. Perl, K. E.
Nelson, and D. A. Cummings, The Lancet infectious diseases 9, 291 (2009).
[9] Y. Yang, Q. Lu, M. Liu, Y. Wang, A. Zhang, N. Jalali,
N. Dean, I. Longini, M. E. Halloran, B. Xu, et al.,
medRxiv (2020).
[10] E. Prompetchara, C. Ketloy, and T. Palaga, Asian Pacific
J. allergy Immunol 10 (2020).
[11] S. Su, G. Wong, W. Shi, J. Liu, A. C. Lai, J. Zhou,

W. Liu, Y. Bi, and G. F. Gao, Trends in microbiology
24, 490 (2016).
F. Li, W. Li, M. Farzan, and S. C. Harrison, Science 309,
1864 (2005).
F. Li, Journal of virology 82, 6984 (2008).
W. Li, C. Zhang, J. Sui, J. H. Kuhn, M. J. Moore, S. Luo,
S.-K. Wong, I.-C. Huang, K. Xu, N. Vasilieva, et al., The
EMBO journal 24, 1634 (2005).
R. L. Graham and R. S. Baric, Journal of virology 84,
3134 (2010).
L. Kuo, G.-J. Godeke, M. J. Raamsman, P. S. Masters,
and P. J. Rottier, Journal of virology 74, 1393 (2000).
L. Du, Y. He, Y. Zhou, S. Liu, B.-J. Zheng, and S. Jiang,
Nature Reviews Microbiology 7, 226 (2009).
M. Hoffmann, H. Kleine-Weber, S. Schroeder, N. Krüger,
T. Herrler, S. Erichsen, T. S. Schiergens, G. Herrler, N.H. Wu, A. Nitsche, et al., Cell (2020).
P. Zhou, X.-L. Yang, X.-G. Wang, B. Hu, L. Zhang,
W. Zhang, H.-R. Si, Y. Zhu, B. Li, C.-L. Huang, et al.,
Nature pp. 1–4 (2020).
R. Yan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Xia, Y. Guo, and Q. Zhou,
Science (2020).
K. G. Andersen, A. Rambaut, W. I. Lipkin, E. C. Holmes,
and R. F. Garry, Nature Medicine pp. 1–3 (2020).
C. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Yang, P. Zhang, W. Zhong, Y. Wang,
Q. Wang, Y. Xu, M. Li, X. Li, et al., Acta Pharmaceutica
Sinica B (2020).
B. R. Donald, Algorithms in structural molecular biology
(MIT Press, 2011).
T. Kortemme, L. A. Joachimiak, A. N. Bullock, A. D.

[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

[19]

[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.006197; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]

[31]

[32]
[33]

[34]
[35]

Schuler, B. L. Stoddard, and D. Baker, Nature structural
& molecular biology 11, 371 (2004).
P. Gainza, F. Sverrisson, F. Monti, E. Rodolà,
D. Boscaini, M. Bronstein, and B. Correia, Nature Methods 17, 184 (2020).
A. Shulman-Peleg, R. Nussinov, and H. J. Wolfson, Journal of molecular biology 339, 607 (2004).
D. Duhovny, R. Nussinov, and H. J. Wolfson, in International workshop on algorithms in bioinformatics
(Springer, 2002), pp. 185–200.
K. A. Sharp and B. Honig, Annual review of biophysics
and biophysical chemistry 19, 301 (1990).
S. Daberdaku and C. Ferrari, Bioinformatics 35, 1870
(2019).
M. A. Tortorici, A. C. Walls, Y. Lang, C. Wang, Z. Li,
D. Koerhuis, G.-J. Boons, B.-J. Bosch, F. A. Rey, R. J.
de Groot, et al., Nature structural & molecular biology
26, 481 (2019).
R. J. Hulswit, Y. Lang, M. J. Bakkers, W. Li, Z. Li,
A. Schouten, B. Ophorst, F. J. van Kuppeveld, G.-J.
Boons, B.-J. Bosch, et al., Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 116, 2681 (2019).
C. Schwegmann-Weßels and G. Herrler, Glycoconjugate
journal 23, 51 (2006).
Y.-J. Park, A. C. Walls, Z. Wang, M. M. Sauer, W. Li,
M. A. Tortorici, B.-J. Bosch, F. DiMaio, and D. Veesler,
Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 26, 1151 (2019).
V. Venkatraman, Y. D. Yang, L. Sael, and D. Kihara,
BMC bioinformatics 10, 407 (2009).
D. Kihara, L. Sael, R. Chikhi, and J. Esquivel-Rodriguez,
Current Protein and Peptide Science 12, 520 (2011).

10

[36] L. Di Rienzo, E. Milanetti, R. Lepore, P. P. Olimpieri,
and A. Tramontano, Scientific reports 7, 1 (2017).
[37] Y. Wan, J. Shang, R. Graham, R. S. Baric, and F. Li,
Journal of virology (2020).
[38] W. Li, R. J. G. Hulswit, I. Widjaja, V. S. Raj,
R. McBride, W. Peng, W. Widagdo, M. A. Tortorici,
B. van Dieren, Y. Lang, et al., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114, E8508 (2017).
[39] M. A. Tortorici, A. C. Walls, Y. Lang, C. Wang, Z. Li,
D. Koerhuis, G.-J. Boons, B.-J. Bosch, F. A. Rey, R. J.
de Groot, et al., Nature Structural & Molecular Biology
26, 481 (2019).
[40] K. Kinoshita and H. Nakamura, Bioinformatics 20, 1329
(2004).
[41] F. Sievers, A. Wilm, D. Dineen, T. J. Gibson, K. Karplus,
W. Li, R. Lopez, H. McWilliam, M. Remmert, J. Söding,
et al., Molecular systems biology 7 (2011).
[42] A. Vandelli, M. Monti, E. Milanetti, R. D. Ponti, and
G. G. Tartaglia, arXiv:2003.13655 (2020).
[43] E. Qing, M. Hantak, S. Perlman, and T. Gallagher, mBio
11 (2020).
[44] J. Yang and Y. Zhang, Nucleic acids research 43, W174
(2015).
[45] F. M. Richards, Annual review of biophysics and bioengineering 6, 151 (1977).
[46] H. M. Berman, P. E. Bourne, J. Westbrook, and
C. Zardecki, in Protein Structure (CRC Press, 2003), pp.
394–410.
[47] V. Lakshminarayanan and A. Fleck, Journal of Modern
Optics 58, 545 (2011).

