bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Article
Immunogenicity and Protective Efficacy of an Intranasal Liveattenuated Vaccine Against SARS-CoV-2 in Preclinical Animal
Models
Jun-Guy Park1+, Fatai S. Oladunni1+, Mohammed A. Rohaim2,3+, Jayde WhittinghamDowd2, James Tollitt2, Bakri M Assas4, Wafaa Alhazmi5, Abdullah Almilaibary6, Munir
Iqbal7, Pengxiang Chang7, Renee Escalona1, Vinay Shivanna1, Jordi B. Torrelles1, John
J Worthington2, Lucy H. Jackson-Jones2, Luis Martinez-Sobrido1, Muhammad Munir2*

1

Texas Biomedical Research Institute, Host-Pathogen Interactions and Population Health Programs, San

Antonio, TX, 78227, USA; 2Division of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medicine,
Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YG, UK; 3Department of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Cairo University, Giza, 12211, Egypt; 4Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Department of Medical
Laboratory Technology, Immunology Group, King Abdul Aziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; 5Faculty of
Applied Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Laboratory Technology, Microbiology Group, King Abdul
Aziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia; 6Faculty of Medicine, Al Baha University, Al Baha, Saudi Arabia;
7

The Pirbright Institute, United Kingdom

+Contributed equally

*Corresponding author:
Muhammad Munir, Lancaster University, UK muhammad.munir@lancaster.ac.uk

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

ABSTRACT
The global deployment of an effective and safe vaccine is currently a public health priority
to curtail the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Here, we evaluated a Newcastle
disease virus (NDV)-based intranasal vectored-vaccine in mice and hamsters for its
immunogenicity, safety and protective efficacy in challenge studies with SARS-CoV-2.
The recombinant (r)NDV-S vaccine expressing spike (S) protein of SARS-CoV-2
administrated via intranasal route in mice induced high levels of SARS-CoV-2-specific
neutralizing immunoglobulin A (IgA) and IgG2a antibodies and T cell-mediated immunity.
Hamsters vaccinated with two doses of vaccine showed complete protection from clinical
disease including lung infection, inflammation, and pathological lesions after SARS-CoV2 challenge. Importantly, a single or double dose of intranasal rNDV-S vaccine completely
blocked SARS-CoV-2 shedding in nasal turbinate and lungs within 4 days of vaccine
administration in hamsters. Taken together, intranasal administration of rNDV-S has the
potential to control infection at the site of inoculation, which should prevent both the
clinical disease and transmission to halt the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Keywords: Vaccines, SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19, Pandemic, Viral Infection, Immunity

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), emerged in a seafood market in Wuhan, China during late
2019 and was linked to pneumonia-associated illness, which can culminate in respiratory
failure1. COVID-19 can be also manifested by pathologies in the cardiovascular and
gastrointestinal system and induce a hyperinflammatory syndrome2-4. People with
immunosuppression, older age (>60s), and with existing co-morbidities such as obesity,
diabetes, and hypertension, among others, are highly vulnerable and may bear severe
COVID-19 clinical symptoms5. COVID-19 has currently overwhelmed healthcare systems
around the world with >75 million infections and hundreds of thousands of deaths with a
case-fatality rate of approximately 4%7. The enormous impact of COVID-19 on lives, and
its socioeconomic effect on the human population requires the development of a vaccine
that not only reduces the severity of the SARS-CoV-2 infection, but also curbs virus
transmission and protects vaccinated people from infection.
SARS-CoV-2 is a positive sense, single-stranded RNA virus with a genome of
approximately 30,000 nucleotides. Most of the genome (2/3) encodes for non-structural
proteins (nsp) which play critical roles in viral replication and RNA synthesis7. The rest of
the one-third viral genome encodes the main structural proteins including spike (S),
envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N) proteins. The S protein constitute a
180 kDa homo-trimeric class I viral fusion protein on the surface of virions, which interacts
with the cellular carboxypeptidase angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) facilitating
SARS-CoV-2 infection of host cells. Owing to S-ACE2 interaction as a solo entry
mechanism for SARS-CoV-2, and that the S protein contains several crucial B- and T-cell

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

epitopes8,9, it remains the main target for neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) and thus, it
serves as a promising vaccine target against coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-2.
Since the release of SARS-CoV-2 genome sequence, a range of vaccine platforms were
repurposed principally targeting the S protein of SARS-CoV-210. Currently, a number of
candidate SARS-CoV-2 vaccines are either under development including viral vectored-,
inactivated virion- and recombinant protein-based vaccines or being authorised for only
emergency use such as lipid nanoparticle encapsulated mRNA vaccine11,12. While each
of these vaccine platforms present their merit and demerits, vectored-based vaccines
possess an enormous potential at eliciting strong and long-lasting adaptive immunity
including antibody (Ab) responses11,12. Most of the currently developed SARS-CoV-2
vectored-based vaccines adapt the intramuscular route of administration; however, it has
been demonstrated that the intranasal route offers superior induction of local mucosal
immunity and protection against SARS-CoV-213.
Indeed, owing to the nature of the virus biology, the Newcastle disease virus (NDV) vector
offers multifaceted and superior advantages for intranasal immunization. As an avian
virus, NDV is fully attenuated in human and non-human primates and causes no clinical
symptoms except occasional flu-like short-lived conjunctivitis in humans14. Several strains
of NDV have been proven to be safe, being used extensively as oncolytic agents in
humans14. NDV is genetically stable and can tolerate insertion of foreign transgenes of
approximately 5 Kb into its genome without compromising viral replication14. Noticeably,
humans typically lack pre-existing immunity against NDV, which favours NDV over
currently applied human viral vectors such as human adenovirus (Ad), measles virus
(MeV), modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA) or vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). Owing to its

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

tendency to replicate in the respiratory tract, NDV has also been shown to induce local
mucosal immunity offering an additional advantage of interfering with viral shedding.
Importantly, NDV-based vaccines can be produced in chicken embryonated eggs or in
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved cell lines using protocols and
infrastructure currently being applied for influenza virus vaccines. Given these and other
features, apathogenic strains of NDV have been used as live attenuated vaccines (LAVs)
against multiple viruses including influenza15,16, SARS-CoV17, human immunodeficiency
virus18,19, human parainfluenza20,21, rabies22, Nipah23, Rift Valley fever24 and Ebola25-27.
Notably, NDV-based vaccines have been shown to be safe and effective in multiple
animal models including mice16, dogs22, pigs23, cattle22, sheep28, African green and
rhesus monkeys15,17 and ultimately humans17, -29-31.
We have previously developed an NDV-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccine encoding a human
codon optimized full length spike (S) protein of SARS-CoV-2 (rNDV-S) using reverse
genetics33. rNDV-S replicated in chicken embryonated eggs and cultured cells to levels
comparable to a recombinant wild-type NDV (rNDV-WT). Here we tested the
immunogenicity and safety of this rNDV-S-based LAV in mice and advanced our studies
to assess protective efficacy in hamsters. The rNDV-S induced robust systemic humoral
and cell-mediated immune responses with two intranasal vaccine doses in mice and fully
protected against lung infection, inflammation, and pathology after SARS-CoV-2
challenge in hamsters. Intranasal administration of two doses of rNDV-S induced high
levels of SARS-CoV-2 NAbs and anti-SARS-CoV-2 immunoglobulin A (IgA) and IgG2a
and conferred complete protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection. Importantly, single or
double dose of rNDV-S completely blocked the virus shedding into nasal turbinate and

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

lungs of hamsters. Altogether, intranasal immunization of rNDV-S has the potential to
control SARS-CoV-2 infection at the site of inoculation, which should prevent both virusinduced disease and transmission, representing an excellent valid option for the
prevention of SARS-CoV-2 infection and associated COVID-19 disease.

RESULTS
Intranasal vaccination with rNDV-S successfully establishes a viral load with no
accompanying adverse pathology
In order to explore the potential of intranasal live-attenuated vector vaccine against
SARS-CoV-2, we engineered rNDV-S (i.e., avian orthoavulavirus 1, AOaV-1) encoding a
human codon-optimized SARS-CoV-2 full-length S glycoprotein gene, including the
ectodomain, transmembrane domain, and cytoplasmic domain. The S gene was cloned
in a pre-optimized gene junction between phosphoprotein and matrix gene of NDV. As
we demonstrated previously33, the rNDV-S replicated comparably to rNDV-WT in both
cell culture and avian eggs and spreads within cells independently of exogenous trypsin,
proposing a competitive vaccine candidate.
For safety and immunogenicity assessment of rNDV-S vaccine in mice, groups of 12week-old BALB/c mice were immunized by intranasal inoculation with 106 PFU of test
vaccine rNDV-S or wild type NDV (rNDV-WT) or were mock-vaccinated with phosphate
buffer saline (PBS) (Fig. 1a). The rNDV-WT and one rNDV-S group of mice received a
booster dose of 106 PFU of rNDV-WT or rNDV-S, respectively, a week later, while other
groups were mock-boosted. All animals were euthanized on day 19 post-vaccination for
safety assessment, as well as pathological and immunological responses. Mice were

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

monitored daily for weight loss, health status, and feed intake. Initial starting weights did
not significantly differ in any experimental group prior to treatment (Fig. 1b and
Supplementary Fig. 1), and there was no significant alteration in the percentage of weight
in groups immunised with rNDV-S and the control mock-vaccinated group across the time
course of the experiment (Fig.1b). The first dose of rNDV-S induced a significant
reduction in percentage of basal weight at 2- and 3-days post-vaccination (DPV), but
weights returned to comparable levels to mock immunised mice on the following day and
for the rest of the time course (Fig.1b). A reduction in percentage weight was also seen
at 14 and 15 DPV in the rNDV-S (prime + boost) group, but weights also quickly returned
to mock levels for the rest of the study. Analysis of daily chow intake revealed no
significant differences in daily chow consumption among groups (Fig. 1c). Mice were
scored daily assessing movement, hair coat, temperature, eyes, and signs of hunching
on a 14-point scale. No adverse clinical disease signs were observed with indicated daily
score “0” in the duration of experiments. Following the end of the experiment at day 19
post-vaccination, the gross and histopathological assessment of right lung lobe showed
no significant lesions in any of the treated groups (Fig. 1d, e). Further to confirm that
intranasally delivered rNDV-S replicated in immunised mice, we examined the expression
of matrix (M) gene of NDV in various tissues at 19 DPV using qRT-PCR. Results indicate
a high number of NDV copies, and a comparable replication of rNDV-S and rNDV-WT
was observed in the respiratory tract (nasal turbinate, trachea, and lungs) (Fig. 1f- h).
However, comparatively reduced replication was observed in the gut of mice vaccinated
with rNDV-S or rNDV-WT (Fig. 1i). Collectively, these data indicate that rNDV-S intranasal

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

vaccination showed no adverse pathology in the tissues examined and the rNDV-S
vaccine replicated significantly in the target tissues comparable to the rNDV-WT.

Intranasal immunization with rNDV-S elicits potent S-protein binding Abs and NAbs
in mice
To evaluate the immunogenicity of rNDV-S, sera samples collected at 19 days postvaccination were used to evaluate the total IgG antibody titers using ELISAs and levels
of neutralizing antibodies using microneutralization and pseudo-particle entry inhibition
assays, respectively. To detect anti-spike serum Abs, full-length spike (S) protein or
recombinant Spike protein receptor binding domain (RBD) expressed using the
Drosophila S2 cell system were used to coat ELISA plates. After prime immunization only,
the sera from mice immunized with rNDV-S contained S protein-specific Abs, which were
significantly increased with the boosting dose. In comparison, no S protein-specific Abs
were detected in sera from the mice vaccinated with rNDV-WT or mock-vaccinated (Fig.
2a). Next, we assessed the levels of total IgG responses against purified RBD. The rNDVS only induced significantly high levels of anti-RBD-specific IgG in the prime + boost
vaccinated group when compared to mock-immunised or rNDV-WT-immunised mice (Fig.
2b). We next functionally characterized serum Ab responses by the lentiviral entry
inhibition and focal-reduction neutralization tests34,35. As expected, serum from mock- or
rNDV-WT vaccinated mice did not inhibit the entry of pseudoviral particles (Fig. 2c). In
contrast, serum from rNDV-S prime or rNDV-S prime + boost groups significantly inhibited
the entry of the pseudoviral particles. Correspondingly, compared to mice mockimmunised or immunised with rNDV-WT, a significant level of neutralization of SARS-

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

CoV-2 infection was observed by sera collected from rNDV-S immunised mice, both
prime and prime + boost, the latter more efficient in generating NAbs (Fig. 2d). Overall,
rNDV expressing SARS-CoV-2 S protein elicited high titters of protein binding and virus
NAbs in mice, especially when a prime + boost regime was utilized.

Intranasal vaccination with rNDV-S does not induce overt myeloid inflammatory
responses in the lungs, pleural cavity or systemically
We next analysed systemic and local immunological responses to determine whether
innate and adaptive responses were beyond the basal response induced by rNDV-WT.
We did not observe significant alterations in cellularity of the spleen, used as a surrogate
marker of systemic inflammation (Supplementary Fig. 2a). We also did not observe
significant changes in the rNDV-S prime + boost group percentages of myeloid subsets
examined, including neutrophils, monocytes, inflammatory monocytes, or eosinophils
(Supplementary Fig. 2b). However, we observed a significant increase in the percentage
of dendritic cells (DCs) in the spleen of rNDV-WT immunised animals as compared to the
mock vehicle control, and although no significant increase was seen in the rNDV-S prime
immunised group, a similar but non-significant trend in DC levels was seen in murine
spleen after prime + boost rNDV-S immunisation (Supplementary Fig. 2b). Despite the
observed slight morphological changes in the cellular architecture in the lung (Fig. 1d, e),
we did observe a significant increase in the cellularity of the lung in the rNDV-S (prime +
boost) immunized group, as compared to all other experimental groups studied
(Supplementary Fig. 2c). However, when we further examined the myeloid immune
subsets,

we

did

not

observe

significant

9

differences

in

neutrophils,

Ly6C-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

monocyte/macrophages, alveolar macrophages, and eosinophils as compared to the
mock vehicle control group. A significant decrease in the Ly6c+ monocyte/macrophage
subset was observed in the rNDV-S (prime + boost) group (Supplementary Fig. 2d).
Interestingly and similar to the results in the spleen, we only observed a significant
increase in the total DC population in the lung of mice receiving the rNDV-WT vaccine as
compared to mock-vaccinated group (Supplementary Fig. 2d).
To investigate further whether a local inflammatory response occurred following intranasal vaccination, we assessed the immune response within the pleural cavity. Our
results indicate that there were no statistically significant increases in total CD45+
haematopoietic cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, monocytes, and F4/80loMHCIIhi myeloid
cells within either pleural lavage fluid (Supplementary Fig. 3a- f) or pericardial adipose
tissue (Supplementary Fig. 3g- k). However, although not significant, a trend for higher
amounts of F4/80hiMHCIIlo pleural cells was observed in rNDV-S prime + boost group
(Supplementary Fig. 3f). These data suggest that there is no lasting abhorrent myeloid
inflammatory response generated at the site of vaccination or systemically following
intranasal delivery of rNDV-S as compared to the mock-vaccinated mice.

Intranasal vaccination with rNDV-S drives T-cell IFNγ responses both in the lung
and systemically
We next examined T-cell subsets, asking what antigen specific cytokine responses were
produced against the purified full length S protein both systemically and locally at the
vaccination site. Systemically, within the spleen, there was no alteration in the percentage
of splenic CD4+ or CD8+ T-cell subsets in any of the experimental groups studied

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(Supplementary Fig. 4a). We also did not see a significant increase in CD8+ T-cell TNF+
or CD8+ T-cell IFNγ+ cell populations in response to the full-length S protein Ag in any of
the groups studied (Supplementary Fig. 4b). Conversely, splenic CD4+ T-cell IFNγ+ (Fig.
3a) and NK T-cell TNF+ (Fig. 3b) were significantly increased in the rNDV-S boosted
group indicating a systemic SARS-CoV-2 S specific response following vaccination with
rNDV-S.
Locally, within the lung homogenate, a significant decrease in CD4+ T cells and an
increase in CD8+ T cell percentage was observed following vaccination with all NDV
containing groups (Supplementary Fig. 4c). Looking at cytokine responses we saw a
significant reduction in CD8+ T-cell TNFα production in both the NVD-WT and NVD-S
groups and a significant increase in IFNγ production in the rNDV-S boosted group as
compared to the mock vehicle group (Fig. 3c, e). However, despite an overall decrease
of CD4 T cell percentage and no alteration in CD4+ T cell subpopulations producing IL17 or TNF, a significant increase in CD4+ T cell IFNγ+ (6.4-fold) was observed also in the
rNDV-S boosted group as compared to the mock-vaccinated group (Fig. 3d, e).
Collectively, these data indicate both a systemic and local IFNγ antigen specific T-cell
response following intranasal vaccination with rNDV-S.

Intranasal vaccination with rNDV-S drives NAb responses specifically targeting
SARS-COV-2 S protein
Fat associated lymphoid clusters (FALCs) are sites of local Ab production within the
pericardium and mediastinum, known for their early response to intranasal challange36.
Using whole-mount immunofluorescence staining, we were able to detect an expansion

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

of FALCs within the mediastinum at 19 DPV in the rNDV-S boosted group (Fig. 4a, b).
Within FALCs of mice receiving rNDV-S boost, and supporting an earlier response, there
was a significant increase of the level of Ki67+ proliferation, representative of cellular
division, (Fig. 4c, d). Although not reaching significance, a trend for increased percentage
area of CD4 was seen, suggesting a local accumulation of CD4 T cells within the
mediastinum (Fig. 4e). No increase in the % area of IgM (B cell marker) was seen within
the pericardium at day 19 DPV (Fig. 4e).
IgM is the first polyclonal Ab induced during an immune response, and following induction
of adaptive immunity B cells, IgM class switches to other Ab subclasses defined by the
cytokine milieu. As FALCs are the site from which Abs detected in pleural fluid are
produced we next confirmed the local activation of B cells by assessing the presence of
Abs against SARS-CoV2 S RBD within the pleural fluid. Within the pleural fluid no antigen
specific IgM was detected (Fig. 4g), however a significant increase in both RBD-specific
IgA (Fig. 4h) and IgG2a (Fig. 4i) but not IgG1 (Fig. 4j) levels were present within the
pleural fluid of mice in the rNDV-S boosted group compared to control mice and those
receiving rNDV-WT. These data suggest that B cells producing the Abs had class
switched and is consistent with the antigen specific T cell derived IFNγ+ detected upon
re-stimulation, driving a switch to IgA and/or IgG2a (Fig. 4h, i). We next determined the
number of B cells present within the pleural lavage fluid and digested pericardium and did
not observe significant differences in the numbers of B1a, B1b, or B2 cells present within
the pleural lavage fluid or pericardium when comparing rNDV-S boosted to mock control
mice (Supplementary Fig. 5). Furthermore, we also did not detect a significant increase
in pericardial B cell proliferation (Supplementary Fig. 6a, b), suggesting that Abs detected

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

within the pleural fluid may have been secreted earlier or resulted from an ongoing
systemic B cell response within primary lymphoid organs. To further support this,
systemic anti-full-length spike and anti-RBD Ab responses were observed which
neutralized SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 2).

Safe intranasal administration of rNDV-S in hamsters
After establishing the basis of immunological and safety profiles in mice, we next
attempted to evaluate the safety of aerosol rNDV-S vaccination in golden Syrian hamsters,
which have the advantage of being susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection. A total of n=8
hamsters in each group were mock (PBS)-vaccinated or vaccinated with 1 x 106 PFU of
rNDV-WT or rNDV-S once (prime, Fig. 5a) or twice in a 2-week interval (boosted, Fig. 5b).
Body weight was measured daily for 14 (prime) or 28 (boosted) DPV. Prime vaccination
with rNDV-S resulted in no apparent clinical disease except slight (<5%) body weight loss
at 5 DPV (Fig. 5c), and no mortality (Fig. 5d). Boosted vaccination also induced less than
5% of body weight loss by 5 DPV (Fig. 5e) with all the animals surviving rNDV-S
vaccination (Fig. 5f). Vaccination with rNDV-WT resulted in body weight loss only one day
after vaccination in either the prime or boosted vaccinated hamsters (Fig. 5c, e). These
results demonstrate that vaccination of golden Syrian hamsters with 1 x 106 PFU of rNDVS is safe without lasting significant changes in body weight, with all the animals surviving
aerosol rNDV-S vaccination.

Ability of intranasally administered rNDV-S to induce Ab and NAb responses in
hamsters

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Serum samples collected at 0, 14, and 28 DPV from experimental hamsters were
analysed for Ab and NAb responses against SARS-CoV-2. Total levels of Abs against
SARS-CoV-2 were evaluated by ELISA, while NAbs were evaluated by PRNT assay
using SARS-CoV-2. Sera from prime vaccinated hamsters (14 DPV) were able to react
with extracts from SARS-CoV-2 infected cell homogenates, but not from mock-infected
cell homogenates (Fig. 6a). Notably, levels of total Abs against SARS-CoV-2 were higher
in sera from boosted rNDV-S-vaccinated hamsters (28 DPV) (Fig. 6a, Supplementary Fig.
7, 8). In terms of NAb responses, only sera from hamsters receiving boosted vaccination
(28 DPV) presented NAbs in the PRNT assay in both pre-treatment (Fig. 6b, and Table
1) and post-treatment (Fig. 6c and Table 1) conditions. These results indicate that
boosting is required to induce robust NAb responses against SARS-CoV-2 upon
vaccination with rNDV-S.

Protection efficacy of rNDV-S against SARS-CoV-2 infection in hamsters
To access protection efficacy of rNDV-S against SARS-CoV-2 infection, hamsters were
vaccinated (prime or boosted) with rNDVs (WT or S) and then challenged with 2 x 104
PFU of SARS-CoV-2. For viral titration and pathology, hamsters were sacrificed at 2 and
4 DPI (n=4/group). Mock-vaccinated hamsters either challenged with SARS-CoV-2 or
mock challenged were used as internal controls. Lungs from mock-vaccinated hamsters
showed mild to moderate, multifocal pneumonic lesions and congestions at 2 DPI, and
higher inflammation scores characterized by moderate to severe locally extensive to
diffuse bronchopneumonia and foamy exudate in the trachea at 4 DPI (Fig. 7a). Similar
results were observed in hamsters vaccinated with rNDV-WT (primed or prime + boost).

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Conversely, hamsters vaccinated with rNDV-S (prime + boost) showed significantly lower
inflammation scores compared to those of mock or rNDV-WT vaccinated hamsters at
both 2 and 4 DPI (Fig. 7a, b).
Viral titers from nasal turbinate and lung followed similar trends and further support the
lung inflammation scoring. We were not able to detect the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in
the nasal turbinate and lungs of hamsters vaccinated with rNDV-S (boosted). Hamsters
vaccinated with a single dose of rNDV-S (prime) showed SARS-CoV-2 titers in nasal
turbinate and lungs at 2 DPI similar to those of mock-vaccinated hamsters or hamsters
vaccinated with rNDV-WT (Fig. 7c, d). However, at 4 DPI, we could not detect the
presence of SARS-CoV-2 in the nasal turbinate or lungs of hamsters vaccinated with
rNDV-S, contrary to the situation of mock-vaccinated hamsters or hamsters vaccinated
with rNDV-WT, where high titers of SARS-CoV-2 were detected at 4 DPI (Fig. 7c, d).
Histopathological analysis further confirmed these results (Fig. 8). At 2 DPI, lungs from
mock- or rNDV-WT-vaccinated hamsters showed abundant infiltration of inflammatory
cells such as degenerate and non-degenerate neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes,
plasma cells and few eosinophils within the lumen of bronchi and bronchioles and
surrounding small blood vessels (Fig. 8a). At 4 DPI, histologic lesions were primarily
characterized by extensive infiltration of the alveolar septa and alveolar space by
neutrophils, macrophages and lesser lymphocytes, plasma cells, and few eosinophils.
The bronchi and bronchioles showed a slightly lesser degree of inflammation compared
to 2 DPI (Fig. 8b). No significant differences in inflammation (Fig. 8c) and neutrophil
infiltration scores (Fig. 8d) were seen between the different groups at 2 DPI. However,
degree of neutrophil infiltration and lung inflammation scores were significantly decreased

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

in the rNDV-S vaccinated groups (inflammation score of 2.25 for prime and of 1.25 for
boosted) compared to that of mock-vaccinated (inflammation score of 5) or infected with
rNDV-WT (inflammation scores of 5 for both prime and boosted) groups at 4 DPI (Fig.
8d). Lungs of SARS-CoV-2 infected hamsters vaccinated with rNDV-S showed lower lung
inflammation and numbers of neutrophil infiltration than those mock- or rNDV-WT
vaccinated, indicating that a booster vaccination with rNDV-S protects hamsters from
SARS-CoV-2 infection and subsequent lung damage (Fig. 8). Finally, IHC staining was
performed to evaluate the presence and spread of SARS-CoV-2 replication by detecting
viral N protein in the lungs from mock-, rNDV-WT-, or rNDV-S-vaccinated hamsters. As
expected, SARS-CoV-2 N protein staining was not detected in any of the lungs from
rNDV-S vaccinated groups (prime or boosted) at 2 and 4 DPI, while lungs from mock- or
rNDV-WT-vaccinated hamsters showed significant SARS-CoV-2 N protein positively
stained cells. At 2 DPI, SARS-CoV-2 viral N protein staining was primarily within the
epithelium of bronchi, bronchioles, and in inflammatory cells present in the lumen of
bronchi and bronchioles and extended mild to rarely to the alveolar septa surrounding the
bronchioles. At 4 DPI, SARS-CoV-2 N protein positive straining was present in the
epithelium of bronchioles, and along the edges of areas of bronchointerstitial inflammation
within the inflammatory cells and alveolar septa that are distant from bronchioles (Fig. 9a).
The average IHC scores showed progressive and widespread distribution of SARS-CoV2 in mock- and rNDV-WT-vaccinated groups and marked absence of viral N protein
staining at 2 and 4 DPI in the rNDV-S-vaccinated groups (Fig. 9b). These results
demonstrate that vaccination with rNDV-S can protect from SARS-CoV-2 infection,
resulting in lower SARS-CoV-2 titers and protection from lung damage.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

DISCUSSION
Due to high transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 and lack of considerable pre-existing
immunity, the COVID-19 pandemic is posing significant health challenges particularly in
the elderly and people with existing co-morbidities37-39. While both treatments and
vaccines are being developed40-44, there are limited attempts to offer vaccines that can
be deployed in frail and resource-limited health care system particularly in low- and
middle-income countries. In a thirst to curb the pandemic, upper and middle-income
countries are scooping most of the pharmaceutical capacity of vaccine production, which
can contribute to reduce the transmission and impact of the pandemic. In this regard, a
low-cost vaccine production system for mass immunization of people in low and middleincome countries is required. Here, we describe a promising and scalable live-attenuated
vector vaccine based on the use of a rNDV expressing SARS-CoV-2 S, which can be
produced robustly and economically in avian embryonated eggs, as well as in US FDAapproved cell lines, that can be administered intranasally to induce protection at the site
of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Our studies establish that intranasal vaccination with rNDV-S induces Abs, including
NAbs, against SARS-CoV-2 full S protein and RBD, as well as antigen specific T-cell
responses. Although a single dose confers protection against SARS-CoV-2 challenge, a
prime and boost regime provided superior protection, reduced pathology in lung and
completely blocked shedding of SARS-CoV-2 in hamsters, which is considered an
appropriate animal model for vaccine evaluation45,46. The intranasal route for
immunization is advantageous in comparison to traditional routes (i.e., intramuscular)
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

mainly due to its ability to elicit immunity at the local mucosal level47-49. Enhancing
mucosal protective abilities is desirable as it is the first line of defence in the human body
against the majority of pathogens targeting the respiratory tract. Beside the possibility to
self-administer and lack of needles, the intranasal delivery of antigen is associated with
mucosal immunity including production of IgA and priming of T and B cells in the
nasopharynx-associated lymphoid tissues50, and may also provide cross-protection by
eliciting mucosal immunity at different mucosal sites such as the intestines and genital
tract, which have been shown to be potential replication sites for SARS-CoV-251,52. Indeed,
intranasal vaccination of mice with rNDV-S induced the secretion of IgA as well as IgG2a
Abs providing a complete response both locally and systemically. Moreover, detection of
significant increase in Abs in pleural lavage fluid highlight the local induction of the
immune response post-intranasal vaccination. While significant Abs were elicited, further
increasing the interval between prime and boost doses may enhance the memory
responses and higher humoral immunity which warrant future studies. Nevertheless, the
induction of Abs following administration of intranasal vaccines does not require highly
skilled personnel and could even be self-administered, while also avoiding the issues of
individuals who experience trypanophobia and hemophobia. Based on these advantages,
we propose that intranasal delivery of rNDV-S is a promising platform for preventing
SARS-CoV-2 infection, COVID-19 disease, and transmission and, therefore; it warrants
clinical evaluation in humans.
The correlation between SARS-CoV-2 viral load, viral manifestation, clinical symptoms
and the variety of immune cells associated with viral immunity are a topic of ongoing
debate. However, the relation between the site of cellular infiltration and kinetics of

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

sensitive cell/humoral immunity is by far the most influential factor determining the
outcome of the infection. CD8+ T cells are critical in the fight against viral infections as
their cytotoxic characteristics are designed to target intracellular threats such as viruses.
CD4+ T cells on the other hand drive the immune milieu towards a Th1 immune response
characterised by IFNγ-mediated immune responses and subsequent IgG2a Ab release.
Current evidence indicate that Th1 type responses are key in the successful control of
SARS-CoV-253. In our study, systemically, spleen CD4+ T cell IFNγ+ levels increased
post-vaccination in both prime and boost groups. Locally, in the lung tissue, increased
IFNγ levels from both CD4+/CD8+ T cells were observed. This, in line with previously
discussed data potentially provides a level of protective immunity in the form of IFNγantiviral functions45. Boosts in TNF have been associated with disease severity. TNF and
IL-10 directly correlate with COVID-19 severity and are synonymous with patient
deterioration (SARS-CoV-2: A Storm is Raging)54. In SARS-CoV-2 infection, TNF
appears to lean towards detrimental rather than protective roles, especially as a key
component of the group of cytokines known as the cytokine storm55. In our work, a
reduction in lung CD8+ T cell-TNF+ levels were associated with increased CD8+ T cell
percentages. This potentially suggests that in our model, the vaccine promotes cytotoxic
phenotype for CD8+ T cells independent of TNF.
Overall induction of IgM, IgA and IgG as well as NAbs have been reported in numerous
natural infections and in vaccine trials13. Coronavirus-specific IgM production is transient
and leads to isotype switch to IgA and IgG, these latter Ab subtypes can persist for
extended periods in the serum and in nasal fluids45. After two doses of intranasal
vaccination, we hypothesized the greater protection observed was because of the

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

mucosal immune responses generated. In our study, at day 19 post immunisation, local
IgM levels were not increased in either FALC or plural fluid suggesting a natural transition
of the Ab phenotype towards an adaptive response from an innate immediate reaction.
Interestingly, studies have reported earlier peaks in anti-S protein IgA in mild cases earlier
than peaks in IgM54,56. This suggests a more robust effect for IgA in COVID-19 in
protection and clinical outcome of the disease57. Indeed, high levels of anti-SARS-CoV-2
IgA were detected in serum and lung, and B cells secreting IgA were detected in the
spleen only in mice vaccinated via an intranasal route. Moreover, intranasal but not
intramuscular vaccination induced SARS-CoV-2-specific CD8+ T cells in the lung,
including CD103+CD69+ cells, which are likely of a resident memory phenotype13. Future
Ab passive transfer and T cell depletion studies can assess the relative contribution of
each arm of the immune system and establish more precisely the mechanistic basis for
the enhanced protection conferred by intranasal delivery of rNDV-S vaccine.
In our study, we noted an increase in specific anti-S RBD-IgA levels in the pleural cavity.
This corroborated with previous findings associating with mild COVID-19 infections where
anti-S RBD-IgA levels were elevated at different mucosal tissues in recovered COVID-19
patients57,58. Conversely, in our study, anti-S RBD-IgG2a production increased in the
pleural cavity. This localised expansion of IgG2a, in particular, suggests a promotion of
an Fc-mediated killing of the target cell through antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
(ADCC) type of protection in response to the vaccine. In order to assess the relative
contribution of each arm of the immune system to conferred protection against SARSCoV-2 by intranasal delivery of rNDV-S vaccine, future studies are warranted.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

To our knowledge, there are limited, if any, SARS-CoV-2 vaccine platforms currently in
clinical trial using intranasal delivery methods. Similar to influenza LAV, which induces
profound local humoral and cellular responses59, immunization with rNDV-S offer superior
properties over the intramuscular route. Additionally, sterilizing immunity against reinfection or blockage of virus shedding require local and mucosal immunity against SARSCoV-2, which is optimally provided by the intranasal route60,61.
In summary, our studies established that intranasal immunization with rNDV-S induces
both NAbs and antigen-specific T cell responses in mice. Intranasal administration of two
doses fully protected hamsters against lung infection, inflammation, and pathology after
SARS-CoV-2 challenge. Importantly, single or double dose of rNDV-S completely blocked
SARS-CoV-2 shedding in the nasal turbinate and lungs of hamsters. Thus, intranasal
vaccination with rNDV-S has the potential to control SARS-CoV-2 infection at the site of
inoculation, which should prevent both virus-induced COVID-19 disease and
transmission. Based on these pre-clinical results in two rodent models, future clinical
evaluation of rNDV-S in humans for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection is urgently
warranted.

METHODS
Animals
BALB/c female mice were purchased from Charles River, UK and housed under specific
pathogen free conditions at Lancaster University. Experiments were performed using age
and sex matched mice at 11-14 weeks of age. Mice were provided sterilized water and
chow ad libitum and acclimatized for minimum of one week prior to experimental

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

manipulation. Specific-pathogen-free (SPF) 4-weeks-old female golden Syrian hamsters
were purchased from Charles River, US. Hamsters were maintained in micro-isolator
cages at Animal Biosafety Level (ABSL)-2 before and during vaccination with rNDV-WT
or rNDV-S. For challenge with SARS-CoV-2, hamsters were transferred to ABSL-3.
Hamsters were provided sterilize water and chow ad libitum and acclimatized for one
week prior to experimental manipulation. All experiments in hamsters were conducted at
Texas Biomedical Research Institute.

Ethics statement
All mice experiments were performed under the regulations of the Home Office Scientific
Procedures Act (1986), specifically under the project licence PPL PACEB18AC. The
project licence was approved by both the Home Office and the local AWERB committee
of Lancaster University. All the in vitro and in vivo hamster experiments with infectious
SARS-CoV-2 were conducted under appropriate BSL-3 and ABSL-3 laboratories,
respectively, at Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, Texas, US.
Experiments were approved by the Texas Biomedical Research Institutional Biosafety
(BSC) and Institutional Animal Care and Use (IACUC) committees, protocols BSC20004.2 and 1722 MA 3, respectively.

Cells and viruses
SARS-CoV-2, USA-WA1/2020 strain (Gen Bank: MN985325), was obtained from the
Biodefense and Emerging Infections Research Resources Repository (BEI Resources,
NR-52281) and amplified in African green monkey kidney epithelial Vero E6 cells

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, CRL-1586) as previously
described62. Briefly, the virus stock obtained from BEI Resources considered as passage
four (P4) was amplified two more times to generate a P6 working stocks for animal
infections. To that end, Vero E6 cells were infected at low multiplicity of infection (MOI,
0.01) for 72 h and tissue culture supernatants (TCS) were collected, clarified, aliquoted
and stored at -80°C until use. Virus stocks were titrated in Vero E6 cells by plaque assay
and immunostaining as previously described35,63. The rNDV-WT and rNDV-S viruses
were propagated in chicken embryonated eggs quantified in Vero cells using procedures
we described before33. 293T cells and Vero cells were maintained in Dulbecco's Modified
Eagle Medium (DMEM) with 10% FBS as described previously33.

Safety and immunogenicity studies in mice
Mice were assigned to 4 experimental groups receiving a 50 µl intranasal dose of either
mock (PBS) vehicle at days 0 and 14; 104 PFU of rNDV-WT at days 0 and 14 (booster) or
rNDV-S at day 0 only (prime) or at days 0 and 14 (booster). Mice and chow were weighed
daily and nasally swabbed at times indicated before sacrifice at 19 DPV. Mouse morbidity
was scored using a 14 point scoring system based on a) Hunched posture: Yes (1), No
(0); b) Spontaneous activity: None (2), Reduced (1), Normal (0); c) Response to touch:
None (3), Movement (2), Move away (1), Normal (0); d) Feels cold: Yes (1), No (0); e)
Breathing laboured: Yes (1), No (0); f) “Rasping” breathing: Yes (1), No (0); g) Ruffled
fur/piloerection: Yes (1), No (0); h) Pallor at extremities: Yes (1), No (0); and i) Moderate
staining around eyes and/or nose.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Vaccine safety studies in hamsters
To evaluate in vivo safety of rNDV-S, hamsters (n=8 per group) were vaccinated
intranasally with 1 x 106 PFU of rNDV-WT or rNDV-S, or mock-vaccinated with saline
(PBS), in a final volume of 100 µl, after sedation in an isoflurane chamber. Hamsters were
vaccinated following a prime or a booster regimen. In the case of the booster
immunization, animals were boosted 2 weeks after prime vaccination. After vaccination,
hamsters were monitored daily for morbidity (body weight changes and clinical signs of
infection) and mortality (survival) for 14 (prime) or 28 (booster) DPV. Sera were collected
at 0 and 14 (mock, prime, and booster groups), and 28 (booster) DPV. One mockvaccinated hamster in the vaccination group was removed because of accidental death.

Vaccine efficacy in hamster
After 14 (prime) or 28 (mock and booster groups) DPV, hamsters were challenged
intranasally with 2 x 104 PFU of SARS-CoV-2 in a final volume of 100 µl under isoflurane
sedation. To evaluate SARS-CoV-2 titers in nasal turbinates and lung, hamsters were
humanely sacrificed at 2 (n=4) or 4 (n=4) DPI. Nasal turbinates and lungs were harvested,
and half of the organs were homogenized in 2 mL of PBS using a Precellys tissue
homogenizer (Bertin Instruments) for viral titration and the other half was kept in 10%
neutral buffered formalin (NBF, ThermoFisher Scientific) for histopathology and
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Tissue homogenates were centrifuged at 21,500 x g for 5
min and supernatants were used to calculate viral titers.

Real-time PCR for quantification of rNDV replication

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

RNA was extracted from mice organs (nasal turbinate, lungs, trachea, and gut) using
TRIzol™ reagent as per manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen, USA). Real-time qRTPCR was performed using SuperScript™ III Platinum™ One-Step qRT-PCR Kit
(Invitrogen, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions to detect NDV M gene64 and
enable the calculation of NDV genome copies.

Production and purification of recombinant SARS-CoV-2 S and RBD proteins
Recombinant S and RBD proteins were produced and purified as previously described65.
Briefly, expression cassettes containing SARS-CoV-2 S and RBD nucleotide sequences
were codon optimized for Drosophila melanogaster Schneider 2 (S2) cells. The Nterminus signal sequence of both S and RBD proteins were replaced with Drosophila BiP
signal sequence which encodes immunoglobulin-binding chaperone protein, and the Cterminus were fused with T4 foldon sequence (GSG YIP EAP RDG QAY VRK DGE WVL
LST FL) and a C-tag sequence (EPEA) for affinity purification. The protein expression
cassettes

were

commercially

synthesised

(GeneArt,

ThermoFisher

Scientific,

Regensburg, Germany) and cloned into pExpres2.1 expression vector (ExpreS2ion
Biotechnologies, Hørsholm, Denmark). The recombinant plasmids were transfected into
Drosophila S2 cells using Calcium Phosphate Transfection Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Paisley, Scotland, UK). Following antibiotic selection with Zeocin (InvivoGen, Toulouse,
France), cells were propagated in Drosophila EX-CELL® 420 Serum-Free Medium
(Merck Life Science) at 25oC. Recombinant S and RBD trimeric proteins secreted in cell
culture supernatants were purified using the CaptureSelect™ C-tag Affinity Matrix
(ThermoFisher Scientific). Concentration of purified recombinant Abs were determined by

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) and the purity was assessed
by sodium dodecyl sulphate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).

Indirect antigen capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) for Ab
detection in mice
SARS-CoV-2 S or RBD proteins were coated onto 96-well ELISA plates. Viral antigen
proteins were diluted in PBS to a concentration of 5 µg/ml, using 100 µl per well. Following
an overnight incubation at 4oC, plates were washed 3 times with PBS-Tween-20 (PBST)
and blocked with 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS overnight at 4oC. Sera samples
were heat inactivated at 56oC for 30 min prior to testing by ELISA. Hundred µl of the
diluted (1:10 in 2% BSA) primary Abs were added to each well and incubated for 3 h at
37oC. Following 3 times washing with PBST, plates were incubated with 1:6,000 IgG1
HRP avidin-horseradish-peroxidase conjugate diluted in 2% BSA for 2 h at 37oC.
Following 3 times washing in PBST, colour was developed using 3,3',5,5'tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) chromogen (100 µl per well) for 5 min at room temperature.
The reaction was stopped with an equal volume of 0.16M H2SO4 and optical density (OD)
was read at 450 nm. Sample to positive ratio (S/P), as defined by the formula S/P =
(sample OD - standard negative OD)/ (standard positive OD - standard negative OD),
were used for reporting all ELISA values.

ELISA for Ab detection in hamsters
Binding affinity of hamster sera to SARS-CoV-2 antigens was determined by ELISA using
lysates from mock-vaccinated and SARS-CoV-2-infected Vero E6 cells. Briefly, ELISA

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

plates were coated overnight at 4oC with a 1:1,000 dilution of cells extracts from mockand SARS-CoV-2-infected Vero E6 cells. Plates were washed 3X with PBS and incubated
with 2-fold, serially diluted hamster serum samples in PBS (starting dilution of 1:100) for
1 h at 37oC. Plates were washed 3X with PBS and incubated with HRP-conjugated antihamster IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch, PA, USA) for 1 h at 37oC. After 3X washes with
PBS, plates were developed with TMB substrate buffer. The reaction was stopped by 2M
H2SO4 after incubation for 10 min at room temperature. The optical density (OD) values
were measured at 450 nm using an ELISA plate reader.

Neutralization assays using pseudotyped viruses
Derivatives of 293T cells expressing ACE2 receptors were generated by transducing
293T cells with ACE2 receptor expressing vector. Human 293T cells expressing ACE2
were used for rescue of SARS-COV-2 S-pseudotyped HIV particles for neutralisation
assays.

To

generate

SARS-COV-2

S-pseudotyped

HIV,

the

reporter

vector

(pCCNanoLuc2AEGFP), HIV-1 structural/regulatory proteins (pHIVNLGagPol) and
pSARS-CoV-2-Strunc were used at a molar plasmid ratio of 1:1:0.45 and the infectivity of
pseudotyped viral particles was calculated as described previously34. For neutralization
assays of mice sera, sera (1:10 starting dilution) were five-fold serially diluted in 96-well
plates. Thereafter, a 50 μl aliquot of HIV-based SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus containing
approximately 1×103 infectious units were added. After 1h incubation at 37°C, 100 μl of
the mixture was transferred to target cells plated at 1×104 cells/well in 100 μl medium in
96-well plates. Cells were then cultured for 48h and cells were harvested for NanoLuc
luciferase assays. For the NanoLuc luciferase assays, cells were washed twice, carefully,

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

with PBS and lysed with 50 μl/well of Luciferase Cell Culture Lysis reagent (Promega).
NanoLuc Luciferase activity in lysates was measured using the Nano-Glo Luciferase
Assay System (Promega). Specifically, 25 μl of substrate in NanoGlo buffer was mixed
with 25 μl cell lysate in black flat bottom plates and incubated for 5 min at RT. NanoLuc
luciferase activity was measured using Glowmax Navigator luminometer (Promega),
using 0.1s integration time. Relative luminescence units (RLU) obtained were normalized
to those derived from cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus in the absence of Abs.
The half maximal neutralizing concentration (NC50) for sera was determined using 4parameter nonlinear regression curve fit to raw infectivity data measured as relative light
units, or as the percentage of infected cells (GraphPad Prism).

SARS-CoV-2 microneutralization assay
The day before infection, Vero-E6 cells were seeded at 1×104 cells/well into 96-well plates
and incubated at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator overnight. Mice sera samples were heat
inactivated at 56°C for 30 min. Sera samples were 10-fold serially diluted in DMEM
(Invitrogen, USA) supplemented with 1% BSA and 1x penicillin/streptomycin. Next, the
diluted sera samples were mixed with a constant amount of SARS-CoV-2 (100 Median
Tissue Culture Infectious Dose (TCID50)/50 μl) and incubated for 1 h at 37°C. The Abvirus-mix was then directly transferred to Vero E6 cells and incubated for 3 days at 37°C
in a 5% CO2 incubator. The median microneutralization (MN) 50 (MN50) or 100 (MN100) of
each serum sample was calculated as the highest serum dilution that completely protect
the cells from cytopathic effect (CPE) in half or all wells, respectively.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Plaque reduction microneutralization (PRMN) assays
PRMN assays were performed to identify the levels of SARS-CoV-2 NAbs as described
previously30. Briefly, sera samples were inactivated at 56oC for 30 min prior to assay. For
pre-treatment conditions, 200 PFU/well of SARS-CoV-2 were mixed with 2-fold serial
dilutions (starting dilution 1:100) of hamsters’ sera and incubated at 37oC for 1 h.
Confluent monolayers of Vero E6 cells (96-well plate format, 4 x 104 cells/well,
quadruplicates) were infected with the virus-serum mixture for 1 h 37oC. After viral
absorption, infectious media was exchanged with post-infection media containing 2%
FBS and 1% Avicel. For post-treatment conditions, confluent monolayers of Vero E6 cells
(96-well plate format, 4 x 104 cells/well, quadruplicates) were infected with 100 PFU/well
of SARS-CoV-2 for 1 h at 37oC. After viral adsorption, infection media was exchanged
with 100 µl of post-infection media containing 2% FBS, 1% Avicel, and 2-fold serial
dilutions (starting dilution 1:100) of hamster sera. In both cases (pre- and post-treatment
conditions) infected cells were fixed 24 h post-infection (hpi) with 10% neutral formalin for
24 h and immunostained with a monoclonal Ab (1C7) against the viral nucleocapsid (N)
protein (1 µg/ml). Viral neutralization was evaluated and quantified using ELISPOT, and
a sigmoidal dose-response, non-linear regression curve was generated using GraphPad
Prism to calculate median neutralization titer (NT50) in each of the serum samples.

SARS-CoV-2 virus titrations
Nasal turbinate and lungs from SARS-CoV-2-infected golden Syrian hamsters were
homogenized in 2 ml of PBS for 20 s at 7,000 rpm using a Precellys tissue homogenizer
(Bertin Instruments). Confluent monolayers of Vero E6 cells (96-plate format, 4 x 104

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

cells/well, duplicates) were infected with 10-fold serial dilutions of supernatants obtained
from the nasal turbinate or lung homogenates from SARS-CoV-2 infected golden Syrian
hamsters. Virus from serially diluted samples was adsorbed at 37°C for 1 h followed by
incubation in post-infection media containing 2% FBS and 1% Avicel at 37°C for 24 h.
After viral infection, plates were submerged in 10% NBF for 24 h for fixation/inactivation.
For immunostaining, cells were washed 3X with PBS and permeabilised with 0.5% Triton
X-100 for 10 min at room temperature, followed by blocking with 2.5% bovine serum
albumin (BSA) in PBS for 1 h at 37°C. Cells were incubated with the N protein 1C7
monoclonal Ab (1 µg/ml) diluted in 1% BSA for 1 h at 37°C. Then cells were washed 3X
with PBS and stained with the Vectastain ABC kit and developed using the DAB
Peroxidase Substrate kit (Vector Laboratory, Inc, CA, USA), as previously described 1.
Virus titers were calculated as PFU/ml.

Cell re-stimulation and flow cytometry staining
Spleens were removed from mice and disaggregated through a 100 µm sieve.
Pericardium was digested using 1mg/ml Collagenase D (Roche) in a shaking heat block
at 37°C, digestion was stopped after 35mins by addition of 5mM EDTA (Fisher) followed
by passing through a 100µm cell strainer. Pleural exudate cells (PLEC) were isolated via
lavage of the pleural cavity with 10ml of ice cold dPBS (Sigma). Left lung lobes were
excised and finely diced using scissors prior to digestion in 2 ml lung digest medium (PBS
(Sigma), 0.1mg/ml Liberase TM (Roche), 50 µg/ml DNAse I (Roche)) for 30 min in a
shaking incubator at 37°C. Digestion was stopped after 30mins by adding 5mM EDTA
(Fisher) followed by passing through a 100 µm cell strainer. Lung & spleen cells were

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

diluted to 1x106cells/ml before incubating with 50 μg/ml SARS-CoV-2 purified spike
antigen for 24 h in media (RPMI-1640, 10% FCS, 100U/ml penicillin/streptomycin,
5%NEAA, L-glutamine and HEPES, 0.05 mM β-mercaptoethanol (SIGMA)). Cell
suspensions were incubated for the final 6 h with 1x Cell stimulation cocktail (plus protein
inhibitors) (eBioscience). Cell suspensions were blocked with anti-FcγR Ab (clone 24G2;
eBioscience and Biolegend) before labelling with combinations of Abs specific for Ly6G
(1A8; Biolegend), Siglec F (E50-2440; BD), CD19 (6D5, Biolegend), TCRβ (H57-597,
Biolegend), CD11c (N418; Biolegend), CD45 (30-F11; Biolegend), CD5 (53-7.3;
Biolegend), Ly6C (HK1.4; Invitrogen), CD11b (M1/70; Biolegend), IA/IE (M5/114.15.2,
Biolegend), F4/80 (BM8, Invitrogen), CD3 (eBio500A2), CD4 (clone GK1.5; eBioscience,
RM4-5, Biolegend), , CD49b (DX5; EBioscience), IL-13 (clone eBiol13A; eBioscience),
IFNγ (clone XMG1.2; eBioscience), Ki67 (REA183, Miltenyi) and IL-17(eBio17B7;
eBioscience). For intracellular cytokine analysis cells were then stained with Abs using
the eBioscience Foxp3 permeabilization kit according to the manufacturer's instructions.
All samples were analysed on a Beckman Cytoflex and analysed with FlowJo Software
(TreeStar).

Pathologic observation
Mouse lung tissues were inflated and fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin (NBF)
solution and embedded in paraffin prior to H&E. After mounting, positive cells were
enumerated in field of view and alveolar space enumerated via NIH Image J software.
In the hamster studies, lungs were collected at 2- and 4- DPI from mock- and SARS-CoV2-challenged golden Syrian hamsters. Lung samples were photographed to show gross

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

lesions on both the dorsal and ventral views. Images were used for macroscopic
pathology scoring analysis by measuring the distributions of pathological lesions,
including consolidation, congestion, and pneumonic lesions using NIH ImageJ software.
The area of pathological lesions was converted into percent of the total lung surface area.
Half of the hamster lungs fixed with 10% neutral buffer formalin (NBF) were embedded in
paraffin blocks, and sectioned (5 µm). Sections were stained with H&E and evaluated
under light microscopy in a blinded manner by a board-certified veterinary pathologist at
Texas Biomedical Research Institute. The average inflammation scores were graded
based on percent of inflamed lung area: grade 0 = no histopathological lesions observed,
grade 1 = minimal (< 10%), grade 2 = mild (10 to 25%), grade 3 = moderate (25 to 50%),
grade 4 = marked (50 to 75%), and grade 5 = severe (> 75%). And the neutrophil
infiltration scores were graded base on lesion severity as follows: grade 0 = no lesions
observed, grade 1 = <10 cells, grade 2 = <25 cells, grade 3 = <50 cells, grade 4 = >100
cells, and grade 5 = Too numerous to count (TNTC).

Immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays
Immunostainings were performed as previously described54,55. Briefly, 5 um lung tissues
sections were mounted on Superfrost Plus Microscope slides, deparaffinized and antigen
retrieval was conducted using the HIER method (Heat Induced Epitope Retrieval).
Subsequently, slides were stained with the primary N protein monoclonal Ab 1C7 (1
µg/ml). Then slides were incubated and developed with the MACH 4 Universal HRP
Polymer Kit and Betazoid DAB Chromagen Kit (Biocare Medical, LLC), according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The presence of SARS-CoV-2 N protein antigen was

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

analysed by a veterinary pathologist at Texas Biomedical Research Institute. Scores of
antigens were graded based on the anatomical location of viral N protein staining: grade
0 = no or rare immunostaining, grade 1 = viral N protein staining only in
bronchi/bronchiole, grade 2 = viral N protein staining only in bronchi/bronchiole and
surrounding alveolar septa, grade 3 = viral N protein staining in alveolar septa distant
from the bronchi and bronchioles, grade 4 = viral N protein staining throughout the lung.
The Mann–Whitney test was used for statistical analysis.

Confocal imaging
Mouse mediastinum samples were fixed for one hour on ice in 10% NBF (Sigma) and
then permeabilised in PBS 1% Triton-X 100 (Sigma) for 15 min at room temperature prior
to staining with primary Abs for one hour at room temperature in PBS 0.5% BSA 0.5%
Triton. DAPI was added for the final 10 min of the 1 h incubation. After washing in PBS,
tissues were mounted in fluoromount G and confocal images were acquired using a Zeiss
LSM880 confocal laser scanning microscope. Samples were analysed using Fiji software.
Cluster area was delineated using IgM, and percentage area of Ki67 & CD4 staining within
each cluster was calculated.

Statistical analysis
Results are expressed as mean ± SEM. Where statistics are quoted, two experimental
groups were compared via the Student’s t test or the Mann–Whitney for non-parametric
data. Three or more groups were compared with ANOVA, with Sidaks, Dunnett’s or
Bonferroni’s post-test as indicated. A P value of <0.05 was considered statistically

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

significant. *, P<0.05; **, P<0.01; or ***, P<0.005 for indicated comparisons, error bars
represent standard error of means.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We want to thank Dr. Thomas Moran at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai for
providing us with the SARS-CoV cross-reactive N protein monoclonal Ab 1C7. We also
thank BEI Resources for providing the SARS-CoV-2 USA-WA1/2020 isolate (NR-52281).
We would also like to thank members at our institutes for their efforts in keeping them
fully operational during the COVID-19 pandemic, and the BSC and IACUC committees at
Texas Biomedical Research Institute for reviewing our protocols in a time efficient
manner. We would also like to thank the support of Texas Biomed Research Institute
members and donors, whose efforts and COVID-19 philanthropic donations, respectively,
made possible the realization of this study. The MM laboratory is supported by the
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) (BB/M008681/1 and
BBS/E/I/00001852) and the British Council (172710323 and 332228521). JJW was
supported by a Wellcome Trust Grant; Award Number: 209087/Z/17/Z. LHJJ was
supported by a Wellcome Trust Grant; Award Number 213697/Z/18/Z.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The overall design of the study was by M.M., L.M., L.H.J. and J.J.W. Experiments and
analyses were performed by J.P., F.S.O., M.A.R., M.M., J.W., J.T., L.H.J. and J.J.W.
Recombinant protein for mice experiment was produced by M.I. and P.C. Animal studies
were performed by L.H.J., J.J.W., L.M., J.B.T., V.S., R.E., J.P., F.S.O., J.W. and J.T. The

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

manuscript was written by M.M., L.H.J. and J.J.W, J.P., and F.S.O. and revised by M.A.R,
B.M.A., W.A., A.A., M.I., R.E., V.S., J.B.T., and L.M. All authors have read and approved
the manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
Authors declare no competing interests
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information is available for this paper.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to MM.

REFERENCES
1. Guan, W. J. et al. Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in China. N.
Engl. J. Med. 382, 1708-1720 (2020).
2. E.W. Cheung, E. W. et al. Multisystem inflammatory syndrome related to COVID19 in previously healthy children and adolescents in New York City. JAMA. 324,
294-296 (2020).
3. Mao, R. et al. Manifestations and prognosis of gastrointestinal and liver
involvement in patients with COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Lancet Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 5, 667-678 (2020)
4. Wichmann, D. et al. Autopsy findings and venous thromboembolism in patients
with COVID-19: a prospective cohort study. Ann. Intern. Med. 173, 268-277 (2020)
5. Zhou, F. et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with
COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 395,1054-1062
(2020)

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

6. WHO. Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard. https://covid19.who.int/
7. Rohaim, M. A., El Naggar, R. F., Clayton, E. & Munir, M. Structural and functional
insights into non-structural proteins of coronaviruses. Microb. Pathog. 150,104641
(2020)
8. Letko, M. et al. Functional assessment of cell entry and receptor usage for SARSCoV-2 and other lineage B betacoronaviruses. Nat. Microbiol. 5, 562-569 (2020)
9. Walls, A.C. et al. Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike
Glycoprotein. Cell. 181, 281-292.e6 (2020)
10. Graham, B. S. Rapid COVID-19 vaccine development. Science. 368, 945-946
(2020)
11. Zhu, F. et al. Immunogenicity and safety of a recombinant adenovirus type-5vectored COVID-19 vaccine in healthy adults aged 18 years or older: a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. Lancet. 396, 479-488
(2020)
12. Logunov, D. Y. et al., 2020. Safety and immunogenicity of an rAd26 and rAd5
vector-based heterologous prime-boost COVID-19 vaccine in two formulations:
two open, non-randomised phase 1/2 studies from Russia. Lancet. 396, 887-897
(2020).
13. Hassan, A. O. et al. A Single-Dose Intranasal ChAd Vaccine Protects Upper and
Lower Respiratory Tracts against SARS-CoV-2. Cell. 183, 169-184.e13 (2020)
14. Bukreyev, A. & Collins, P. L. Newcastle disease virus as a vaccine vector for
humans. Curr Opin Mol Ther. 10, 46-55 (2008)

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

15. DiNapoli, J. M. et al. Newcastle disease virus-vectored vaccines expressing the
hemagglutinin or neuraminidase protein of H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza
virus protect against virus challenge in monkeys. J. Virol. 84, 1489–1503 (2010a)
16. Ge, J. et al. Newcastle disease virus-based live attenuated vaccine completely
protects chickens and mice from lethal challenge of homologous and heterologous
H5N1 avian influenza viruses. J. Virol. 81, 150–158 (2007)
17. Bukreyev, A. et al. Recombinant Newcastle disease virus expressing a foreign viral
antigen is attenuated and highly immunogenic in primates. J. Virol. 79, 13275–
13284 (2005)
18. Khattar,

S.

K.

et

al.

Newcastle

Disease

Virus

Expressing

Human

Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 Envelope Glycoprotein Induces Strong Mucosal
and Serum Antibody Responses in Guinea Pigs. J. Virol. 85, 10529–10541 (2011)
19. Carnero, E. et al. Optimization of human immunodeficiency virus gag expression
by Newcastle disease virus vectors for the induction of potent immune
responses. J. Virol. 83, 584–597 (2009)
20. Haller, A. A., Miller, T., Mitiku, M. & Coelingh, K.. Expression of the surface
glycoproteins of human parainfluenza virus type 3 by bovine parainfluenza virus
type 3, a novel attenuated virus vaccine vector. J. Virol. 74, 11626-11635 (2000)
21. Hurwitz, J. L. et al. Intranasal Sendai virus vaccine protects African green monkeys
from infection with human parainfluenza virus-type one. Vaccine. 15, 533-540
(1997)

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

22. Ge, J. et al. Newcastle disease virus-vectored rabies vaccine is safe, highly
immunogenic, and provides long-lasting protection in dogs and cats. J. Virol. 85,
8241–8252 (2011)
23. Kong, D. et al. Newcastle disease virus vectored Nipah encephalitis vaccines
induce B and T cell responses in mice and long-lasting neutralizing antibodies in
pigs. Virology. 432, 327–335 (2012)
24. Kortekaas, J. et al. Rift Valley fever virus immunity provided by a paramyxovirus
vaccine vector. Vaccine. 28, 4394–4401 (2010)
25. DiNapoli, J. M. et al. Respiratory tract immunization of non-human primates with a
Newcastle disease virus-vectored vaccine candidate against Ebola virus elicits a
neutralizing antibody response. Vaccine. 29, 17–25 (2010b)
26. Yang, L. et al. A paramyxovirus-vectored intranasal vaccine against Ebola virus is
immunogenic in vector-immune animals. Virology. 377, 255-264 (2008)
27. Yoshida, A. et al. Novel avian paramyxovirus-based vaccine vectors expressing
the Ebola virus glycoprotein elicit mucosal and humoral immune responses in
guinea pigs. Sci Rep. 9, 5520 (2019)
28. Khattar, S. K. et al. Immunization of cattle with recombinant Newcastle disease
virus expressing bovine herpesvirus-1 (BHV-1) glycoprotein D induces mucosal
and serum antibody responses and provides partial protection against BHV1. Vaccine. 28, 3159–3170 (2010)
29. Pecora, A. L. et al. Phase I trial of intravenous administration of PV701, an
oncolytic virus, in patients with advanced solid cancers. J. Clin. Oncol. 20, 2251–
2266 (2002)

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

30. Ockert, D. et al. Newcastle disease virus infected intact autologous tumor cell
vaccine for adjuvant active specific immunotherapy of resected colorectal
carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 2, 21–28 (1996)
31. Karcher, J. et al. Antitumor vaccination in patients with head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas with autologous virus-modified tumor cells. Cancer Res. 64, 8057–
8061 (2004)
32. Ayllon, J., García-Sastre, A. & Martínez-Sobrido, L. Rescue of recombinant
Newcastle disease virus from cDNA. JoVE. 80, e50830 (2013)
33. Rohaim, M. A. & Munir, M. A Scalable Topical Vectored Vaccine Candidate against
SARS-CoV-2. Vaccines. 8, 472 (2020)
34. Schmidt, F. et al., 2020. Measuring SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibody activity
using pseudotyped and chimeric viruses. J. Exp. Med. 217, e20201181 (2020)
35. Park, J. G. et al. Rapid in vitro assays for screening neutralizing antibodies and
antivirals against SARS-CoV-2. J. Virol. Methods. 287, 113995 (2021).
36. Jackson-Jones, L. H. et al. Fat-associated lymphoid clusters control local IgM
secretion during pleural infection and lung inflammation. Nat. Commun. 7, 12651
(2016).
37. Banerjee, A. et al. Estimating excess 1-year mortality associated with the COVID19 pandemic according to underlying conditions and age: a population-based
cohort study. Lancet. 395, 1715-1725 (2020).
38. Lee, L. Y. et al. COVID-19 mortality in patients with cancer on chemotherapy or
other anticancer treatments: a prospective cohort study. Lancet. 395, 1919-1926
(2020)
39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

39. Kang, S. J. & Jung, S. I. Age-Related Morbidity and Mortality among Patients with
COVID-19. Infect Chemother. 52, 154-164 (2020)
40. Casadevall, A. & Pirofski, L. A. The convalescent sera option for containing
COVID-19. J. Clin. Invest. 130, 1545–8 (2020).
41. Li, L. et al. Effect of convalescent plasma therapy on time to clinical improvement
in patients with severe and life-threatening COVID-19: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA. 324, 460-470 (2020).
42. Wang, Y. et al. Remdesivir in adults with severe COVID-19: a randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial. Lancet. 395, 1569–78 (2020).
43. WHO. Draft Landscape of COVID-19 Candidate Vaccines. 2020. Available
online: https://www.who.int/who-documents-detail/draft-landscape-of-covid-19candidate-vaccines (accessed on 23 Dec 2020).
44. Krammer, F. SARS-CoV-2 vaccines in development. Nature. 586, 516–527(2020).
45. Tostanoski, L. H. et al. Ad26 vaccine 457 protects against SARS-CoV-2 severe
clinical disease in hamsters. Nat. Med. 26, 1694–1700. (2020)
46. Sun, W. et al. A Newcastle disease virus (NDV) 460 expressing membraneanchored spike as a cost-effective inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine. Vaccines, 8,
771 (2020).
47. Ainai, A. et al. Intranasal vaccination with an inactivated whole influenza virus
vaccine induces strong antibody responses in serum and nasal mucus of healthy
adults. Hum. Vaccine Immunother. 9, 1962-70 (2013)
48. Wang, S. et al. Intranasal and oral vaccination with protein-based antigens:
advantages, challenges and formulation strategies. Protein Cell. 6, 480-503 (2015)
40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

49. Zheng, Z. et al. Noninvasive vaccination against infectious diseases. Hum.
Vaccine Immunother. 14, 1717-33 (2018)
50. Lycke, N. Recent progress in mucosal vaccine development: potential and
limitations. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12, 592-605 (2012)
51. Zhang, T. et al. Detectable SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA in feces of three children during
recovery period of COVID-19 pneumonia. J. Med. Virol. 92, 909-914. (2020)
52. Cui, P. et al. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 detection in the
female lower genital tract. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 223, 131–134 (2020)
53. Fara, A., Mitrev, Z., Rosalia, R. A., Assas, B. M. Cytokine storm and COVID-19: a
chronicle of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Open Biol. 10, 200160 (2020).
54. Chaolin, H. et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus
in Wuhan, China. Lancet. 395, 497-506 (2020)
55. Chen, G. et al. Clinical and immunological features of severe and moderate
coronavirus disease 2019. J. Clin. Invest. 130, 2620-2629 (2020).
56. Cervia, C. et al. Systemic and mucosal antibody responses specific to SARS-CoV2 during mild versus severe COVID-19. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. S0091-6749,
31623-7 (2020).
57. Yu, H. et al. Distinct features of SARS-CoV-2-specific IgA response in COVID-19
patients. Eur. Respir. J. 56, 2001526. (2020)
58. Sterlin, D. et al., 2020. IgA dominates the early neutralizing antibody response to
SARS-CoV-2. Sci. Transl. Med. eabd2223 (2020).
59. Calzas, C. & Chevalier, C. Innovative mucosal vaccine formulations against
influenza A virus infections. Front. Immunol. 10, 1605 (2019)

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

60. Dutta, A. et al. Sterilizing immunity to influenza virus infection requires local
antigen-specific T cell response in the lungs. Sci. Rep. 6, 32973 (2016)
61. Laurie, K. L. et al. Multiple infections with seasonal influenza A virus induce crossprotective immunity against A (H1N1) pandemic influenza virus in a ferret model.
J. Infect. Dis. 202, 1011-1020 (2010)
62. Case, J. B., Bailey, A. L., Kim, A. S., Chen, R. E. & Diamond, M. S. Growth,
detection, quantification, and inactivation of SARS-CoV-2. Virology. 548, 39-48
(2020)
63. Mendoza, E. J., Manguiat, K., Wood, H. & Drebot, M. Two Detailed Plaque Assay
Protocols for the Quantification of Infectious SARS-CoV-2. Curr. Protoc. Microbiol.
57, ecpmc105 (2020)
64. Wise, M. G. et al. Development of a real-time reverse-transcription PCR for
detection of Newcastle disease virus RNA in clinical samples. J. Clin. Microbiol.
42, 329–338 (2004)
65. Lukosaityte, D. et al. Engineered Recombinant Single Chain Variable Fragment
of Monoclonal Antibody Provides Protection to Chickens Infected with H9N2 Avian
Influenza. Vaccines. 8, 118 (2020)

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig. 1. No adverse pathology results following rNDV-S intranasal vaccination. (a)
Experimental model for the prime and prime + boost intranasal vaccination of mice. (b)
Percentage weight change of mice following instillation of PBS or indicated rNDV
constructs over the experimental time-course. (c) Daily chow intake by mock-vaccinated
or rNDV-S vaccinated mice. Mean interstitial space size of right lung following H&E
staining and assessed via ImageJ (d) and representative images (e). Viral replication of
intranasally administered rNDV in nasal turbinate (f), trachea (g), lung (h) and gut (i).
Data (n = 4–5 mice/group); *, P<0.05 and NS, non-significant between naïve and
vaccinated groups, error bars represent SE of means via repeated t-test or ANOVA with
Dunnett’s post-test.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig. 2. Intranasal administration of rNDV-S elicits high titers of binding and NAbs
in mice. (a) S-specific serum IgG titers measured by ELISA. Sera from animals at 19
days after-prime and after prime + boost were isolated and used in the ELISA against a
recombinant trimeric S protein. Sera from mock-vaccinated mice and mice vaccinated
with rNDV-WT were used as control. (b) Corresponding sera from all group of mice were
used to detect Abs against RBD of spike protein. (c) Lentiviruses expressing the S protein
of SARS-CoV-2 were used to perform pseudoparticle entry inhibition assay. Sera
samples collected from mice after prime or after prime + boost inhibited the entry of
lentiviral pseudoparticles compared to sera collected from mice vaccinated with rNDVWT or mock-vaccinated (d) Sera samples from all groups were used to measure
neutralization of SARS-CoV-2. Sera from prime from group of mice which were
vaccinated with rNDV-S prime only or after prime + boost group of mice showed marked
virus neutralization compared to sera from mock-treated or vaccinated with rNDV-WT.
Data (n = 4–5 mice/group); *, P<0.05; **, P<0.01; or ***, P<0.005 between naïve and
vaccinated groups, error bars represent SE of means via repeated T-test or ANOVA with
Dunnett’s.

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig. 3. Vaccination with rNDV-S drives both CD4 and CD8 T-cell cytokine
responses. Flow cytometric analysis of cytokine responses to SARS-CoV-2 S protein
from splenic CD4 (a) and NK (b) T-cell populations and lung CD4 (c) and CD8 (d) T cell
populations from mice on day 19 following instillation of mock (PBS) or indicated rNDV
constructs intranasally on days 0 & 7. (e) Representative T-cell flow cytometry plots of
lung cytokine production of (c) and (d). Data (n = 4–5 mice/group); *, P<0.05; **, P<0.01;
or ***, P<0.005 between naïve and vaccinated groups, error bars represent SE of means
via ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-test.

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig. 4. Fat associated lymphoid clusters (FALCs) expand within the pericardium
and class switched Abs are present within the pleural fluid following vaccination.
Expansion of fat associated lymphoid clusters within the thoracic cavity in response to
rNDV-S. (a) Whole mount immuno-fluorescence imaging of the murine mediastinum on
day 19 following instillation of PBS or indicated rNDV constructs, intranasally, on days 0
& 7. (b) Cluster perimeter. (c) %Ki67+ area of cluster and (d) mean fluorescence intensity
of Ki67 expression. (e) %CD4+ area of cluster. (f) %IgM+ area of cluster. Scale bar =
50μm. IgM (g), IgA (h), IgG2a (i) and IgG1 (j) Abs against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein
receptor binding domain present within pleural fluid on day 19 following instillation PBS
or indicated NDV construct i.n. on day 0 & day 7. Data (n = 4–5 mice/group); *, P<0.05; **,
P<0.01; between mock and vaccinated groups, N.S. = non- significant, error bars
represent SE of means via one-way ANOVA with Sidak’s post-test.

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig. 5. Safety of rNDV-S in golden Syrian hamsters. (a-b) Schematic representation
of the vaccination approach: Golden Syrian hamsters (n=8/group) were mock (PBS)vaccinated or vaccinated intranasally with 1 x 106 PFU of rNDV-WT or rNDV-S using a
prime (a) or a prime + boost (b) vaccination regimen. After vaccination, hamsters were
challenged at 14 (prime, a) or 28 (prime + boost, b) DPV with 2 x 104 PFU of SARS-CoV2 and sacrificed at 2 and 4 DPV for gross lung pathology, viral titers, H&E staining and
histopathology. (c-d) Morbidity and mortality of rNDV-S in prime vaccinated
hamsters: Body weight changes (c) and survival (d) were evaluated at the indicated DPV
with a single dose of rNDV-WT or rNDV-S. Mock (PBS)-vaccinated hamsters were used
as control. (e-f) Morbidity and mortality of rNDV-S in prime + boost vaccinated
hamsters: Body weight changes (e) and survival (f) were evaluated at the indicated DPV
with two doses of rNDV-WT or rNDV-S. Mock (PBS)-vaccinated hamsters were included
as control. Error bars represent standard deviations (SD) of the mean for each group of
hamsters.

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig. 6. Total and NAbs in serum of golden Syrian hamsters vaccinated with rNDVS. (a) ELISA: Levels of total S binding Abs in sera from hamsters vaccinated with rNDVS at 0, 14, and 28 DPV. (b) Neutralization assays, pre-treatment conditions: In vitro
neutralizing activity of hamster serum samples against SARS-CoV-2 at 0, 14, and 28
DPV. (c) Neutralization assays, post-treatment conditions: In vitro neutralizing activity
of hamster sera against SARS-CoV-2 at 0, 14, and 28 DPV. Virus neutralization assays
were quantified using ELISPOT and the percentage of infectivity calculated using
sigmoidal dose response curves (b and c). Mock-infected cells and SARS-CoV-2
infections in the absence of serum were used as internal controls (b and c). Dotted line
indicates 50% neutralization (b and c). Data were expressed as mean and SD.

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig. 7. Gross lung pathology and SARS-CoV-2 titers in challenged golden Syrian
hamsters. (a) Lung images: Representative images of the lungs from mock, rNDV-WT
and rNDV-S vaccinated hamsters at 2 and 4 DPI with SARS-CoV-2 are shown. Scale
bars = 1 cm. (b) Lung pathologic lesions: Macroscopic pathology scoring of lungs from
hamsters in panel A was determined by measuring the distributions of pathological
lesions (arrows), including consolidation, congestion, and pneumonic lesions using
ImageJ software. (c-d) SARS-CoV-2 titers: SARS-CoV-2 titers in nasal turbinate (c) and
lungs (d) from hamsters in panel A were determined by standard plaque assay. Dotted
line indicates limit of detection (LOD, 200 PFU). Each symbol represents an individual
animal and @ represents one mock-vaccinated hamster that was removed because of
accidental death. &, Virus not detected in one mouse; #, virus not detected in two mice;
ND, not detected. Lines represent the geometric mean. The Mann–Whitney test used for
statistical analysis. *, P<0.05; **, P<0.01; or ***, P<0.005 for indicated comparisons.

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig. 8. Histopathologic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 challenged golden Syrian
hamsters. (a-b) H&E images of lungs from SARS-CoV-2 challenged hamsters at 2
DPI (a) and 4 DPI (b): Lung lesions are primarily characterized by suppurative
inflammation within and surrounding the bronchi/bronchiole (black asterisks) at 2 DPI and
extending to bronchointerstitial inflammation (arrows) by 4 DPI. Scale bars = 500 µm. (c)
Average inflammation scoring: The average inflammation scores were determined
based on percent of inflamed lung area: grade 0 = no histopathological lesions; grade 1
= minimal (< 10%) histopathological lesions; grade 2 = mild (10 to 25%) histopathological
lesions; grade 3 = moderate (25 to 50%) histopathological lesions; grade 4 = marked (50
to 75%) histopathological lesions; and grade 5 = severe (> 75%) histopathological lesions.
(d) Neutrophil infiltration: The neutrophil infiltration scores were graded base on lesion
severity as follows: grade 0 = no lesions observed; grade 1 = <10 cells; grade 2 = <25
cells; grade 3 = <50 cells; grade 4 = >100 cells; and grade 5 = too many cells to count.
The Mann–Whitney test was used for statistical analysis. *, P<0.05; **, P<0.01; or ***,
P<0.005 for indicated comparisons. Lines represent the geometric mean. @ represents
one mock-vaccinated hamster that was removed because of accidental death.
50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.08.425974; this version posted January 11, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig. 9. IHC analysis in SARS-CoV-2 challenged golden Syrian hamsters. (a) IHC
imaging: Presence of SARS-CoV-2 viral N protein in the lungs of SARS-CoV-2
challenged hamsters at 2 and 4 DPI. Scale bars = 500 µm. (b) IHC scores: Scores were
determined on the presence of SARS-CoV-2 N protein staining: grade 0 = no or rare
immunostaining; grade 1 = viral N protein staining only in bronchi/bronchiole; grade 2 =
viral N protein staining in bronchi/bronchiole and surrounding alveolar septa; grade 3 =
viral N protein staining in alveolar septa distant from the bronchi and bronchioles; grade
4 = viral N protein staining throughout the lung. @ represents one mock-vaccinated
hamster that was removed because of accidental death. The Mann–Whitney test was
used for statistical analysis. *, P<0.05; **, P<0.01; or ***, P<0.005 for indicated
comparisons.

51

