bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.160499; this version posted June 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 specific T-cell receptors in ImmuneCode
reveals cross-reactivity to immunodominant Influenza M1 epitope
John-William Sidhom, Alexander S. Baras
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Adaptive Biotechnologies and Microsoft have
recently partnered to release ImmuneCode, a
database containing SARS-CoV-2 specific T-cell
receptors derived through MIRA, a T-cell receptor
(TCR) sequencing based sequencing approach to
identify antigen-specific TCRs. Herein, we query the
extent of cross reactivity between these derived SARSCoV-2 specific TCRs and other known antigens
present in McPas-TCR, a manually curated catalogue
of pathology-associated TCRs. We reveal cross
reactivity between SARS-CoV-2 specific TCRs and
the immunodominant Influenza GILGFVFTL M1
epitope, suggesting the importance of further work in
characterizing the implications of prior Influenza
exposure or co-exposure to the pathology of SARSCoV-2 illness.
In December 2019, SARS-CoV-2 or SARS-CoV2, a novel coronavirus was first reported in Wuhan, China,
and was later named a pandemic by the WHO in March
2020. In moderate to severe disease, the immune system
is thought to play an important role in clinical presentation
and course of illness (Qin et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2020;
Li et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2020). Given the extent of the
morbidity and mortality that have been caused by SARSCoV-2, there have been massive efforts across academia
and industry to expedite our knowledge of the disease to
develop better therapies and vaccines. In this effort,
Adaptive Biotechnologies and Microsoft have partnered
together to release ImmuneCode, a database of T-cell
receptor sequences with derived specificities to SARSCoV-2 epitopes through the use of the MIRA assay
(Multiplex Identification of T cell Receptor Antigen
Specificity) (Klinger et al. 2015). The assay exposes Tcells to antigens that span a significant portion of the viral
genome and identifies antigen-specific TCR through the
use of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) TCR
sequencing.
In this analysis, we wanted to query whether these
SARS-CoV-2 specific TCRs were known to respond to
other antigens. To do so, we collected known TCRepitope pairs from McPas-TCR, a manually curated
catalogue of pathology-associated T Cell Receptor
Sequences and looked for SARS-CoV-2 specific TCRs
within this database and further isolated the SARS-CoV2 epitopes with cross-reactive TCRs to SARS-CoV-2 and
other known antigens (Tickotsky et al. 2017). In our
analysis, we reveal that there is notable cross-reactivity to
the Influenza derived epitope M1 GILGFVFTL and these

cross-reactive TCRs were present in both SARS-CoV-2
exposed and non-exposed individuals.
Results
We first examined the distribution of TCRs
within the McPas database over the types of pathogens
present in the database and cross-referenced the SARSCoV-2 specific TCRs into the McPas database (Figure
1A), and we noted that there was a statistically significant
enrichment (from 17.3% to 32.9%) of SARS-CoV-2
specific TCRs that had known specificity to the
immunodominant M1 GILGFVFTL epitope We then
examined the distribution of TCRs within the
ImmuneCode database across the various open readings
frames (orfs) and mapped the M1 specific TCRs within
this database (Figure 1B). We further noted that there was
a statistically significant enrichment (from 11.8% to
66.7%) of cross-reactive SARS-CoV-2 specific TCRs
within the surface glycoprotein orf. To better characterize
the SARS-CoV-2 epitopes these TCRs were responsive
to, we visualized the number of unique TCRs per epitope
in the ImmuneCode database and noted a high level of
specificity to a stretch of overlapping epitopes within the
surface glycoprotein orf (Figure 1C). We observed that
these 16 highly homologous TCRs (visualized by
seqlogo) mapped to a set of overlapping epitopes
containing an SNVT motif, suggesting that this repertoire
of T-cells is capable of recognizing both the M1 epitope
and this SARS-CoV-2-derived epitope. Finally, we found
that these cross-reactive TCRs were present in both
individuals who were and were not exposed to SARSCoV-2 (Figure 1D).
Discussion
In this brief analysis, we have identified a set of
TCRs with known specificities to both a SARS-CoV-2
and Influenza antigen. The implications of these findings
are relevant in understanding the nature of the immune
response to SARS-CoV-2 as the clinical course is highly
variable with patients presenting anywhere from being
asymptomatic to requiring critical care (Goyal et al.
2020). Further insights into the evolution of the immune
response could help guide early triage of individuals who
are more likely to require more intensive support.
However, there are several limitations of this
study. The number of individuals in this study was fairly
small with 7 exposed and 5 non-exposed individuals.
Given the lack of power in this analysis, it was difficult to
assess for any differences in the extent of cross reactivity

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.160499; this version posted June 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

in exposed vs non-exposed individuals. Differences in
cross reactivity may shed light on the role of Influenza
specific antigen-experienced T-cells in the control of
SARS-CoV-2 infection. Furthermore, given these results,
future studies may want to consider comparing the
clinical course in Influenza vaccinated vs unvaccinated
individuals. Another significant limitation is assessing the
certainty of antigen-specificity of a given TCR. Often,
specificity of a TCR is determined in a high throughput
fashion through methods such as tetramer sorting or Tcell expansion based assays, which can be inherently
noisy and non-specific sources of data (Sidhom et al.,
n.d.). This problem is highlighted in Figure 1A when we
compare the distribution of unique TCR sequences in the
McPAS-TCR database vs the sampled distribution of
SARS-CoV-2 specific TCRs. While there is clear
enrichment in the M1 epitope, the NP 177 epitope, while
demonstrating a large number of TCRs that are seemingly
cross-reactive, the enrichment over the background
distribution within McPas-TCR is not significant,
suggesting that this may be nonspecific signal within the
MIRA assay. In light of these limitations, T-cell
recognition assays such as ELISPOT would be needed
moving forward to validate these results, and confirm that
truly, Influenza specific T-cells are capable also of
recognizing SARS-CoV-2 specific epitopes. Finally,
while these SARS-CoV-2 epitopes may elicit in-vitro
responses, if they are not processed and presented in-vivo,
Influenza specific T-cells would likely not have any
ability to recognize SARS-CoV-2 infected cells. Thus,
further work is required to not only confirm that these
Influenza specific T-cells are cross-reactive to these
SARS-CoV-2 epitopes but studies are needed to confirm
their in-vivo processing and presentation.
In conclusion, while these results are preliminary
in a small cohort of individuals, we have identified a set
of TCRs that is known to both recognize an
immunodominant epitope derived from Influenza and
SARS-CoV-2, suggesting that immune control of one
infection may play a role in the control of the other. These
results justify further study into evolution of the immune
response to SARS-CoV-2 in the setting of prior or
coexisting Influenza infection.
Data Availability & Code
All data and code used to conduct this analysis
are available at https://github.com/sidhomj/COVID19
with included jupyter notebook to reproduce all analyses
and figures present in this manuscript.

References
Goyal, Parag, Justin J. Choi, Laura C. Pinheiro, Edward
J. Schenck, Ruijun Chen, Assem Jabri, Michael J.
Satlin, et al. 2020. “Clinical Characteristics of
Covid-19 in New York City.” The New England
Journal of Medicine 382 (24): 2372–74.
Klinger, Mark, Francois Pepin, Jen Wilkins, Thomas
Asbury, Tobias Wittkop, Jianbiao Zheng, Martin
Moorhead, and Malek Faham. 2015. “Multiplex
Identification of Antigen-Specific T Cell Receptors
Using a Combination of Immune Assays and
Immune Receptor Sequencing.” PloS One 10 (10):
e0141561.
Li, Xiaowei, Manman Geng, Yizhao Peng, Liesu Meng,
and Shemin Lu. 2020. “Molecular Immune
Pathogenesis and Diagnosis of COVID-19.”
Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis 10 (2): 102–8.
Qin, Chuan, Luoqi Zhou, Ziwei Hu, Shuoqi Zhang,
Sheng Yang, Yu Tao, Cuihong Xie, et al. 2020.
“Dysregulation of Immune Response in Patients
with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China.” Clinical
Infectious Diseases: An Official Publication of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America, March.
https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa248.
Shi, Yufang, Ying Wang, Changshun Shao, Jianan
Huang, Jianhe Gan, Xiaoping Huang, Enrico Bucci,
Mauro Piacentini, Giuseppe Ippolito, and Gerry
Melino. 2020. “COVID-19 Infection: The
Perspectives on Immune Responses.” Cell Death
and Differentiation 27 (5): 1451–54.
Sidhom, John-William, H. Benjamin Larman, Petra
Ross-MacDonald, Megan Wind-Rotolo, Drew M.
Pardoll, and Alexander S. Baras. n.d. “DeepTCR: A
Deep Learning Framework for Understanding TCell Receptor Sequence Signatures within Complex
T-Cell Repertoires.”
https://doi.org/10.1101/464107.
Tickotsky, Nili, Tal Sagiv, Jaime Prilusky, Eric Shifrut,
and Nir Friedman. 2017. “McPAS-TCR: A
Manually Curated Catalogue of PathologyAssociated T Cell Receptor Sequences.”
Bioinformatics 33 (18): 2924–29.
Zheng, Meijuan, Yong Gao, Gang Wang, Guobin Song,
Siyu Liu, Dandan Sun, Yuanhong Xu, and Zhigang
Tian. 2020. “Functional Exhaustion of Antiviral
Lymphocytes in COVID-19 Patients.” Cellular &
Molecular Immunology.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.160499; this version posted June 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1. a) T-cell receptor sequences for pathogenic epitopes were collected from McPas-TCR and their distribution by
pathogen was plotted (left) along with the distribution of SARS-CoV-2 specific TCRs (middle) that had exact sequence
match to TCR sequences in the McPas-TCR database. Both counts and proportions for each pathogen is shown. The
magnitude of enrichment is visualized (right) for each McPas-TCR epitope (Fisher’s Exact Test: * : p-val < 0.05 after
multiple hypothesis testing correction) b) Distribution of SARS-CoV-2 TCRs from ImmuneCode (left) and M1 specific
(middle) TCRs were visualized across all open reading frames (orfs). The magnitude of enrichment is visualized (right) for
each orf (Fisher’s Exact Test: *** : p-val < 0.001 after multiple hypothesis testing correction). c) Distribution of 16 unique
TCRs specific for M1 GILGFVFTL across SARS-CoV-2 epitopes (top). Select overlapping epitopes were highlighted
showing a shared SNVT motif and corresponding specific TCRs were represented with a seqlogo (bottom). d) Distribution
of 16 unique TCRs specific for M1 GILGFVFTL across individuals stratified by whether the individual was considered
exposed or non-exposed to SARS-CoV-2.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.160499; this version posted June 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

