bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

DC/L-SIGN recognition of spike glycoprotein
promotes SARS-CoV-2 trans-infection and can be
inhibited by a glycomimetic antagonist
Michel Thépaut1,4, Joanna Luczkowiak2,4, Corinne Vivès1, Nuria Labiod2, Isabelle
Bally1, Fátima Lasala2, Yasmina Grimoire1, Daphna Fenel1, Sara Sattin3, Nicole
Thielens1, Guy Schoehn1, Anna Bernardi3, Rafael Delgado2*, Franck Fieschi1*

1Univ.

Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, Institut de Biologie Structurale, 38000 Grenoble, France
de Investigación Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre (imas12), Universidad
Complutense School of Medicine, 28041 Madrid, Spain.
3Universita` degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Chimica, via Golgi 19, 20133, Milano, Italy.
4These authors contributed equally
*Correspondance: rafael.delgado@salud.madrid.org, franck.fieschi@ibs.fr
2Instituto

Summary
The efficient spread of SARS-CoV-2 resulted in a pandemic that is unique in modern
history. Despite early identification of ACE2 as the receptor for viral spike protein, much
remains to be understood about the molecular events behind viral dissemination. We
evaluated the contribution of C-type lectin receptors (CLRS) of antigen-presenting cells,
widely present in air mucosa and lung tissue. DC-SIGN, L-SIGN, Langerin and MGL
bind to diverse glycans of the spike using multiple interaction areas. Using pseudovirus
and cells derived from monocytes or T-lymphocytes, we demonstrate that while virus
capture by the CLRs examined does not allow direct cell infection, DC/L-SIGN, among
these receptors, promote virus transfer to permissive ACE2+ cells. A glycomimetic
compound designed against DC-SIGN, enable inhibition of this process. Thus, we
described a mechanism potentiating viral capture and spreading of infection. Early
involvement of APCs opens new avenues for understanding and treating the
imbalanced innate immune response observed in COVID-19 pathogenesis

Keyword: COVID-19, Glycomimetic, Spike protein, SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirion
assay, Ebola pseudovirus, C-type lectins, DC-SIGN, L-SIGN, glycomimetic

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Introduction
C-type lectin Receptors (CLRs) are Pathogen Recognition Receptors (PRRs) involved
in the detection of carbohydrate-based pathogen-associated molecular patterns by
antigen-presenting cells (APC), including macrophages and dendritic cells, and in the
elaboration of the immune response (Geijtenbeek and Gringhuis, 2009; Takeuchi and
Akira, 2010). Many innate immune cells express a wide variety of CLRs, which differ
between cell types, allowing specific adjustments of the immune response upon target
recognition. Thus, CLRs such as Dectin-2, Mincle, MGL (Macrophage galactose
lectin), Langerin and DC-SIGN are major players in the recognition of pathogenic fungi,
bacteria, parasites and viruses (de Jong et al., 2010; van Kooyk and Geijtenbeek,
2003; Mnich et al., 2020; Van Breedam et al., 2014). The interaction of these CLRs
with their ligands allows dendritic cells (DC) to modulate the immune response towards
either activation or tolerance. This is done in particular through antigen presentation in
lymphoid organs (primary mission of APCs) but also through the release of cytokines.
Thus, DCs have a major role in modulating the immune response from the early stages
of infection. To fulfill their sentinel function, DCs are localized at and patrol the sites of
first contact with a pathogen, such as epithelia and mucous interfaces, including the
pulmonary and nasopharyngeal mucosae. Similarly, alveolar macrophages are found
in the lung alveoli.
In this battle for infection, some pathogens have evolved strategies to
circumvent the initial role of CLRs in activating immunity and even to divert CLRs to
their benefit for their infection process. Many viruses associate with CLRs and other
host factors at the cell surface to facilitate they transfer towards their specific target
receptors that will trigger fusion of viral and host membranes. This kind of viral
subversion has been reported for several C-type lectin receptors, including L-SIGN
(also called DC-SIGNR) and especially DC associated DC-SIGN, which promotes cisand/or trans-infection of several viruses such as HIV, Cytomegalovirus, Dengue, Ebola
and Zika viruses (Alvarez et al., 2002; Carbaugh et al., 2019; Geijtenbeek et al., 2000;
Halary et al., 2002; Navarro-Sanchez et al., 2003). In particular, DC-SIGN mediates
direct HIV infection of DCs (cis-infection) and can also induce trans-infection of T cells,
the primary target of the virus (de Witte et al., 2008), while in the case of Dengue and

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Ebola, DC-SIGN allows direct cis-infection of the receptor-carrying cells (Alvarez et al.,
2002; Navarro-Sanchez et al., 2003). Even more noteworthy nowadays, DC-SIGN and
L-SIGN (herein after collectively referred to as DC/L-SIGN) have also been reported
to be involved in the enhancement of SARS-CoV-1 infection (Jeffers et al., 2004; Marzi
et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2004).
In the context of the current COVID-19 pandemic, attention is now focused on
the SARS-CoV-2 virus (Huang et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020).Coronaviruses use a
homotrimeric glycosylated spike (S) protein protruding from their viral envelope to
interact with cell membranes and promote fusion upon proteolytic activation. In the
case of SARS-CoV-2, a first cleavage occurs within infected cells, at the level of a furin
site (S1/S2 site), generating two functional subunits S1 and S2 that remain complexed
in a prefusion conformation in newly formed virus. S2 contains the fusion machinery of
the virus, while the surface unit S1 contains the receptor-binding domain (RBD) and
stabilizes S2 in its pre-fusion conformation. The S protein of both SARS-CoV-2
(Hoffmann et al., 2020; Letko et al., 2020; Walls et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020) and
SARS-CoV-1 (Li et al., 2003) use ACE2 (Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2) as their
primary receptor. For SARS-CoV-2 spike, interaction of its RBD with ACE2, as well as
a second proteolytic cleavage at a S2’ site, trigger further irreversible conformational
changes in S2, thus engaging the fusion process (Hoffmann et al., 2020).
The sequence of events around the S protein/ACE2 interaction are becoming
increasingly clearer, but much remains to be unraveled about additional factors
facilitating the infection such as SARS-CoV-2 delivery to the ACE2 receptor. Indeed,
S proteins from both SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 have identical affinity for ACE2
(Walls et al., 2020), but this translates to very different transmission rates. We posit
that the enhanced transmission rate of SARS-CoV-2 relative to SARS-CoV-1 (HCA
Lung Biological Network et al., 2020) might result from a more efficient viral adhesion
through host-cell attachment factors, which may promote efficient infection of ACE2+
cells. This type of mechanism is frequently exploited by viruses using alternatively
heparan sulfate, glycolipids or CLRs to concentrate and scan cell surface for their
receptor. Additionally, in the case of SARS-CoV-2, a new paradigm is needed to
untangle the complex clinical picture, resulting in a vast range of possible symptoms
and in a spectrum of disease severity associated on one hand with active viral

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

replication and cell infection through interaction with ACE2 along the respiratory tract,
and, on the other hand, to the development of excessive immune activation, i.e. the so
called “cytokine storm”, that is related to additional tissue damage and potential fatal
outcomes.
In this framework, C-type lectin PRRs and the APCs displaying them, i.e. DCs
and macrophages, can play a role both as viral attachment factors and in immune
activation. Thus, their role in SARS-CoV-2 infection deserves attention and we focused
on DC-SIGN and L-SIGN because of their involvement in SARS-CoV-1 infections
(Jeffers et al., 2004; Marzi et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2004). L-SIGN is expressed in type
II alveolar cells of human lungs as well as in endothelial cells and was identified as a
cellular receptor for SARS-CoV-1 S glycoprotein (Jeffers et al., 2004). DC-SIGN was
also characterized as a SARS-CoV-1 S protein receptor (Marzi et al., 2004) able to
enhance virus cellular entry by DC transfer to ACE2+ pneumocytes (Yang et al., 2004).
Recent thorough glycan and structural analyses comparing both SARS-CoV1/2 spike glycoproteins have shown that glycosylation is mostly conserved in the two
proteins, both in position and nature of the glycan exposed (Watanabe et al., 2020a,
2020b; Wrapp et al., 2020), creating a glycan shield which complicates neutralization
by antibodies. Secondly, elegant molecular dynamic simulations suggested how some
of the spike glycans may directly modulate the dynamics of the interaction with ACE2,
stabilizing the up conformation of the RBD domain (Casalino et al., 2020; Zhao et al.,
2020). Finally, and yet unexplored, spike glycans may contribute to infectivity by acting
as anchor points for DC-SIGN and L-SIGN on host cells surfaces. Indeed, 28 % of
glycans are of the oligomannose-type and could therefore constitutes ligands for CLRs
and notably for DC-SIGN and L-SIGN. This argues also for the potential use of these
CLRs by SARS-CoV-2, as do SARS-CoV-1. Additionally, some mutations modulating
SARS-CoV-2 virulence have an impact on the glycosylation level of the spike. As an
example, the D614G mutation, which increases virulence, has been reported as
potentially increasing glycosylation at neighboring asparagine 616 (Brufsky and Lotze,
2020; Jia et al., 2020; Korber et al., 2020). A recent proteomic profiling study pointed
to DC-SIGN as a mediator of genetic risk in COVID-19 (Katz et al., 2020) and finally it
is of note that DC/L-SIGN expression is induced by proinflammatory cytokines such as
IL-4, IL-6, IL-10 and IL-13, known to be overexpressed in severe SARS and COVID-

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

19 cases (Lucas et al., 2020; Relloso and Puig-Kroger). These observations prompted
us to investigate the potential interaction of C-type lectins receptors, notably DC/LSIGN with SARS-CoV-2, through glycan recognition of the spike envelope
glycoprotein, as well at their potential role in SARS-CoV-2 transmission.

Results
Production and stabilization of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein
In order to accurately analyze the interaction properties of the spike protein from
SARS-CoV-2 with C-type lectin receptors, we expressed and purified recombinant
spike protein using an expression system well-characterized in term of its site-specific
glycosylation. We used here the same construct that was used 1) to obtain the cryoelectron microscopy structure of the structure (Wrapp et al., 2020) and 2) for extensive
characterization of glycan distribution on the spike surface (Watanabe et al., 2020a).
Expression was performed as reported, without using kifunensine to avoid blocking
glycan processing. The spike protein was purified exploiting its 8xHis tag, followed by
a Superose size exclusion chromatography (SEC). SEC chromatogram deconvolution
allowed to select the best fractions (Figure 1B). SDS-PAGE analysis confirmed protein
purity and differences in migration after reduction supported the presence of expected
disulfide bridges and thus proper folding (Figure 1A). Furthermore, sample quality and
trimeric assembly were confirmed by 2D class averages of the spike obtained from
negatively stained sample observed under the electron microscope (Figure 1C). This
construct contains “2P” stabilizing mutations at residues 986 and 987 (Pallesen et al.,
2017), a inacivated furin cleavage site at the S1/S2 interface, and a C-terminal
sequence optimizing trimerization (Wrapp et al., 2020). Nonetheless, we observed a
limited stability over a week time scale at 4°C. To further improve protein stability and
therefore ensure the quality of the following investigations, we optimized the storage
buffer. Increasing ionic strength of the purification buffer up to 500 mM NaCl proved
successful, preserving the trimeric state at 4°C at least for three weeks (Figure 1D to
1G). This “high-salt” concentration does not modify the structural properties of the
protein as shown by identical elution profile in SEC (Figure 1B); in addition, negativestain EM images are better in “high-salt” conditions (Figure 1D and 1 F). All protein

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

samples were therefore subsequently produced in 500 mM NaCl and stored at -80°C.
Buffer was then modified according to the analysis performed.

Figure 1. Production and optimization of spike protein
(A) SDS-PAGE analysis (8% acrylamide gel) of 2 µg purified SARS-Cov-2 S protein; non-reduced and
reduced with mercapto-ethanol, NR and R, respectively. (B) Chromatograms of gel filtration profile of
SARS-Cov-2 S protein using buffer with 150 mM NaCl (green line), 375 mM NaCl (blue line) and 500
mM NaCl (thick red line). Manual deconvolution of gel filtration chromatogram at 500 mM NaCl: principal
peak (thin red line) and contaminants (dashed red line). Collected fractions are represented by the grey
area. (C) Classification of 2543 particles of SARS-Cov-2 S protein after the first step of purification on
HisTrap HP column, using Relion (auto-picking mode). (D) to (G) Quality control of SARS-CoV-2 S
protein performed by negative staining Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) using uranyl acetate
as stain (2% w/v). Scale bar is 50 nm. (D) and (E) Sample produced in 150 mM NaCl buffer, day of
production and after 17 days at 4°C, respectively. (F) and (G) Sample produced in 500 mM NaCl buffer,
day of production and after 22 days at 4°C, respectively.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Several C-type lectin receptors can interact with SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein
DC-SIGN and L-SIGN have been already described as receptor of SARS-CoV-1 and
twenty out of the twenty-two SARS-CoV-2 S protein N-linked glycosylation sequons
are conserved. Glycan shielding represent 60 to 90 % of the spike surface considering
the head or the stalk of the S ectodomain, respectively (Casalino et al., 2020; Grant et
al., 2020; Sikora et al., 2020). One third of N-glycans of SARS-CoV-2 spike are of the
oligomannose type (Watanabe et al., 2020a). These glycans are common ligands for
DC-SIGN and L-SIGN, and also for Langerin, a CLR of Langerhans cells, a subset of
tissue-resident DCs of the skin, also present in mouth and vaginal mucosae (Hussain
and Lehner, 1995).
To compare their recognition capabilities, SPR interaction experiments were
performed with the various CLRs with immobilized SARS-CoV-2 S proteins. First, a S
protein functionalized surface was generated using a standard procedure for covalent
amine coupling onto the surface. The functionalization degree of this "non-oriented"
surface depends upon the number of solvent exposed lysine residues (Figure 2A),
which may be severely restricted by the glycan shield discussed above. Such restricted
protein orientation could preclude the accessibility of some specific N-glycan clusters,
located close to the linkage site and the sensor surface, thus hampering recognition
by the oligomeric CLRs tested. In order to overcome these limitations, we devised and
generated a so-called “oriented surface” where the S protein is captured via its Cterminal StrepTagII extremities onto a Streptactin functionalized surface (Figure 2B).
In this set-up, no lateral parts of the S protein are attached to, and thus masked by,
the sensor surface. Moreover, in the “oriented surface” set-up the spike protein is
presented as it would be at the surface of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which might better
reflect the physiological interaction with host receptors. Considering both surface setups for the spike, the "non-oriented" one may favor access to N-glycans of the spike's
stalk domain while the “oriented" one may favor access to N-glycans of the head
domain.
On the C-type lectin receptors side, we tested exclusively recombinant
constructs corresponding to the extracellular domains (ECD), containing both their
carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) and their oligomerization domain. Thus, the
specific topological presentation of their CRD as well as their oligomeric status is

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

preserved for each of the CLR, going from tetramers for DC-SIGN and L-SIGN to
trimers for MGL and Langerin, ensuring interactions with avidity properties as close as
possible to the physiological conditions for each CLR.

Figure 2. C-type lectin interactions with SARS-CoV-2 S protein
(A) Covalently functionalized S protein surface in random orientation. Multivalent C-type lectins
oligomeric ectodomains (ECD) are injected over the surface. From left to right, surfaces titrations were
performed with DC-SIGN ECD (tetrameric), L-SIGN ECD (tetrameric) and MGL-ECD (trimeric). (B)
Surfaces were first functionalized with streptactin (in green) and then S protein was captured by its Cterminal double-StrepTagII. From left to right, surfaces titrations were performed with DC-SIGN ECD
(tetrameric), L-SIGN ECD (tetrameric) and Langerin-ECD (trimeric). The same color code for
concentrations of all CLR-ECD has been used for all panels. Concentrations injected (i.e DC-SIGN ECD
in A) range from 50 µM to 0.1 µM by 2-fold serial dilutions (decreasing concentrations from top to
bottom). The red sensorgram, lower flat line, correspond to control experiments with buffer injection
deprived of CLR.

Sensorgrams of interaction with both types of surface for various CLR are presented
in Figure 2A and 2B. DC-SIGN and L-SIGN, initially tested on both surfaces,
recognized the spike with the same profile, whatever the set-up. Thus, the next two
CLRs were tested only on one type of surface. Langerin was found to interact with the
S protein in agreement with the presence of oligomannose-type glycans. Finally, MGL,
a lectin that specifically recognizes glycans bearing terminal Gal or GalNAc residues,
also interacted with the S protein (Figure 2A). This shows that complex N-glycans may
also serve as potential anchors for the SARS-CoV-2 S protein to cell surface CLRs.
While all CLRs tested interacted with the spike, the interactions observed are
not all equivalent. Unfortunately, the complexity of the process involving probably
multiple binding sites per oligomeric CLR prevented a kinetic fitting using classical

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

kinetic models, which precluded the determination of kinetic rate constants.
Nevertheless, an apparent equilibrium dissociation constant (KD) could be obtained by
steady state fitting for DC-SIGN, L-SIGN and MGL. For Langerin, despite a longer
injection time, a much higher range of concentration would have been required to reach
the equilibrium and accurately evaluate an apparent KD. DC/L-SIGN and MGL showed
affinities in the µM range, from around 2 to 10 µM (Table 1), depending on the CLR
and the surface type, while Langerin has an affinity of at least one order of magnitude
lower. Despite the impossibility to evaluate kinetic association and dissociation rate
constants (kon and koff), visual inspection of the sensorgrams clearly reveals different
behaviors between DC-SIGN and L-SIGN independent of the surface set-up. While
association and dissociation seem to be very fast for DC-SIGN, L-SIGN sensorgrams
suggest a much slower association and dissociation rate that compensate each other
to provide a KD similar to that of DC-SIGN. However, while the higher kon value for DCSIGN argues for a faster formation of the DC-SIGN/S protein complex, the lower koff
value for L-SIGN suggests that the L-SIGN/S-protein complex might be more stable.
Finally, for DC-SIGN and L-SIGN, which have been tested both on “non-oriented” and
“oriented” S surface, no obvious differences has been observed in the interaction
sensorgrams. This suggests that the interaction is not restricted to a limited glycan
cluster, but rather that oligomannose-type glycans are multiple, accessible and
distributed over the whole S protein.

Table 1: Steady state determination of apparent KD for CLRs interaction with SARS-CoV-2 S protein

DC-SIGN

L-SIGN

MGL

Lang

µM

µM

µM

Non-oriented

11.90 ± 4.6

1.80 ± 0.12

7 ± 1.5

n.a.

Oriented

4.33 ± 0,7

1.66 ± 0.12

-

-

Values reported results from steady state fitting of titration experiments as shown in Figure 2. They
are the average from 2 to 4 independent measurements with different S protein preparations.

DC-SIGN forms multiple complexes with SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein
The SPR interaction analysis argues for multiple potential binding sites for CLRs on
the S protein. Such initial host adhesion mechanism could be essential for efficient
viral capture, viral particles concentration on the cell surface and subsequent

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

enhanced ACE2 targeting and infection. Negative stain electron microscopy was used
to visualize potential DC-SIGN/S protein complexes.

Figure 3. Electron Microscopy micrographs of DC-SIGN/S protein complexes
(A) DC-SIGN. Top: model of DC-SIGN ECD tetramer adapted from Tabarani et al (2009). On the bottom:
Negative staining images of DC-SIGN. Top row: original images; bottom row: Photoshop processed
images. The scale bar represents 25 nm. (B) Spike protein. Top: model of the glycosylated Spike
adapted from model of Casalino et al pdb 6vsb). Glycan sites are represented with color code derived
from the work of Crispin et coll. (Watanabe et al., 2020a), according to oligomannose-type glycan
content, in green (80-100%), orange (30-79%) and magenta (0-29%). On the bottom: Negative staining
images of spike protein. Top row: original images, bottom row: Photoshop processed images. The scale
bar represents 25 nm. (C) Complex between DC-SIGN and spike protein. Negative staining image of
the complexes between DC-SIGN and spike protein. The white arrows highlight DC-SIGN molecules.
Top row: original images; bottom row: Photoshop processed images. The scale bar represents 25 nm.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Extemporaneously after a fresh purification of S protein, SEC fractions corresponding
to the pure trimeric spike were mixed with a DC-SIGN ECD preparation in a molecular
ratio 1:3 (meaning 1 trimeric spike for 3 tetrameric DC-SIGN ECD). In order to enrich
the proportion of complex in the sample for EM observation, we directly reinjected this
mix onto same SEC column and recovered fractions in the elution profile
corresponding to higher molecular weight, thus potentially corresponding to DCSIGN/S protein complex. These fractions were immediately used to prepare and
observe negatively stained electron microscopy grid (Figure 3). Figure 3A and 3B show
control images of the DC-SIGN and spike sample used and images of the sample
corresponding to the enriched complexes are shown in Figure 3C where DC-SIGN/S
complexes can be clearly seen. Most images show a 1:1 complex but, in some cases,
(Figure 3C, left) at least two molecules of DC-SIGN interacting with the spike protein
can be detected. Even if it is not possible to precisely define the interacting region on
the spike protein, several areas seem to be involved in the interaction with DC-SIGN.

Antigen-Presenting Cells expressing DC-SIGN, MDDCs and M2-MDM are not
infected by SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirions
To study the potential role of DC/L-SIGN in SARS-CoV-2 infection, VSV/SARS-CoV-2
pseudotyped viruses were firstly used for direct infection of primary monocyte-derived
cells, including monocyte-derived DCs (MDDCs) and M2 monocyte-derived
macrophages (M2-MDM), that have been shown to express DC-SIGN. As a control,
VSV/EBOV-GP pseudotypes, expected to display enhanced infection in the presence
of DC/L-SIGN receptor was used as well as VSV/VSV-G as a DC/L-SIGN independent
pseudotype. To evaluate the infection mediated exclusively by DC/L-SIGN receptor on
primary monocyte-derived cells we also examined the infection with these three
pseudotypes in the presence of anti-DC/L-SIGN antibody.
VSV/SARS-CoV-2 did not infect MDDCs or M2-MDMs, despite DC-SIGN
expression (Figure 4A). As expected, all primary cell lines were efficiently infected with
VSV/EBOV-GP and this infection could be substantially blocked by an antibody
targeting DC-SIGN. Infection of primary cells with EBOV does not exclusively depend
on the presence of DC-SIGN on the cell surface, since other receptors are also
responsible for the direct infection with EBOV (Marzi et al., 2007) which explains the

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

residual infection observed in the presence of an anti-DC/L-SIGN. DC-SIGN-mediated
cis-infection was clearly blocked with anti-DC/L-SIGN in the case of MDDCs (92.5%
inhibition of infection), followed by M2-MDM (68.4% inhibition). VSV/VSV-G also
showed a great infectivity of all primary cell lines. However, this infection was DC-SIGN
independent, since anti-DC-SIGN antibodies did not impact the infection level (Figure
4A).

Figure 4. SARS-CoV-2 cis- and trans-infection of monocytes-derived antigen presenting cells.
(A) Direct infection of primary cells: monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MDDCs), and M2 monocytederived macrophages (M2-MDM). Cells (5 x 104) were challenged with SARS-CoV-2, EBOV-GP or VSVG pseudotyped recombinant viruses. Bars represent mean ± SEM of mean of three independent
experiments with cells from different donors performed in duplicates. As a control of inhibition of infection
mediated by DC-SIGN, anti-DC-SIGN Ab was used. (B) Trans-infection using MDDCs. Cells (5 x 104)
were challenged with SARS-CoV-2 pseudotyped recombinant viruses during 2 h at room temperature
with rotation and then were co-cultivated with adherent Vero E6 cells for 24 h. Bars represent mean ±
SEM of mean of three independent experiments with cells from different donors performed in duplicates.
As a control of inhibition of trans-infection mediated by DC-SIGN, anti-DC-SIGN Ab was used. Infection
values from luciferase assays are expressed as Relative Light Units (RLUs).

MDDCs

promote

DC-SIGN-mediated

trans-infection

of

SARS-CoV-2

pseudovirions
DC/L-SIGN are known to enhance viral uptake for direct infection in the process
referred to as cis-infection and can also internalize viral particles into cells for storage
in non-lysosomal compartments and subsequent transfer to susceptible cells in the
process recognized as trans-infection (Alvarez et al., 2002; Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).
To study the potential function of DC/L-SIGN in SARS-CoV-2 trans-infection, MDDCs

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

were incubated with VSV/SARS-CoV-2 for 2 h and, after extensive washing, they were
placed onto susceptible Vero E6 cells, the reference ACE2+ cell line for SARS-CoV-2
cell culture (Zhou et al., 2020). Interestingly, DC-SIGN promoted efficient SARS-CoV2 trans-infection from MDDC to Vero E6 (Figure 4B). An Anti-DC-SIGN antibody could
reduce substantially the infectivity observed (98% inhibition), confirming the role of this
CLR in the process of SARS-CoV-2 trans-infection.

DC/L-SIGN but not Langerin mediate trans-infection of SARS-CoV-2 in a Tlymphocyte cell line
The role of DC/L-SIGN and Langerin in SARS-CoV-2 infection was also examined in
Jurkat cells (a T-lymphocyte cell line lacking ACE2 expression). Parental Jurkat cell
line, which does not express DC-SIGN, was used as control of infectivity along with
Jurkats stably expressing DC/L-SIGN and Langerin (Alvarez et al., 2002). VSV/VSVG pseudovirions were used in parallel. VSV-G cell entry is independent of the presence
of CLRs and can efficiently infect Jurkat cells. Direct infection assay with VSV/SARSCoV-2 showed no infectivity of any of the cell line tested, Jurkat, Jurkat DC-SIGN and
Jurkat L-SIGN (Figure 5A), indicating that DC/L-SIGN do not function as direct
receptors for SARS-CoV-2. As expected, VSV/VSV-G could infect all of the cell lines
at similar level. The use of DC/L-SIGN and Langerin by SARS-CoV-2 was further
verified in trans-infection assays using Jurkat, Jurkat DC-SIGN, Jurkat L-SIGN and
Jurkat Langerin cells. As controls, VSV/EBOV-GP and VSV/VSV-G were used in
parallel. VSV/EBOV-GP trans-infection based on Jurkat cells is absolutely dependent
on the presence of DC/L-SIGN or Langerin on the cell surface, since EBOV does not
infect T-lymphocytes (Yang, 1998). On the other hand, VSV/VSV-G is DC/L-SIGN or
Langerin independent. Jurkat, Jurkat DC-SIGN, Jurkat L-SIGN and Jurkat Langerin
cells were incubated with VSV-based pseudotypes for 2h and after extensive washing,
they were co-incubated upon susceptible Vero E6 cells monolayers. Similarly to the
results obtained with primary cells, we could observe that DC/L-SIGN, but not
Langerin, promoted efficient SARS-CoV-2 trans-infection of Vero E6 (Figure 5B).
Trans-infection in the presence of antibodies anti-DC/L-SIGN could significantly
reduce DC/L-SIGN-mediated trans-infection (86.7% and 78.7% inhibition of trans-

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

infection, respectively) confirming the important role of these receptors in the SARSCoV-2 trans-infection process.

Figure 5. Impact of DC/L SIGN and Langerin in cis- and trans-infection of SARS-CoV-2.
(A) Direct infection of Jurkat, Jurkat DC-SIGN and Jurkat L-SIGN with SARS-CoV-2 and VSV-G
pseudotyped recombinant viruses. Cells (5 x 104) were challenged with SARS-CoV-2, or VSV-G
pseudotyped recombinant viruses. (B) Trans-infection using Jurkat cell with or without CLR DC-SIGN,
L-SIGN and Langerin. As a control of inhibition of trans-infection mediated by CLRs, Ab specifically
directed toward the corresponding CLR were used. (C) Trans-infection ratio of Jurkat DC-SIGN or Jurkat
L-SIGN versus Jurkat cells. Cells were challenged with SARS-CoV-2, EBOV and VSV-G pseudotyped
recombinant viruses during 2 h at room temperature with rotation and then were co-cultivated with

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

adherent Vero E6 cells for 24 h. Bars represent mean ± SEM of mean of two independent experiments
performed in triplicates. Infection values from luciferase assays are expressed as Relative Light Units
(RLUs) and ratios represents RLUs obtained by trans-infection with Jurkats expressing CLRs divided
by those obtained from parental Jurkats.

Interestingly, no trans-infection was observed using Jurkat Langerin cells
(Figure 5B), which could indicate that Langerin does not serve as SARS-CoV-2 transinfection receptor. As expected, VSV/EBOV-GP achieved high DC/L-SIGN-mediated
trans-infection of Vero E6 cells which could be blocked by anti-DC/L-SIGN antibody
(96.9% and 97.3% inhibition of infection respectively). VSV/EBOV-G could also use
Langerin as an attachment factor for trans-infection and this process could be partially
blocked by anti-Langerin antibody (57.2% inhibition of infection). On the other hand,
VSV/VSV-G does not use CLRs for trans-infection, thus no transmitted infection was
detected in Vero E6 cells. The ratio of trans-infection mediated by DC/L-SIGN was
calculated for VSV/SARS-CoV-2, VSV/EBOV-GP and VSV/VSV-G using the parental
Jurkat cell line as reference. The ratio of VSV/SARS-CoV-2 trans-infection using Jurkat
DC-SIGN and Jurkat L-SIGN was 62% and 35% respectively. VSV/EBOV-GP transinfection ratio was 23% for Jurkat DC-SIGN and 172% for Jurkat L-SIGN. VSV/VSV-G
did not show any appreciable DC/L-SIGN mediated trans-infection (Figure 5C).
DC-SIGN binding to the S protein and DC-SIGN-dependent trans-infection are
inhibited by a known glycomimetic ligand of DC-SIGN (PM26)
Polyman26 (PM26, Figure 6A) is a multivalent glycomimetic mannoside tailored for
optimal interaction with DC-SIGN (Ordanini et al., 2015). It is known to bind DC-SIGN
carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD), eliciting a Th-1 type response from human
immature monocyte derived dendritic cells (Berzi et al., 2016). It also inhibits DC-SIGN
mediated HIV infection of CD8+ T lymphocytes with an IC50 of 24 nM (Ordanini et al.,
2015).
PM26 was used in SPR competition experiments to inhibit DC-SIGN binding to
immobilized spike protein, both in the oriented and non-oriented set-ups (Figure 6BC). The lectin (20 µM) was co-injected with variable concentrations of PM26 (from 50
µM to 0.1 µM), and the results showed clear dose-dependent inhibition. No significant
difference was observed between the oriented and non-oriented surface, which is
consistent with the binding data previously discussed (Figure 2). Thus, an IC50 of

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

9,6±0,4 µM correlates with the interaction affinity between DC-SIGN and the spike
functionalized surfaces. It suggests, in such competition test were the reporting
interaction can be limiting (Porkolab et al., 2020), that a real higher avidity towards DCSIGN can be awaited for PM26 (Figure 6C).

Figure 6. PM26, a specific antagonist of DC-SIGN, can inhibit DC-SIGN/S protein interaction and
trans-infection of SARS-CoV-2
(A) Structure of Polyman26 (PM26). (B) Sensorgrams of DC-SIGN/S protein interaction inhibition by a
range of PM26 concentration. DC-SIGN is injected at the constant concentration of 20 µM, PM26 is coinjected at decreasing concentration going from 50 µM to 0.1 µM. S protein is presented in an oriented
mode in the experiment presented here. (C) PM26 inhibition curve of the DC-SIGN S protein interaction
using an oriented S protein surface (blue) or non-oriented S protein surface (red) set up as described in
Figure 2. (D) Inhibition of trans-infection of MDDCs with SARS-CoV-2. MDDCs were incubated for 20
min with PM26 at 5 and 0.5 μM before being challenged with SARS-CoV-2 for 2h at rotation. After
extensive washing, MDDCs were co-cultivated with susceptible Vero E6 for 24h. Bars correspond to a
single experiment of inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 trans-infection. Results are presented as percentage of
inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 trans-infection in the presence of PM26 as compared to MDDCs mediated
SARS-CoV-2 trans-infection of susceptible Vero E6 without addition of any compound.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

The possibility of blocking DC-SIGN-mediated SARS-CoV-2 trans-infection using
PM26 was also examined. DCs were pre-incubated with PM26 for 20 min before being
challenged with VSV/SARS-CoV-2. The results of blocking DC-SIGN receptor by
PM26 are shown as a percentage of inhibition of infection transmitted by DCs to
susceptible Vero E6, as compared with SARS-CoV-2 trans-infection mediated by DCs
to Vero E6 without addition of any compound. PM26 was tested at two different
concentrations: 5 and 0.5 μM showing 99% and 77% of inhibition of SARS-CoV-2
trans-infection, respectively, which is consistent with the results described for HIV
inhibition and confirming an effective affinity in the nanomolar range for PM26
(Ordanini et al., 2015).

Discussion
Even if viruses target mainly one specific cellular entry receptor within their infection
cycle, their efficiency often largely depends upon additional binding events at the cell
surface, which promote access to the so-called primary receptor. Although such
additional receptors may not promote any fusion step, they can drive viral
internalization through endocytic processes or simply by viral adhesion to the host cell,
accumulation of viral particles on the cell surface and finally engagement with the
primary receptor followed by the fusion event. Different types of attachment factors can
be found on the host cell surface: either glycans, such as heparan-sulfate, glycolipids
or protein N-glycans, often targeted by envelope viral protein with lectin-like properties
(Dimitrov, 2004), or immune lectin-type receptors including CLRs and Siglecs
(Bermejo-Jambrina et al., 2018; Perez-Zsolt et al., 2019). CLRs primary role is to sense
the presence of pathogen through recognition of specific non-self glycans. However,
some viruses are able to hijack them as co-receptors for cell entry or hiding. HIV
represents a well-known example since it exploits DC-SIGN in genital mucosa to
promote uptake by DCs and T lymphocytes trans-infection (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).
SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV have been described to use heparan sulfate and
sialic acid exposed at the cell surface to attach to cell membranes (Milewska et al.,
2014; Park et al., 2019; Tortorici et al., 2019). Remarkably, DC/L-SIGN were not only
reported to act as attachment factors for SARS-CoV-1, but also as promoters of viral
dissemination through trans-infection. Here we investigate whether those CLRs could

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

also play a role in SARS-CoV-2 infection and dissemination. While we were finalizing
this work, a first preprint article described the binding (Elisa test) of Fc-CLR constructs,
notably based on DC-SIGN and MGL, to a commercial RBD domain of the SARS-CoV2 (Chiodo et al., 2020). Given the importance of the role played by glycan determinants
in this recognition event, therefore peculiar attention must be paid to the quality of the
S protein sample used. Indeed, it has to be ideally as close as possible to the
physiological product in terms of glycosylation pattern and distribution. In particular,
the expression system considered as well as the local protein environment may have
a strong impact on the type of glycan added as well as on their level of maturation.
Viral envelope proteins display a dense array of glycans resulting from evolutionary
pressure to mask immunogenic epitopes at their surfaces. This glycan density coupled
to specific structural features of envelope proteins generate steric constraints
preventing proper access of glycan processing enzymes to some substrate glycans
(Behrens and Crispin, 2017). Expressing the whole spike ectodomain or just the single
RBD domain may therefore lead to very different N-glycan distribution, especially
considering that the RBD contains only 2 N-glycosylations sites, while up to 66 Nglycan sites are found over the whole spike protein. For these reasons, we selected
the entire ectodomain of S as our model to investigate additional attachment factors
for SARS-CoV-2. We expressed the protein using the same construct enabling the
spike EM structure (Wrapp et al., 2020) and its glycan profiling (Watanabe et al.,
2020a), using a HEK293-derived expression system known to provide glycosylation
pattern similar to epithelial tissues. Similarly, we expressed the entire ectodomain for
the CLRs as well, avoiding Fc-CRD constructs, in order to preserve their specific
oligomeric assembly and therefore their avidity properties.
Using SPR we showed that all the C-type lectin receptors tested interact with
the spike protein. Three of those, DC-SIGN, L-SIGN and langerin share the ability to
recognize high-mannose oligosaccharides. In particular, L-SIGN is tightly specific for
high-mannose, while DC-SIGN additionally recognizes fucose based ligands (several
Lewis type glycans) and Langerin binds sulfated sugars as well. MGL is specific for
Gal and GalNAc terminated glycans and may bind to complex N-glycans as a function
of their level of maturation (Valverde et al., 2020). Analyzing the glycosylation pattern
of the spike protein, reported in Figure 3B, all glycosylation site depicted in green or

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

orange are potential ligands for L-SIGN and Langerin, with different level of probability
from site to site, while MGL’s ligands will be found in magenta sites. DC-SIGN might
potentially recognize all of them. Beside all considerations about specificity, the
accessibility of N-glycan sites upon spike presentation at the SARS-CoV-2 virus
surface is also of paramount importance for recognition. DC-SIGN and L-SIGN share
the same tetrameric organization and they recognize with similar avidity the spike
functionalized SPR surface, suggesting that they share a primary recognition epitope
- i.e. high mannose. The SPR experiments described here have been performed
sequentially on the same spike surfaces with the different CLRs. Of these, DC-SIGN
and L-SIGN have similar organization and molecular weight (Feinberg et al., 2001),
thus the difference in RU level reached by the two lectins at their equilibrium (approx.
1000 RU higher for DC-SIGN) suggests that there is more DC-SIGN binding and thus
more epitopes available for it, implying that high mannose are not the unique glycan
epitope used here by DC-SIGN. This suggest that DC-SIGN may be able to also bind
to some o complex N-glycosylation sites (in magenta in Figure 3B), possibly presenting
a

proper

fucosylation

pattern

that

generates

Lewis-type

epitopes.

These

considerations, in addition to the oligomeric state of the CLRs examined, lead us to
rule out a simple interaction with a single preferential epitope and a 1:1 stoichiometry
in favor of a more complex picture with multiple and simultaneous binding events,
much like the “Velcro effect” often recalled when discussing glycan-protein
interactions. This is clearly supported by the EM characterization of Spike/DC-SIGN
complexes (Figure 3C) that shows several interactions areas on the spike and can also
explain the absence of affinity differences between non-oriented and oriented spikes
surfaces in SPR.
The complexity of the binding event(s) described above does not allow to extract
kinetic association and dissociation rates from the sensorgrams. Only a global
apparent KD could be inferred, giving avidity levels. However, L-SIGN may have a
slightly better affinity (around 2 µM, while values ranging from 5 to 10 µM have been
obtained for DC-SIGN and MGL) and seems to generate more stable complexes. Such
µM range of affinity, as determined here for soluble forms of CLR, will result in surface
avidity of several order of magnitude higher at the cell membrane (Porkolab et al.,

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

2020). Indeed, CLRs, as DC SIGN, are organized in microdomain allowing multiple
attachment point for viral capture (Cambi et al., 2004).
CLRs and particularly DC/L-SIGN have been associated to important steps of
viral entry and infection of different viruses. Participation of DC-SIGN in the infectivity
and initial dissemination of a number of viral agents has been described in animal
models for measles (Mesman et al., 2012, 2014), Japanese encephalitis virus (Liang
et al., 2018) and in vivo for HIV-1. The founder viruses that initiate HIV infection through
mucosa exhibit higher content of high-mannose carbohydrates (Go et al., 2011), as
well as higher binding to DCs dependent on DC-SIGN expression (Parrish et al., 2013).
In the case of Ebola virus, DCs and macrophages have been shown to be the initial
targets of infection in macaques (Geisbert et al., 2003; Martinez et al., 2012) and
circulating DC-SIGN+ DCs have been shown to be the first cell subset infected upon
intranasal EBOV inoculation in a murine model (Lüdtke et al., 2017).
In SARS-CoV-1 infection it was shown that DC/L-SIGN can enhance viral
infection and dissemination (Marzi et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2004) and even it has been
proposed that L-SIGN could act as an alternative cell receptor to ACE2 (Jeffers et al.,
2004). Our work shows that DC/L-SIGN are important enhancers of infection mediated
by the S protein of SARS-CoV-2 that greatly facilitate viral transmission to susceptible
cells. In vivo, DC-SIGN is largely expressed in immature dendritic cells in submucosa
and tissue resident macrophages, including alveolar macrophages (Tailleux et al.,
2005) whereas L-SIGN is highly expressed in human type II alveolar cells and lung
endothelial cells (Jeffers et al., 2004). Using primary MDDCs and M2-MDM, two of the
established primary cell models to explore DC-SIGN interactions (Dominguez-Soto et
al., 2007) and a well-established VSV-based pseudovirion system, we did not observe
direct infection of MDDCs or M2-MDM, indicating that DC-SIGN expressed by these
cells does not function as an alternative receptor (Figure 4A). MDDCs and M2-MDM,
as expected, were infected by VSV pseudotyped with EBOV-GP or VSV-G, although
in a DC-SIGN dependent and independent manner respectively. DC-SIGN, however,
showed a clear function as an enhancer of infection, in a process known as transinfection (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000). An obvious increase of infection was observed
when SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirions were incubated with these primary cells and then
placed in contact with susceptible VeroE6 cells (Figure 4B). Similar results were

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

obtained with the T lymphocyte Jurkat cell line. T lymphocytes lack ACE2 expression
(Hamming et al., 2004) and both the parental Jurkat cell line and Jurkats expressing
DC/L-SIGN were not directly infected by SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirions (Figure 5A).
Therefore, we did not observe that these CLRs can function as alternative receptors
to ACE2 in non-permissive cells such as T lymphocytes or HEK 293 (Supplementary
information), as it has been recently suggested by Amraie et al. (Amraie et al., 2020).
On the other hand, DC/L-SIGN expression on Jurkat cells allows binding and capture
of SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirions. This trans-infection mechanism is significantly inhibited
by a specific DC/L-SIGN antibody and, remarkably, it seems exclusive of DC/L-SIGN,
since the related CLR langerin does not mediate trans-infection in Jurkat cells. This is
similar to what has been reported for HIV-1, since langerin acts as an antiviral receptor
that degrades HIV-1 via internalization and subsequent degradation (de Witte et al.,
2007). On the other hand, langerin appears to function as a trans-receptor for EBOV
pseudovirions highlighting the complexity of CRLs recognition patterns and
functionalities.
The biological relevance of the interaction of CLRs with SARS-CoV-2 remains
yet to be fully explored. The innate immune system provides the first line of defense
against viruses and it is now clear that severe COVID-19 is largely due to an imbalance
between viral replication and antiviral and pro-inflammatory responses (Yang et al.,
2020). Here we demonstrate that DC/L-SIGN can function, in primary cells and cell
lines, as potent trans-receptors. The expression of DC/L-SIGN in relevant cell subsets
along the respiratory tract, such as submucosal DCs and Macrophages or type II
alveolar cells together with their potency to enhance viral infection could be critical for
the pathogenesis of COVID-19. In this context, it is important to note that DC-SIGN
expression is negatively regulated by IFN, TGF-β, and anti-inflammatory agents
(Relloso et al., 2002) and that DC/L-SIGN activation though ligand recognition triggers
an immune response consisting in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such
as IL-6 and IL-12 (Bermejo-Jambrina et al., 2018). These cytokines are raised up in
severe forms of COVID-19 and are among the mediators responsible for the
development of the cytokine storm and the hyper-inflammatory syndrome related to
poor prognosis and eventual fatalities(Vabret et al., 2020). DC/L-SIGN expression can
be upregulated as well, since it has been demonstrated that while innate immune

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

responses are potently activated by SARS-CoV-2, it also counteracts the production
of type I and type III interferon (Blanco-Melo et al., 2020).
Innate immunity plays an important role in initial control and the pathogenesis
of COVID-19. Indeed, there are a number of clinical trials focused on the use of
interferon and anti-inflammatory agents to counteract the sometimes deleterious
immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection (Angka et al., 2020). Such an approach
could be key in treating severe cases of COVID-19, which correlate with cytokine storm
and hyper-activation of immune responses normally not related to viral infections,
particularly type-2 effectors (Lucas et al 2020). However, indiscriminate tempering of
immune signaling would be counterproductive in the early stages of the infection and
for patients with moderate disease, who appear to maintain a functional, well-adapted
immune response.
DC/L-SIGN antagonists may help reducing the severity of SARS-CoV-2
infection by inhibiting the trans-receptor role played by these CLRs. We show here that
Polyman26 (PM26), a glycomimetic antagonist of DC-SIGN, inhibits the interaction of
the S protein with the lectin receptor and blocks DC-SIGN-mediated SARS-CoV-2
trans-infection of susceptible Vero cells. PM26 is known to act both by binding DCSIGN CRD and by promoting its internalization (Berzi et al 2016), thus reducing the
lectin concentration on cell surface and further impairing the ability of the virus to exploit
it for enhancing the infection process. Additionally, upon binding to DC-SIGN PM26
was shown to induce a pro-inflammatory anti-viral response (Berzi et al., 2016), which
should be beneficial at the onset of the infection and may help to steer the immune
response towards a profile correlated with milder forms of the disease.
Demonstration of involvement of APCs in SARS-CoV-2 early dissemination
through CRLs DC/L-SIGN, opens new avenues for understanding and treating the
imbalanced innate immune response observed in COVID-19 pathogenesis. The
potential of this and other CLRs antagonists in prevention or as part of combination
therapy of COVID-19 needs to be further explored.

Methods
Protein production and purification

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

The extracellular domains (ECD) of DC-SIGN (residues: 66-404), L-SIGN (residues:
78-399), Langerin (residues: 68-328) and MGL (residues: 61-292) were produced and
purified as already described (Achilli et al., 2020; Chabrol et al., 2012; Maalej et al.,
2019; Reina et al., 2008) while SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein was expressed and purified
as follows. The mammalian expression vectors used for the S ectodomain, derived
from a p𝛂H vector, was a kind gift from J. McLellan (Wrapp et al., 2020). This construct
possesses, in its C-terminus, an 8xHis tag followed by 2 StrepTagII. EXPI293 cells
grown in EXPI293 expression medium were transiently transfected with the S
ectodomain vector according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Cultures were harvested five days after transfection and the medium was separated
from the cells by centrifugation. Supernatant was passed through a 0.45 µm filter and
used for a two-step protein purification on Aktä Xpress, with a HisTrap HP column (GE
Healthcare) and a Superose 6 column (GE Healthcare). Before sample loading,
columns were equilibrated into 20 mM Tris pH 7.4; supplemented with variable
concentrations of NaCl (150-500 mM) depending on the experiments. Unbound
proteins were eluted from affinity column with equilibration buffer, contaminants with
the same buffer supplemented with 75 mM imidazole while the spike protein was eluted
with equilibration buffer supplemented with 500 mM imidazole and immediately loaded
onto a gel filtration column run in equilibration buffer. Fractions of interest were pooled
and concentrated at 0.5 mg/mL on an Amicon Ultra 50K centrifugal filter according to
the manufacturer’s protocol (Millipore). The concentration of purified spike protein was
estimated using an absorption coefficient (A1%,1cm) at 280 nm of 10.4 calculated using
the PROTPARAM program (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) on the Expasy Server.
Quality control and visualization of the three different samples was performed by
negative staining Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) using Uranyl Acetate as
stain (2% w/v).

Negative staining electron microscopy
Negative-stain grids were prepared using the mica-carbon flotation technique
(Valentine et al., 1968). 4 µL of spike samples from purifications diluted at about 0.050.1 mg/mL were adsorbed on the clean side of a carbon film previously evaporated on
mica and then stained using 2% w/v Uranyl Acetate for 30 s. The sample/carbon

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

ensemble was then fished using an EM grid and air-dried. Images were acquired under
low dose conditions (<30 e−/Å2) on a Tecnai 12 FEI electron microscope operated at
120 kV using a Gatan ORIUS SC1000 camera (Gatan, Inc., Pleasanton, CA) at
30,000x nominal magnification. To facilitate the visualization of the molecules, a
Gaussian filter was applied to the images using Photoshop, then the gray levels were
saturated and the background eliminated. For the 2D classification, images were
processed with RELION 2.1 (Scheres, 2012). CTF was estimated with CTFFind-4.1
(Zhang, 2016). An initial set of 409 particles (box size of 512 pixels, sampling of
2.2 Å/pixel) was obtained by manual picking. After 2D classification the best looking 2D
class averages were used as references for Autopicking. A set of around 35 000
particles (box size of 256 pixels, sampling of 4.4 Å/pixel, mask diameter 300Å) was
obtained by Autopicking with a gaussian blob. The 8 best obtained classes were
calculated from 2854 particles.

SPR binding studies
Two types of surface plasmon resonance (SPR) experiments were performed at 25 °C
on a Biacore T200. The first experiments with non-oriented spike surfaces were
performed using a CM5 sensor chip, functionalized at 5 μL/min. Spike protein was
immobilized on flow cells using a classical amine-coupling method. Flow cell 1 (Fc1)
was functionalized with BSA and used as reference surface. Fc1 to 4 were activated
with 50 μL of a 0.2 M EDC/ 0.05 M NHS mixture and functionalized with 20 µg/mL BSA
(Fc1) or 50 μg/mL spike protein (Fc2-4), the remaining activated groups of all cells
were blocked with 30 μL of 1 M ethanolamine pH 8.5. The four Fc were treated at 100
µL/min with 5 μL of 10 mM HCl to remove non-specificly bound protein and 5 μL of 50
mM NaOH/ 1M NaCl to expose surface to regeneration protocol. Finally, an average
of 2500, 3000 and 2300 RU of spike protein were functionalized onto Fc2, 3 and 4,
respectively.
The second type of experiments used oriented spike surfaces and were performed
using a CM3 sensor chip functionalized at 5 μL/min. The procedure for oriented
functionalization has been described in our recent work (Porkolab et al., 2020). Fc4
was functionalized with non-oriented spike protein exactly as described for the CM5
sensor chip using 20 µg/mL spike protein (final functionalization of 1430 RU). Fc1

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(reference surface) and Fc2 were activated with 50 μL of a 0.2M EDC/ 0.05 M NHS
mixture and functionalized with 170 μg/mL StrepTactin (IBA company) and the
remaining activated groups were blocked with 80 μL of 1 M ethanolamine. Flow cells
were treated at 100 µL/min with 5 μL of 10 mM HCl and 5 μL of 50 mM NaOH/ 1M
NaCl. An average of 2000 RU of covalently immobilized StrepTactin was obtained. The
spike protein was then captured at 20 µg/mL on Fc2 via its StrepTags. The surface
was washed at 100 µL/min with 1M NaCl. Fc2 final level of functionalization was 990
RU. The presence of a double StrepTagII at the C-terminal extremity of the S protein
(a total of 6 within the spike trimer) led to very stable surfaces and capture did not
require the additional EDC/NHS treatment previously reported for such oriented
functionalization. On both type of surfaces, for direct interaction studies, increasing
concentrations of extracellular domain of DC-SIGN, L-SIGN, MGL and Langerin were
prepared in a running buffer composed of 25 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 4 mM
CaCl2, 0.05% P20 surfactant, and either 80 μL of each DC-SIGN/L-SIGN ECD sample
or 120 µL of Langerin/MGL ECD sample were injected onto the surfaces at 20 μL/min
flow rate. The resulting sensorgrams were reference surface corrected. The apparent
affinity of compounds was determined by fitting the steady state affinity model to the
plots of binding responses versus concentration.

Cell lines
Baby hamster kidney cells (BHK-21, 12-14-17 MAW, Kerafast, Boston, MA) and
African Green Monkey Cell Line (VeroE6) were cultured in Dulbecco´s modified Eagle
medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS),
25 μg/mL gentamycin and 2 mM L-glutamine. Jurkat, Jurkat DC-SIGN, Jurkat L-SIGN
(Alvarez et al., 2002) and Jurkat langerin were maintained in RPMI 1640 supplemented
with 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 25 μg/mL gentamycin and 2 mM L-glutamine.

Production of human monocyte-derived macrophages and dendritic cells.
Blood samples were obtained from healthy human donors (Hospital 12 de Octubre,
Madrid, Spain) under informed consent and IRB approval. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by Ficoll density gradient centrifugation
(Ficoll Paque, GE17-5442-02, Sigma-Aldrich). To generate monocyte-derived

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

dendritic cells (MDDCs), 1 x107 PBMC/mL were placed into 24-well plates and
incubated for 1 h at 37°C with 5% CO2. The adherent monocytes were then washed
twice with PBS and resuspended in RPMI supplemented with the cytokines GM-CSF
(1000 U/mL) and IL-4 (500 U/mL) (Miltenyi Biotec). Differentiation to immature MDDCs
was achieved by incubation at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 7 days and subsequent activation
with cytokines addition every other day. To generate monocyte-derived macrophages
(M2-MDMs), CD14+ monocytes were purified using anti-human CD14 antibodylabeled magnetic beads and iron-based LS columns (Miltenyi Biotec) and used directly
for further differentiation into macrophages (Dominguez-Soto et al., J Immunol 2011).
For differentiation of M2-MDMs, cells were incubated at 37ºC with 5% CO2 for 7 days
and activated with M-CSF (1000 U/mL) (Miltenyi Biotec) every second day.

Production of SARS-CoV-2 pseudotyped recombinant Vesicular Stomatitis Virus
(rVSV-luc)
rVSV-luc pseudotypes were generated following a published protocol (Whitt, J Virol
Methods 2010). First, BHK-21 were transfected to express the S protein of SARS-CoV2 (codon optimized, kindly provided by J. García-Arriaza, CNB-CSIC, Spain), Ebola
virus Makona Glycoprotein (EBOV-GP) (KM233102.1) was synthesized and cloned
into pcDNA3.1 by GeneArt AG technology (Life Technologies, Regensburg, Germany)
or VSV-G following the manufacturer’s instructions of Lipofectamine 3000 (Fisher
Scientific). After 24 h, transfected cells were inoculated with a replication-deficient
rVSV-luc pseudotype (MOI: 3-5) that contains firefly luciferase instead of the VSV-G
open reading frame, rVSVΔG-luciferase (G*ΔG-luciferase) (Kerafast, Boston, MA).
After 1 h incubation at 37ºC, cells were washed exhaustively with PBS and then DMEM
supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated FBS, 25 μg/mL gentamycin and 2 mM Lglutamine were added. Pseudotyped particles were collected 20-24 h post-inoculation,
clarified from cellular debris by centrifugation and stored at -80ºC (Hoffmann et al.,
2020; Letko et al., 2020; Whitt, 2010). Infectious titers were estimated as tissue culture
infectious dose per mL by limiting dilution of rVSV-luc-pseudotypes on Vero E6 cells.
Luciferase activity was determined by luciferase assay (Steady-Glo Luciferase Assay
System, Promega).

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Direct infection
Cell lines: Jurkat, Jurkat DC-SIGN and Jurkat L-SIGN (3 x 105 cells) or primary cells:
MDDCs, M2-MDMs (5 x 104 cells) were challenged with SARS-CoV-2, EBOV-GP or
VSV-G pseudotyped recombinant viruses (MOI: 0.5-2). After 24 h of incubation, cells
were washed twice with PBS and lysed for luciferase assay.

Trans-infection
For trans-infection studies, Jurkat DC-SIGN, Jurkat L-SIGN, Jurkat Langerin (3 x 105
cells) or MDDCs (5 x 104 cells) were challenged with recombinant SARS-CoV-2,
EBOV-GP or VSV-G pseudotyped viruses (MOI: 0.5-2) and incubated during 2 h at
room temperature with rotation. Cells were then centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 5 minutes
and washed twice with PBS supplemented with 0.5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and
1 mM CaCl2. Jurkat DC-SIGN and MDDCs were then resuspended in RPMI medium
and co-cultivated with adherent Vero E6 cells (1.5 x 105 cells/well) on a 24-well plate.
After 24 h, the supernatant was removed and the monolayer of Vero E6 was washed
with PBS three times and lysed for luciferase assay.

Synthesis of Inhibitors and inhibition experiments
Polyman26 (PM26) is a known glycomimetic ligand of DC-SIGN and an antagonist of
DC-SIGN mediated HIV trans-infection (Berzi et al., 2016; Ordanini et al., 2015). It was
synthesized as previously described and tested in SPR studies as an inhibitor of DCSIGN interaction to the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2, using both the oriented and nonoriented S surface described above. In both cases, a 20 µM solution of DC-SIGN in a
running buffer composed of 25 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 4 mM CaCl2, 0.05% P20
surfactant was co-injected with variable concentrations of Polyman26, from 50 µM to
0.1 µM, in the same buffer. IC50 values were determined from the plot of PM26
concentration vs % inhibition by fitting four-parameter logistic model as previously
described (Varga et al., 2014).
In the infection studies, cells were first incubated with the compound PM26 for 20 min
at room temperature with rotation and then challenged with SARS-CoV-2 recombinant
viruses (MOI: 0.5-2) during 2 h at room temperature with rotation. The concentrations
tested for compound PM26 were 5 and 0.5μM. As a control, inhibition experiment was

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

performed in the presence of anti-DC/L-SIGN antibody (R&D Systems). Cells were
then washed as described above, resuspended in RPMI medium and co-cultivated
with adherent Vero E6 cells (1.5 x 105 cells/well) on a 24-well plate. After 24 h, the
supernatant was removed and the monolayer of Vero E6 was washed with PBS three
times and lysed for luciferase assay.

Acknowledgments
This work used the platforms of the Grenoble Instruct-ERIC centre (ISBG ; UMS 3518
CNRS-CEA-UGA-EMBL) within the Grenoble Partnership for Structural Biology (PSB),
supported by FRISBI (ANR-10-INBS-05-02) and GRAL, within the University Grenoble
Alpes graduate school CBH-EUR-GS (ANR-17-EURE-0003). The EM facility is
supported by the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes Region, the Fondation Recherche Medicale,
the fonds FEDER and the GIS-Infrastructures Biologie Sante et Agronomie (IBISA).
F.F. acknowledges the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche PIA for Glyco@Alps
(ANR-15-IDEX-02). Research in R.D. lab is supported by grants from the Instituto de
Investigación Carlos III, ISCIII, (FIS PI 1801007), the European Commission Horizon
2020 Framework Programme: Project VIRUSCAN FETPROACT-2016: 731868, and
by Fundación Caixa-Health Research (Project StopEbola). F.F. thanks J. McLellan for
sharing expressing vector and E. Fadda for making models of the spike glycoprotein
available as well as for stimulating exchanges on the #glycotime on twitter.

Author contributions
R.D. and F.F. conceived, designed, supervised the work and wrote first draft of the
manuscript. A.B. contributed to the writing, M.T., J.L., C.V., N.L., I.B., F.L., Y.G., S.S.,
N.T. performed the experiment, D.F., G.S., processed EM Data, S.S., A.B. synthesized
glycomimetic compound, R.D., F.F., S.S., A.B., N.T and G.S. reviewed and edited the
manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

Declaration of interests
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References
Achilli, S., Monteiro, J.T., Serna, S., Mayer-Lambertz, S., Thépaut, M., Le Roy, A., Ebel, C.,
Reichardt, N.-C., Lepenies, B., Fieschi, F., et al. (2020). TETRALEC, Artificial Tetrameric
Lectins: A Tool to Screen Ligand and Pathogen Interactions. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 5290.
Alvarez, C.P., Lasala, F., Carrillo, J., Muniz, O., Corbi, A.L., and Delgado, R. (2002). C-type
lectins DC-SIGN and L-SIGN mediate cellular entry by Ebola virus in cis and in trans. J. Virol.
76, 6841–6844.
Amraie, R., Napoleon, M.A., Yin, W., Berrigan, J., Suder, E., Zhao, G., Olejnik, J.,
Gummuluru, S., Muhlberger, E., Chitalia, V., et al. (2020). CD209L/L-SIGN and CD209/DCSIGN act as receptors for SARS-CoV-2 and are differentially expressed in lung and kidney
epithelial and endothelial cells (bioRxiv).
Angka, L., Market, M., Ardolino, M., and Auer, R.C. (2020). Is innate immunity our best
weapon for flattening the curve? J. Clin. Invest. 10.1172/JCI140530.
Behrens, A.-J., and Crispin, M. (2017). Structural principles controlling HIV envelope
glycosylation. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 44, 125–133.
Bermejo-Jambrina, M., Eder, J., Helgers, L.C., Hertoghs, N., Nijmeijer, B.M., Stunnenberg,
M., and Geijtenbeek, T.B.H. (2018). C-Type Lectin Receptors in Antiviral Immunity and Viral
Escape. Front. Immunol. 9, 590.
Berzi, A., Ordanini, S., Joosten, B., Trabattoni, D., Cambi, A., Bernardi, A., and Clerici, M.
(2016). Pseudo-Mannosylated DC-SIGN Ligands as Immunomodulants. Sci. Rep. 6, 35373.
Blanco-Melo, D., Nilsson-Payant, B.E., Liu, W.-C., Uhl, S., Hoagland, D., Møller, R., Jordan,
T.X., Oishi, K., Panis, M., Sachs, D., et al. (2020). Imbalanced Host Response to SARSCoV-2 Drives Development of COVID-19. Cell 181, 1036-1045.e9.
Brufsky, A., and Lotze, M.T. (2020). DC/L‐SIGNs of hope in the COVID‐19 pandemic. J.
Med. Virol. jmv.25980.
Cambi, A., de Lange, F., van Maarseveen, N.M., Nijhuis, M., Joosten, B., van Dijk, E.M., de
Bakker, B.I., Fransen, J.A., Bovee-Geurts, P.H., van Leeuwen, F.N., et al. (2004).
Microdomains of the C-type lectin DC-SIGN are portals for virus entry into dendritic cells. J
Cell Biol 164, 145–155.
Carbaugh, D.L., Baric, R.S., and Lazear, H.M. (2019). Envelope Protein Glycosylation
Mediates Zika Virus Pathogenesis. J. Virol. 93, e00113-19.
Casalino, L., Gaieb, Z., Dommer, A.C., Harbison, A.M., Fogarty, C.A., Barros, E.P., Taylor,
B.C., Fadda, E., and Amaro, R.E. (2020). Shielding and Beyond: The Roles of Glycans in
SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein (bioRxiv).
Chabrol, E., Nurisso, A., Daina, A., Vassal-Stermann, E., Thépaut, M., Girard, E., Vivès,
R.R., and Fieschi, F. (2012). Glycosaminoglycans are interactants of Langerin: comparison
with gp120 highlights an unexpected calcium-independent binding mode. PloS One 7,
e50722.
Chiodo, F., Bruijns, S.C.M., Rodriguez, E., Li, R.J.E., Molinaro, A., Silipo, A., Di Lorenzo, F.,
Garcia-Rivera, D., Valdes-Balbin, Y., Verez-Bencomo, V., et al. (2020). Novel ACE2Independent Carbohydrate-Binding of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein to Host Lectins and Lung
Microbiota (bioRxiv).
Dimitrov, D.S. (2004). Virus entry: molecular mechanisms and biomedical applications. Nat.
Rev. Microbiol. 2, 109–122.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Dominguez-Soto, A., Aragoneses-Fenoll, L., Martin-Gayo, E., Martinez-Prats, L.,
Colmenares, M., Naranjo-Gomez, M., Borras, F.E., Munoz, P., Zubiaur, M., Toribio, M.L., et
al. (2007). The DC-SIGN-related lectin LSECtin mediates antigen capture and pathogen
binding by human myeloid cells. Blood 109, 5337–5345.
Feinberg, H., Mitchell, D.A., Drickamer, K., and Weis, W.I. (2001). Structural basis for
selective recognition of oligosaccharides by DC-SIGN and DC-SIGNR. Sci. N. Y. NY 294,
2163–2166.
Geijtenbeek, T.B.H., and Gringhuis, S.I. (2009). Signalling through C-type lectin receptors:
shaping immune responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 9, 465–479.
Geijtenbeek, T.B., Kwon, D.S., Torensma, R., van Vliet, S.J., van Duijnhoven, G.C., Middel,
J., Cornelissen, I.L., Nottet, H.S., KewalRamani, V.N., Littman, D.R., et al. (2000). DC-SIGN,
a dendritic cell-specific HIV-1-binding protein that enhances trans-infection of T cells. Cell
100, 587–597.
Geisbert, T.W., Hensley, L.E., Larsen, T., Young, H.A., Reed, D.S., Geisbert, J.B., Scott,
D.P., Kagan, E., Jahrling, P.B., and Davis, K.J. (2003). Pathogenesis of Ebola Hemorrhagic
Fever in Cynomolgus Macaques. Am. J. Pathol. 163, 2347–2370.
Go, E.P., Hewawasam, G., Liao, H.-X., Chen, H., Ping, L.-H., Anderson, J.A., Hua, D.C.,
Haynes, B.F., and Desaire, H. (2011). Characterization of Glycosylation Profiles of HIV-1
Transmitted/Founder Envelopes by Mass Spectrometry. J. Virol. 85, 8270–8284.
Grant, O.C., Montgomery, D., Ito, K., and Woods, R.J. (2020). Analysis of the SARS-CoV-2
spike protein glycan shield: implications for immune recognition (bioRxiv).
Halary, F., Amara, A., Lortat-Jacob, H., Messerle, M., Delaunay, T., Houles, C., Fieschi, F.,
Arenzana-Seisdedos, F., Moreau, J.F., and Déchanet-Merville, J. (2002). Human
cytomegalovirus binding to DC-SIGN is required for dendritic cell infection and target cell
trans-infection. Immunity 17, 653–664.
Hamming, I., Timens, W., Bulthuis, M., Lely, A., Navis, G., and van Goor, H. (2004). Tissue
distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for SARS coronavirus. A first step in
understanding SARS pathogenesis. J. Pathol. 203, 631–637.
HCA Lung Biological Network, Sungnak, W., Huang, N., Bécavin, C., Berg, M., Queen, R.,
Litvinukova, M., Talavera-López, C., Maatz, H., Reichart, D., et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2
entry factors are highly expressed in nasal epithelial cells together with innate immune
genes. Nat. Med. 26, 681–687.
Hoffmann, M., Kleine-Weber, H., Schroeder, S., Krüger, N., Herrler, T., Erichsen, S.,
Schiergens, T.S., Herrler, G., Wu, N.-H., Nitsche, A., et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry
Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor.
Cell 181, 271-280.e8.
Huang, C., Wang, Y., Li, X., Ren, L., Zhao, J., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Fan, G., Xu, J., Gu, X., et al.
(2020). Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China.
The Lancet 395, 497–506.
Hussain, L.A., and Lehner, T. (1995). Comparative investigation of Langerhans’ cells and
potential receptors for HIV in oral, genitourinary and rectal epithelia. Immunology 85, 475–
484.
Jeffers, S.A., Tusell, S.M., Gillim-Ross, L., Hemmila, E.M., Achenbach, J.E., Babcock, G.J.,
Thomas, W.D., Thackray, L.B., Young, M.D., Mason, R.J., et al. (2004). CD209L (L-SIGN) is
a receptor for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 101,
15748–15753.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Jia, Y., Shen, G., Zhang, Y., Huang, K.-S., Ho, H.-Y., Hor, W.-S., Yang, C.-H., Li, C., and
Wang, W.-L. (2020). Analysis of the mutation dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 reveals the spread
history and emergence of RBD mutant with lower ACE2 binding affinity (bioRxiv).
de Jong, M.A.W.P., Vriend, L.E.M., Theelen, B., Taylor, M.E., Fluitsma, D., Boekhout, T., and
Geijtenbeek, T.B.H. (2010). C-type lectin Langerin is a beta-glucan receptor on human
Langerhans cells that recognizes opportunistic and pathogenic fungi. Mol. Immunol. 47,
1216–1225.
Katz, D.H., Tahir, U.A., Ngo, D., Benson, M.D., Bick, A.G., Pampana, A., Gao, Y., Keyes,
M.J., Correa, A., Sinha, S., et al. (2020). Proteomic Profiling in Biracial Cohorts Implicates
DC-SIGN as a Mediator of Genetic Risk in COVID-19 (Infectious Diseases (except
HIV/AIDS)).
van Kooyk, Y., and Geijtenbeek, T.B. (2003). DC-SIGN: escape mechanism for pathogens.
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3, 697–709.
Korber, B., Fischer, W.M., Gnanakaran, S., Yoon, H., Theiler, J., Abfalterer, W., Hengartner,
N., Giorgi, E.E., Bhattacharya, T., Foley, B., et al. (2020). Tracking changes in SARS-CoV-2
Spike: evidence that D614G increases infectivity of the COVID-19 virus. Cell
S0092867420308205.
Letko, M., Marzi, A., and Munster, V. (2020). Functional assessment of cell entry and
receptor usage for SARS-CoV-2 and other lineage B betacoronaviruses. Nat. Microbiol. 5,
562–569.
Li, W., Moore, M.J., Vasilieva, N., Sui, J., Wong, S.K., Berne, M.A., Somasundaran, M.,
Sullivan, J.L., Luzuriaga, K., Greenough, T.C., et al. (2003). Angiotensin-converting enzyme
2 is a functional receptor for the SARS coronavirus. Nature 426, 450–454.
Liang, J.-J., Chou, M.-W., and Lin, Y.-L. (2018). DC-SIGN Binding Contributed by an Extra
N-Linked Glycosylation on Japanese Encephalitis Virus Envelope Protein Reduces the Ability
of Viral Brain Invasion. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 8.
Lucas, C., Wong, P., Klein, J., Castro, T., Silva, J., Sundaram, M., Ellingson, M., Mao, T.,
Oh, J., Israelow, B., et al. (2020). Longitudinal immunological analyses reveal inflammatory
misfiring in severe COVID-19 patients (Infectious Diseases (except HIV/AIDS)).
Lüdtke, A., Ruibal, P., Wozniak, D.M., Pallasch, E., Wurr, S., Bockholt, S., Gómez-Medina,
S., Qiu, X., Kobinger, G.P., Rodríguez, E., et al. (2017). Ebola virus infection kinetics in
chimeric mice reveal a key role of T cells as barriers for virus dissemination. Sci. Rep. 7,
43776.
Maalej, M.M., Forgione, R.E., Marchetti, R., Bulteau, F.B., Thepaut, M.T., Lanzetta, R.,
Laguri, C., Simorre, J., Fieschi, F., Molinaro, A., et al. (2019). The human macrophage
galactose-type lectin, MGL, recognizes the outer core of E. coli lipooligosaccharide.
Chembiochem Eur. J. Chem. Biol.
Martinez, O., Leung, L.W., and Basler, C.F. (2012). The role of antigen-presenting cells in
filoviral hemorrhagic fever: Gaps in current knowledge. Antiviral Res. 93, 416–428.
Marzi, A., Gramberg, T., Simmons, G., Möller, P., Rennekamp, A.J., Krumbiegel, M., Geier,
M., Eisemann, J., Turza, N., Saunier, B., et al. (2004). DC-SIGN and DC-SIGNR Interact with
the Glycoprotein of Marburg Virus and the S Protein of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus. J. Virol. 78, 12090–12095.
Marzi, A., Möller, P., Hanna, S.L., Harrer, T., Eisemann, J., Steinkasserer, A., Becker, S.,
Baribaud, F., and Pöhlmann, S. (2007). Analysis of the Interaction of Ebola Virus
Glycoprotein with DC‐SIGN (Dendritic Cell–Specific Intercellular Adhesion Molecule 3–
Grabbing Nonintegrin) and Its Homologue DC‐SIGNR. J. Infect. Dis. 196, S237–S246.
31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Mesman, A.W., de Vries, R.D., McQuaid, S., Duprex, W.P., de Swart, R.L., and Geijtenbeek,
T.B.H. (2012). A Prominent Role for DC-SIGN+ Dendritic Cells in Initiation and
Dissemination of Measles Virus Infection in Non-Human Primates. PLoS ONE 7, e49573.
Mesman, A.W., Zijlstra-Willems, E.M., Kaptein, T.M., de Swart, R.L., Davis, M.E., Ludlow,
M., Duprex, W.P., Gack, M.U., Gringhuis, S.I., and Geijtenbeek, T.B.H. (2014). Measles
Virus Suppresses RIG-I-like Receptor Activation in Dendritic Cells via DC-SIGN-Mediated
Inhibition of PP1 Phosphatases. Cell Host Microbe 16, 31–42.
Milewska, A., Zarebski, M., Nowak, P., Stozek, K., Potempa, J., and Pyrc, K. (2014). Human
Coronavirus NL63 Utilizes Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans for Attachment to Target Cells. J.
Virol. 88, 13221–13230.
Mnich, M.E., van Dalen, R., and van Sorge, N.M. (2020). C-Type Lectin Receptors in Host
Defense Against Bacterial Pathogens. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 10, 309.
Navarro-Sanchez, E., Altmeyer, R., Amara, A., Schwartz, O., Fieschi, F., Virelizier, J.-L.,
Arenzana-Seisdedos, F., and Desprès, P. (2003). Dendritic-cell-specific ICAM3-grabbing
non-integrin is essential for the productive infection of human dendritic cells by mosquito-cellderived dengue viruses. EMBO Rep. 4, 723–728.
Ordanini, S., Varga, N., Porkolab, V., Thépaut, M., Belvisi, L., Bertaglia, A., Palmioli, A.,
Berzi, A., Trabattoni, D., Clerici, M., et al. (2015). Designing nanomolar antagonists of DCSIGN-mediated HIV infection: ligand presentation using molecular rods. Chem. Commun.
Camb. Engl. 51, 3816–3819.
Pallesen, J., Wang, N., Corbett, K.S., Wrapp, D., Kirchdoerfer, R.N., Turner, H.L., Cottrell,
C.A., Becker, M.M., Wang, L., Shi, W., et al. (2017). Immunogenicity and structures of a
rationally designed prefusion MERS-CoV spike antigen. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, E7348–
E7357.
Park, Y.-J., Walls, A.C., Wang, Z., Sauer, M.M., Li, W., Tortorici, M.A., Bosch, B.-J., DiMaio,
F., and Veesler, D. (2019). Structures of MERS-CoV spike glycoprotein in complex with
sialoside attachment receptors. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 1151–1157.
Parrish, N.F., Gao, F., Li, H., Giorgi, E.E., Barbian, H.J., Parrish, E.H., Zajic, L., Iyer, S.S.,
Decker, J.M., Kumar, A., et al. (2013). Phenotypic properties of transmitted founder HIV-1.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, 6626–6633.
Perez-Zsolt, D., Erkizia, I., Pino, M., García-Gallo, M., Martin, M.T., Benet, S., Chojnacki, J.,
Fernández-Figueras, M.T., Guerrero, D., Urrea, V., et al. (2019). Anti-Siglec-1 antibodies
block Ebola viral uptake and decrease cytoplasmic viral entry. Nat. Microbiol. 4, 1558–1570.
Porkolab, V., Pifferi, C., Sutkeviciute, I., Ordanini, S., Taouai, M., Thépaut, M., Vivès, C.,
Benazza, M., Bernardi, A., Renaudet, O., et al. (2020). Development of C-type lectin-oriented
surfaces for high avidity glycoconjugates: towards mimicking multivalent interactions on the
cell surface. Org. Biomol. Chem. 18, 4763–4772.
Reina, J.J., Díaz, I., Nieto, P.M., Campillo, N.E., Páez, J.A., Tabarani, G., Fieschi, F., and
Rojo, J. (2008). Docking, synthesis, and NMR studies of mannosyl trisaccharide ligands for
DC-SIGN lectin. Org. Biomol. Chem. 6, 2743–2754.
Relloso, M., and Puig-Kroger, A. DC-SIGN (CD209) Expression Is IL-4 Dependent and Is
Negatively Regulated by IFN, TGF-␤, and Anti-Inflammatory Agents. J. Immunol. 10.
Relloso, M., Puig-Kröger, A., Pello, O.M., Rodríguez-Fernández, J.L., de la Rosa, G., Longo,
N., Navarro, J., Muñoz-Fernández, M.A., Sánchez-Mateos, P., and Corbí, A.L. (2002). DCSIGN (CD209) Expression Is IL-4 Dependent and Is Negatively Regulated by IFN, TGF-β,
and Anti-Inflammatory Agents. J. Immunol. 168, 2634–2643.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Scheres, S.H.W. (2012). RELION: Implementation of a Bayesian approach to cryo-EM
structure determination. J. Struct. Biol. 180, 519–530.
Sikora, M., von Bülow, S., Blanc, F.E.C., Gecht, M., Covino, R., and Hummer, G. (2020).
Map of SARS-CoV-2 spike epitopes not shielded by glycans (bioRxiv).
Tailleux, L., Pham-Thi, N., Bergeron-Lafaurie, A., Herrmann, J.-L., Charles, P., Schwartz, O.,
Scheinmann, P., Lagrange, P.H., Blic, J. de, Tazi, A., et al. (2005). DC-SIGN Induction in
Alveolar Macrophages Defines Privileged Target Host Cells for Mycobacteria in Patients with
Tuberculosis. PLoS Med. 2, e381.
Takeuchi, O., and Akira, S. (2010). Pattern Recognition Receptors and Inflammation. Cell
140, 805–820.
Tortorici, M.A., Walls, A.C., Lang, Y., Wang, C., Li, Z., Koerhuis, D., Boons, G.-J., Bosch, B.J., Rey, F.A., de Groot, R.J., et al. (2019). Structural basis for human coronavirus attachment
to sialic acid receptors. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 481–489.
Vabret, N., Britton, G.J., Gruber, C., Hegde, S., Kim, J., Kuksin, M., Levantovsky, R., Malle,
L., Moreira, A., Park, M.D., et al. (2020). Immunology of COVID-19: Current State of the
Science. Immunity 52, 910–941.
Valentine, R.C., Shapiro, B.M., and Stadtman, E.R. (1968). Regulation of glutamine
synthetase. XII. Electron microscopy of the enzyme from Escherichia coli. Biochemistry 7,
2143–2152.
Valverde, P., Martinez, J.D., Cañada, F.J., Arda, A., and Jimenez-Barbero, J. (2020).
Molecular recognition in C‐type lectins: the cases of DC‐SIGN, Langerin, MGL, and L‐sectin.
ChemBioChem cbic.202000238.
Van Breedam, W., Pöhlmann, S., Favoreel, H.W., de Groot, R.J., and Nauwynck, H.J.
(2014). Bitter-sweet symphony: glycan-lectin interactions in virus biology. FEMS Microbiol.
Rev. 38, 598–632.
Varga, N., Sutkeviciute, I., Ribeiro-Viana, R., Berzi, A., Ramdasi, R., Daghetti, A., Vettoretti,
G., Amara, A., Clerici, M., Rojo, J., et al. (2014). A multivalent inhibitor of the DC-SIGN
dependent uptake of HIV-1 and Dengue virus. Biomaterials 35, 4175–4184.
Walls, A.C., Park, Y.-J., Tortorici, M.A., Wall, A., McGuire, A.T., and Veesler, D. (2020).
Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein. Cell 181, 281292.e6.
Watanabe, Y., Allen, J.D., Wrapp, D., McLellan, J.S., and Crispin, M. (2020a). Site-specific
glycan analysis of the SARS-CoV-2 spike. Science eabb9983.
Watanabe, Y., Berndsen, Z.T., Raghwani, J., Seabright, G.E., Allen, J.D., Pybus, O.G.,
McLellan, J.S., Wilson, I.A., Bowden, T.A., Ward, A.B., et al. (2020b). Vulnerabilities in
coronavirus glycan shields despite extensive glycosylation. Nat. Commun. 11, 2688.
Whitt, M.A. (2010). Generation of VSV pseudotypes using recombinant ΔG-VSV for studies
on virus entry, identification of entry inhibitors, and immune responses to vaccines. J. Virol.
Methods 169, 365–374.
de Witte, L., Nabatov, A., Pion, M., Fluitsma, D., de Jong, M.A.W.P., de Gruijl, T., Piguet, V.,
van Kooyk, Y., and Geijtenbeek, T.B.H. (2007). Langerin is a natural barrier to HIV-1
transmission by Langerhans cells. Nat. Med. 13, 367–371.
de Witte, L., Nabatov, A., and Geijtenbeek, T.B.H. (2008). Distinct roles for DC-SIGN+dendritic cells and Langerhans cells in HIV-1 transmission. Trends Mol Med 14, 12–19.
Wrapp, D., Wang, N., Corbett, K.S., Goldsmith, J.A., Hsieh, C.-L., Abiona, O., Graham, B.S.,

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.09.242917; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

and McLellan, J.S. (2020). Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion
conformation. Science 367, 1260–1263.
Yang, Z. (1998). Distinct Cellular Interactions of Secreted and Transmembrane Ebola Virus
Glycoproteins. Science 279, 1034–1037.
Yang, L., Liu, S., Liu, J., Zhang, Z., Wan, X., Huang, B., Chen, Y., and Zhang, Y. (2020).
COVID-19: immunopathogenesis and Immunotherapeutics. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther.
5, 128.
Yang, Z.-Y., Huang, Y., Ganesh, L., Leung, K., Kong, W.-P., Schwartz, O., Subbarao, K., and
Nabel, G.J. (2004). pH-Dependent Entry of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus
Is Mediated by the Spike Glycoprotein and Enhanced by Dendritic Cell Transfer through DCSIGN. J. Virol. 78, 5642–5650.
Zhang, K. (2016). Gctf: Real-time CTF determination and correction. J. Struct. Biol. 193, 1–
12.
Zhao, P., Praissman, J.L., Grant, O.C., Cai, Y., Xiao, T., Rosenbalm, K.E., Aoki, K., Kellman,
B.P., Bridger, R., Barouch, D.H., et al. (2020). Virus-Receptor Interactions of Glycosylated
SARS-CoV-2 Spike and Human ACE2 Receptor (bioRxiv).
Zhou, P., Yang, X.-L., Wang, X.-G., Hu, B., Zhang, L., Zhang, W., Si, H.-R., Zhu, Y., Li, B.,
Huang, C.-L., et al. (2020). A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of
probable bat origin. Nature 579, 270–273.

34

