bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics

From COVID-19 to the Common Cold: Novel Host-Targeted,
Pan-Respiratory Antiviral Small Molecule Therapeutics

Suganya Selvarajaha, Anuradha F. Lingappaa, Maya Michona, Shao Feng Yua, Amanda
Macieika, Suguna Mallesha, Umesh Appaiaha, Jackelyn Crabtreeb, Kiel Copelanda, Jim Lina,
Olayemi Akintundea, Christine Nicholsa, Emma Petrouskia, A. Raquel Moreiraa, I-ting Jianga,
Nicholas DeYarmana, Sean Brocea, Ian Browna, Sharon Laua, Ilana Segala, Danielle Goldsmitha,
Shi Honga, Vinod Asundia, Erica M. Briggsa, Ngwe Sin Phyoa, Markus Froehlicha, Robert J.
Hoganb, Ralph Trippb, Sanjeev Anandc, Thomas W. Campic, Michael Fordd, Jonathan C. Reede,
Bruce Oniskof, Kent Matlacka, Debendranath Deya, Jaisri R. Lingappae, M. Dharma Prasada,
Anatoliy Kitaygorodskyya, Dennis Solasa, Kumar Paulvannana, and Vishwanath R. Lingappaa #

a

Prosetta Biosciences, 670 5th St., San Francisco, CA 94107

b

University of Georgia, Animal Health Research Center, 111 Carlton St., Building 1077, Athens,

GA 30602
c

Santo Biotech, LLC., 8954 W Fall Creek Dr., Pendleton, IN 46064

d

MS Bioworks, Ann Arbor, MI, 48108

e

Dept. of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98109

f

Onipro LLC., Kensington, CA 94707

#

To whom correspondence should be addressed

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
Abstract
Antiviral compounds displaying remarkable features have been identified by an unconventional
drug screen and advanced through animal validation. Efficacy is observed against the six viral
families causing most human respiratory viral disease, irrespective of strain, including both
influenza (FLUV) and SARS-CoV-2, with cell culture EC50 at or below 100 nM. Survival benefit
is demonstrated in pigs against another member of family Coronaviridae, porcine epidemic
diarrhea virus (PEDV), and shown equally effective in mild and severe disease. Respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) titer is reduced by drug treatment in cotton rats. A substantial barrier to
viral resistance is demonstrated for FLUV. Drug resin affinity chromatography (DRAC) reveals a
novel drug target: a multi-protein complex (MPC) formed transiently, in an energy-dependent
fashion, and composed of host proteins implicated in both viral lifecycles and manipulation of
innate immunity. The protein composition of this host MPC is modified upon viral infection, with
increase or decrease of some proteins and appearance or complete loss of others. Valosincontaining protein, also known as Transitional endoplasmatic reticulum ATPase (VCP/p97), is
present in the target MPC of uninfected cells and significantly increased in both FLUV and CoV
infection. SQSTM1/p62, a key regulator of the autophagy pathway of innate immunity whose
dysfunction is implicated in cytokine storm, is i) found in the target MPC from uninfected cells, ii)
diminished in DRAC eluates by infection, and iii) restored by drug treatment of infected cells. 143-3 is one of likely several proteins that comprise the drug-binding site. Advanced compounds
with improved pharmacokinetic (PK) properties and lung exposure are approaching criteria for a
Target Product Profile. We propose these novel drug targets to comprise a previously
unappreciated molecular basis for homeostasis that is modified by viruses to allow exploitation
for viral propagation and is restored by treatment with the therapeutic compounds presented.
This discovery has transformative implications for treatment of respiratory viral-related disease,
applicable to everything from seasonal FLUV to COVID-19 and future novel respiratory viruses,
due to the pan-family nature of drug activity and barrier to resistance development.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics

Introduction
Viruses are challenging adversaries for two very different reasons. First, because their
reproductive strategy involves reprogramming of host protein machinery in order that it be used
to meet their needs rather than those of homeostasis1. As a consequence, there are only a
limited number of virus-specific drug targets, all others having an intrinsic risk of host toxicity.
Second, because their generation time is so much shorter than ours. This allows viruses,
particularly RNA viruses, to rapidly evolve mutants that are resistant to virus-targeted therapies,
be they vaccines or small molecules2,3.
There is, however, a third feature of viruses that is not as obvious as the first two noted
above, that provides an overlooked antiviral opportunity. Through natural selection over eons of
time, viruses have identified the most valuable of innumerable potential host targets and have
refined the best approach to reprogramming those targets to meet their needs. In doing so, they
have made discoveries that we have not yet made about human biology and have validated
them in the practical world of survival of the fittest. If a means could be devised of determining
the targets most useful to viruses, perhaps that information could be turned to therapeutic
advantage against them.
Here we describe results from a highly unconventional host-targeted antiviral therapeutic
approach directed to a new class of virus-favored host targets. Small molecules with some
striking features have been identified and advanced. These features include pan-respiratory
family antiviral activity (with influenza [FLUV], SARS-CoV-2, and respiratory syncytial virus
[RSV] among the examples demonstrated), and a barrier to resistance development (shown for
FLUV). These findings suggest a breakthrough therapeutic strategy for the current COVID-19
pandemic in particular, and viral diseases in general.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics

Results
Probing viral assembly with an orthogonal host-targeted viral protein biogenesis screen
Cell-free protein synthesis is a biochemical process by which a central event of life,
conversion of the genetic code into the proteins that make life possible, is reduced to reactions
occurring in a test tube. It has proven itself a remarkably versatile tool for the study of biological
mechanisms. It made possible deciphering of the genetic code4 and deconvolution of events in
protein targeting5, two centerpiece achievements of modern molecular and cell biology.
Subsequently this tool has been adapted to the study of viruses; cell-free protein synthesis and
assembly (CFPSA) systems enabled insights into the mechanism of viral assembly6,7,8 that were
not easily revealed by other methods9. Applied to drug discovery, this approach has identified
small molecules termed assembly modulators, which have novel, host-targeted mechanisms of
antiviral action. The host MPCs on which these compounds are active have been termed
assembly machines8 by virtue of their ability to catalyze capsid formation10,8,11
Here we have utilized the same approach to study assembly of viruses implicated in
severe respiratory disease. As a starting point, we began with FLUV, a member of family
Orthomyxoviridae. By analogy to previous studies on human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)10,11
and rabies virus8, FLUV nucleoprotein (NP) was expressed together with other FLUV gene
products including the matrix protein (M), in the CFPSA system. We observed a putative capsid
assembly pathway (Figure 1A), roughly analogous to the pathways observed previously for
other viral families, progression of whose assembly intermediates to the final structure is
energy-dependent 8,9,12,12–15. Assembly was assessed by co-migration of multiple newly
synthesized FLUV gene products in the final sucrose step gradient (ssg) peak. The timedependent high molecular weight peak in fraction 10/11 was subsequently analyzed by
iodixanol buoyant density gradients (idxg), and showed multiple viral gene products comigrating in the expected buoyant density range of authentic FLUV particles16. Expression of

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
the capsid proteins of other respiratory viral families, including SARS-CoV-2, a member of
family Coronaviridae (Figure 1B), and RSV of family Paramyxoviridae (data not shown), also
displayed similar assembly pathways, albeit with features distinctive to each viral family.
Additional data on the details of the respiratory virus assembly pathways will be presented
elsewhere. In summary, CFPSA assembly studies suggested that the same approach that has
been used successfully to generate unconventional host-targeted antiviral small molecules for
HIV17 and rabies8, could be applied to diverse respiratory viruses.
Antibodies recognizing the FLUV NP were used to establish an ELISA-style plate assay
for FLUV capsid assembly (Figure 2A)16 as previously achieved for rabies virus, rift valley fever
virus (RVFV) and HIV8,17,18. A portion of a 150,000 drug-like small molecule library was
screened and a number of hits identified from completely different chemical classes (Tanimoto
similarity coefficient < 40%), three of which were advanced by medicinal chemistry analog
synthesis (Figure 2B). Activity in the CFPSA screen correlates with activity against infectious
virus in cell culture (Figure 2C), demonstrating the fidelity of the CFPSA screen.

Medicinal chemistry advancement of a FLUV assembly modulator
One of these FLUV-active chemotypes was taken as the lead starting point for
advancement (Table 1). The parent compound structure was noted to have a 1,3 benzodioxan
core. Due to the limited commercial availability of building blocks with a 1,3-benzodioxan core, a
pyrazole carboxamide library of analogs containing a simple alkoxy phenyl ring was synthesized
and screened for efficacy against FLUV in cell culture (Table 1). Initial screening resulted in the
identification of a non 1,3-benzodioxan core-containing compound with antiviral activity in the
micromolar range, PAV-773. The weaker activity of PAV-1866 shows the importance of an
unsubstituted secondary amide.
Considering the metabolic susceptibility of the tert-butyl group19 and to improve
pharmacokinetic (PK) properties, various C-3 substituted pyrazole carboxamides were prepared

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
and tested (Table 1 compounds PAV-854, PAV-530, and PAV-835). Based on the activity and
other properties of PAV-835, a pyrazole carboxylic acid with a C-3 cyclopropyl group was the
choice of acid for subsequent pyrazole carboxamide analogs. To study the impact of the
pyrazole regioisomer (3-cyclopropyl-1-methyl-pyrazole-5-carboxylic acid vs 5-cyclopropyl-1methyl-pyrazole-3-carboxylic acid), the regioisomer of PAV-835 was prepared using 5cyclopropyl-1-methyl-pyrazole-3-carboxylic acid and tested, found inactive, and not further
pursued in our antiviral program.
In view of the substantial efficacy observed we proceeded with rodent PK and toxicology
studies (Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Acute repeat dose toxicity was evaluated in BALB/c
mice with daily dose of 2 mg/kg for 10 days through intraperitoneal injections. No significant
differences were observed between the control and study group with respect to hematology,
differential leucocyte count and clinical chemistry. Also, there was no significant variation in the
weight between control and study group animals. No abnormalities were observed in
histopathological investigations (Supplementary Table 2).
Following these successes, further improvement of the lead series was attempted.
Keeping the cyclopropyl as the preferred C-3 substituent, analogs were made to optimize druglike properties. Selected results are shown in Table 2. Based on the overall data PAV-431 was
taken as an advanced analog superior to the earlier compounds assessed. The synthetic
scheme for PAV-431 is shown in Supplementary Figure 1.

Pan-respiratory viral family antiviral activity
The early FLUV compounds were counter-screened against other viral families by
assessment of viral titer in cell culture by TCID50 determination. These studies revealed strong
efficacy against the Coronaviridae. Therefore we proceeded with an animal efficacy trial (Figure
3). The testing model involved randomizing newborn piglets from separate litters into control
and treatment groups, then infecting all with porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) and

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
assessing efficacy of just two intramuscular doses of early lead series compounds (PAV-773
and PAV-835) versus vehicle on survival, which was found to be significant (Figure 3).
Recognizing that, as with COVID-19, there is no way to predict those at risk of severe disease,
each litter of newborn piglets was separately randomized to control and treatment groups
allowing retrospective analysis of litters whose control groups demonstrated mild vs severe
disease. As anticipated, a subset of litters manifested severe disease in the form of 100% death
of the control group; efficacy observed in that subset of the treatment group was no different
from that observed for all drug-treated animals, indicating equal efficacy against mild and severe
disease (Figure 3B).
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, activity of PAV-431 against SARS-CoV-2 was
assessed and found efficacious by plaque assay, the gold standard for cell culture infectivity
determination (Figure 4A), with EC50 of 100nM. A second, structurally distant (Tanimoto
coefficient < 30%) backup assembly modulator chemotype represented by PAV-617 also
demonstrated 100nM EC50, indicating that the SARS-CoV-2 antiviral activity observed is not
limited to the lead chemotype. The initial screening had been performed on FLUV A strain
WSN/33 using a TCID50 assay. Efficacies of the lead and backup chemotypes were confirmed
on swine FLUV (SIV), and, in order to allow BSL-2 target identification studies on bovine
coronavirus (BoCoV, Figure 4B). Additionally, PAV-431 was assessed against RSV strain A-2,
adenovirus serotype 5 strain adenoid 65, human cytomegalovirus strain AD-69, and human
rhinovirus 16, together representing all six major respiratory viral families (Orthomyxoviridae,
Coronaviridae, Paramyxoviridae, Adenoviridae, Herpesviridae, Picornaviridae respectively). All
were found to be highly sensitive to this compound (EC50 ≤ 100 nM by TCID50), while a member
of a non-respiratory viral family, rabies virus (family Rhabdoviridae) was much less so (Figure
4B).
A second animal trial was carried out, in this case with the more advanced compound
PAV-431, in the cotton rat infected with RSV, a model that allows accurate determination of viral

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
titer20. This study observed a significant drop in viral titer upon drug treatment (Supplementary
Figure 2), providing an objective assessment to complement efficacy assessed by survival as
observed in the earlier pig trial (Figure 3). As the effect on viral titer was modest compared to
that of the far weaker earlier compounds on survival in the pig trial, we suspected that a
substantial portion of the efficacy of these compounds came from other actions, e.g. on innate
immunity, as will be discussed below.
A number of additional studies, including hERG channel inhibition and Ames test
assessment, were performed on compound PAV-431, revealing no significant liabilities, and
putting the lead series close to achievement of a Target Product Profile (TPP) indicating
suitability for advancement to investigational new drug (IND)-enabling studies (Supplementary
Figure 3). Additional analogs varying substituents on the R4-R8 positions of the phenyl ring
were synthesized and tested, resulting in the identification of molecules with substantially
improved PK properties (for example > 10x improved lung exposure of compound PAV-092,
Supplementary Table 2) and antiviral efficacy (for example > 5x improved efficacy of compound
PAV-471, Supplementary Table 4, which was used for subsequent studies of compound
mechanism of action). A select subset of these more potent analogs will need to be assessed in
another animal efficacy trial before naming a clinical candidate for investigational new drug
(IND)-enabling studies in advance of IND submission to the FDA for a human clinical trial.

Evidence for a barrier to resistance development
In principle, a host target should provide a greater barrier to resistance since the virus is
not the immediate drug target. Thus, the rapid mutation capacity of the virus is tangential and
while resistance is not impossible, its progression would be expected to be difficult. Accordingly,
assembly modulators active against HIV and other retroviruses have shown an impressive
barrier to resistance development17. We assessed the capacity of FLUV to develop resistance to
the present lead chemotype (represented by PAV-835) and one of the backup chemotypes

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
(represented by PAV-333). We found no resistance development to either chemotype, in
parallel with substantial resistance development to oseltamivir, a small molecule targeting a
virally encoded enzyme (Supplementary Table 3). The assembly modulator active against
multiple Retroviridae and shown to have a barrier to resistance development for HIV17, is not
active on FLUV (EC50 > 800 nM). Thus, the barrier to resistance development is likely a general
property of assembly modulators, but specific to the viruses utilizing the particular drug’s host
MPC assembly machine target.

Evidence for an unconventional host target
In order to glean insight into the target, drug resin affinity chromatography (DRAC) was
utilized. Drug-resin conjugates of compound PAV-431 were constructed by attachment to the
pyrazole nitrogen (Supplementary methods; Supplementary Figure 1B). The “surrogate ligand”
(drug with an added linker but not attached to the resin) displayed antiviral activity against FLUV
comparable in magnitude to PAV-431 itself. Thus, the attachment point chosen for resin
construction was not essential for antiviral activity and made possible the construction of drug
resins for use as affinity ligands for target identification. Cellular extracts were applied to the
drug resin, washed extensively, bound proteins eluted with free drug to reveal specific binding of
a set of host proteins, as will be described below. Similar protein profiles were observed upon
elution with the surrogate ligand rather than free drug.
Early in the course of these studies two profound observations were made with regards
to the drug target and the use of DRAC for its identification. First, that the inclusion of nucleotide
triphosphates and an energy regenerating system (creatine phosphate and creatine kinase) and
carrying out both binding and elution from the drug resin at room temperature (22 oC) rather
than 4 oC, resulted in a substantial increase in the specific proteins bound and eluted with free
drug, compared to identical conditions in the absence of metabolic energy or at 4 oC
(Supplementary Figure 4A). Both the binding step and the free drug elution step were found to

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
be independently nucleotide triphosphate dependent. This suggested that the drug target was a
dynamic MPC whose component proteins joined together as a multimer only transiently, and
whose release from the drug ligand required an energy-dependent conformational change. All
subsequent studies were performed under these conditions, a protocol distinguished by the
acronym eDRAC. Further characterization of these extraordinary findings are beyond the scope
of the present manuscript and will be published elsewhere.
The second observation was that the fraction of any given protein found in eDRAC
eluates was small (< 5% of the total amount of that protein present in the initial starting extract
applied to the drug resin), and that rerun of the flow through on a fresh eDRAC column showed
little additional binding. The identical extract applied to a control resin (lacking the drug affinity
ligand) showed no specific binding. When the flow through from the control resin was
subsequently applied to the PAV-431 drug resin, it showed most of the expected binding to the
drug resin (Supplementary Figure 4B). Thus, the lack of binding of the drug resin flow through to
a second drug resin column cannot be fully explained by degradation or other changes to the
target MPC. Rather it argues that the target had been largely depleted by passage over the first
drug resin. This in turn, implies that the target of the assembly modulator drug represents an
exceedingly small fraction of the total of each of its component proteins in the cell. In the case of
VCP/p97, this was calculated to be approximately 2.5-5% of total cellular VCP/p97.
These two observations are true for extracts prepared from various cell lines competent
for infection with both FLUV and BoCoV, including MDCK cells (Supplementary Figure 4A),
HRT-18G cells (Figure 6A), and MRC-5 cells (Figure 5). Likewise, extracts were prepared from
uninfected pig lung, for comparison of a heterogeneous but physiologically more faithful tissue
to the homogeneous cell lines, and gave similar results (Supplementary Figure 4B). The
implications of these two observations are each profound in different ways, and together may
explain why the present findings have not been discovered previously.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
For detailed characterization of the target we used extracts of human MRC-5 cells, either
uninfected or infected with either FLUV or BoCoV, applied to the drug resin, extensively
washed, and the bound target eluted with free drug (Figure 5A). The eluates were analyzed by
silver stain, western blot (WB), and tandem mass spectrometry (MS-MS). Spectral counts of
proteins seen in the eDRAC eluates from the control resin were subtracted and only proteins
with spectral counts > 5 were considered significant. Analysis of eluates from uninfected cells
revealed 39 significant proteins (Supplementary Table 5). The parallel study performed with cell
extracts infected with FLUV revealed 73 significant proteins, 35 of which were in uninfected cell
eluates and 38 of which were new. 4 proteins were lost from eDRAC eluates upon FLUV
infection. BoCoV infected cell lysates revealed a similar phenomenon. Of a total of 54 significant
proteins seen in eDRAC eluates from BoCoV infected cell lysates, 32 were increased from what
was observed in uninfected cells, 22 were new, and 6 proteins present in uninfected cell eDRAC
eluates were lost upon BoCoV infection. Of a total of 60 proteins that are new or increased in
either FLUV or BoCoV, 35 of them are up in infection by both viruses, 12 in FLUV but not
BoCoV infection and 13 in BoCoV but not FLUV infection. Of the 6 proteins lost on FLUV
infection and 4 proteins lost on BoCoV infection, only a single protein was in common, triose
phosphate isomerase, a protein identified as having a growing list of “moonlighting”
functions21,22.
Volcano plots of the data analyzed by label free quantitation (LFQ) methods23,24 were
used to provide a clear description of the striking differences observed by eDRAC in uninfected
versus FLUV or BoCoV-infected cells (Figure 5B and 5C). This analysis identified 47 proteins
deemed characteristic of the FLUV-infected eluates, 33 of which are found in the FLUV
interactome literature25. In particular, 9 are in the 81 proteins identified for the FLUV lifecycle26
and 23 are in immune-relevant interactomes27 (Figure 5B). For BoCoV 48 proteins were
deemed characteristic, of which 10 were in the CoV interactome literature28, 4 were identified by

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
a recent study29 and 19 were in immune-relevant interactomes27 (Figure 5C). All other proteins
found by eDRAC showed no change with either FLUV or BoCoV infection by LFQ.
The dose of drug treatment needed for anti-viral efficacy is many orders of magnitude lower
than the concentration of drug on the resin used for eDRAC. Furthermore, only a miniscule
fraction of treatment drug is carried over into the extract used for eDRAC. Thus, it is possible to
assess the effect of drug-treatment on composition of the eDRAC eluate without significant
interference of treatment drug on target binding/elution to the drug resin. When cells were
treated with PAV-431 1 hour after infection (at a dose of 400 nM sufficient to achieve > 2 log
drop in viral titer by TCID50 after 24 hours) some striking changes were observed in the
corresponding eDRAC eluates. Of the 47 proteins identified by LFQ as increased in eDRAC
eluates upon FLUV infection, 19 are restored to uninfected levels 24 hours after drug treatment.
Of 7 proteins lost from eDRAC eluates upon FLUV infection, 6 are restored to uninfected levels
24 hours after drug treatment. For BoCoV, the results were even more striking. Of 48 proteins
increased in eDRAC eluates upon BoCoV infection, 30 are restored to uninfected levels 24
hours after drug treatment. All 4 of 4 proteins lost from eDRAC eluates upon BoCoV infection
are restored to uninfected levels 24 hours after drug treatment. Thus, the eDRAC eluate protein
patterns observed are, substantially for FLUV infection and dramatically for BoCoV infection,
restored to the uninfected state by PAV-431 treatment. In the absence of infection no significant
changes in eDRAC protein composition after PAV-431 treatment was observed by MS-MS LFQ
analysis by comparison to DMSO treated cells. Supplementary Table 6 provides a
comprehensive list of interactomes in which proteins found by MS-MS participate.
Several of the proteins found in both uninfected and infected cell lysates were notable.
For example, VCP/p97, is a multi-functional host protein30 implicated in the lifecycles of both
FLUV26,31 and BoCoV31,32. VCP/p97 is present in the eDRAC eluates from uninfected cells,
strikingly enriched in the eDRAC eluates from both FLUV and BoCoV infected cells, and

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
restored close to normal levels in the eDRAC eluates upon drug treatment of BoCoV-infected
samples. However, it remains elevated in the eDRAC eluates from drug-treated FLUV-infected
samples. These data are consistent with the hypothesis that a host assembly machine
containing VCP/p97, seen as its normal composition in uninfected cells, is altered during
infection to form an aberrant assembly machine that contains additional VCP/p97, in order to
meet the needs of the virus rather than the host. Assembly modulator drug-treatment
substantially restores normal assembly machine composition, including for VCP/p97, at least in
the case of BoCoV-infected cells. A second notable observation was the presence in all eDRAC
eluates of creatine kinase (CK), an enzyme essential to energy homeostasis that
rephosphorylates adenosine diphosphate to ATP. While rabbit CK is added to the eDRAC
cocktail as part of our eDRAC protocol, the CK identified by MS-MS is human CK recruited to
the drug resin from the extract (Supplementary Table 5), with or without the presence of rabbit
CK added, and is missing from the DRAC free drug eluate in the absence of metabolic energy
or at 4 oC. Unlike VCP/p97, CK is present in all eDRAC samples, irrespective of infection or
drug treatment (Supplementary Table 5). Thus assembly machine composition is governed by
signals from a complex set of factors including infection, treatment, and metabolic energy.
In addition to proteins detected by MS-MS, western blotting was performed to confirm
key MS-MS findings and to detect proteins that might have been missed in the MS-MS analysis.
Conventional reasons for a protein not appearing by MS-MS include that they are below the
abundance level needed for MS-MS detection (100 pg), that the peptide failed to ionize, or that
post-translational modifications blocked trypsin digestion (2 missed cleavage cutoff) and/or
changed peptide masses. In light of the observations of energy-dependence and that the
eDRAC eluates represent a single digit percentage subfraction of the total cellular abundance of
each of the identified proteins, we were alert to the possibility that important proteins present in
the eDRAC eluates might be missed by a single method of detection, such as MS-MS.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
One protein in particular, missing by MS-MS analysis but readily detected by WB, was
SQSTM1/p62, a key regulator of the autophagy pathway, a crucial component of innate
immunity33–35. Monospecific commercial antibodies showed the clear presence of an
SQSTM1/p62 band at the correct size in the uninfected eDRAC eluate cells (Figure 6A). This
band was substantially diminished in the eDRAC eluate from either FLUV or BoCoV infection.
Moreover, treatment of infected cells with either of two structurally distinct assembly modulator
compounds, PAV-431 and advanced analog PAV-818 of the backup chemotype compound
PAV-617 studied in Figure 4A, significantly restored SQSTM1/p62 to the eDRAC eluates.
SQSTM1/p62 interacts directly with vimentin and HSP70 by interactome analysis27 both of
which are upregulated in the eDRAC eluates upon infection and downregulated upon drug
treatment (Figure 6B). While additional studies are needed to fully understand these
observations, they are consistent with our working hypothesis on viral manipulation of innate
immunity, and will be discussed below.

Testing predictions of the working hypothesis
We have previously interpreted work on rabies virus8 and HIV17 to suggest that a normal
transient and dynamic host MPC assembly machine involved in host homeostasis is modified by
viral infection to form an aberrant assembly machine to facilitate viral assembly. We further
hypothesized that assembly modulator drug-treatment modifies the aberrant assembly machine
in a manner that triggers restoration of homeostasis. Restoration could be either a simple return
to normal assembly machine composition or proceed by a more complex and indirect route, e.g.
direction of the aberrant assembly machine to the autophagic pathway, with feedback
restoration of the normal assembly machine by re-synthesis (Figure 8). In any event, these
hypotheses make a series of predictions.
A first prediction is that, if the eluate comprises a discrete multi-protein complex rather
than numerous individual proteins binding to the drug resin, that should be demonstrable by

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
photo-crosslinking with a drug analog where a photoactivatable diazirine group and a biotin
moiety are attached at the same position used to make the resin conjugate. The synthetic
scheme by which the crosslinker analog was synthesized is described in methods. eDRAC was
carried out as previously described but the photo-crosslinker was used in place of free drug to
elute from the resin. The resulting eluate was exposed to UV light at 355nm as described and
the crosslinked adducts assessed by SDS-PAGE and WB probed with streptavidin-alkaline
phosphate (Figure 6C). As can be seen, a number of distinct protein bands are detected as
having covalently attached biotin. Controls included crosslinking of the starting extract and
diminution of the crosslink in the presence of competing free drug. The crosslinked eDRAC
eluate was then divided into two aliquots, one of which was denatured while the other was
maintained native. Streptavidin sepharose beads were added to both aliquots and after
incubation and washing, the biotinylated proteins bound by the streptavidin sepharose beads
were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and WB for various proteins present in the starting eDRAC
eluate. The prediction is that if a protein is in a MPC along with the direct drug-binding protein
that has the covalent biotin attached by the crosslinking reaction, it should be present in the
native streptavidin Sepharose pellet and be detectable by WB. If the band is lost upon
denaturation, it is not the direct drug-binding protein that contains covalent biotin. If however it is
observed in both the native and the denatured streptavidin Sepharose samples, then the protein
is a direct drug-binding protein. As can be seen from Figure 6D, VCP, p62, and CAPN2 are
present in the native but not denatured streptavidin blots when probed by WB with the
corresponding antibodies. This indicates that they are in the target MPC, but are not direct drugbinding proteins. 14-3-3 however, was observed in both native and denatured streptavidin
sepharose-bound samples (Figure 6E), indicating it as one, perhaps of several, direct drugbinding proteins.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
What needs to be emphasized here is that the sets of proteins identified by MS-MS or WB
under different conditions (uninfected, FLUV infected, BoCoV infected, FLUV infected and
treated with PAV-431, and BoCoV infected treated with PAV-431) are those generated by
eDRAC from cell extracts, and as evidenced by the crosslinking studies shown, a number of
them are physically together and comprise the drug target. That they include known
components of various interactomes relevant to viral infection and host defense, is notable.
Similarly, the fact that they are detected together only by eDRAC, that is, in the presence of
metabolic energy, which is also needed for their release from the drug resin, and then only in
the presence of free drug as a competitor, is remarkable. We propose this to reflect the ability of
the eDRAC method to detect a previously largely unappreciated molecular basis for
homeostasis.
A second prediction can be tested by CFPSA, the method used to find these compounds
in the first place. The prediction is that drug treatment should adversely affect either the
formation or the structure of the viral capsid. The former possibility is confirmed for SARS-CoV2 capsids by demonstration that PAV-431 treatment during synthesis in the CFPSA system
disrupts assembly of NP with M in ssg analysis (Figure 7A). The latter possibility is observed for
FLUV capsids. While they do not show disruption of NP and M co-migration on ssg, when the
putative completed capsid fraction is further analyzed for buoyant density by idxg, aberrant
capsid formation is observed in a drug dose-dependent fashion (Figure 7B). Thus, the two
different respiratory viral families studied, while susceptible to the same host-targeted drug,
display different drug-induced assembly-defective phenotypes. Presumably this reflects different
evolutionary choices made by these viral families in their struggle with the host. In view of the
fact that this is an unconventional assay, further evidence connecting its conclusion to those
from more conventional approaches (e.g. the infectious virus data in Figure 4) is worth noting.
Thus, idxg analysis of CFPSA SARS-CoV-2 assembly in the presence of 10uM of the early

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
analog PAV-835 is seen to be comparable in effect to treatment with 625nM of the advanced
analog PAV-471, consistent with the > 20 fold improvement based on infectious virus TCID50
(supplementary Table 4).

Discussion
We have hypothesized that a class of highly heterogeneous and dynamic host MPCs
(assembly machines), perform a range of assembly-relevant tasks to maintain homeostasis.
Viruses have, over deep evolutionary time, become adept at co-opting host machinery to their
needs1, including and perhaps especially, assembly machines. The needs of the virus include
both formation of the capsid and misdirecting innate immunity, which would otherwise impede
its propagation.
The unconventional approach to drug discovery described here has made possible the
detection and exploitation of these assembly machines as drug targets. Furthermore, this has
enabled the identification of compounds that appear to modulate this host machinery in
important ways, with potent antiviral activity at doses without significant host toxicity. The
present study demonstrates relevance of this assembly modulation paradigm to respiratory
viruses. Several features of the study are notable and will be discussed.
First, let us consider the screen. Most phenotypic screens involve whole cell assays36.
Such screens, while often successful, face significant liabilities. The presence of confounding
events in the complex milieu of a living cell can mask detection of a potentially interesting target.
Moreover, the target is unknown at the time of hit generation and perhaps even through lead
optimization. In cellular physiology, feedback effects are typically complex and multifaceted37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46. This in turn creates a signal to noise problem for detection of
several potential contributors to a particular phenotypic effect. Even when multiple contributors
are identified, deciding which is the one to pursue can be problematic.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
By contrast, the CFPSA-based phenotypic screening approach taken here focuses
attention on those events set into motion early in protein biogenesis (during and immediately
after protein synthesis). This results in an improved signal-to-noise ratio by excluding much of
the rest of the lifecycles of most proteins, of both viruses and cells, from experimental
interrogation. A growing literature supports the notion that protein assembly is co-translational47–
49

; thus it should not be surprising that CFPSA reveals aspects of the viral lifecycle not

discernable by other experimental approaches, and enables the detection of drug targets that
had not been previously detected. This is precisely how cell-free protein synthesis allowed
detection of the pathways of protein targeting5. Of course, every scientific method has its
strengths and its limitations, the point being to take advantage of the former and recognize the
latter. CFPSA is just one new and specialized experimental tool.
Second, the confounding nature of both the energy-dependence (and therefore
transience) of the MPC target and the biochemical heterogeneity of its individual protein
components explains why these targets have been heretofore missed. With regards to energydependence, we are not aware of previous demonstration or use of energy-dependent affinity
chromatography. If, as our data suggests, independent energy-dependent steps are involved in
the formation/binding of an MPC to an affinity ligand (in this case the drug), and for release from
the affinity ligand, the discovery of this new class of targets may have impact far beyond the
therapeutics of respiratory viruses described here. Moreover the transience of such targets
suggests relevance for a new understanding of the molecular basis for homeostasis with myriad
therapeutic implications.
With regards to protein heterogeneity, if only 5 percent or less of a given protein
represents the subset found in an MPC target of interest (as demonstrated here for VCP/p97),
then efforts focusing on that gene product by methods that don’t allow subset discrimination
may fail to detect the relevance of that subset for the target of interest. It should be noted that a
burgeoning literature on the multifunctionality of proteins1,50, including in viral infection1,51,

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
suggests that the widespread conventional use of recombinant proteins in classical “pull down”
assays and yeast 2-hybrid screens may miss an important degree of nuance in protein-protein
interactions that are captured by the methods used here. Furthermore, genetic methods from
siRNA knockdown to CRISPR, while extraordinarily powerful, may impact many functionally
distinct subsets of those gene products, complicating deconvolution and limiting therapeutic
applications in ways not generally considered. Some evidence suggests that the 95% of any
given protein not in the MPC assembly machine target is itself heterogeneous8, but that has not
been further studied here.
A third observation is that the drug binding site within the assembly machine is likely to
be an allosteric site, albeit involving an allostery more complex than classical descriptions52.
Several indirect lines of evidence suggest this, including the energy-dependence of drug binding
and elution, and the change in protein composition of the eDRAC eluted MPC observed with
infection and again with treatment. Presumably as a consequence of virus-induced signaling
pathway manipulation, perhaps through metabolite binding-induced conformational change at
the same or another allosteric site, the actual protein composition of this MPC is altered upon
infection (see Figure 5B and 5C). The striking return to the eDRAC pattern of the uninfected
state upon treatment, seen in BoCoV infection, is consistent with the hypothesized drug-induced
assembly machine normalization. Formation of aberrant viral capsids in the presence of drug
(Figure 7) may explain the more modest normalization of eDRAC eluate upon treatment for
FLUV. The presence of aberrant capsids, while foiling viral propagation, may also interfere with
assembly machine normalization. In vivo, autophagy or other pathways triggered by feedback
loops likely allow normalization perhaps over a longer time frame than the 24 hours studied in
FLUV infected cell culture here. In this regard, the return of SQSTM1/p62 a known regulator of
autophagy, upon drug treatment may be significant. In the case of CoV where capsid formation
is shown to be blocked by drug treatment, rather than generating an aberrant non-functional
CoV capsid (Figure 7), assembly machine normalization may proceed more rapidly, e.g.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
following the simple model described in Figure 8A. These changes likely reflect evolutionarilyselected signaling pathway modulation that allows the virus to redirect critical machinery away
from homeostatic balance and towards the needs of the virus. Those viral efforts can be
blocked, reversed or redirected by assembly modulator small molecules and which manifest
differently for the different susceptible viral families, depending on the molecular details of their
lifecycles. The detection of 14-3-3 as a direct drug binding protein is also notable. This protein
family is implicated in a diversity of protein-protein interactions, consistent with our working
hypothesis53. It is likely that this is just one of several nearest neighbor proteins that comprise
the drug binding site. What is not yet known, and is the subject of active investigation, are the
other nearest neighbor proteins and whether they reflect heterogeneity of MPCs bound and
eluted by the eDRAC protocol.
Fourthly, is the observation that at least a subset of the assembly modulator compounds
have potent activity against multiple families of viruses causing respiratory disease, but are
substantially less active on rabies virus, a non-respiratory viral family tested (Figure 4B). Activity
across diverse (but not all) viral families suggests that, despite their differences in structure and
lifecycles, these viral families have at least one host drug-binding site in common. Whether that
is a single protein binding site, or as we favor, an allosteric site on a transient MPC, perhaps
comprised of several proteins, remains to be determined. The fact that all of these viruses target
the lung may mean that the answer to this question will involve a specialized role in the target
organ or perhaps in epithelial cells more generally. As work in this paradigm is at an early stage,
many other variations still remain possible. We cannot rule out for example that only a subset of
the proteins found are part of the particular transient MPC assembly machine responsible for
the antiviral effects, and that some of the proteins identified by MS-MS are in other MPCs that
share that drug-binding site. This may account for the ability of the drug to both interfere with
virus assembly and restore p62 to the eDRAC eluate, which would seem to be separate, albeit
interconnected, actions. Likewise, the very concept of a single drug binding site may have to be

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
revised for these novel targets. Perhaps a better analogy is to a key code needed to open a
gate: different molecular interactions at the drug binding site could trigger different
conformational changes in the bound MPC(s), each with a different consequent change in
composition and action. Continued drug advancement and further study of the transient target
complex may resolve this and other issues at the boundary of current experimental tractability.
Regardless, the present methods provide important new tools by which to better define and
characterize the common and distinctive essential host factors of each viral family and to
address pressing current public health problems.
Fifthly, apart from the intellectual interest of a relatively poorly understood dimension of
catalysis with profound implications for the general understanding of gene expression, are more
immediate and practical concerns. Specifically that we have advanced a compound with
remarkable biological activity close to a Target Product Profile (Supplementary Figure 3).
Moreover, we have identified more advanced analogs with > 5x improved potency as potential
clinical candidates. The path from clinical candidate nomination, through IND-enabling studies,
IND filing and human clinical trials of a small molecule is a straightforward one made all the
more compelling by data suggesting a substantial barrier to resistance development
(Supplementary Table 3). Such compounds are predicted to be active against not only seasonal
and sporadic respiratory viral disease, but also feared pandemic strains and emerging or
engineered viral threats. In this regard, advancement of these compounds may provide a hedge
against the unpredictable setbacks that may occur in vaccine development, including
emergence of resistant strains that may undermine other therapeutic strategies, or for
individuals at higher risk of adverse reactions to mainstay efforts.
The demonstration of efficacy in both mild and severe disease in the early compound pig
efficacy trial (Figure 3) is both reassuring and consistent with the hypothesis that targeting the
host through assembly modulation is a way to restore homeostasis including innate immune

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
function, as suggested by restoration of p62/SQSTM1 to the assembly machine that was
substantially lost upon viral infection.
Finally, it is likely that the current pandemic will be followed in an unpredictable time
frame by other viral pandemics, including influenza. A single drug active against everything from
the common cold to pandemic strains, without significant resistance development liability, would
be an important addition to the worldwide public health armamentarium.

Materials and methods
Materials. Materials were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. or Thermo Fisher, unless
otherwise noted. Selected antibodies were purchased from Bethyl Laboratories, Inc (rabbit
polyclonal affinity purified antibody to VCP/p97, catalogue number A300-588A-T) and Abcam
(mouse monoclonal antibody to human p62, catalogue number ab56416).

Cell-free protein synthesis and assembly. Coding regions of interest (FLUV N, M, PA, PB1,
and PB2, and SARS-CoV-2 np and M) were engineered behind the SP6 bacteriophage
promoter and the Xenopus globin 5′ UTR54. DNA was amplified by PCR and then transcribed in
vitro to generate mRNA encoding each full-length protein. Translations were carried out in
energy-supplemented wheat germ (WG) extracts containing 35S methionine and the other nonradiolabeled amino acids, as previously described, but at 5% WG extract. After incubation at 26
o

C for 90 minutes, puromycin was added to 1 mM to terminate protein synthesis and aliquots

incubated at 34 oC for 90 or 180 minutes to drive assembly. Samples were adjusted to 1%
Triton X-100 and applied to sucrose step gradients.

Sucrose step gradients (ssg). To form gradients, 10%, 15%, 40%, 50%, 60%, 70%, and 85%
w/v sucrose solutions were prepared with water and then each was diluted 1/10 with a 10x stock
of column buffer (50 mM Hepes, 100 mM KAc, 5 mM MgAc, 4 mM TGA) containing TritonX-100

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
to 1%. 2 mL step gradients containing equivalent layers of each diluted sucrose solution were
prepared and allowed to diffuse for 1 hour at room temperature, then chilled. Gradients were
loaded with ~100 μL of either CFPSA product or cell lysate (~100 μg of total protein), and
subjected to velocity sedimentation in a Beckman TLS-55 swinging bucket rotor at 55k rpm for
50 min at 4 °C. Gradients were fractionated from top to bottom in ten 200 µL fractions, with 85%
sucrose and pelleted material in an 11th fraction adjusted to 200 µL volume. Aliquots of each
fraction were analyzed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDSPAGE). Gels were dried, scanned, and radiolabelled NP and M protein bands quantified using a
Cytiva Typhoon phosphoimager and software and presented as a percent of total.

Iodixanol gradient (idxg) analysis. Fraction 10 and 11 from CFPSA followed by ssg were
analyzed by idxg. At 4 oC, 75 µL of ssg fractions were added to 3 mL of 37.4% iodixanol, 0.2%
triton column buffer mixed to homogeneity, then spun at 50k rpm for 4 hours in a Beckman TLS55 rotor. Twenty 150 µL fractions were taken, a portion of each used to determine the refractive
index by manual refractometry and another portion of which was analyzed by SDS-PAGE.

SDS/PAGE. SDS/PAGE was carried out as previously described8.

Moderate-throughput small molecule screening. Moderate-throughput small molecule
screening was carried out in a 384-well plate format by translation of eGFP and FLUV NP and
M mRNA in the presence of small molecules from the Prosetta compound collection. Reactions
were run at 26 °C for 1-2 hours for synthesis, followed by assembly at 34 °C for 2 hours. eGFP
fluorescent readout was measured at 488/515 nm (excitation/emission) to assess protein
synthesis. Assembly products were captured on a second 384-well plate precoated with affinitypurified FLUV NP antibody. Plates were washed with PBS containing 1% Triton X-100,
decorated with biotinylated affinity-purified FLUV NP antibody, washed, detected by

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
NeutraAvidin HRP, washed again, and then incubated with a fluorogenic HRP substrate Quanta
Blue for 1 hour. FLUV assembly fluorescent readout was measured at 330/425 nm
(excitation/emission). Relevant reagents were obtained from Pierce Protein Research Products.
Using the means and standard deviations of the positive and negative controls, the z factor for
the Flu plate screen is calculated using the formula Z-factor = 1-3(SDpositive +
SDnegative)/(MEANpositive – MEANnegative). As shown in this representative plot, the Flu
plate screen routinely performs with an acceptable S:N ratio and a Z-factor of 0.5-1.

FLUV virus production. FLUV A/WSN/33 viral stocks were prepared in MDCK.2 cells as
described previously55.

FLUV antiviral assay. Inhibition of FLUV replication was assayed using infection of MDCK.2
cells. A day before the assay, MDCK.2 cells were seeded at 30,000 cells/well in complete MEM
in a 96-well plate. The next day, seeded cells were washed with PBS and incubated for 1 hour
with 100 μL of FLUV A/WSN/33 stock diluted in VGM media containing 42 mM HEPES, 0.125%
BSA, and 1 μg/mL TPCK-trypsin (final MOI of 0.001). Cells were then washed with PBS and
incubated in 90 uL of complete MEM. Single compound dilutions were prepared in complete
MEM at 10x the desired final concentration, and 10 μL of DMSO or 10x compound was added
to infected cells for final volume of 100 μL. At 24 hours post infection, media was aspirated, cells
were washed with PBS, and 100 μL of complete MEM was added to each well. After a 2 hour
incubation, media was collected for TCID50 determination.
To determine TCID50, ten-fold serial dilutions of virus-containing supernatant were
prepared and seven replicates of 11.1 μL of neat and diluted stocks were added to the MDCK
cells (final dilutions in the TCID50 plate ranged from 10-1-106). Plates were incubated at 37 °C for
3 days, and the number of infected wells for each dilution was determined by visual inspection.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
The data were used to calculate TCID50/mL using the Reed and Muench method56.

SARS-CoV-2 assay. SARS-CoV-2 (2019-nCoV/USA-WA1/2020; MN985325.1) was received
from BEI resources and propagated in Vero clone E6, Vero E6, CRL-1586. Infections were done
at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 in serum-free Dulbecco's minimal essential medium
(DMEM) for 1 hour after which the virus-containing media was decanted and replaced with
DMEM supplemented with 1% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum57. The virus was propagated
for 72 hours before it was harvested and the titer determined by plaque assay on Vero and Vero
E6 cells58. The viral plaques were counted and the titer was determined as PFU/mL. The Vero
cells were plated at 3 x 105 cells/well in a 6-well plate and incubated overnight at 37 ºC. The
following day the compounds were prepared into the following concentrations/well in a
separate plate; 400 µM, 100 µM, 25 µM, and 6 µM. The cells were washed once with PBS
1X and then infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 for 1 hour after which the
virus containing media was removed and the compounds were added to the cells and
incubated for 72 hours at 37 ºC at 5% CO2. The cells were then fixed and stained with
crystal violet to determine plaque numbers. These were all done in duplicate and the
calculations were performed using Prism8 from GraphPad.

SIV and BoCoV assays. MDCK Cells (100 μL) at a density of 1x106 – 1x107/mL in MEM plus
5% - 10% FBS were seeded in 96-well plates. Cells were incubated for 24 hours prior to
infection. After medium was removed, wells were washed once with phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS). Virus solution was prepared in MEM without FBS (for SIV) or with 1% FBS (for BoCoV).
Virus solution (100 μL) was added to each well. The plates were incubated for 1 hour after
inoculation, followed by removal of the supernatant and washing once with MEM. Compounds
were diluted in MEM without FBS (for SIV) or with 1% FBS (for BoCoV). An aliquot of 100 μL of
diluted compound solution was added to each corresponding well. The reaction was performed

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
in triplicate. The cells were incubated for 24 hours. The cell monolayer was inspected for
cytopathic effect (CPE). The media was collected for TCID50 determination of viral titer.
To determine TCID50, supernatant of each well was collected and ten-fold serially diluted
in MEM without FBS (for SIV and BRV-B) or with 2% FBS (for BHV-1) or with 1% FBS (for
BoCoV), for a dilution range of 10-1 – 10-8. An aliquot (100 μL) of each diluted solution was used
to infect cell monolayers in 96-well plates, in replicates of six. The plates were incubated and
observed for CPE for 2 – 4 days, and then the TCID50 values were determined.

Cytotoxicity assays. For each viral inhibition assay, a cytotoxicity assay was performed in
parallel on uninfected cells by adding one tenth volume of AlamarBlue (Thermo Fisher,
Waltham, MA; DAL1199) to the plates and mixing well. AlamarBlue-treated plates were
incubated for 2 – 3 hours at 37 °C (timing was optimized for linear signal), mixed well, and read
using a fluorescence plate reader at 560/590 nm (excitation/emission) (Synergy H1; BioTek
Instruments, Inc.).

Cell lysate preparation for MS-MS. MRC-5 cells were grown to 80% confluence in 15 cm
plates either uninfected or infected with influenza A/WSN/33 or BoCoV at a low MOI. 24 hours
later cells were chilled, collected by scraping, washed with ice cold PBS, extracted with 10 mM
Tris pH 7.6, 10 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA and 0.35% Triton X-100 (termed PB buffer), and
centrifuged at 10k x g for 10 min. The supernatants of uninfected, FLUV-infected, and BoCoVinfected samples were collected and flash frozen for later use.

Affinity chromatography and eDRAC protocol. Drug resin was prepared by coupling
compound PAV-431 to an Affi-gel resin via the pyrazole nitrogen at a concentration of 10 µM.
Control resin was prepared by blocking the Affi-gel matrix without drug. Resins were
equilibrated with column buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, 100 mM KAc, 6 mM MgAc, 1 mM

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
EDTA, 4 mM TGA) prior to any DRAC experiments. 30 µL of cell extract adjusted to 1 mM ATP,
GTP, CTP and UTP with 4 mM creatine phosphate, and in some cases rabbit creatine kinase at
a final concentration of 5ug/ml, was applied. The column was clamped and incubated at 22 °C
for 1 hour for binding, and then washed with 100 bed volumes of the same buffer. 100ul of
column buffer containing free compound at a final concentration of 100 µM to 1 mM
(approaching its maximum solubility in water) was added, adjusted to 1mM ATP, GTP, CTP and
UTP with 4 mM creatine phosphate, and in some cases rabbit creatine kinase at a final
concentration of 5ug/ml. The column was clamped for 1 hour, and serial eluates were collected.
The column was then washed with 100 bed volumes, clamped for 1 hour in 8 M urea or 1%
SDS, washed further, and equilibrated in isopropanol for storage, or discarded.

MS-MS sample preparation and analysis. Half of each sample was processed by SDS-PAGE
using a 10% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) with the MES buffer system. The mobility region
was excised and processed by in-gel digestion with trypsin using a ProGest robot (Digilab) with
the protocol outlined below. Washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by
acetonitrile. Reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C followed by alkylation with 50 mM
iodoacetamide at room temperature. Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C for 4 hours.
Quenched with formic acid, lyophilized, and reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.
Half of each digested sample was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters M-Class
HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were
loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75 μm analytical column at 350 nL/min; both
columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was
operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 15,000
FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. APD was enabled and the instrument was run with a 3
s cycle for MS and MS/MS.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot (Matrix Science) with the following
parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P; Database: SwissProt Human plus the custom sequences*
(concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants); Fixed modification:
Carbamidomethyl (C)Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term
Q), Deamidation (N/Q)Mass values: Monoisotopic; Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment
Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da; Max Missed Cleavages: 2. The resultant protein data set, filtered for
a 1% protein/peptide false discovery rate requiring 2 unique peptides per protein, was further
adjusted by subtraction of spectral counts for specific proteins observed in the control resin.
Proteins with > 5 spectral counts were deemed significant. Tables of proteins and their spectral
counts are presented comparing uninfected vs. MRC-5 cells infected with FLUV A/WSN/33 or
BoCoV and for each infected sample a sample that was treated 1 hour after infection with
compound PAV-431 for 24 hours. Additionally, the data was analyzed by label free quantitation
(LFQ) methods59. LFQ intensity values of each condition were measured in triplicate and
compared against each other to generate log2 fold change values for each protein and each
combination of conditions. Proteins that were found significantly enriched by a log2 fold change
of > 1 and an adjusted p-value (accounting for multiple hypothesis testing) of < 0.05 in the FLUV
infected eDRAC eluates compared to the uninfected eluates were searched for in a list of high
confidence FLUV virus-host protein interactions26 and the VirusMentha database of virus-protein
interactions25. Likewise, significantly enriched and depleted proteins found in the BoCoV
infected eDRAC eluate were searched for in a list of high confidence coronavirus interactors29
and an aggregated list of coronavirus protein interactors shown experimentally28.

Western blotting. For western blotting, SDS/PAGE gels were transferred in Towbin buffer to
polyvinylidene fluoride membrane, blocked in 1% BSA, incubated for 1 hour at room
temperature in a 1:1,000 dilution of 100 μg/mL affinity-purified primary IgG, washed three times
in PBS with 0.1% Tween-20, and incubated for 1 hour in a 1:5,000 dilution of secondary anti-

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
rabbit antibody coupled to alkaline phosphatase. This incubation was followed by washing to
various degrees of stringency by elevation of salt, a Tris-buffered saline wash, and incubation in
developer solution prepared from 100 μL of 7.5 mg/mL 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate
dissolved in 60% dimethyl formamide (DMF) in water and 100 μL of 15 mg/mL nitro blue
tetrazolium dissolved in 70% DMF in water, adjusted to 50 mL with 0.1 M Tris (pH 9.5)/0.1 mM
magnesium chloride.

Photo-crosslinking and native vs denatured streptavidin association
eDRAC columns were eluted with 100uM PAV-431 photocrosslinker at 22oC. PAV-431 to a final
concentration of 100uM was added to an aliquot of the resulting eluate for competition 30
minutes prior to UV exposure. After crosslinking, eluates were subjected to treatments that
maintained protein-protein associations (native) or which reduced and denatured all proteins
(denatured). Native conditions were maintained by adjusting an aliquot of the eDRAC free drug
eluate to 20x volume of 1% Triton-X-100 column buffer. Denaturation was achieved by adjusting
an aliquot of the eDRAC free drug eluate to 1% SDS and 10mM DTT and heating to 100oC/10
minutes. The samples were then cooled, diluted 20x in 1% Triton containing column buffer so
the final concentration of SDS was 0.05%. Streptavidin Sepharose beads were then added to
both native and denatured samples and mixed for 1 hr to capture all biotinylated proteins, with
co-associated proteins in the native case and without in the denatured case, then washed 3x
with 1% Triton-containing column buffer and the washed beads resuspended in 20ul of SDS
loading buffer and analyzed by SDS-PAGE, transferred and analyzed by WB for the presence of
various co-associated proteins under native or denatured conditions. Proteins identified only by
native conditions are components of the target MPC that are lost on denaturation. Proteins
identified by both native and denatured conditions are direct drug-binding proteins.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
PEDV pig survival efficacy study: Newborn (2 – 4 days old) crossbred pigs weighing 3 kg
were used in the study. Animals were infected with 1 x105 PFU PEDV. The compounds or
vehicle was administered intraperitoneal at 4 mg/kg. In the 150 pig trial done, a number of
different litters of newborn pigs were all infected and then randomized to control (vehicle) and
compound. Compound efficacy was determined by survivability until 5 days post-infection.

RSV cotton rat study. Twenty-four female cotton rats, ~5 weeks of age, were obtained from
Envigo (formerly Harlan), ear-tagged for identification purposes and allowed to acclimate for > 1
week prior to study start. Animals were housed individually. Just prior to the study initiation the
animals were distributed into 4 groups so that the average weights per group were similar.
Throughout the study, the cotton rats were monitored for clinical symptoms of distress or
ambulatory discomfort. Body weights were recorded on days -2, 0, 3 and 5. RSV A-2 virus was
originally from ATCC (VR-1540). A high titer stock that was prepared and verified to replicate in
cotton rats was used for this study.
On day 0, 1x105 pfu of RSV A-2 was administered in a 50 mL volume by an intranasal
route approximately 2 hours after the AM dose of the treatment drugs. Back titration the viral
stock and diluted inoculum was performed to confirm the titer of the RSV stock used for
infection. All inoculations were performed while the animals were under the influence of an
inhalant anesthesia. Test compound and vehicle were administered by an intraperitoneal route
twice daily on study days -1 through day 4. All animals were euthanized on day 5 and the lungs
were processed for determination of RSV A-2 titers. Plaque assays were performed for viral titer
determination.

Acknowledgments
We thank Alfredo Calayag, Lisa Tucker, and Caleb Declouette for assistance, Usha Lingappa
for careful reading and improvement of the manuscript, and the late Guenter Blobel for advice,

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
inspiration, and encouragement. Funding for this work was provided by Prosetta Biosciences
Inc.

Competing interest:
VRL is CEO of Prosetta Biosciences.

Abbreviations:
Bovine Coronavirus (BoCoV)
Cell-free protein synthesis and assembly (CFPSA)
Coronavirus (CoV)
Creatine Kinase (CK)
Dithiothreitol (DTT)
Drug resin affinity chromatography (DRAC)
Enzyme-linked immunoadsorption assay (ELISA)
Energy-dependent drug resin affinity chromatography (eDRAC)
Influenza virus (FLUV)
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Iodixanol buoyant density gradient (idxg)
Matrix protein (M)
Nucleoprotein (NP)
Pharmacokinetics (PK)
Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS-PAGE)
Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV)
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
Silver stain (SS)
Structure-activity relationship (SAR)

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
Sucrose step gradient (ssg)
Swine influenza virus (SIV)
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS-MS)
Target product profile (TPP)
Transitional endoplasmatic reticulum ATPase also known as Valosin-containing protein (VCP)
Western blotting (WB)

References
1. Goodwin, C. M., Xu, S. & Munger, J. Stealing the Keys to the Kitchen: Viral Manipulation of
the Host Cell Metabolic Network. Trends Microbiol. 23, 789–798 (2015).
2. Ison, M. G. Antivirals and resistance: influenza virus. Curr. Opin. Virol. 1, 563–573 (2011).
3. Peck, K. M. & Lauring, A. S. Complexities of Viral Mutation Rates. J. Virol. 92, (2018).
4. Nirenberg, M. Historical review: Deciphering the genetic code – a personal account. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 29, 46–54 (2004).
5. Blobel, G. Protein targeting (Nobel lecture). Chembiochem Eur. J. Chem. Biol. 1, 86–102
(2000).
6. Lingappa, V. R. & Lingappa, J. R. Recent insights into biological regulation from cell-free
protein-synthesizing systems. Mt. Sinai J. Med. N. Y. 72, 141–160 (2005).
7. Lingappa, J. R. et al. A eukaryotic cytosolic chaperonin is associated with a high molecular
weight intermediate in the assembly of hepatitis B virus capsid, a multimeric particle. J. Cell
Biol. 125, 99–111 (1994).
8. Lingappa, U. F. et al. Host-rabies virus protein-protein interactions as druggable antiviral
targets. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, E861–E868 (2013).
9. Dooher, J. E. & Lingappa, J. R. Conservation of a stepwise, energy-sensitive pathway
involving HP68 for assembly of primate lentivirus capsids in cells. J. Virol. 78, 1645–1656
(2004).

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
10. Lingappa, J. R., Hill, R. L., Wong, M. L. & Hegde, R. S. A multistep, ATP-dependent
pathway for assembly of human immunodeficiency virus capsids in a cell-free system. J.
Cell Biol. 136, 567–581 (1997).
11. Copeland, K. et al. Protein–Protein Interactions Occurring During HIV Capsid Assembly in a
Cell-free Protein Synthesizing System. Antiviral Res. 86, A22 (2010).
12. Lingappa, J. R., Newman, M. A., Klein, K. C. & Dooher, J. E. Comparing capsid assembly of
primate lentiviruses and hepatitis B virus using cell-free systems. Virology 333, 114–123
(2005).
13. Dooher, J. E., Pineda, M. J., Overbaugh, J. & Lingappa, J. R. Characterization of virus
infectivity and cell-free capsid assembly of SIVMneCL8. J. Med. Primatol. 33, 262–271
(2004).
14. Dooher, J. E. & Lingappa, J. R. Cell-free systems for capsid assembly of primate
lentiviruses from three different lineages. J. Med. Primatol. 33, 272–280 (2004).
15. Klein, K. C., Polyak, S. J. & Lingappa, J. R. Unique features of hepatitis C virus capsid
formation revealed by de novo cell-free assembly. J. Virol. 78, 9257–9269 (2004).
16. Petsch, B. et al. Discovery of Novel Small Molecule Inhibitors of Multiple Influenza Strains in
Cell Culture. Antiviral Res. 86, A42 (2010).
17. Reed, J. C. et al. Identification of an antiretroviral small molecule that appears to be a hosttargeting inhibitor of HIV-1 assembly.
http://biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2020.03.18.998088 (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.03.18.998088.
18. Broce, S. et al. Biochemical and biophysical characterization of cell-free synthesized Rift
Valley fever virus nucleoprotein capsids enables in vitro screening to identify novel
antivirals. Biol. Direct 11, 25 (2016).
19. Barnes-Seeman, D. et al. Metabolically Stable tert-Butyl Replacement. ACS Med. Chem.
Lett. 4, 514–516 (2013).

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
20. Blanco, J. C., Boukhvalova, M. S., Perez, D. R., Vogel, S. N. & Kajon, A. Modeling Human
Respiratory Viral Infections in the Cotton Rat (Sigmodon hispidus). J. Antivir. Antiretrovir. 6,
40–42 (2014).
21. Rodríguez-Bolaños, M. & Perez-Montfort, R. Medical and Veterinary Importance of the
Moonlighting Functions of Triosephosphate Isomerase. Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 20, 304–315
(2019).
22. Rozovsky, S. & McDermott, A. E. Substrate product equilibrium on a reversible enzyme,
triosephosphate isomerase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104, 2080–2085 (2007).
23. Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized
p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26,
1367–1372 (2008).
24. Cox, J. et al. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and
maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol. Cell. Proteomics MCP 13, 2513–
2526 (2014).
25. Calderone, A., Licata, L. & Cesareni, G. VirusMentha: a new resource for virus-host protein
interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D588-592 (2015).
26. Watanabe, T. et al. Influenza virus-host interactome screen as a platform for antiviral drug
development. Cell Host Microbe 16, 795–805 (2014).
27. Jassal, B. et al. The reactome pathway knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, D498–D503
(2020).
28. Perrin-Cocon, L. et al. The current landscape of coronavirus-host protein-protein
interactions. J. Transl. Med. 18, 319 (2020).
29. Gordon, D. E. et al. Comparative host-coronavirus protein interaction networks reveal panviral disease mechanisms. Science 370, (2020).

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
30. Xue, L. et al. Valosin-containing protein (VCP)-Adaptor Interactions are Exceptionally
Dynamic and Subject to Differential Modulation by a VCP Inhibitor. Mol. Cell. Proteomics
MCP 15, 2970–2986 (2016).
31. Gordon, D. E. et al. A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug
repurposing. Nature 583, 459–468 (2020).
32. Zhang, J. et al. Identification of NMS-873, an allosteric and specific p97 inhibitor, as a broad
antiviral against both influenza A and B viruses. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. Off. J. Eur. Fed. Pharm.
Sci. 133, 86–94 (2019).
33. Deretic, V. Autophagy as an innate immunity paradigm: expanding the scope and repertoire
of pattern recognition receptors. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 24, 21–31 (2012).
34. Deretic, V. & Levine, B. Autophagy balances inflammation in innate immunity. Autophagy
14, 243–251 (2018).
35. Gu, Y. et al. Role of the Innate Cytokine Storm Induced by the Influenza A Virus. Viral
Immunol. 32, 244–251 (2019).
36. Lee, J. A. & Berg, E. L. Neoclassic drug discovery: the case for lead generation using
phenotypic and functional approaches. J. Biomol. Screen. 18, 1143–1155 (2013).
37. Versteeg, H. H., Heemskerk, J. W. M., Levi, M. & Reitsma, P. H. New fundamentals in
hemostasis. Physiol. Rev. 93, 327–358 (2013).
38. Rizzino, A. & Wuebben, E. L. Sox2/Oct4: A delicately balanced partnership in pluripotent
stem cells and embryogenesis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1859, 780–791 (2016).
39. Karsdal, M. A. et al. The good and the bad collagens of fibrosis - Their role in signaling and
organ function. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 121, 43–56 (2017).
40. Hannezo, E. & Heisenberg, C.-P. Mechanochemical Feedback Loops in Development and
Disease. Cell 178, 12–25 (2019).
41. Ivan, M. & Kaelin, W. G. The EGLN-HIF O2-Sensing System: Multiple Inputs and
Feedbacks. Mol. Cell 66, 772–779 (2017).

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
42. Klimesch, W. EEG alpha and theta oscillations reflect cognitive and memory performance: a
review and analysis. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 29, 169–195 (1999).
43. Lake, D., Corrêa, S. A. L. & Müller, J. Negative feedback regulation of the ERK1/2 MAPK
pathway. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. CMLS 73, 4397–4413 (2016).
44. Fukuda, K., Kanazawa, H., Aizawa, Y., Ardell, J. L. & Shivkumar, K. Cardiac innervation and
sudden cardiac death. Circ. Res. 116, 2005–2019 (2015).
45. Heinricher, M. M. Pain Modulation and the Transition from Acute to Chronic Pain. Adv. Exp.
Med. Biol. 904, 105–115 (2016).
46. Hurley, J. M., Loros, J. J. & Dunlap, J. C. Circadian Oscillators: Around the TranscriptionTranslation Feedback Loop and on to Output. Trends Biochem. Sci. 41, 834–846 (2016).
47. Kamenova, I. et al. Co-translational assembly of mammalian nuclear multisubunit
complexes. Nat. Commun. 10, 1740 (2019).
48. Panasenko, O. O. et al. Co-translational assembly of proteasome subunits in NOT1containing assemblysomes. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 110–120 (2019).
49. Williams, N. K. & Dichtl, B. Co-translational control of protein complex formation: a
fundamental pathway of cellular organization? Biochem. Soc. Trans. 46, 197–206 (2018).
50. Jeffery, C. J. Multitalented actors inside and outside the cell: recent discoveries add to the
number of moonlighting proteins. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 47, 1941–1948 (2019).
51. Newton, A. H., Cardani, A. & Braciale, T. J. The host immune response in respiratory virus
infection: balancing virus clearance and immunopathology. Semin. Immunopathol. 38, 471–
482 (2016).
52. Fenton, A. W. Allostery: an illustrated definition for the ‘second secret of life’. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 33, 420–425 (2008).
53. Fu, H., Subramanian, R. R. & Masters, S. C. 14-3-3 proteins: structure, function, and
regulation. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 40, 617–647 (2000).

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
54. Krieg, P. A. & Melton, D. A. Functional messenger RNAs are produced by SP6 in vitro
transcription of cloned cDNAs. Nucleic Acids Res. 12, 7057–7070 (1984).
55. Lutz, A., Dyall, J., Olivo, P. D. & Pekosz, A. Virus-inducible reporter genes as a tool for
detecting and quantifying influenza A virus replication. J. Virol. Methods 126, 13–20 (2005).
56. Reed, L. J. & Muench, H. A SIMPLE METHOD OF ESTIMATING FIFTY PER CENT
ENDPOINTS12. Am. J. Epidemiol. 27, 493–497 (1938).
57. Harcourt, J. et al. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 from Patient with
Coronavirus Disease, United States. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 26, 1266–1273 (2020).
58. Zhang, Y., Wei, Y., Li, J. & Li, J. Development and optimization of a direct plaque assay for
human and avian metapneumoviruses. J. Virol. Methods 185, 61–68 (2012).
59. Shah, A. D., Goode, R. J. A., Huang, C., Powell, D. R. & Schittenhelm, R. B. LFQ-Analyst:
An Easy-To-Use Interactive Web Platform To Analyze and Visualize Label-Free Proteomics
Data Preprocessed with MaxQuant. J. Proteome Res. 19, 204–211 (2020).

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics

Figures

Figure 1. CFPSA of putative FLUV and SARS-CoV-2 capsids. Cell-free protein
synthesis reactions were programmed with a cocktail of mRNAs encoding relevant
FLUV or SARS-CoV-2 proteins. Reactions were incubated at 20 °C for protein
synthesis, and moved to 34 °C for assembly. Analysis of CFPSA products by ssg
revealed time-dependent assembly pathways, with the progression of viral gene
products to the bottom of the gradient, shown here for both FLUV (A) and SARS-CoV-2
(B).

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics

Structure$Ac:vity'Rela:onship'Op:miza:on:'correla:on'of'Cel
free'and'Cell'Culture'Data'
Cell+Free"Screen"to"Infec4ous"Virus"Correla4on"
FLUV"Cell+free"Screen"and"assessment"against"
infec8ous"virus"in"cell"culture"
Rela&ve*Ac&vity*in*the*Cell>Free*Screen*
120"
100"
80"
60"
40"
20"

140"

C

0"
10"

Infec&ous*Virus*Log*Drop*at*10uM*

G"
F"

Cell+Free"Screen"to"Infec4ous"Virus"Correla4on"

100"

80"

60"

40"

20"

1"

A"

Rela&ve*Ac&vity*in*the*Cell>Free*Screen*
120"

E"

D"

C"

B"
140"

0"
6"

FLUV&Cell5Free&Screen&
120"

G"

RABV cell-fre

3"

80"

0.1"

60"
40"

B"

C"

D"

E"

F"

0uM"

25uM"

10uM"

2.5uM"

0uM"

25uM"

10uM"

2.5uM"

0uM"

25uM"

10uM"

2.5uM"

0uM"

25uM"

10uM"

2.5uM"

0uM"

25uM"

10uM"

2.5uM"

0uM"

25uM"

10uM"

25uM"

10uM"

A"

2.5uM"

0"

0uM"

20"

2.5uM"

4"

Infec&ous*Virus*Log*Drop*at*10uM*

5"

RFUs,&%DMSO&Control&

100"

G"

Compound
Figure 2. FLUV drug screen, results, and validation. A.
of theLog*Drop*10uM
CFPSA
F" Schematic
A
0.5
phenotypic drug screen indicating steps and readouts. CFPSA
reactions
carried
out in
B
0.5
E"
C
0.75
C"
D"
384-well format (1) result in synthesis of A"encoded
FLUV proteins, with
co-expression
of
B"
D
0.75
E
1.2
eGFP to distinguish compounds that lower fluorescence readout due
to a trivial
effect
F
2.5
on protein synthesis (2). Assembled products are transferred to a capture
plate
(3),
G
>5/
which is coated with antibodies to the FLUV NP, capturing and immobilizing synthesized
FLUV proteins. As a function of multimerization, unoccupied epitopes will exist on
bound assembly intermediates and completed viral structures. Secondary antibodies
with fluorescent tags bind those exposed epitopes (4), generating a fluorescent readout
specific to multimeric assembly. Drug action that directly or indirectly block multimer
formation results in a diminution of signal (5). B. Summary of FLUV screen outcome. C.
Correlation between compound activity in CFPSA screen (x-axis) and activity against
infectious virus in cell culture (y-axis assessed by log drop in FLUV titer by TCID50). A-G
indicate compounds representing distinct FLUV-active chemotypes with < 70% similarity
by Tanimoto coefficient. Bottom panel shows the dose-dependent plots from the CFPSA
screen from which relative CFPSA activity was determined.
2"

1"

0"

39

RABV infectious vir

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics

Figure 3. PEDV pig efficacy trial. A. Study timeline and observations. B. Study results.
Graph on the left represents all animals in the study with percent survival shown in
green. As results with PAV-773 and PAV-835 were identical, they have been combined
(Fisher exact test p = 0.046). Graph on the right represents the subset of litters in which
all control animals (treated with vehicle only) died. C. Breakdown of survival for PAV773 and PAV-835 separately for both the total population and the severe disease
subset, where p = 0.002 and p = 0.004, respectively.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics

Figure 4. Pan-respiratory antiviral activity. A. Dose-dependent antiviral activity of two
assembly modulator chemotypes (PAV-431 and PAV-617) against SARS-CoV-2
determined by plaque assay in Vero E6 cells. B. Efficacy of PAV-431 against each
respiratory viral family in cell culture.

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics

Figure 5. eDRAC eluates from uninfected vs. FLUV and BoCoV infected MRC-5 cells.
A. Silver stain of starting extract and free drug eluates. Starting extract silver stains on
the left are 1/40th (2.5%) of the equivalent fraction of eDRAC eluate shown on the right.
B and C. Analysis of eDRAC eluate MS-MS findings for FLUV (B) and BoCoV (C).
Boxes shaded blue indicate proteins in our network found in immune system pathways.

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
Boxes shaded yellow indicate a hit for known FLUV or coronavirus interactors. Volcano
plots show enriched and depleted proteins characterizing the uninfected versus FLUV
or BoCoV infected eDRAC eluates; gene names of proteins with significant (adjusted pvalue < 0.05) log2 fold change from the other condition are displayed. D. Substantial
restoration of proteins to the uninfected state upon drug treatment. Significant (> 1 log2
fold) increase from uninfected LFQ value is show in green, statistically the same LFQ
intensity as uninfected is shown in yellow, and significant (> 1 log2 fold) decrease from
uninfected is shown in red.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
A

U

I-CoV/818

I-CoV 72hr

I-Flu 72hr

U

Col.272 W/431 pre-sat
I-CoV/818

I-CoV 72hr

I-Flu 72hr

U

PSMW

Col.272
I-CoV/818

I-CoV 72hr

I-Flu 72hr

Inputs
0.1mg/ml

B

BoCoV+
FLUV. BoCoV PAV-818

C
1
PAV-431
competition

D
2

3

-

+

1

2

3

4

140
100

VCP/p97

70

100kDa 5

70kDa -

6

7

8

70
SQSTM1/p62
50

50kDa 9

10

11

140140
100 100
CAPN2

25kDa -

260

12

40kDa -

13

14

15

70

70

50

50

16

14-3-3

Figure 6. Significance of key proteins in the eDRAC eluate. A. MRC-5 cells or HRT-18G cells
either uninfected (U), or infected with FLUV or BoCoV, or infected and subsequently treated
with PAV-431 or PAV-818, were extracted with PB buffer, and the 10kxg/10min supernatant

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
adjusted to 1x CB and applied to PAV-431 resin according to the eDRAC protocol. Free drug
eluate was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and WB for SQSMT1/p62. Shown are quantified p62 bands
seen by WB for MRC-5 cells (above) and HRT18G cells (below), with the actual WB shown for
HRT18G below. Both FLUV and BoCoV infection resulted in a striking diminution of
SQSMT1/p62 in the eDRAC eluate. B. Comparison of protein components of eDRAC eluates
and host interactomes implicated in the lifecycles of FLUV and CoV, along with corresponding
databases that implicate proteins found by eDRAC in the PAV-431 resin eluate, in various
immune functions. SQSTM1/p62 is the only protein shown that was found by WB, all others by
MS-MS. Note that SQSTM1/p62, found by WB, is known to interact directly with three of the
proteins found in the eDRAC eluate by MS-MS. C. Lane 1 is a silver stain of the starting pig lung
eDRAC eluate that was subjected to photo-crosslinking with the PAV-431 diazarine and biotincontaining analog. Strepavidin blot of pig lung eDRAC eluate in the absence (-) and presence
(+) of free drug competitor followed by photocrosslinking as described. The presence of free
drug competitor should diminish the intensity of the crosslinked adduct(s). D. co-IP under native
vs denaturing conditions of crosslinked eDRAC eluate. Starting pig lung 10kxg supernatant was
blotted for VCP/p97 (lane 1). Uninfected pig lung 10kxg supernatant was applied to eDRAC
column, washed, and eluted with PAV-431crosslinker and blotted for VCP/p97 (lane 2). An
aliquot of the crosslinked products was adjusted to 1% SDS and 10mM DTT and heated at
100oC/10 minutes, then diluted 20x with column buffer containing 1% triton x-100 (denatured
sample). An equal sample was just diluted with column buffer containing 1% triton (native
sample). Streptavidin-sepharose was used to isolate crosslinked adducts from the native vs
denatured samples, and the washed beads analyzed by SDS-PAGE and WB with antisera to
VCP/p97 (lane 3, native and lane 4, denatured). WB was reprobed for SQSTM1/p62 (lane 5,
starting material, lane 6 cross-linked eDRAC eluate, lane 7 is isolated streptavidin Sepharose
bound material native, reprobed with antibody to SQSTM1/p62, lane 8 is isolated streptavidin
Sepharose bound material denatured, reprobed with antibody to SQSTM1/pt62. Another
identical set of samples was prepared and blotted instead for CAPN2. Total crosslinked
products, lane 9; native, lane 10, denatured, lane 11. Molecular weight markers are indicated in
lane 12. Another identical set of samples was prepared and blotted instead for 14-3-3. Starting
material, lane 13; total crosslinked products, lane 14; native, lane 15, denatured, lane 16. As
can be seen, of the four WBs shown only that for 14-3-3 has reactivity in the material
precipitated by streptavidin sepharose, indicating that 14-3-3 is a direct nearest neighbor protein
to the biotinylated drug analog with covalently attached biotin following crosslinking.

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics

Figure 7. Assembly modulator drug effects on FLUV and SARS-CoV-2 assembly by
CFPSA. A. CFPSA with FLUV or SARS-CoV-2 mRNAs as previously described for
Figure 1 were carried out in the presence of either vehicle alone (DMSO) or 10 µM
PAV-431 or backup chemotypes PAV-471 or PAV-617, and analyzed by ssg. Inset table
highlights the compound effects on SARS-CoV-2 by indicating the percent of total

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
SARS-Cov-2 M protein found in ssg fractions 3 and 4 vs. fraction 9. B. Iodixanol
gradient (idxg) analysis of FLUV ssg fractions 10 and 11, showing a dose-dependent
change from the density of 1.218 g/mL observed for assembly to material that migrates
at both higher and lower densities upon compound treatment.

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics

Figure 8. Cartoon summarizing our working hypothesis on assembly modulation
therapeutics. Normal assembly machines are transiently coming together to carry out
various events that comprise the molecular basis of homeostasis, and then falling apart
or being remodeled for other functions (not shown). Certain insults, including viral
infection, are able to disturb assembly machine composition. Viruses have evolved to
facilitate the changes in assembly machines that meet their needs. This causes
formation of an aberrant assembly machine that does something it is not supposed to
do (e.g. building a viral capsid) and perhaps fails to do something it is supposed to do
(e.g. inform innate immunity that the cell is under viral attack). The former action is
reflected as viral propagation and the latter action is reflected in the failure of
autophagic innate immune defense. Both consequences manifest as disease.
Treatment with PAV-431 and other assembly modulators results in normalizing of the
assembly machine drug target, substantially for FLUV and dramatically for BoCoV. The
latter may reflect the direct pathway back to the normal assembly machine (A), while
the former may reflect a more circuitous route, perhaps involving autophagy and
synthesis of new assembly machines (B).

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics
Tables

compound

R1

R2

R3

R4

R5

R6

R7

EC90 (µM)

PAV-868

Me

t-Bu

H

OMe

OMe

OMe

H

>3

PAV-858

Me

t-Bu

H

OMe

H

OMe

OMe

>3

PAV-772

Me

t-Bu

H

OMe

F

H

F

3

PAV-736

CH2CH2OH

t-Bu

H

OMe

OMe

H

H

>3

PAV-869

Me

t-Bu

H

OPr

OMe

H

H

>3

PAV-773

Me

t-Bu

H

OMe

OMe

H

H

1.25

PAV-1866

Me

t-Bu

Me

OMe

OMe

H

H

>3

PAV-834

Me

Me

H

OMe

OMe

H

H

3

PAV-854

Me

Cy-hex

H

OMe

OMe

H

H

>1

PAV-530

Me

iPr

H

OMe

OMe

H

H

1

PAV-835

Me

cyPr

H

OMe

OMe

H

H

1

Table 1. Medicinal chemistry of early compounds culminating in compounds PAV-773
and PAV-835. Activity data shown is for FLUV.

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.17.426875; this version posted January 18, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Host-targeted Pan-respiratory Antiviral Therapeutics

compound

R4

R5

R6

R7

R8

EC90 (µM)

PAV-895

OMe

Me

H

H

H

2

PAV-039

OMe

OMe

H

H

F

1

PAV-896

Me

OMe

H

H

H

1.5

PAV-700

Cl

OMe

H

H

H

2

PAV-235

F

OMe

H

H

H

0.2

PAV-944

OMe

CF3

H

H

H

0.2

PAV-901

CF3

OMe

H

H

H

0.3

PAV-671

H

Cl

OCF3

H

H

0.05

PAV-774

Cl

OCF3

H

H

H

0.2

PAV-431

OMe

OCF3

H

H

H

< 0.1

PAV-528

OCHF2

OCHF2

H

H

H

< 0.1

PAV-877

H

Me

OCHF2

Me

H

>2

Table 2. Early advanced compounds culminating in PAV-431 whose synthetic scheme
is shown in Supplementary Figure 1. Activity data shown is for FLUV.

50

