bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein is dynamic, disordered, and
phase separates with RNA
Jasmine Cubuk​1,2​, Jhullian J. Alston​1,2​, ​J. Jeremías Incicco​1,2 , ​Sukrit Singh​1,2​, Melissa D.
Stuchell-Brereton​1,2​, Michael D. Ward​1,2​, Maxwell I. Zimmerman​1,2​, Neha Vithani​1,2​, Daniel
Griffith​1,2​, Jason A. Wagoner​3​, Gregory R. Bowman​1,2​, Kathleen B. Hall​1​, Andrea Soranno​1,2​*,
Alex S. Holehouse​1,2​*
1​

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics​, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S.
Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA
2​
Center for Science and Engineering of Living Systems (CSELS)​, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis,
MO 63130, USA
3​
Laufer Center for Physical and Quantitative Biology​, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794

Correspondence​: ​soranno@wustl.edu​, ​alex.holehouse@wustl.edu
Abstract:
The SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein is an abundant RNA binding protein critical for viral
genome packaging, yet the molecular details that underlie this process are poorly understood.
Here we combine single-molecule spectroscopy with all-atom simulations to uncover the
molecular details that contribute to N protein function. N protein contains three dynamic
disordered regions that house putative transiently-helical binding motifs. The two folded
domains interact minimally such that full-length N protein is a flexible and multivalent RNA
binding protein. N protein also undergoes liquid-liquid phase separation when mixed with RNA,
and polymer theory predicts that the same multivalent interactions that drive phase separation
also engender RNA compaction. We offer a simple symmetry-breaking model that provides a
plausible route through which single-genome condensation preferentially occurs over phase
separation, suggesting that phase separation offers a convenient macroscopic readout of a key
nanoscopic interaction.

Introduction
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is an enveloped,
positive-strand RNA virus that causes the disease COVID-19 (Coronavirus Disease-2019) 1​​ .
While coronaviruses typically cause relatively mild respiratory diseases, COVID-19 is on course
to kill 1.6 million people since its emergence in late 2019 1–3​
​ . While recent progress in vaccine
development has been remarkable, the emergence of novel coronavirus in human populations
represents a continuing threat​4​. As a result, therapeutic approaches that address fundamental
and general viral mechanisms will offer a key route for first-line intervention against future
pandemics.
A challenge in identifying candidate drugs is our relatively sparse understanding of the
molecular details that underlie the function of SARS-CoV-2 proteins. As a result, there is a
surge of biochemical and biophysical exploration of these proteins, with the ultimate goal of
Page 1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

identifying proteins that are suitable targets for disruption, ideally with insight into the molecular
details of how disruption could be achieved 5,6​
​ .
While much attention has been focused on the Spike (S) protein, many other
SARS-CoV-2 proteins play equally critical roles in viral physiology, yet we know relatively little
about their structural or biophysical properties 7–10​
​ . Here we performed a high-resolution
structural and biophysical characterization of the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein, the
protein responsible for genome packaging 11,12​
​
. A large fraction of N protein is predicted to be
intrinsically disordered, which constitutes a major barrier to conventional structural
characterization 13​
​ . To overcome these limitations, we combined single-molecule spectroscopy
with all-atom simulations to build a residue-by-residue description of all three disordered regions
in the context of their folded domains. The combination of single-molecule spectroscopy and
simulations to reconstruct structural ensembles has been applied extensively to uncover key
molecular details underlying disordered protein regions 14–19​
​
. Our goal here is to provide
biophysical and structural insights into the physical basis of N protein function.
In exploring the molecular properties of N protein, we discovered it undergoes phase
separation with RNA, as was also reported recently ​20–27​. Given N protein underlies viral
packaging, we reasoned phase separation may in fact be an unavoidable epiphenomenon that
reflects physical properties necessary to drive compaction of long RNA molecules. To explore
this principle further, we developed a simple physical model, which suggested symmetry
breaking through a small number of high-affinity binding sites can organize anisotropic
multivalent interactions to drive single-polymer compaction, as opposed to multi-polymer phase
separation. Irrespective of its physiological role, our results suggest that phase separation
provides a macroscopic readout (visible droplets) of a nanoscopic process (protein:RNA and
protein:protein interaction). In the context of SARS-CoV-2, those interactions are expected to be
key for viral packaging, such that assays which monitor phase separation of N protein with RNA
may offer a convenient route to identify compounds that will also attenuate viral assembly.

Results
Coronavirus nucleocapsid proteins are multi-domain RNA binding proteins that play a
critical role in many aspects of the viral life cycle 12,28​
​
. The SARS-CoV-2 N protein shares
substantial sequence conservation with other coronavirus nucleocapsid proteins (​Fig. S1-5​).
Work on N protein from a range of model coronaviruses has shown that N protein undergoes
both self-association, interaction with other proteins, and interaction with RNA, all in a highly
multivalent manner.

Page 2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1: Sequence and structural summary of N protein
A ​Domain architecture of the SARS-CoV-2 N protein with disorder prediction performed using IUPred2A
29​
. Dye positions used in this study are annotated across the top, disorder prediction calculated across the
bottom. ​The specific positions were selected such that fluorophores are sufficiently close to be in the
dynamic range of FRET measurements. Labeling was achieved using cysteine mutations and
thiol-maleimide chemistry.
B ​Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA binding domain (RBD) (PDB: 6yi3). Center and left: coloured based
on surface potential calculated with the Adaptive Poisson Boltzmann Method 30​
​ , revealing the highly basic
surface of the RBD. Right: ribbon structure with N- and C-termini highlighted.
C ​Dimer structure of the SARS-CoV-2 dimerization domain (PDB: 6yun). Center and left: coloured based
on surface potential, revealing the highly basic surface. Right: ribbon structure with N- and C-termini
highlighted.

The SARS-CoV-2 N protein can be divided into five domains; a predicted intrinsically
disordered N-terminal domain (NTD), an RNA binding domain (RBD), a predicted disordered
central linker (LINK), a dimerization domain, and a predicted disordered C-terminal domain
(CTD) (​Fig. 1A-C​). While SARS-CoV-2 is a novel coronavirus, decades of work on model
coronaviruses (including SARS coronavirus) have revealed a number of features expected to
hold true in the SARS-CoV-2 N protein. Notably, all five domains are predicted to bind RNA 31–37​
​
,
and while the dimerization domain facilitates the formation of well-defined stoichiometric dimers,
RNA-independent higher-order oligomerization is also expected to occur 36,38–40​
​
. Importantly,

Page 3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

protein-protein and protein-RNA interaction sites have been mapped to all three disordered
regions.
Despite recent structures of the RBD (​Fig. 1B​) and dimerization domains (​Fig. 1C​) from
SARS-CoV-2, the solution-state conformational behavior of the full-length protein remains
elusive 41–43​
​
. Understanding N protein function necessitates a mechanistic understanding of the
flexible predicted disordered regions and their interplay with the folded domains. A recent
small-angle X-ray study shows good agreement with previous work on SARS, suggesting the
LINK is relatively extended, but neither the structural basis for this extension nor the underlying
dynamics are known 31,44​
​
.
Here, we address these questions by probing three full-length constructs of the N protein
with fluorescent labels (Alexa 488 and 594) flanking the NTD, the ​LINK​, and the CTD (see ​Fig.
1A​). These constructs allow us to quantify conformations and dynamics of the disordered
regions in the context of the full-length protein using single-molecule Förster Resonance Energy
Transfer (FRET) and Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy (FCS) (see SI for details). We also
investigated the stability of the RBD and truncated variants of the protein to test the role of long
range interactions on the disordered regions (see ​SI and ​Table S1​). In parallel to the
experiments, we performed all-atom Monte Carlo simulations of each of the three IDRs in
isolation and in context with their adjacent folded domains.
The NTD is disordered, flexible, and transiently interacts with the RBD
We started our analysis by investigating the NTD conformations. Under native conditions,
single-molecule FRET measurements revealed the occurrence of a single population with a
mean transfer efficiency of 0.65 ± 0.03 (​Fig. 2A ​and Fig. S6​). To assess whether this transfer
efficiency reports about a rigid distance (e.g. structure formation or persistent interaction with
the RBD) or is a dynamic average across multiple conformations, we first compare the lifetime
of the fluorophores with transfer efficiency. Under native conditions, the donor and acceptor
lifetimes for the NTD construct lie on the line that represents fast conformational dynamics (​Fig.
S7A​). To properly quantify the timescale associated with these fast structural rearrangements,
we leveraged nanoseconds FCS. As expected for a dynamic population 45,46​
​
, the
cross-correlation of acceptor-donor photons for the NTD is anticorrelated (​Fig. 2B and S12​). A
global fit of the donor-donor, acceptor-acceptor, and acceptor-donor correlations yields a
reconfiguration time τ r =
170 ± 30 ns. This is longer than reconfiguration times observed for
​
other proteins with a similar persistence length and charge content 46–49​
​
, hinting at a large
contribution from internal friction due to rapid intramolecular contacts (formed either within the
NTD or with the RBD) or transient formation of short structural motifs 50​
​ . ​A conversion from
transfer efficiency to chain dimensions can be obtained by assuming the distribution of
distances computed from polymer models. Assuming a Gaussian chain distribution yields a
root mean square distance between the fluorophores r​1-68 of 48 ± 2 Å. When using the
recently proposed self-avoiding walk (SAW) model (Zheng et al., 2018) (see ​SI​), we
compute a value of r​1-68 47 ± 2 Å. This corresponds to values of persistence length (see SI)

Page 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

equal to 4.5 ± 0.4 Å and 4.3 ± 0.4 Å for the Gaussian and SAW distribution, respectively,
which are similar to values reported for another unfolded protein under native conditions
46–48,51​
. Overall, these results confirm the NTD is disordered, as predicted by sequence
analysis.
We next examined the interaction of the NTD with other domains in the protein. We
studied a ​truncated N protein variant that contains only the NTD and RBD domains
(NTD-RBD) and samples identical labeling positions. The root-mean-square distance r​1-68 is
46 ± 2 Å for both the Gaussian and SAW models, within errors from the NTD-FL values,
suggesting that there is no or limited interaction between the NTD and the LINKER, DIMER
and CTD domains (see Fig. ​S8 and Table ​S2​). We then assessed the role of the folded RBD
and its influence on the conformations of the NTD by studying the effect of a chemical
denaturant on the protein. The titration with guanidinium chloride (GdmCl) reveals a decrease of
transfer efficiencies when moving from native buffer conditions to 1 M GdmCl, followed by a
plateau of the transfer efficiencies at concentrations between 1 M and 2 M and a subsequent
further decrease at higher concentrations (​Fig. S6 and ​S8​). This behavior can be understood
assuming that the plateau between 1 M and 2 M GdmCl represents the average of transfer
efficiencies between two populations in equilibrium that have very close transfer efficiency and
are not completely resolved because of shot noise. We interpret these two populations as the
contribution of the folding and unfolding fraction of the RBD domain on the distances probed by
the NTD-FL construct, which includes a labeling position within the folded RBD. Indeed, this
interpretation is supported by a broadening in the transfer efficiency peak between 1 M and 2 M
GdmCl. Besides the effect of the unfolding of the RBD, the dimensions of the NTD FL are also
modulated by change in the solvent quality when adding denaturant ​(Fig. 2C ​and ​Fig. S6, S8)
and this contribution to the expansion of the chain can be described using an empirical binding
model 52–56​
​
. A fit of the interdye root-mean-square distances to this model and the inferred
stability of the RBD domain (midpoint: 1.3 ± 0.2 M; ΔG0 = (5 ± 1) kcal mol​-1​) are presented in
Fig. 2C. A comparative fit of the histograms assuming two overlapping populations yields a
consistent result in terms of RBD stability and protein conformations (​Fig. S9​). To confirm the
inferred RBD stability results, we directly interrogated the RBD domain by measuring a
full-length construct with labels in position 68 and 172, which flanks the folded RBD structure
(see section ​RBD folding ​in ​SI​). Though the denaturation of the RBD reveals coexistence of up
to three populations, which we identify as an unfolded, an intermediate, and a folded state, the
range of the folding transition is compatible with the estimates made using the NTD constructs
(midpoint: 1.68 ± 0.02 M, see ​Fig. S9​ and ​Table S5​).

To better understand the sequence-dependent conformational behavior of the NTD we
turned to all-atom simulations of an NTD-RBD construct. We used a novel sequential sampling
approach that integrates long timescale MD simulations performed using the Folding@home
distributed computing platform with all-atom Monte Carlo simulation performed with the

Page 5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ABSINTH forcefield to generate an ensemble of almost 400,000 distinct conformations (see
methods) 57–59​
​
. We also performed simulations of the NTD in isolation.
We observed good agreement between simulation and experiment for the equivalent
inter-residue distance (​Fig. 2D​). The peaks on the left side of the histogram reflect specific
simulations where the NTD engages more extensively with the RBD through a fuzzy interaction,
leading to local kinetic traps 60​
​ . We also identified several regions in the NTD where transient
helices form, and using normalized distance maps found regions of transient attractive and
repulsive interaction between the NTD and the RBD (​Fig. 2E​). In particular, the basic
beta-strand extension from the RBD (​Fig. 1B​) repels the arginine-rich C-terminal region of the
NTD, while a phenylalanine residue (F17) in the NTD engages with a hydrophobic face on the
RBD (​Fig. 2G​). Finally, we noticed the arginine-rich C-terminal residues (residues 31 - 38) form
a transient alpha helix projecting three of the four arginines in the same direction (​Fig. 2F, 2H​).
These features provide molecular insight into previously reported functional observations (see
Discussion).

Figure 2 : The N-terminal domain (NTD​ FL​) is disordered with residual helical motifs

Page 6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A ​Histogram of the transfer efficiency distribution measured across the labeling positions 1 and 68 in the
context of the full-length protein, under aqueous buffer conditions (50 mM Tris buffer).
B Donor-acceptor cross-correlation measured by ns-FCS (see SI​). The observed anticorrelated rise is the
characteristic signature of FRET dynamics and the timescale associated is directly related to the
reconfiguration time of the probed segment.
C Interdye distance as extracted from single-molecule FRET experiments across different concentrations
using a Gaussian chain distribution, examining residues 1-68 in the context of the full-length protein. The
full line represents a fit to the model in ​Eq. S7​, which accounts for denaturant binding (see ​Table S1​) and
unfolding of the folded RBD. The dashed line represents the estimate of folded RBD across different
denaturant concentrations based on ​Eq. S8​.
D ​All-atom simulations of the NTD in the context of RBD reveal good agreement with smFRET-derived
average distances. The peaks on the left shoulder of the histogram are due to persistent NTD-RBD
interactions in a small subset of simulations.
E ​Normalized distance maps (scaling maps) quantify heterogeneous interaction between every pair of
residues in terms of average distance normalized by distance expected for the same system if the IDR
had no attractive interactions (the “excluded volume” limit 61​
​ ). Both repulsive (yellow) and attractive (blue)
regions are observed for NTD-RBD interactions.
F Transient helicity (residues 5-11 and 21-39) in the NTD in isolation or in the context of the RBD. Perfect
profile overlap suggests interaction between the NTD and the RBD does not lead to a loss of helicity.
G ​Projection of normalized distances onto the folded domain reveals repulsion is through electrostatic
interaction (positively charged NTD is repelled by the positive face of the RBD, which is proposed to
engage in RNA binding) while attractive interactions are between positive, aromatic, and polar residues in
the NTD and a slightly negative and hydrophobic surface on the RBD (see ​Fig. 1B​, center).
H​ The C-terminal half of transient helicity in H2 encodes an arginine-rich surface.

The linker is highly dynamic and there is minimal interaction between the RBD and the
dimerization domain
We next turned to the linker (LINK FL) construct to investigate how the disordered region
modulates the interaction and dynamics between the two folded domains. Under aqueous buffer
conditions, single-molecule FRET reveals the coexistence of two overlapping populations with
mean transfer efficiencies of 0.55 ± 0.03 and 0.75 ± 0.03, respectively (​Fig. 3A​). A small change
in ionic strength of the solution is sufficient to alter the equilibrium between these two
populations and favor the low transfer efficiency state (see ​inset ​Fig. 3C​). Comparison of the
fluorescence lifetimes and transfer efficiencies indicates that, like the NTD, the transfer
efficiencies represent dynamic conformational ensembles sampled by the LINK (Fig. ​S7A​).
ns-FCS confirms fast dynamics across the measured distribution of transfer efficiencies, with a
characteristic reconfiguration time τ r of 120 ± 20 ns (​Fig. 3B ​and ​S12​). This reconfiguration
time is compatible with high internal friction effects, as observed for other unstructured proteins
46,47​
, but may also account for the drag of the surrounding domains. The root-mean-square
interdye distance corresponding to the low transfer efficiency population r​172-245 is
equal to 55 ± 2
​
Å ( lp = 5.4 ± 0.4 Å ) when assuming a Gaussian chain distribution and 54 ± 2 Å ( lp = 5.2 ± 0.4
Å) when using a SAW model (see SI). The one corresponding to the high transfer efficiency
population is equal to 42 ± 2 Å when assuming a Gaussian Chain distribution or 45 ± 2 Å using
the SAW model (with a corresponding lp = 3.2 ± 0.3 Å and lp = 3.6 ± 0.3 Å, respectively) (see
SI​).
Page 7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Next, we addressed whether the LINK segment populates elements of persistent
secondary structure or forms stable interaction with the RBD or dimerization domains. Addition
of denaturant leads to the rapid loss of the high transfer efficiency population and a continuous
shift of the remaining population toward lower transfer efficiencies (​Fig. S6,S8)​ . These results
correspond to an almost linear expansion of the chain in response to denaturant (see​ Fig. 3C​).
To better understand the nature of the two populations and the reason behind this weak
dependence of the linker expansion on denaturant, we investigated the same labeling positions
in absence of the DIMER and CTD domains (LINK ΔDIMER) (​Table S1​). smFRET
measurements of this truncated version revealed a single population that undergoes a strong
compaction with decreasing GdmCl concentration (​Fig. S6, S8​). Interestingly the transfer
efficiency measured in aqueous buffer is equivalent to the one reported by the high transfer
efficiency population of the LINK FL construct. The electrostatic nature of this compaction is
clearly revealed by titrating a polar non ionic denaturant (Urea) and observing that the chain
remains largely compact and recovers the same dimensions measured in GdmCl only when
adding salt to the solution (​Fig. S10​). Overall, the LINK ΔDIMER observations lead us to
speculate that the LINK domain can either self-interact or interact with the RBD domain,
whereas addition of the DIMER and CTD domains restricts these configurations and largely
favor more expanded states with the exceptions of very low ionic strength conditions. To further
explore the configurations of the LINK, we turned again to Monte Carlo simulations.
As with the NTD, all-atom Monte Carlo simulations provide atomistic insight that can be
compared with our spectroscopic results. Given the size of the system an alternative sampling
strategy to the NTD-RBD construct was pursued here that did not include MD simulations of the
folded domains, but we instead ran simulations of a construct that included the RBD, LINK and
dimerization domain. In addition, we also performed simulations of the LINK in isolation.
We again found good agreement between simulations and experiment (​Fig. 3D​). The
root mean square inter-residue distance for the low transfer efficiency population (between
simulated positions 172 and 245) is 59.1 Å, which is within the experimental error of the
single-molecule observations. Normalized distance map shows a number of regions of
repulsion, notably that the RBD repels the N-terminal part of the LINK and the dimerization
domain repels the C-terminal part of the LINK (​Fig. 3E​). We tentatively suggest this may reflect
sequence properties chosen to prevent aberrant interactions between the LINK and the two
folded domains. In the LINK-only simulations we identified two regions that form transient
helices at low populations (20-25%), although these are much less prominent in the context of
the full-length protein (​Fig. 3F)​. These two helices encompass a serine-arginine (SR) rich region
known to mediate both protein-protein and protein-RNA interaction. Helix H3 formation leads to
the alignment of three arginine residues along one face of the helix. The second helix (H4) is a
leucine/alanine-rich hydrophobic helix which may contribute to oligomerization, or act as a
helical recognition motif for other protein interactions (notably as a nuclear export signal for
Crm1, see ​Discussion)​ .
Page 8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3: The RNA binding domain (RBD) and dimerization domains are interconnected
by a flexible disordered linker (LINK)
A ​Histogram of the transfer efficiency distribution measured across the labeling positions 172 and 245 in
the context of the full-length protein, under aqueous buffer conditions.
B Donor-acceptor cross-correlation measured by ns-FCS (see SI). The observed anticorrelated rise is the
characteristic signature of FRET dynamics and the timescale associated is directly related to the
reconfiguration time of the probed segment.
C Interdye distance as extracted from single-molecule FRET experiments across different denaturant
concentrations. The full line represents a fit to the model in ​Eq. S6​, which accounts for denaturant
binding. Inset provides an estimate of the fraction of each population in the low GdmCl concentration
regime.
D ​Inter-residue distance distributions calculated from simulations (histogram) show good agreement with
distances inferred from single-molecule FRET measurements (green bar).
E Scaling maps reveal repulsive interactions between the N- and C-terminal regions of the LINK with the
adjacent folded domains. We also observe relatively extensive intra-LINK interactions around helix H4
(see ​Fig. 3F​).
F Two transient helices are observed in the linker (residues 177-194 and 216-227). The N-terminal helix
H3 overlaps with part of the SR-region and orientates three arginine residues in the same direction,
analogous to b
​ ehavior observed for H2 in the NTD. The C-terminal helix H4 overlaps with a Leu/Ala rich
motif which we believe is a conserved nuclear export signal (see Discussion).

The CTD engages in transient but non-negligible interactions with the dimerization
domain
Finally, we again applied single-molecule FRET (​Fig. 4A​) and nsFCS (​Fig. 4B​) to
understand the conformational behavior of the CTD FL construct. Single-molecule FRET
experiments again reveal a single population with a mean transfer efficiency of 0.59 ± 0.03 (​Fig.
4A​) and the denaturant dependence follows the expected trend for a disordered region, with a
shift of the transfer efficiency toward lower values (​Fig. 4C​, and ​Fig. S6 ​and ​S8​), from 0.59 to
Page 9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0.35. Interestingly, when studying the denaturant dependence of the protein, we noticed that the
width of the distribution increases while moving toward aqueous buffer conditions. This
suggests that the protein may form transient contacts or adopt local structure. Comparison with
a truncated variant that contains only the CTD (​Fig. S8​) reveals a very similar distribution, with
almost identical mean transfer efficiency, but a narrower width (​Fig. S6),​ suggesting that part of
the broadening is due to interactions with the neighbouring domains.
To further investigate putative interaction between the CTD and neighbouring domains,
we turned to the investigation of protein dynamics. Though the comparison of the fluorophore
lifetimes against transfer efficiency (​Fig. S7A​) appears to support a dynamic nature underlying
the CTD FL population, nsFCS reveals a flat acceptor-donor cross-correlation on the
nanosecond timescale (​Fig. 4B​). However, inspection of the donor-donor and acceptor-acceptor
autocorrelations reveal a correlated decay. This is different from that expected for a completely
static system such as polyprolines 62​
​ , where the donor-donor and acceptor-acceptor
autocorrelation are also flat. An increase in the autocorrelations can be observed for static
quenching of the dyes with aromatic residues. Interestingly, donor dye quenching can also
contribute to a positive amplitude in the donor-acceptor correlation 63,64​
​
. Therefore, a plausible
interpretation of the flat cross-correlation data is that we are observing two populations in
equilibrium whose correlations (one anticorrelated, reflecting conformational dynamics, and one
correlated, reflecting quenching due contact formation) compensate each other.
To further investigate the possibility of two coexisting populations, we performed ns-FCS
at increasing GdmCl concentrations. These experiments revealed a progressive increase of the
anticorrelated amplitude in the cross-correlation, consistent with an increase of the dynamic
population. Moreover, we also observed a simultaneous decrease in the overall donor-donor
auto-correlation amplitude, consistent with a decrease in the quenched population (​Fig. S12​).
Taken together, these results support our hypothesis that there are at least two distinct species
existing in equilibrium. By analyzing the dynamic species between 0.16 and 0.6 M GdmCl, we
quantified an average reconfiguration time ( τ r ) of 64 ± 7 ns for the dynamic population in the
CTD. Under the assumption that the mean transfer efficiency still originates (at least partially)
from a dynamic distribution, the estimate of the inter-residue root-mean-square distance is
r​363-419 = 51 ± 2 Å ( lp = 6.1 ± 0.5 Å) for a Gaussian chain distribution and r​363-419 = 48 ± 1 Å ( lp =
5.4 ± 0.4 Å) for the SAW model (see SI). However, some caution should be used when
interpreting these numbers since we know there is some contribution from fluorophore static
quenching, which may in turn contribute to an underestimate of the effective transfer efficiency
65​
.
We again obtained good agreement between all-atom Monte Carlo simulations and
experiment (​Fig. 4D​). Scaling maps reveal extensive intramolecular interaction by the residues
that make up H6, both in terms of local intra-IDR interactions and interaction with the
dimerization domain (​Fig. 4E​). We identified two transient helices, one (H5) is minimally
populated but the second (H6) is more highly populated in the IDR-only simulation and still
present at ~20% in the folded state simulations (​Fig. 4F​). The difference reflects the fact that
several of the helix-forming residues interact with the dimerization domain, leading to a
competition between helix formation and intramolecular interaction. Mapping normalized
Page 10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

distances onto the folded structure reveals that interactions occur primarily with the N-terminal
portion of the dimerization domain (​Fig. 4G​). As with the LINK and the NTD, a positively
charged set of residues immediately adjacent to the folded domain in the CTD drive repulsion
between this region and the dimerization domain. H6 is the most robust helix observed across
all three IDRs, and is a perfect amphipathic helix with a hydrophobic surface on one side and
charged/polar residues on the other (​Fig. 4H​). The cluster of hydrophobic residues in H6
engage in intramolecular contacts and offer a likely physical explanation for the complex nsFCS
data in aqueous buffer.

Figure 4: The C-terminal domain (CTD) is disordered, engages in transient interaction
with the dimerization domain, and contains a putative helical binding motif
A ​Histogram of the transfer efficiency distribution measured across the labeling positions 363 and 419 in
the context of the full-length protein, under aqueous buffer conditions
B Donor-acceptor cross-correlation measured by ns-FCS (see SI). The flat correlation indicates a lack of
dynamics in the studied timescale or the coexistence of two populations in equilibrium whose correlations
(one correlated and the other anticorrelated) compensate each other.
C Interdye distance as extracted from single-molecule FRET experiments across different denaturant
concentrations. The full line represents a fit to the model in ​Eq. S6​, which accounts for denaturant
binding.

Page 11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

D ​Inter-residue distance distributions calculated from simulations (histogram) show good agreement with
distances inferred from single-molecule FRET measurements (purple bar).
E ​Normalized contacts maps describe the average inter-residue distance between each pair of residues,
normalized by the distance expected if the CTD behaved as a self-avoiding random coil. H6 engages in
extensive intra-CTD interactions and also interacts with the dimerization domain. We observe repulsion
between the dimerization domain and the N-terminal region of the CTD.
F ​Two transient helices (H5 and H6) are observed in the CTD (residues 383-396 and 402-415). Both
show a reduction in population in the presence of the dimerization domain at least in part because the
same sets of residues engage in transient interactions with the dimerization domain.
G The normalized distances are projected onto the surface to map CTD-dimerization interaction. The
helical region drives intra-molecular interaction, predominantly with the N-terminal side of the dimerization
domain.
H ​Helix H6 is an amphipathic helix with a polar/charged surface (left) and a hydrophobic surface (right).

N protein undergoes phase separation with RNA
Over the last decade, biomolecular condensates formed through phase separation have
emerged as a new mode of cellular organization 66–69​
​
. Many of the proteins that have been
shown to drive phase separation ​in vitro are RNA binding proteins with intrinsically disordered
regions 66,70​
​
. Moreover, multivalency is the key molecular feature that determines if a
biomolecule can undergo higher-order assembly 71​
​ . Having characterized N protein to reveal
three IDRs with distinct binding sites for both protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions it
became clear that N protein poses all of the features consistent with a protein that may undergo
phase separation. With these results in hand, we anticipated that N protein would undergo
phase separation with RNA 72–74​
​
.
In line with this expectation, we observed robust droplet formation with homopolymeric
RNA (​Fig. 5A-B​) under aqueous buffer conditions, both at 50 mM Tris and at a higher salt
concentration of 50 mM NaCl. Turbidity assays at different concentrations of protein and
poly(rU) (200-250 nucleotides) demonstrate the classical reentrant phase behavior expected for
a system undergoing heterotypic interaction (​Fig. 5C-D​). It is to be noted that turbidity
experiments do not exhaustively cover all the conditions for phase separation and are only
indicative of the low-boundary concentration regime explored in the current experiments. In
particular, turbidity experiments do not provide a measurement of tie-lines, though they are
inherently a reflection of the free energy and chemical potential of the solution mixture 75​
​ .
Interestingly, phase separation occurs at relatively low concentrations, in the low μM range,
which are compatible with physiological concentration of the protein and nucleic acids. Though
increasing salt concentration results in an upshift of the phase boundaries, one has to consider
that in a cellular environment this effect might be counteracted by cellular crowding.
One peculiar characteristic of our measured phase-diagram is the narrow regime of
conditions in which we observe phase separation of nonspecific RNA at a fixed concentration of
protein. This leads us to hypothesize that the protein may have evolved to maintain a tight
control of concentrations at which phase separation can (or cannot) occur. Interestingly, when
rescaling the turbidity curves as a ratio between protein and RNA, we find all the curve maxima
aligning at a similar stoichiometry, approximately 20 nucleotides per protein in absence of

Page 12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

added salt and 30 nucleotides when adding 50 mM NaCl (​Fig. S13​). These ratios are in line
with the charge neutralization criterion proposed by Banerjee ​et al.​, since the estimated net
charge of the protein at pH 7.4 is +24 76​
​ . Finally, given we observed phase separation with
poly(rU), the behavior we are observing is likely driven by relatively nonspecific protein:RNA
interactions. In agreement, work from a number of other groups has also established this
phenomenon across a range of solution conditions and RNA types 20–27​
​
.
Having established phase separation through a number of assays, we wondered what -if
any- physiological relevance this may have for the normal biology of SARS-CoV-2.

Figure 5: Nucleocapsid protein undergoes phase separation with RNA
A-B. Appearance of solution turbidity upon mixing was monitored to determine the concentration regime
in which N protein and poly(rU) undergo phase separation. Representative turbidity titrations with poly(rU)
in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5 (HCl) at room temperature, in absence of added salt (A) and in presence of 50 mM
NaCl (B), at the indicated concentrations of N protein. Points and error bars represent the mean and
standard deviation of 2-4 consecutive measurements from the same sample. Solid lines are simulations
of an empirical equation fitted individually to each titration curve (see SI). An inset is provided for the

Page 13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

titration at 3.1 μM N protein in 50 mM NaCl to show the small yet detectable change in turbidity on a
different scale.
C-D. ​Projection of phase boundaries for poly(rU) and N protein mixtures highlights a re-entrant behavior,
as expected for phase-separations induced by heterotypic interactions. Turbidity contour lines are
computed from a global fit of all titration curves (see SI).
Insets: confocal fluorescence images of droplets doped with fluorescently labeled N protein. Total
concentrations are 22 μM N protein, 0.5 nM labeled N protein and 0.54 mM nt. poly(rU). At higher salt
concentration, a lower concentration of protein in the droplet is detected.

A simple polymer model shows symmetry-breaking can facilitate multiple metastable
single-polymer condensates instead of a single multi-polymer condensate
Why might phase separation of N protein with RNA be advantageous to SARS-CoV-2?
One possible model is that large, micron-sized cytoplasmic condensates of N protein with RNA
form through phase separation and play a role in genome packaging. These condensates may
act as molecular factories that help concentrate the components for pre-capsid assembly
(where we define a pre-capsid here simply as a species that contains a single copy of the
genome with multiple copies of the associated N protein), a model that has been proposed in
other viruses 77​
​ .
However, given that phase separation is unavoidable when high concentrations of
multivalent species are combined, we propose that an alternative interpretation of our data is
that in this context, phase separation is simply an inevitable epiphenomenon that reflects the
inherent multi-valency of the N protein for itself and for RNA. This poses questions about the
origin of specificity for viral genomic RNA (gRNA), and, of focus in our study, how phase
separation might relate to a single genome packaging through RNA compaction.
Given the expectation of a single genome per virion, we reasoned SARS-CoV-2 may
have evolved a mechanism to limit phase separation with gRNA (i.e. to avoid multi-genome
condensates), with a preference instead for single-genome packaging (single-genome
condensates). This mechanism may exist in competition with the intrinsic phase separation of
the N protein with other nonspecific RNAs (nsRNA).
One possible way to limit phase separation between two components (e.g. gRNA/nsRNA
and N protein) is to ensure the levels of these components are held at a sufficiently low total
concentration such that the phase boundary is never crossed. While possible, such a regulatory
mechanism is at the mercy of extrinsic factors that may substantially modulate the saturation
concentration 78–80​
​
. Furthermore, not only must phase separation be prevented, but gRNA
compaction should also be promoted through the binding of N protein. In this scenario, the
affinity between gRNA and N protein plays a central role in determining the required
concentration for condensation of the macromolecule (gRNA) by the ligand (N protein).
Given a defined valence of the system components, phase boundaries are encoded by
the strength of interaction between the interacting domains in the components. Considering a
long polymer (e.g. gRNA) with proteins adsorbed onto that polymer as adhesive points
Page 14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(“stickers”), the physics of associative polymers predicts that the same interactions that cause
phase separation will also control the condensation of individual long polymers 71,72,81–84​
​
. With
this in mind, we hypothesized that phase separation is reporting on the physical interactions that
underlie genome compaction.
To explore this hypothesis, we developed a simple computational model where the
interplay between compaction and phase separation could be explored. Our setup consists of
two types of species: long multivalent polymers and short multivalent binders (​Fig. 6A​). All
interactions are isotropic and each bead is inherently multivalent as a result. In the simplest
instantiation of this model, favourable polymer:binder and binder:binder interactions are
encoded, mimicking the scenario in which a binder (e.g. a protein) can engage in nonspecific
polymer (RNA) interaction as well as binder-binder (protein-protein) interaction. As expected for
simulations of binders with homopolymer polymers we observed phase separation in a
concentration-dependent manner (​Fig. 6B-E​). Phase separation gives rise to a single large
spherical cluster with multiple polymers and binders (​Fig. 6D, 6H-L​).
Given our homopolymers undergo robust phase separation, we wondered if a break in
the symmetry between intra- and inter-molecular interactions would be enough to promote
single-polymer condensation in the same concentration regime over which we had previously
observed phase separation. Symmetry breaking in our model is achieved through a single
high-affinity binding site (​Fig. 6A​). We choose this particular mode of symmetry-breaking to
mimic the presence of a packaging signal -a region of the genome that is essential for efficient
viral packaging- an established feature in many viruses (including coronaviruses) although we
emphasize this is a general model, as opposed to trying to directly model gRNA with a
packaging signal 85–87​
​
.
We performed identical simulations to those in ​Fig. 6C-D using the same system with
polymers that now possess a single high affinity binding site (​Fig. 6E​). Under these conditions
we did not observe large phase separated droplets (​Fig. 6F​). Instead, each individual polymer
undergoes collapse to form a single-polymer condensate (​Fig. 6E​). Collapse is driven by the
recruitment of binders to the high-affinity site, where they “coat” the chain, forming a local cluster
of binders on the polymer. This cluster is then able to interact with the remaining regions of the
polymer through weak “nonspecific” interactions, the same interactions that drove phase
separation in ​Fig. 6 B-D​. Symmetry breaking is achieved because the local concentration of
binder around the site is high, such that intramolecular interactions are favoured over
intermolecular interaction. This high local concentration also drives compaction at low binder
concentrations. As a result, instead of a single multi-polymer condensate, we observe multiple
single-polymers condensates, where the absolute number matches the number of polymers in
the system (​Fig. 6G​).

Page 15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6: A simple polymer suggests symmetry breaking can promote single-polymer
condensates over multi-polymer assemblies
A Summary of our model setup, which involves long ‘polymers’ (61 beads) or short ‘binders’ (2 beads).
Each bead is multivalent and can interact with every adjacent lattice site. The interaction matrix to the
right defines the pairwise interaction energies associated with each of the bead times.

Page 16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B​ Concentration dependent assembly behavior for polymers lacking a high-affinity binding site.
C Phase diagram showing the concentration-dependent phase regime - dashed line represents the
binodal (phase boundary) and is provided to guide the eye.
D Analysis in the same 2D space as C assessing the number of droplets at a given concentration. When
phase separation occurs, a single droplet appears in almost all cases.
E ​Concentration dependent assembly behavior for polymers with a high-affinity binding site.
F ​No large droplets are formed in any of the systems, although multiple polymer:binder complexes form.
G ​The number of clusters observed matches the number of polymers in the system - i.e. each polymer
forms an individual cluster.
H ​Simulation snapshots from equivalent simulations for polymers with (top) or without (bottom) a single
high-affinity binding site.
I Polymer dimensions in the dense and dilute phase (for the parameters in our model) for polymers with
no high-affinity binding site. Note that compaction in the dense phase reflects finite-size effects, as
addressed in panel K, and is an artefact of the relatively small droplets formed in our systems (relative to
the size of the polymer). The droplets act as a bounding cage for the polymer, driving their compaction
indirectly.
J ​Polymer dimensions across the same concentration space for polymers with a single high-affinity
binding site. Across all concentrations, each individual polymer is highly compact.
K Compaction in the dense phase (panel I) is due to small droplets. When droplets are sufficiently large,
we observe chain expansion, as expected from standard theoretical descriptions.
L Simulations performed under conditions in which nonspecific interactions between binder and polymer
are reduced (interaction strength = 0 kT). Under these conditions phase separation is suppressed.
Equivalent simulations for polymers with a high-affinity site reveal these chains are no longer compact. As
such, phase separation offers a readout that - in our model - maps to single-polymer compaction.

The high affinity binding site polarizes the single-polymer condensate, such that they are
organized, recalcitrant to fusion, and kinetically metastable. To illustrate this metastable nature,
extended simulations using an approximate kinetic Monte Carlo scheme demonstrated that a
high-affinity binding site dramatically slows assembly of multichain assemblies, but that
ultimately these are the thermodynamically optimal configuration (​Fig. S18​). A convenient
physical analogy is that of a micelle, which are non-stoichiometric stable assemblies. Even for
micelles that are far from their optimal size, fusion is slow because it requires substantial
molecular reorganization and the breaking of stable interactions 88,89​
​ .
Finally, we ran simulations under conditions in which binder:polymer interactions were
reduced, mimicking the scenario in which non-specific protein:RNA interactions are inhibited
(​Fig. 6L​). Under these conditions no phase separation occurs for polymers that lack a
high-affinity binding site, while for polymers with a high-affinity binding site no chain compaction
occurs (in contrast to when binder:polymer interactions are present, see ​Fig. 6J​). This result
illustrates how phase separation offers a convenient readout for molecular interactions that
might otherwise be challenging to measure.
We emphasize that our conclusions from these coarse-grained simulations are subject to
the parameters in our model. We present these results to demonstrate an example of “​how this

Page 17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

single-genome packaging could be achieved​”, as opposed to the much stronger statement of
proposing “​this is how it is” achieved. Recent elegant work by Ranganathan and Shakhnovich
identified kinetically arrested microclusters, where slow kinetics result from the saturation of
stickers within those clusters 90​
​ . This is completely analogous to our results (albeit with
homotypic interactions, rather than heterotypic interactions), giving us confidence that the
physical principles uncovered are robust and, we tentatively suggest, quite general. Future
simulations are required to systematically explore the details of the relevant parameter space in
our system. However, regardless of those parameters, our model does establish that if weak
multivalent interactions underlie the formation of large multi-polymer droplets, those same
interactions cannot ​also​ drive polymer compaction inside the droplet.

Discussion
The nucleocapsid (N) protein from SARS-CoV-2 is a multivalent RNA binding protein
critical for viral replication and genome packaging 11,12​
​
. To better understand how the various
folded and disordered domains interact with one another, we applied single-molecule
spectroscopy and all-atom simulations to perform a detailed biophysical dissection of the
protein, uncovering several putative interaction motifs. Furthermore, based on both sequence
analysis and our single-molecule experiments, we anticipated that N protein would undergo
phase separation with RNA. In agreement with this prediction, and in line with work from the
Gladfelter and Yildiz groups working independently from us, we find that N protein robustly
undergoes phase separation ​in vitro with model RNA under a range of different salt conditions.
Using simple polymer models, we propose that the same interactions that drive phase
separation may also drive genome packaging into a dynamic, single-genome condensate. The
formation of single-genome condensates (as opposed to multi-genome droplets) is influenced
by the presence of one (or more) symmetry-breaking interaction sites, which we tentatively
suggest could reflect packaging signals in viral genomes.
All three IDRs are highly dynamic
Our single-molecule experiments and all-atom simulations are in good agreement with
one another, and reveal that all three IDRs are extended and, depending on solution condition,
highly dynamic. Simulations suggest the NTD may interact transiently with the RBD, which
offers an explanation for the slightly slowed reconfiguration time measured by nanosecond FCS.
The LINK shows rapid rearrangement, demonstrating the RBD and dimerization domain are not
interacting. Finally, we see more pronounced interaction between the CTD and the dimerization
domain, although these interactions are still highly transient.
Single-molecule experiments and all-atom simulations were performed on monomeric
versions of the protein, yet N protein has previously been shown to undergo dimerization and
form higher-order oligomers in the absence of RNA 38​
​ . To assess the formation of oligomeric
species, we use a combination of nativePAGE, crosslinking and FCS experiments (see ​Fig. S14
and SI). These experiments also verified that under the conditions used for single-molecule
experiments the protein exists only as a monomer.

Page 18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Simulations identify multiple transient helices
We identified a number of transient helical motifs which provide structural insight into
previously characterized molecular interactions. Transient helices are ubiquitous in viral
disordered regions and have been shown to underlie molecular interactions in a range of
systems 77,91–93​
​
. While the application of molecular simulations to identify transient helices in
disordered regions can suffer from forcefield inaccuracies, it is worth noting that in prior work we
have found good agreement between experimental and simulated secondary structure analysis
across a range of systems explored in an analogous manner 72,94–96​
​
.
Transient helix H2 (in the NTD) and H3 (in the LINK) flank the RBD and organize a set of
arginine residues to face the same direction (​Fig. 2H and 3F​). Both the NTD and LINK have
been shown to drive RNA binding, such that we propose these helical arginine-rich motifs
(ARMs) may engage in both both nonspecific binding and may also contribute to RNA
specificity, as has been proposed previously 31,97,98​
​
. The serine-arginine SR-region (which
includes H3) has been previously identified as engaging in interaction with a structured acidic
helix in Nsp3 in the model coronavirus MHV, consistent with an electrostatic helical interaction
99,100​
. Recent NMR data also shows excellent agreement with our results, identifying a transient
helix that shows 1:1 overlap with H3 24​
​ .The SR-region is necessary for recruitment to
replication-transcription centers (RTCs) in MHV, and also undergoes phosphorylation, setting
the stage for a complex regulatory system awaiting exploration 101,102​
​
.
Transient helix H4 (in the LINK, ​Fig. 3F​), was previously predicted bioinformatically and
identified as a conserved feature across different coronaviruses, in agreement with our own
secondary structure predictions (Fig. S19) 31​
​ . Furthermore, the equivalent region was identified
in SARS coronavirus as a nuclear export signal (NES), such that we suspect this too is a
classical Crm1-binding leucine-rich NES 103​
​ . Jack ​et al. identified helix H4 as enriched for
homotypic cross-links in the context of droplets, supporting a model in which this region
promotes protein:protein interactions, an interpretation corroborated by hydrogen-deuterium
exchange mass spectrometry on RBD-LINK in the dilute phase 20,26​
​ .
Concerning the CTD, two transient helices are identified, helix H5 and H6. While
transient helix H5 is weakly populated, the positive charge associated with this region may
make it critical for protein:RNA interaction, a result strongly supported by the observation that
deletion of this region ablates protein:RNA phase separation 20​
​ .Transient helix H6 is an
amphipathic helix with a highly hydrophobic face (​Fig. 4H​). Recent hydrogen-deuterium
exchange mass spectrometry also identified H6 43​
​ . Residues in this region have previously been
identified as mediating M-protein binding in other coronaviruses, such that we propose H6
underlies that interaction 21,104–106​
​
. Recent work has also identified amphipathic transient helices
in disordered proteins as interacting directly with membranes, such that an additional (albeit
entirely speculative) role could involve direct membrane interaction, as has been observed in
other viral phosphoproteins 107,108​
​
.

Page 19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

As a final note, while these helices are conserved between SARS, SARS-CoV-2, and in
many bat-coronaviruses, they are less well conserved in MHV and MERS, suggesting these
regions are malleable over evolution (Fig.S1/3/5).

The physiological relevance of nucleocapsid protein phase separation in SARS-CoV-2
physiology
Our work has revealed that SARS-CoV-2 N protein undergoes phase separation with
RNA when reconstituted ​in vitro.​ The solution environment and types of RNA used in our
experiments are very different from the cytoplasm and viral RNA. However, similar results have
been obtained in published and unpublished work by several other groups under a variety of
conditions, including via ​in cell experiments 20–27​
​
. Taken together, these results demonstrate that
N protein ​can undergo ​bona fide phase separation, and that N protein condensates ​can form in
cells. Nevertheless, the complexity introduced by multidimensional linkage effects ​in vivo could
substantially influence the phase behavior and composition of condensates observed in the cell
80,83,109​
. Of note, the regime we have identified in which phase separation occurs (​Fig. 5​) is
remarkably relatively narrow, consistent with a model in which single-genome condensates for
virion assembly are favoured over larger multi-genome droplets.
Does p
​ hase separation play a physiological role in SARS-CoV-2 biology? Phase
separation has been invoked or suggested in a number of viral contexts to date 110–116​
​
. In
SARS-CoV-2, one possible model suggests phase separation may drive recruitment of
components to viral replication sites, although how this dovetails with the fact that replication
occurs in double-membrane bound vesicles (DMVs) remains to be explored 24,117​
​
. An alternative
(and non-mutually exclusive) model is one in which phase separation catalyzes nucleocapsid
polymerization, as has been proposed in elegant work on measles virus 77​
​ . Here, the process of
phase separation is decoupled from genome packaging, where gRNA condensation occurs
through association with a helical nucleocapsid. If applied to SARS-CoV-2, such a model would
suggest that (1) initially N protein and RNA phase separate in the cytosol, (2) some discrete
pre-capsid state forms within condensates and, (3) upon maturation, the pre-capsid is released
from the condensate and undergoes subsequent virion assembly by interacting with the
membrane-bound M, E, and S structural proteins at the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment
(ERGIC). While this model is attractive it places a number of constraints on the physical
properties of this pre-capsid, not least that the ability to escape the “parent” condensate dictates
that the assembled pre-capsid must interact less strongly with the condensate components than
in the unassembled state. This requirement introduces some thermodynamic complexities: how
is a pre-capsid state driven to assemble if it is necessarily less stable than the unassembled
pre-capsid, and how is incomplete or abortive pre-capsid formation avoided if – as assembly
occurs – the pre-capsid becomes progressively less stable?
A phase separation and assembly model raises additional questions, such as the origins
of specificity for recruitment of viral proteins and viral RNA, the kinetics of pre-capsid-assembly
within a large condensate, and preferential packaging of gRNA over sub-genomic RNA. None of
Page 20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

these questions are unanswerable, nor do they invalidate this model, but they should be
addressed if the physiological relevance of large cytoplasmic condensates is to be further
explored in the context of virion assembly.
Our preferred interpretation is that N protein has evolved to drive genome compaction for
packaging (​Fig. 7​). In this model, a single-genome condensate forms through N protein gRNA
interaction, driven by a small number of high-affinity sites. This (meta)-stable single-genome
condensate undergoes subsequent maturation, leading to virion assembly. In this model,
condensate-associated N proteins are in exchange with a bulk pool of soluble N protein, such
that the interactions that drive compaction are heterogeneous and dynamic. Our model provides
a physical mechanism in good empirical agreement with data for N protein oligomerization and
assembly 118–120​
​
. Furthermore, the resulting condensate is then in effect a multivalent binder for
M protein, which interacts with N directly, and may drive membrane curvature and budding in a
manner similar to that proposed by Bergeron-Sandoval and Michnick ​(though with a different
directionality of the force) ​and in line with recent observations from cryo electron tomography
(cryoET) ​117,121–123
An open question pertains to specificity of packaging gRNA while excluding other RNAs.
One possibility is for two high-affinity N-protein binding sites to flank the 5’ and 3’ ends of the
genome, whereby only RNA molecules with both sites are competent for compaction. A recent
map of N protein binding to gRNA has revealed high-affinity binding regions at the 5’ and 3’
ends of the gRNA, in good agreement with this qualitative prediction 22​
​ . Alternatively, only gRNA
condensates may possess the requisite valency for N protein binding to drive virion assembly
through interaction with M protein at the cytoplasmic side of the ERGIC, offering a physical
selection mechanism for budding.
Genome compaction through dynamic multivalent interactions would be especially
relevant for coronaviruses, which have extremely large single-stranded RNA genomes. This is
evolutionarily appealing, in that as the genome grows larger, compaction becomes increasingly
efficient, as the effective valence of the genome is increased 71,82​
​
. The ability of multivalent
disordered proteins to drive RNA compaction has been observed previously in various contexts
14,124​
. Furthermore, genome compaction by RNA binding protein has been proposed and
observed in other viruses 120,125,126​
​
, and the SARS coronavirus N protein has previously been
shown to act as an RNA chaperone, an expected consequence of compaction to a dynamic
single-RNA condensate that accommodates multiple N proteins with a single RNA 14,127​
​
.
Furthermore, previous work exploring the ultrastructure of phase separated condensates of
G3BP1 and RNA through simulations and cryoET revealed a beads-on-a-string type
architecture, mirroring recent results for obtained from cryo-electron tomography of
SARS-CoV-2 virions 73,117​
​
.
N protein has been shown to interact directly with a number of proteins studied in the
context of biological phase separation which may influence assembly ​in vivo 5,23,72,79,128​
​
. In
particular, G3BP1-an essential stress-granule protein that undergoes phase separation-was
Page 21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

recently shown to co-localize with overexpressed N protein 24,73,79,129,130​
​
. G3BP1 interaction may
be part of the innate immune response, leading to stress-granule formation, or alternatively N
protein may attenuates the stress response by sequestering G3BP1, depleting the cytosolic
pool, and preventing stress granule formation, as has been shown for HIV-1 and very recently
proposed explicitly for SARS-CoV-2 114,130​
​
.
Our model is also in good empirical agreement with recent observations made for other
viruses​131​. Taken together, we speculate that viral packaging may -in general- involve an initial
genome compaction through multivalent protein:RNA and protein:protein interactions, followed
by a liquid-to-solid transition in cases where well-defined crystalline capsid structures emerge.
Liquid-to-solid transitions are well established in the context of neurodegeneration with respect
to disease progression 132–134​
​
. Here we suggest nature is leveraging those same principles as an
evolved mechanism for monodisperse particle assembly.
Regardless of if phase separated condensates form inside cells, all available evidence
suggests phase separation is reporting on a physiologically important interaction that underlies
genome compaction (​Fig. 6L​). With this in mind, from a biotechnology standpoint, phase
separation may be a convenient readout for ​in vitro assays to interrogate protein:RNA
interaction. Regardless of which model is correct, N protein:RNA interaction is key for viral
replication. As such, phase separation provides a macroscopic reporter on a nanoscopic
phenomenon, in line with previous work 72,82,135,136​
​
. In this sense, we believe the therapeutic
implications of understanding and modulating phase separation here (and elsewhere in biology)
are conveniently decoupled from the physiological relevance of actual, large phase separated
“liquid droplets”, but instead offer a window into the underlying physical interactions that lead to
condensate formation 20​
​ .
The physics of single polymer condensates
Depending on the molecular details, single-polymer condensates may be kinetically
stable (but thermodynamically unstable, as in our model simulations) or thermodynamically
stable. Delineation between these two scenarios will depend on the nature, strength, valency
and anisotropy of the interactions. It is worth noting that from the perspective of functional
biology, kinetic stability may be essentially indistinguishable from thermodynamic stability,
depending on the lifetime of a metastable species.
It is also important to emphasize that at higher concentrations of N protein and/or after a
sufficiently long time period we expect robust phase separation with viral RNA, regardless of the
presence of a symmetry-breaking site. Symmetry breaking is achieved when the apparent local
concentration of N protein (from the “perspective” of gRNA) is substantially higher than the
actual global concentration. As effective local and global concentrations approach one another,
the entropic cost of intra-molecular interaction is outweighed by the availability of inter-molecular
partners. On a practical note, if the readout in question is the presence/absence of liquid
droplets, a high-affinity site may be observed as a shift in the saturation concentration which,
confusingly, could either suppress or enhance phase separation. Further, if single-genome
Page 22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

condensates are kinetically stable and driven through electrostatic interactions, we would expect
a complex temperature dependence, in which larger droplets are observed at higher
temperature (up to some threshold). Recent work is showing a strong temperature-dependence
of phase separation is consistent with these predictions 22​
​ .
Finally, we note no reason to assume single-RNA condensates should be exclusively the
purview of viruses. RNAs in eukaryotic cells may also be processed in these types of
assemblies, as opposed to in large multi-RNA RNPs. The role of RNA:RNA interactions both
here and in other systems is also of particular interest and not an aspect explored in our current
work, but we anticipate may play a key role in the relevant biology.

Page 23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 7: Summary and proposed model
A. Summary of results from single-molecule spectroscopy experiments and all-atom simulations. All three
predicted IDRs are disordered, highly flexible, and house a number of putative helical binding regions
which overlap with subregions identified previously to drive N protein function.
B. ​Overview of general symmetry breaking model. For homopolymers, local collapse leads to
single-polymer condensates with a small barrier to fusion, rapidly assembling into large multi-polymer
condensates. When one (or a small number of) high-affinity sites are present, local clustering of binders
at a lower concentration organize the polymer such that single-polymer condensates are kinetically
stable.
C. ​Proposed model for SARS-CoV-2 genome packaging. ​(1) Simplified model of SARS-CoV-2 genome
with a pair of packaging region at the 5’ and 3’ end of the genome ​(2) N protein preferentially binds to
packaging signal regions in the genome, leading to a local cluster of N protein at the packaging signal
RNA. ​(3) The high local concentration of N protein drives condensation of distal regions of the genome,
forming a stable single-genome condensate. ​(4) Single-genome condensates may undergo subsequent
maturation through a liquid-to-solid (crystallization) transition to form an ordered crystalline capsid, or
solidify into an amorphous ribonuclear particle (RNP), or some combination of the two. While in some
viruses an ordered capsid clearly forms, we favour a model in which the SARS-CoV-2 capsid is an
amorphous RNP. ​Compact single-genome condensates ultimately interact with E, S and M proteins at the
membrane, whose concerted action leads to envelope formation around the viral RNA and final virion
packaging.

Acknowledgements
We thank Amy Gladfelter, Christiane Iserman, Christine Roden, Ahmet Yildiz, Amanda Jack,
Luke Ferro, Steve Michnick, Pascale Legault, and Jim Omichinski for sharing data and
extensive discussion. We also thank Rohit Pappu for placing our groups in contact with one
another.
We thank the labs of John Cooper, Carl Frieden, and Silvia Jansen for providing some of the
reagents we have used in this work. We thank Ben Schuler and Daniel Nettels for developing,
maintaining, and sharing with us the software package used to analyze the single-molecule
data.
J.C. and J.J.A are supported by NIGMS R25 IMSD Training Grant GM103757. We are grateful
to the citizen-scientists of Folding@home for donating their computing resources​. G.R.B holds
an NSF CAREER Award MCB-1552471, NIH R01GM12400701, a Career Award at the
Scientific Interface from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, and a Packard Fellowship for Science
and Engineering from The David and Lucile Packard Foundation. A.S holds an NIH
R01AG062837​. A.S.H. is supported by the Longer Life Foundation: An RGA/Washington
University Collaboration.
A.S.H. is a scientific consultant with Dewpoint Therapeutics.

Methods
Page 24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

All-atom simulations
All-atom Monte Carlo simulations were performed with the ABSINTH implicit solvent model and
CAMPARI simulation engine (abs_3.2_opls) (​http://campari.sourceforge.net/​) 57,137
​
with the
138​
solution ion parameters of Mao et al.​ . Simulations were performed using movesets and
Hamiltonian parameters as reported previously 72,139​
​
. All simulations were performed in
sufficiently large box sizes to prevent finite size effects (where box size varies from system to
system). For simulations with IDRs in isolation all degrees of freedom available in CAMPARI are
sampled. For simulations with folded domains with IDRs, the backbone dihedral angles in folded
domains are not sampled, such that folded domains remain structurally fixed (although
sidechains are fully sampled). The IDR has backbone and sidechain degrees of freedom
sampled.
All-atom molecular dynamics simulations were performed using GROMACS, using the FAST
algorithm in conjunction with the Folding@home platform 58,140,141​
​
. Post-simulation analysis was
performed with Enspara 142​
​ . For additional simulation details see the supplementary information.
Coarse-grained polymer simulations
Coarse-grained Monte Carlo simulations were performed using the PIMMS simulation engine
143​
. All simulations were performed in a 70 x 70 x 70 lattice-site box. The results averaged over
the final 20% of the simulation to give average values at equivalent states. The “polymer” is
represented as a 61-residue polymer with either a central high-affinity binding site or not. The
binder is a 2-bead species. All simulations shown in Fig. 6 were run for 20 x 10​9 Monte Carlo
steps, with four independent replicas. Bead interaction strengths were defined as shown in ​Fig.
6A​. For additional simulation details see SI.
Protein Expression, purification, and labeling​.
SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid protein (NCBI Reference Sequence: YP_009724397.2) including an
N term extension containing His​9​-HRV 3C protease site was cloned into the BamHI EcoRI sites
in the MCS of pGEX-6P-1 vector (GE Healthcare). ​Site-directed mutagenesis was performed on

the His​9​-SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid pGEX vector to create the N protein constructs (SI Table
XX and sequences were verified using Sanger sequencing. All variants were expressed
recombinantly in BL21 Codon-plus pRIL cells (Agilent) or Gold BL21(DE3) cells (Agilent) and
purified using a FF HisTrap column. The GST-His​9​-N tag was then cleaved using HRV 3C
protease and further purified to remove the cleaved tag. Finally, purified N protein variants were
analyzed using SDS-PAGE and verified by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (LC-MS).
Activity of the protein was assessed by testing whether the protein is able to bind and condense
nucleic acids (see phase-separation experiments) as well as to form dimers (see oligomerization
in SI).

Page 25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

All Nucleocapsid variants were labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 maleimide and Alexa Fluor 594
maleimide (Molecular Probes) under denaturing conditions following a two-step sequential
labeling procedure (see SI).
Single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy.
Single-molecule fluorescence measurements were performed with a Picoquant MT200
instrument (Picoquant, Germany). FRET experiments were performed by exciting the donor dye
with a laser power of 100 μW (measured at the back aperture of the objective). For pulsed
interleaved excitation of donor and acceptor, the power used for exciting the acceptor dye was
adjusted to match the acceptor emission intensity to that of the donor (between 50 and 70 mW).
Single-molecule FRET efficiency histograms were acquired from samples with protein
concentrations between 50 pM and 100 pM and the population with stoichiometry corresponding
to 1:1 donor:acceptor labeling was selected. Trigger times for excitation pulses (repetition rate
20 MHz) and photon detection events were stored with 16 ps resolution. For FRET-FCS,
samples of double-labeled protein with a concentration of 100 pM were excited by either the
diode laser or the supercontinuum laser at the powers indicated above.
All samples were prepared in 50 mM Tris pH 7.32, 143 mM β-mercaptoethanol (for
photoprotection), 0.001% Tween 20 (for limiting surface adhesion) and GdmCl at the reported
concentrations. All measurements were performed in uncoated polymer coverslip cuvettes (Ibidi,
Wisconsin, USA) and custom-made glass cuvette coated with PEG (see SI). Each sample was
measured for at least 30 min at room temperature (295 ± 0.5 K).

Page 26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.

Zhu, N. ​et al.​ A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019. ​N. Engl.
J. Med.​ ​382​, 727–733 (2020).

2.

Corman, V. M., Muth, D., Niemeyer, D. & Drosten, C. Chapter Eight - Hosts and Sources of
Endemic Human Coronaviruses. in ​Advances in Virus Research​ (eds. Kielian, M.,
Mettenleiter, T. C. & Roossinck, M. J.) vol. 100 163–188 (Academic Press, 2018).

3.

Roser, M., Ritchie, H., Ortiz-Ospina, E. & Hasell, J. Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19).
Our World in Data​ (2020).

4.

Lurie, N., Saville, M., Hatchett, R. & Halton, J. Developing Covid-19 Vaccines at Pandemic
Speed. ​N. Engl. J. Med.​ ​382​, 1969–1973 (2020).

5.

Gordon, D. E. ​et al.​ A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug
repurposing. ​Nature​ (2020) doi:​10.1038/s41586-020-2286-9​.

6.

Sanders, J. M., Monogue, M. L., Jodlowski, T. Z. & Cutrell, J. B. Pharmacologic Treatments
for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): A Review. ​JAMA​ (2020)
doi:​10.1001/jama.2020.6019​.

7.

Walls, A. C. ​et al.​ Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike
Glycoprotein. ​Cell​ ​181​, 281–292.e6 (2020).

8.

Hoffmann, M. ​et al.​ SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is
Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. ​Cell​ ​181​, 271–280.e8 (2020).

9.

Shang, J. ​et al.​ Structural basis of receptor recognition by SARS-CoV-2. ​Nature​ ​581​,
221–224 (2020).

10. Lan, J. ​et al.​ Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain bound to the
ACE2 receptor. ​Nature​ ​581​, 215–220 (2020).

Page 27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

11. Masters, P. S. Coronavirus genomic RNA packaging. ​Virology​ ​537​, 198–207 (2019).
12. Laude, H. & Masters, P. S. The Coronavirus Nucleocapsid Protein. in ​The Coronaviridae
(ed. Siddell, S. G.) 141–163 (Springer US, 1995).
13. van der Lee, R. ​et al.​ Classification of intrinsically disordered regions and proteins. ​Chem.
Rev.​ ​114​, 6589–6631 (2014).
14. Holmstrom, E. D., Liu, Z., Nettels, D., Best, R. B. & Schuler, B. Disordered RNA
chaperones can enhance nucleic acid folding via local charge screening. ​Nat. Commun.​ ​10​,
2453 (2019).
15. Borgia, A. ​et al.​ Extreme disorder in an ultrahigh-affinity protein complex. ​Nature​ ​555​, 61
(2018).
16. Dimura, M. ​et al.​ Quantitative FRET studies and integrative modeling unravel the structure
and dynamics of biomolecular systems. ​Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.​ ​40​, 163–185 (2016).
17. Fuertes, G. ​et al.​ Decoupling of size and shape fluctuations in heteropolymeric sequences
reconciles discrepancies in SAXS vs. FRET measurements. ​Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
114​, E6342–E6351 (2017).
18. Warner, J. B., 4th ​et al.​ Monomeric Huntingtin Exon 1 Has Similar Overall Structural
Features for Wild-Type and Pathological Polyglutamine Lengths. ​J. Am. Chem. Soc.​ ​139​,
14456–14469 (2017).
19. Chung, H. S., Piana-Agostinetti, S., Shaw, D. E. & Eaton, W. A. Structural origin of slow
diffusion in protein folding. ​Science​ ​349​, 1504–1510 (2015).
20. Jack, A. ​et al.​ SARS CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein forms condensates with viral genomic
RNA. 2020.09.14.295824 (2020) doi:​10.1101/2020.09.14.295824​.
21. Lu, S. ​et al.​ The SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid phosphoprotein forms mutually exclusive
condensates with RNA and the membrane-associated M protein. ​bioRxiv​ (2020)

Page 28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

doi:​10.1101/2020.07.30.228023​.
22. Iserman, C. ​et al.​ Genomic RNA Elements Drive Phase Separation of the SARS-CoV-2
Nucleocapsid. ​Mol. Cell​ (2020) doi:​10.1016/j.molcel.2020.11.041​.
23. Perdikari, T. M. ​et al.​ SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein phase-separates with RNA and
with human hnRNPs. ​EMBO J.​ ​n/a​, e106478 (2020).
24. Savastano, A., Ibáñez de Opakua, A., Rankovic, M. & Zweckstetter, M. Nucleocapsid
protein of SARS-CoV-2 phase separates into RNA-rich polymerase-containing
condensates. ​Nat. Commun.​ ​11​, 6041 (2020).
25. Carlson, C. R. ​et al.​ Phosphoregulation of phase separation by the SARS-CoV-2 N protein
suggests a biophysical basis for its dual functions. ​Mol. Cell​ ​0​, (2020).
26. Wu, C. ​et al.​ Characterization of SARS-CoV-2 N protein reveals multiple functional
consequences of the C-terminal domain. ​Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
2020.11.30.404905 (2020) doi:​10.1101/2020.11.30.404905​.
27. Chen, H. ​et al.​ Liquid–liquid phase separation by SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein and
RNA. ​Cell Res.​ ​30​, 1143–1145 (2020).
28. McBride, R., van Zyl, M. & Fielding, B. C. The coronavirus nucleocapsid is a multifunctional
protein. ​Viruses​ ​6​, 2991–3018 (2014).
29. Mészáros, B., Erdos, G. & Dosztányi, Z. IUPred2A: context-dependent prediction of protein
disorder as a function of redox state and protein binding. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​46​,
W329–W337 (2018).
30. Baker, N. A., Sept, D., Joseph, S., Holst, M. J. & McCammon, J. A. Electrostatics of
nanosystems: application to microtubules and the ribosome. ​Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
98​, 10037–10041 (2001).
31. Chang, C.-K. ​et al.​ Multiple nucleic acid binding sites and intrinsic disorder of severe acute

Page 29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

respiratory syndrome coronavirus nucleocapsid protein: implications for ribonucleocapsid
protein packaging. ​J. Virol.​ ​83​, 2255–2264 (2009).
32. Grossoehme, N. E. ​et al.​ Coronavirus N protein N-terminal domain (NTD) specifically binds
the transcriptional regulatory sequence (TRS) and melts TRS-cTRS RNA duplexes. ​J. Mol.
Biol.​ ​394​, 544–557 (2009).
33. Cui, L. e
​ t al.​ The Nucleocapsid Protein of Coronaviruses Acts as a Viral Suppressor of RNA
Silencing in Mammalian Cells. ​J. Virol.​ ​89​, 9029–9043 (2015).
34. Takeda, M. ​et al.​ Solution structure of the c-terminal dimerization domain of SARS
coronavirus nucleocapsid protein solved by the SAIL-NMR method. ​J. Mol. Biol.​ ​380​,
608–622 (2008).
35. Jayaram, H. ​et al.​ X-ray structures of the N- and C-terminal domains of a coronavirus
nucleocapsid protein: implications for nucleocapsid formation. ​J. Virol.​ ​80​, 6612–6620
(2006).
36. Yu, I.-M. e
​ t al.​ Recombinant severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus
nucleocapsid protein forms a dimer through its C-terminal domain. ​J. Biol. Chem.​ ​280​,
23280–23286 (2005).
37. Luo, H., Chen, J., Chen, K., Shen, X. & Jiang, H. Carboxyl terminus of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus nucleocapsid protein: self-association analysis and
nucleic acid binding characterization. ​Biochemistry​ ​45​, 11827–11835 (2006).
38. Chang, C.-K., Chen, C.-M. M., Chiang, M.-H., Hsu, Y.-L. & Huang, T.-H. Transient
oligomerization of the SARS-CoV N protein--implication for virus ribonucleoprotein
packaging. ​PLoS One​ ​8​, e65045 (2013).
39. Robbins, S. G., Frana, M. F., McGowan, J. J., Boyle, J. F. & Holmes, K. V. RNA-binding
proteins of coronavirus MHV: detection of monomeric and multimeric N protein with an RNA

Page 30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

overlay-protein blot assay. ​Virology​ ​150​, 402–410 (1986).
40. He, R. ​et al.​ Analysis of multimerization of the SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.​ ​316​, 476–483 (2004).
41. Kang, S. ​et al.​ Crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein RNA binding domain
reveals potential unique drug targeting sites. ​Acta Pharm Sin B​ (2020)
doi:​10.1016/j.apsb.2020.04.009​.
42. Zinzula, L., Nagy, M. O. & Bracher, A. 1.45 Angstrom Resolution Crystal Structure of
C-terminal Dimerization Domain of Nucleocapsid Phosphoprotein from SARS-CoV-2 (PDB:
6YUN). ​Protein Data Bank​ (2020).
43. Ye, Q., West, A. M. V., Silletti, S. & Corbett, K. D. Architecture and self-assembly of the
SARS-CoV -2 nucleocapsid protein. ​Protein Sci.​ ​29​, 1890–1901 (2020).
44. Zeng, W. ​et al.​ Biochemical characterization of SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.​ ​527​, 618–623 (2020).
45. Nettels, D. ​et al.​ Single-molecule spectroscopy of the temperature-induced collapse of
unfolded proteins. ​Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.​ ​106​, 20740–20745 (2009).
46. Soranno, A. ​et al.​ Quantifying internal friction in unfolded and intrinsically disordered
proteins with single-molecule spectroscopy. ​Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.​ ​109​,
17800–17806 (2012).
47. Borgia, A. ​et al.​ Localizing internal friction along the reaction coordinate of protein folding by
combining ensemble and single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy. ​Nat. Commun.​ ​3​,
1195 (2012).
48. Schuler, B., Soranno, A., Hofmann, H. & Nettels, D. Single-Molecule FRET Spectroscopy
and the Polymer Physics of Unfolded and Intrinsically Disordered Proteins. ​Annu. Rev.
Biophys.​ ​45​, 207–231 (2016).

Page 31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

49. Soranno, A., Cabassi, F. & Orselli, M. E. Dynamics of Structural Elements of GB1 β-Hairpin
Revealed by Tryptophan–Cysteine Contact Formation Experiments. ​The Journal of​ (2018).
50. Soranno, A. ​et al.​ Integrated view of internal friction in unfolded proteins from
single-molecule FRET, contact quenching, theory, and simulations. ​Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A.​ ​114​, E1833–E1839 (2017).
51. Soranno, A., Zosel, F. & Hofmann, H. Internal friction in an intrinsically disordered
protein—comparing Rouse-like models with experiments. ​J. Chem. Phys.​ (2018).
52. Schellman, J. A. Selective binding and solvent denaturation. ​Biopolymers​ ​26​, 549–559
(1987).
53. Hofmann, H. ​et al.​ Polymer scaling laws of unfolded and intrinsically disordered proteins
quantified with single-molecule spectroscopy. ​Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.​ ​109​,
16155–16160 (2012).
54. Borgia, A. ​et al.​ Consistent view of polypeptide chain expansion in chemical denaturants
from multiple experimental methods. ​J. Am. Chem. Soc.​ ​138​, 11714–11726 (2016).
55. Zheng, W. ​et al.​ Probing the action of chemical denaturant on an intrinsically disordered
protein by simulation and experiment. ​J. Am. Chem. Soc.​ ​138​, 11702–11713 (2016).
56. Aznauryan, M. ​et al.​ Comprehensive structural and dynamical view of an unfolded protein
from the combination of single-molecule FRET, NMR, and SAXS. ​Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.
S. A.​ ​113​, E5389–98 (2016).
57. Vitalis, A. & Pappu, R. V. ABSINTH: A new continuum solvation model for simulations of
polypeptides in aqueous solutions. ​J. Comput. Chem.​ ​30​, 673–699 (2009).
58. Shirts, M. & Pande, V. S. Screen Savers of the World Unite! ​Science​ ​290​, 1903–1904
(2000).
59. Zimmerman, M. I. ​et al.​ Citizen Scientists Create an Exascale Computer to Combat

Page 32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

COVID-19. ​bioRxiv​ (2020) doi:​10.1101/2020.06.27.175430​.
60. Tompa, P. & Fuxreiter, M. Fuzzy complexes: polymorphism and structural disorder in
protein–protein interactions. ​Trends Biochem. Sci.​ ​33​, 2–8 (2008/1).
61. Holehouse, A. S., Garai, K., Lyle, N., Vitalis, A. & Pappu, R. V. Quantitative assessments of
the distinct contributions of polypeptide backbone amides versus side chain groups to chain
expansion via chemical denaturation. ​J. Am. Chem. Soc.​ ​137​, 2984–2995 (2015).
62. Nettels, D., Gopich, I. V., Hoffmann, A. & Schuler, B. Ultrafast dynamics of protein collapse
from single-molecule photon statistics. ​Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.​ ​104​, 2655–2660
(2007).
63. Sauer, M. & Neuweiler, H. PET-FCS: probing rapid structural fluctuations of proteins and
nucleic acids by single-molecule fluorescence quenching. ​Methods Mol. Biol.​ ​1076​,
597–615 (2014).
64. Haenni, D., Zosel, F., Reymond, L., Nettels, D. & Schuler, B. Intramolecular distances and
dynamics from the combined photon statistics of single-molecule FRET and photoinduced
electron transfer. ​J. Phys. Chem. B​ ​117​, 13015–13028 (2013).
65. Zosel, F., Haenni, D., Soranno, A., Nettels, D. & Schuler, B. Combining short- and
long-range fluorescence reporters with simulations to explore the intramolecular dynamics
of an intrinsically disordered protein. ​J. Chem. Phys.​ ​147​, 152708 (2017).
66. Banani, S. F., Lee, H. O., Hyman, A. A. & Rosen, M. K. Biomolecular condensates:
organizers of cellular biochemistry. ​Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.​ ​18​, 285–298 (2017).
67. Shin, Y. & Brangwynne, C. P. Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease.
Science​ ​357​, (2017).
68. Brangwynne, C. P. ​et al.​ Germline P granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled
dissolution/condensation. ​Science​ ​324​, 1729–1732 (2009).

Page 33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

69. Li, P. ​et al.​ Phase transitions in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins. ​Nature​ ​483​,
336–340 (2012).
70. Lin, Y., Protter, D. S. W., Rosen, M. K. & Parker, R. Formation and maturation of
phase-separated liquid droplets by RNA-binding proteins. ​Mol. Cell​ ​60​, 208–219 (2015).
71. Choi, J.-M., Holehouse, A. S. & Pappu, R. V. Physical Principles Underlying the Complex
Biology of Intracellular Phase Transitions. ​Annu. Rev. Biophys.​ ​49​, 107–133 (2020).
72. Martin, E. W. ​et al.​ Valence and patterning of aromatic residues determine the phase
behavior of prion-like domains. ​Science​ ​367​, 694–699 (2020).
73. Guillén-Boixet, J. ​et al.​ RNA-Induced Conformational Switching and Clustering of G3BP
Drive Stress Granule Assembly by Condensation. ​Cell​ ​181​, 346–361.e17 (2020).
74. Wang, J. ​et al.​ A Molecular Grammar Governing the Driving Forces for Phase Separation of
Prion-like RNA Binding Proteins. ​Cell​ ​174​, 688–699.e16 (2018).
75. Stockmayer, W. H. Light Scattering in Multi-Component Systems. ​J. Chem. Phys.​ ​18​,
58–61 (1950).
76. Banerjee, P. R., Milin, A. N., Moosa, M. M., Onuchic, P. L. & Deniz, A. A. Reentrant Phase
Transition Drives Dynamic Substructure Formation in Ribonucleoprotein Droplets. ​Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed Engl.​ ​56​, 11354–11359 (2017).
77. Guseva, S. ​et al.​ Measles virus nucleo- and phosphoproteins form liquid-like
phase-separated compartments that promote nucleocapsid assembly. ​Sci Adv​ ​6​, eaaz7095
(2020).
78. Posey, A. E., Holehouse, A. S. & Pappu, R. V. Chapter One - Phase Separation of
Intrinsically Disordered Proteins. in ​Methods in Enzymology​ (ed. Rhoades, E.) vol. 611
1–30 (Academic Press, 2018).
79. Sanders, D. W. ​et al.​ Competing Protein-RNA Interaction Networks Control Multiphase

Page 34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Intracellular Organization. ​Cell​ ​181​, 306–324.e28 (2020).
80. Riback, J. A. ​et al.​ Composition-dependent thermodynamics of intracellular phase
separation. ​Nature​ ​581​, 209–214 (2020).
81. Semenov, A. N. & Rubinstein, M. Thermoreversible Gelation in Solutions of Associative
Polymers. 1. Statics. ​Macromolecules​ ​31​, 1373–1385 (1998).
82. Rubinstein, M. & Colby, R. H. ​Polymer Physics​. (Oxford University Press, 2003).
83. Choi, J.-M., Dar, F. & Pappu, R. V. LASSI: A lattice model for simulating phase transitions
of multivalent proteins. ​PLoS Comput. Biol.​ ​15​, e1007028 (2019).
84. Post, C. B. & Zimm, B. H. Internal condensation of a single DNA molecule. ​Biopolymers​ ​18​,
1487–1501 (1979).
85. Hsieh, P.-K. ​et al.​ Assembly of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus RNA
packaging signal into virus-like particles is nucleocapsid dependent. ​J. Virol.​ ​79​,
13848–13855 (2005).
86. Woo, K., Joo, M., Narayanan, K., Kim, K. H. & Makino, S. Murine coronavirus packaging
signal confers packaging to nonviral RNA. ​J. Virol.​ ​71​, 824–827 (1997).
87. Cologna, R. & Hogue, B. G. Identification of a bovine coronavirus packaging signal. ​J. Virol.
74​, 580–583 (2000).
88. Pool, R. & Bolhuis, P. G. Sampling the kinetic pathways of a micelle fusion and fission
transition. ​J. Chem. Phys.​ ​126​, 244703 (2007).
89. Denkova, A. G., Mendes, E. & Coppens, M.-O. Non-equilibrium dynamics of block
copolymer micelles in solution: recent insights and open questions. ​Soft Matter​ ​6​,
2351–2357 (2010).
90. Ranganathan, S. & Shakhnovich, E. I. Dynamic metastable long-living droplets formed by
sticker-spacer proteins. ​Elife​ ​9​, (2020).

Page 35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

91. Leyrat, C. ​et al.​ The N0-binding region of the vesicular stomatitis virus phosphoprotein is
globally disordered but contains transient α-helices. ​Protein Sci.​ ​20​, 542–556 (2011).
92. Feuerstein, S. ​et al.​ Transient structure and SH3 interaction sites in an intrinsically
disordered fragment of the hepatitis C virus protein NS5A. ​J. Mol. Biol.​ ​420​, 310–323
(2012).
93. Jensen, M. R. ​et al.​ Quantitative conformational analysis of partially folded proteins from
residual dipolar couplings: application to the molecular recognition element of Sendai virus
nucleoprotein. ​J. Am. Chem. Soc.​ ​130​, 8055–8061 (2008).
94. Martin, E. W. ​et al.​ Sequence Determinants of the Conformational Properties of an
Intrinsically Disordered Protein Prior to and upon Multisite Phosphorylation. ​J. Am. Chem.
Soc.​ ​138​, 15323–15335 (2016).
95. Das, R. K., Crick, S. L. & Pappu, R. V. N-terminal segments modulate the α-helical
propensities of the intrinsically disordered basic regions of bZIP proteins. ​J. Mol. Biol.​ ​416​,
287–299 (2012).
96. Harmon, T. S. ​et al.​ GADIS: Algorithm for designing sequences to achieve target secondary
structure profiles of intrinsically disordered proteins. ​Protein Eng. Des. Sel.​ ​29​, 339–346
(2016).
97. Bayer, T. S., Booth, L. N., Knudsen, S. M. & Ellington, A. D. Arginine-rich motifs present
multiple interfaces for specific binding by RNA. ​RNA​ ​11​, 1848–1857 (2005).
98. Battiste, J. L. ​et al.​ Alpha helix-RNA major groove recognition in an HIV-1 rev peptide-RRE
RNA complex. ​Science​ ​273​, 1547–1551 (1996).
99. Hurst, K. R., Koetzner, C. A. & Masters, P. S. Characterization of a critical interaction
between the coronavirus nucleocapsid protein and nonstructural protein 3 of the viral
replicase-transcriptase complex. ​J. Virol.​ ​87​, 9159–9172 (2013).

Page 36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

100.Hurst, K. R., Ye, R., Goebel, S. J., Jayaraman, P. & Masters, P. S. An Interaction between
the Nucleocapsid Protein and a Component of the Replicase-Transcriptase Complex Is
Crucial for the Infectivity of Coronavirus Genomic RNA. ​J. Virol.​ ​84​, 10276–10288 (2010).
101.Verheije, M. H. ​et al.​ The coronavirus nucleocapsid protein is dynamically associated with
the replication-transcription complexes. ​J. Virol.​ ​84​, 11575–11579 (2010).
102.Surjit, M. ​et al.​ The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nucleocapsid protein is
phosphorylated and localizes in the cytoplasm by 14-3-3-mediated translocation. ​J. Virol.
79​, 11476–11486 (2005).
103.Timani, K. A. ​et al.​ Nuclear/nucleolar localization properties of C-terminal nucleocapsid
protein of SARS coronavirus. ​Virus Res.​ ​114​, 23–34 (2005).
104.Kuo, L. & Masters, P. S. Genetic evidence for a structural interaction between the carboxy
termini of the membrane and nucleocapsid proteins of mouse hepatitis virus. ​J. Virol.​ ​76​,
4987–4999 (2002).
105.Hurst, K. R. ​et al.​ A major determinant for membrane protein interaction localizes to the
carboxy-terminal domain of the mouse coronavirus nucleocapsid protein. ​J. Virol.​ ​79​,
13285–13297 (2005).
106.Verma, S., Bednar, V., Blount, A. & Hogue, B. G. Identification of functionally important
negatively charged residues in the carboxy end of mouse hepatitis coronavirus A59
nucleocapsid protein. ​J. Virol.​ ​80​, 4344–4355 (2006).
107.Brass, V. ​et al.​ An Amino-terminal Amphipathic α-Helix Mediates Membrane Association of
the Hepatitis C Virus Nonstructural Protein 5A. ​J. Biol. Chem.​ ​277​, 8130–8139 (2002).
108.Braun, A. R., Lacy, M. M., Ducas, V. C., Rhoades, E. & Sachs, J. N. α-Synuclein’s Uniquely
Long Amphipathic Helix Enhances its Membrane Binding and Remodeling Capacity. ​J.
Membr. Biol.​ ​250​, 183–193 (2017).

Page 37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

109.Wyman, J. & Gill, S. J. ​Binding and Linkage: Functional Chemistry of Biological
Macromolecules​. (University Science Books, 1990).
110.Nikolic, J. ​et al.​ Negri bodies are viral factories with properties of liquid organelles. ​Nat.
Commun.​ ​8​, 58 (2017).
111.Metrick, C. M., Koenigsberg, A. L. & Heldwein, E. E. Conserved Outer Tegument
Component UL11 from Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Is an Intrinsically Disordered, RNA-Binding
Protein. ​MBio​ ​11​, (2020).
112.Heinrich, B. S., Maliga, Z., Stein, D. A., Hyman, A. A. & Whelan, S. P. J. Phase Transitions
Drive the Formation of Vesicular Stomatitis Virus Replication Compartments. ​MBio​ ​9​,
(2018).
113.Zhou, Y., Su, J. M., Samuel, C. E. & Ma, D. Measles Virus Forms Inclusion Bodies with
Properties of Liquid Organelles. ​J. Virol.​ ​93​, (2019).
114.Monette, A. ​et al.​ Pan-retroviral Nucleocapsid-Mediated Phase Separation Regulates
Genomic RNA Positioning and Trafficking. ​Cell Rep.​ ​31​, 107520 (2020).
115.Nevers, Q., Albertini, A. A., Lagaudrière-Gesbert, C. & Gaudin, Y. Negri bodies and other
virus membrane-less replication compartments. ​Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res.
1867​, 118831 (2020).
116.Monette, A. & Mouland, A. J. Zinc and Copper Ions Differentially Regulate Prion-Like Phase
Separation Dynamics of Pan-Virus Nucleocapsid Biomolecular Condensates. ​Viruses​ ​12​,
(2020).
117.Klein, S. ​et al.​ SARS-CoV-2 structure and replication characterized by in situ cryo-electron
tomography. ​Nat. Commun.​ ​11​, 5885 (2020).
118.Cong, Y., Kriegenburg, F., de Haan, C. A. M. & Reggiori, F. Coronavirus nucleocapsid
proteins assemble constitutively in high molecular oligomers. ​Sci. Rep.​ ​7​, 5740 (2017).

Page 38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

119.Chang, C.-K., Hou, M.-H., Chang, C.-F., Hsiao, C.-D. & Huang, T.-H. The SARS
coronavirus nucleocapsid protein--forms and functions. ​Antiviral Res.​ ​103​, 39–50 (2014).
120.Borodavka, A., Tuma, R. & Stockley, P. G. A two-stage mechanism of viral RNA
compaction revealed by single molecule fluorescence. ​RNA Biol.​ ​10​, 481–489 (2013).
121.He, R. ​et al.​ Characterization of protein–protein interactions between the nucleocapsid
protein and membrane protein of the SARS coronavirus. ​Virus Res.​ ​105​, 121–125 (2004).
122.Bergeron-Sandoval, L.-P. ​et al.​ Endocytosis caused by liquid-liquid phase separation of
proteins. ​bioRxiv​ 145664 (2018) doi:​10.1101/145664​.
123.Bergeron-Sandoval, L.-P. & Michnick, S. W. Mechanics, Structure and Function of
Biopolymer Condensates. ​J. Mol. Biol.​ ​430​, 4754–4761 (2018).
124.Holmstrom, E. D., Nettels, D. & Schuler, B. Conformational Plasticity of Hepatitis C Virus
Core Protein Enables RNA-Induced Formation of Nucleocapsid-like Particles. ​J. Mol. Biol.
430​, 2453–2467 (2018).
125.Rodríguez, L., Cuesta, I., Asenjo, A. & Villanueva, N. Human respiratory syncytial virus
matrix protein is an RNA-binding protein: binding properties, location and identity of the
RNA contact residues. ​J. Gen. Virol.​ ​85​, 709–719 (2004).
126.Linger, B. R., Kunovska, L., Kuhn, R. J. & Golden, B. L. Sindbis virus nucleocapsid
assembly: RNA folding promotes capsid protein dimerization. ​RNA​ ​10​, 128–138 (2004).
127.Zúñiga, S. ​et al.​ Coronavirus nucleocapsid protein is an RNA chaperone. ​Virology​ ​357​,
215–227 (2007).
128.Luo, H. ​et al.​ The nucleocapsid protein of SARS coronavirus has a high binding affinity to
the human cellular heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1. ​FEBS Lett.​ ​579​,
2623–2628 (2005).
129.Yang, P. ​et al.​ G3BP1 Is a Tunable Switch that Triggers Phase Separation to Assemble

Page 39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Stress Granules. ​Cell​ ​181​, 325–345.e28 (2020).
130.Nabeel-Shah, S. ​et al.​ SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid protein attenuates stress granule
formation and alters gene expression via direct interaction with host mRNAs. ​bioRxiv​ (2020)
doi:​10.1101/2020.10.23.342113​.
131.van Rosmalen, M. G. M. ​et al.​ Revealing in real-time a multistep assembly mechanism for
SV40 virus-like particles. ​Science Advances​ ​6​, eaaz1639 (2020).
132.Patel, A. ​et al.​ A liquid-to-solid phase transition of the ALS protein FUS accelerated by
disease mutation. ​Cell​ ​162​, 1066–1077 (2015).
133.Alberti, S. & Dormann, D. Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation in Disease. ​Annu. Rev. Genet.
53​, 171–194 (2019).
134.Weber, S. C. & Brangwynne, C. P. Getting RNA and protein in phase. ​Cell​ ​149​, 1188–1191
(2012).
135.Dignon, G. L., Zheng, W., Best, R. B., Kim, Y. C. & Mittal, J. Relation between
single-molecule properties and phase behavior of intrinsically disordered proteins. ​Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.​ ​115​, 9929–9934 (2018).
136.Zeng, X., Holehouse, A. S., Chilkoti, A., Mittag, T. & Pappu, R. V. Connecting
Coil-to-Globule Transitions to Full Phase Diagrams for Intrinsically Disordered Proteins.
Biophys. J.​ ​119​, 402–418 (2020).
137.Mittal, A., Das, R. K., Vitalis, A. & Pappu, R. V. The ABSINTH implicit solvation model and
forcefield paradigm for use in simulations of intrinsically disordered proteins. in
Computational Approaches to Protein Dynamics: From Quantum to Coarse-Grained
Methods​ (ed. Fuxreiter, M.) 188–222 (CRC Press, 2015).
138.Mao, A. H. & Pappu, R. V. Crystal lattice properties fully determine short-range interaction
parameters for alkali and halide ions. ​J. Chem. Phys.​ ​137​, 064104 (2012).

Page 40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.17.158121; this version posted December 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

139.Sherry, K. P., Das, R. K., Pappu, R. V. & Barrick, D. Control of transcriptional activity by
design of charge patterning in the intrinsically disordered RAM region of the Notch receptor.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.​ ​114​, E9243–E9252 (2017).
140.Abraham, M. J. ​et al.​ GROMACS: High performance molecular simulations through
multi-level parallelism from laptops to supercomputers. ​SoftwareX​ ​1–2​, 19–25 (2015/9).
141.Zimmerman, M. I. & Bowman, G. R. FAST Conformational Searches by Balancing
Exploration/Exploitation Trade-Offs. ​J. Chem. Theory Comput.​ ​11​, 5747–5757 (2015).
142.Porter, J. R., Zimmerman, M. I. & Bowman, G. R. Enspara: Modeling molecular ensembles
with scalable data structures and parallel computing. ​J. Chem. Phys.​ ​150​, 044108 (2019).
143.Holehouse, A. S. & Pappu, R. V. ​PIMMS (0.24 pre-beta)​. (2019).
doi:​10.5281/zenodo.3588456​.

Page 41

