bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.112284; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

SciSight: Combining faceted navigation and research group detection
for COVID-19 exploratory scientific search
Tom Hope

♣,♡

Jason Portenoy

♣,♥∗

♠

Eric Horvitz

♥∗

Kishore Vasan
♣,♡

Jonathan Borchardt
♢

♣∗

♥

Daniel S. Weld
Marti A. Hearst
Jevin West
♣
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
♡
Paul G. Allen School for Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
♥
Information School, University of Washington
♠
♢
Microsoft Research University of California, Berkeley
{tomh,jasonp,jonathanb}@allenai.org
{kishorev,jevinw}@uw.edu
Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has sparked unprecedented mobilization of scientists, generating a deluge of papers that makes it hard
for researchers to keep track and explore new
directions. Search engines are designed for
targeted queries, not for discovery of connections across a corpus. In this paper, we
present SciSight, a system for exploratory
search of COVID-19 research integrating two
key capabilities: first, exploring associations
between biomedical facets automatically extracted from papers (e.g., genes, drugs, diseases, patient outcomes); second, combining
textual and network information to search and
visualize groups of researchers and their ties.
1
SciSight has so far served over 15K users
with over 42K page views and 13% returns.

1 Introduction
Scientists worldwide are racing against the growing number of COVID-19 infections, to understand and treat the disease (Apuzzo and Kirkpatrick, 2020). However, a very different kind of
exponential growth has been plaguing researchers
– the flurry of papers published every year, at a rate
that continues to increase (Williamson and Minter,
2019). At the time of this writing, the COVID-19
Open Research Dataset (CORD-19) (Wang et al.,
2020a) includes over 130,000 publications of potential relevance, both historical and cutting-edge.
To boost scientific discovery over this corpus,
we propose SciSight, a working prototype system
for exploratory search of the COVID-19 literature. Unlike many tools (see Section 2), we shift
the focus from searching over lists of papers or authors, to navigating networks of biomedical con∗
1

Equal contribution.
http://scisight.apps.allenai.org/

cepts and research groups – for example, exploring links between COVID-19 and other diseases,
or labs working on treatments. While search engines are a powerful tool for finding documents,
they are mostly geared toward targeted search,
when researchers know what they are looking for
– less useful for exploring connections that are
not obvious from reading individual papers (Bales
et al., 2009; White and Roth, 2009).
Building exploratory interfaces in science is difficult not only due to the complexities of scientific content, but also because of social undercurrents that have tremendous effects on the construction of knowledge (Wagner and Leydesdorff,
2005; Pan et al., 2012; West et al., 2013) (as reflected, for example, in biased citation patterns
(King et al., 2017)). Silos of knowledge through2
out the literature (Vilhena et al., 2014) can hinder research advancement and cross-fertilization
across groups and fields that is crucial for driving innovation (Hope et al., 2017; Kittur et al.,
2019), ultimately impacting human lives (Loevinsohn et al., 2015). These problems are acute when
it comes to the COVID-19 pandemic, with new information rapidly emerging and urgently needed.
We aim to incorporate the social structure into
an intuitive design interface, to help researchers
make connections to other groups and ideas in
the literature by traversing across networks of
concepts and groups of scientists – helping users
discover who is working on what, and where?
We identify groups by clustering the coauthorship graph, and extract topics and entities
from the group’s papers. Each group is represented using textual and network information:
the group’s salient authors (who), the topics they
2

So Long to the Silos, Nature Biotech, https://
www.nature.com/articles/nbt.3544

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.112284; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

work on (what) and their affiliations (where). We
build meta-edges capturing topical affinity between groups using a language model fine-tuned
for semantic similarity, and present approaches for
searching for groups with queries consisting of authors, topics and affiliations. Each selected query
automatically suggests new queries to try, to support exploration (Kairam et al., 2015).
In summary, our main contributions:
• A working prototype for exploratory search
and visualization of COVID-19 scientific literature and collaboration networks, based on
a fusion of automatically extracted textual information (topics, entities) and co-authorship
network information.
• User interviews with experts suggest that
SciSight can help complement standard
search and help discover new directions.

2 Related work
The field of bibliometric visualization goes back
decades (Borgman and Furner, 2002), with a large
body of work. Visualizations of the scientific literature can take many shapes and forms, with
the aim of depicting the connections between
fields, topics, authors, and, most commonly, papers (Bales et al., 2020). While much research
has been done in this field over the years, actual
tools that are readily available primarily focus on
visualization of citation-based graphs between individual authors, papers or topics (Van Eck and
Waltman, 2010; Synnestvedt et al., 2005; Persson
et al., 2009). While this rich information could in
theory be useful, in practice it often renders the
visualization inscrutable, especially for real-world
networks comprising many authors. This problem
is especially acute when the goal is to enable discovery of new areas with unfamiliar authors.
Recently, such tools have been applied to
COVID-19 papers, such as journal networks and
heat maps of frequently occurring terms (Haghani
et al., 2020). However, many tools require training before being able to be used, and state of the
art bibliometric mapping is currently considered
“complex and unwieldy” (Bales et al., 2020), potentially because the typical user “does not immediately comprehend a map and (as a result) is not
enticed into using it” (Buter et al., 2006).
COVID-19 tools. In response to COVID-19,
many tools for exploring the relevant literature

have been released. The great majority featured
paper search interfaces, with lists of titles and abstracts being the main focus. Many of the COVID19 tools we reviewed included standard faceted
search functionality (Yee et al., 2003; Hearst,
2006; Tunkelang, 2009), enabling users to filter
papers according to various facets. In a search
tool from Microsoft Azure (Microsoft, 2020), for
example, users can filter search results by various
facets (such as by authors or gene mentions extracted automatically from texts). Similar services
were made available by IBM Watson (IBM, 2020),
Elsevier (Elsevier, 2020) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH, 2020).
Currently a small number of tools focus on concept associations. One tool (Tu et al., 2020) feeds
a COVID-19 knowledge graph (KG) from (Wang
3
et al., 2020b) into Kibana , an external product
for creating dashboards with complex heat maps
of term frequencies in documents, including a
specialized query language for users with sufficient familiarity with Kibana. A tool from (Bras
et al., 2020) shows clusters of high-level topics
extracted with Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
(Blei et al., 2003) (visualized with word clouds).
In this paper, we integrate textual information
from papers and the network of author collaborations, allowing users to drill down from research
groups to papers to associations between entities
in one system, with a custom interface aimed to
help users “comprehend the map” (Bales et al.,
2020; Buter et al., 2006) intuitively.

3 SciSight: system overview
In this section we present an overview of our
prototype and its distinct components. We motivate each by discussing researcher needs. We
illustrate SciSight’s features and potential with
the following illustrative example:
Marc is a researcher interested in exploring
Chloroquine, an anti-malarial drug that has been
surrounded with controversies in the context of
COVID-19 (Touret and de Lamballerie, 2020). In
particular, Marc wants to find connections between Chloroquine and other drugs and diseases,
and to understand how these entities are interconnected in order to explore other candidate drugs
and potential side-effects. Marc is familiar with
the field and its main papers, but the amount of re3

https://www.elastic.co/kibana

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.112284; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

lated work is overwhelming with a litany of drugs
and diseases. Complicating things further, knowing that Chloroquine is not a new medication,
Marc wants to examine connections across years
of research, not just recent work.
3.1 Collocation explorer
Users of SciSight can search for a term/concept
of interest, or get suggestions based on important
COVID-19 topics. Searching for a term displays a
network of top related terms mined from the corpus, based on term collocation counts across the
corpus (co-appearance in the same sentence). Entities are displayed in a customized chord diagram
4
(Lee et al., 2015) layout , with edge width corresponding to collocation frequency. As seen in Figure 1a, interrelations between all terms are shown
(not just with the query), presenting the user with
more potential connections to explore (users can
also control the number of entities shown). Clicking an edge between two entities displays a list of
papers containing both terms.

(a)

Continuing our example, Marc can search for
Chloroquine and see its network of associations,
such as a potential connection to liver damage, or
its connection to other drugs such as the anti-viral
drug Ribavirin. Marc can navigate the graph by
clicking nodes to further explore new associations
(e.g., clicking liver damage to potentially discover
more related drugs and diseases). Navigation is
known to help facilitate exploration (Kairam et al.,
2015), such as when users do not have a pinpointed query in mind (White and Roth, 2009).
Entity extraction and selection To extract entities we use S2ORC-BERT (Lo et al., 2020), a
new language model pre-trained on a large cor5
pus of scientific papers. This model is fine-tuned
on two separate biomedical named entity recognition (NER) tasks (BC5CDR (Li et al., 2016)
and JNLPBA (Kim et al., 2004)), enabling us to
extract spans of text corresponding to proteins,
genes, cells, drugs, and diseases from across the
corpus. We extract entities only from titles and abstracts of papers to reduce noise and focus on the
more salient entities in each paper. We show only
entities collocated at least twice with other enti4

SciSight is implemented with React, server-side Crossfilter, DC.js, D3.js, and Varnish.
5
https://github.com/allenai/scibert/
blob/master/scripts/exp.py.

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Collocation explorer: corpus-wide associations between biomedical entities, such as drugs and
conditions. Highlighted in the figure is the edge between Chloroquine and liver injury. (b) Exploratory
search of connections between patient characteristics
and interventions. Papers working with immunocomprimised patients and Ribavirin would be listed below
the facet feature. The time graph above shows the number of papers per year with these criteria.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.112284; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

ties. Our choice of entities is the result of an initial
round of interviews with biomedical experts, identifying these concepts as fundamental to the study
of the virus. Participants with a more clinical orientation expressed interest in viewing associations
between drugs and diseases, while users from a
biology background wished to focus on proteins,
genes and cells. When asked whether they would
prefer to have all types of entities in one view, participants responded with a preference for separate
graphs to avoid clutter and reduce cognitive effort.
3.2 Faceted exploratory search
Similarly to other tools, we incorporate a faceted
search tool into SciSight. Our focus is on exploration of topics and associations, with relevant papers displayed below the facets for users wishing
to dig deeper after refining their search – rather
than being featured front and center. When searching for a topic or an author, new suggestions to
help refine the search are presented based on top
co-mentions with the initial query to help prevent
fixation on an initial topic and boost associative
exploration (Kairam et al., 2015). In our prototype
for this feature we aimed at providing one compact
set of facets that can cater to a wide range of interests but still be sufficiently granular. Based on formative interviews and a review of biomedical concept taxonomies, we converged on three widelyused topical facets in biomedicine, that capture
characteristics of patients or the problem, interventions, and outcomes (Schardt et al., 2007) (see
Figure 1b), extracted automatically from biomedical abstracts with the distant supervision model
in (Wallace et al., 2016). In addition, CORD-19
metadata facets are available, such as journal, affiliation and author. The number of relevant publications is shown over time, possibly revealing trends
for specific facets. Users can adjust the time range
to update the papers and facets displayed.
Having spotted a potential connection to Ribavirin, Marc searches for it under the intervention
facet to find out about related patient populations
and outcomes, and to see how often it has been
mentioned over time (see Figure 1b). A characteristic that pops-up and catches Marc’s attention
is immunocompromised patients, as he recalls a
colleague discussing the risk of treating such populations. He finds peaks of interest around some
points in time, and drilling down to papers from

around 2016 finds a paper with the following conclusion: ”No consensus was found regarding the
use of oral versus inhaled RBV... such heterogeneity demonstrates the need for further studies ...
in immunocompromised hosts.” Marc realizes his
knowledge of this domain is lacking, and decides
to zoom out and find out what groups and labs are
working on immunity and viral diseases, perhaps
also discovering some familiar collaborators.
3.3 Network of science
In the course of formative interviews with domain
experts, participants expressed the need to see
what other groups are doing in order to keep track,
explore new fields and potentially collaborate. We
build a visualization of groups and their ties and
integrate this social graph with exploratory faceted
search over topics, authors and affiliations. We design our tool with the following components.
3.3.1 Author groups
To identify groups of researchers, we start by constructing a co-authorship network in which links
between authors represent collaboration on a paper, weighted by the number of papers. We then
employ an overlapping community detection algorithm based on ego-splitting (Epasto et al., 2017)
so that authors can belong to multiple clusters
(groups). We relax the assumption typically made
in co-authorship analysis that authors belong to
one group alone – in reality, researchers can “wear
many hats” and belong to different groups depending on what they work on and with whom.
As shown in Figure 2, we represent groups with
“cards” (Bota et al., 2016) of salient authors, affiliations and topics (with information from Microsoft Academic Graph (MAG) (Sinha et al.,
2015)). Cards are color-coded to reflect relevance
to the user’s initial query – aiming to strike a balance between the relevance and diversity of the results shown. Users may select how many groups
to view, zoom in/out, click a group to see a list of
its topics, authors and papers.
To explore groups recently active in this space
we select authors with at least one paper in CORD19 since the year 2017. We focus on the giant connected component of this network (111,236 author
nodes, 951,072 edges; smaller components typically represented disambiguation errors), and run
the community detection algorithm. We observe a
small number of “super clusters”, large communities with hundreds of authors not densely linked, a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.112284; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 2:

Visualizing the network of groups with group
“cards”. Each card has three icons denoting the
top three authors, topics and affiliations, respectively. Card color indicates relevance to the search
query. Green edges capture social affinity (shared
authors), and purple edges capture topical affinity.

well-known characteristic of community structure
in real-world networks (Leskovec et al., 2009). We
thus apply the clustering algorithm again within
clusters with more than 120 authors to break them
down further into denser groups. This results in
6,475 clusters. There are 5276 authors belonging
to two groups; 6657 are in more than one cluster,
and 1381 in more than two clusters.
We display a mix of textual and social information: the most salient authors (who), affiliations
(where) and topics (what). We rank topics by their
TF-IDF scores within a cluster, and authors and
affiliations by relative frequency in a group. Users
can also dig deeper into groups with two further
levels of resolution. First, when hovering over a
group with the cursor, users are shown a tooltip
box with the top 5 authors, affiliations and topics,
with full names shown. Secondly, upon clicking
a group we show full ranked lists of these entities,
in addition to the group’s papers ranked by recency
(with title, abstract, journal and authors, including
a hyperlink to read the full paper).
3.3.2 Group links
We construct two types of links between groups.
The first type (shown as purple edges) represents
topical affinity across groups – the interests they

have in common based on publishing on similar
topics. The second type of link (shown as green
edges) captures social affinity between groups,
meaning groups with many shared author relationships. By providing both kinds of links, the
tool implicitly suggests potential collaborations or
connections, particularly when a social connection
does not currently exist alongside a topical one.
Cluster Relationships To find topical affinity
between clusters we embed topic surface forms
with a language model trained to capture seman6
tic similarity . With each topic represented with
its embedding, we get a vector representation of
groups with a simple TF-IDF weighted average of
embeddings, and compute cosine similarity.
Finding Bridges As a test case for demonstrating our framework’s ability to find gaps and similarities across groups of researchers, we identify
“bridges” between groups, potentially signifying
structural holes (Burt, 2004) in the author network.
We examine groups that work on data science
(MAG topic), a highly interdisciplinary field connecting researchers from multiple domains. We
discover Derek AT Cummings, a prominent biologist and epidemiologist with appointments at two
different universities. We find him to be a sole
shared author between two different clusters: one
focusing on areas tied with virology and medical microbiology, while the other more associated with computational epidemiology. The former group has 15 authors, and the latter has 35.
Similarity Evaluation In a preliminary experiment, we selected 30 random clusters and computed topical affinities to other clusters. For each
group we randomly sample one cluster out of the
top 3 closely related clusters, and another cluster
from the bottom 50% of farthest clusters (for network construction as shown to users, we only create links between top-most similar groups). We
randomize the results and give them to a biomedical data analyst for annotation. We find that overall, we are able to correctly find pairs of research
groups that work in similar areas with a 80% precision. In future work we plan to collect validation
data enabling to measure both precision and recall.
3.3.3 Exploratory search for groups
Users can search topics, affiliations, or authors.
We rank topics based on global TF-IDF scores. As
in standard faceted search, queries across facets
6

RoBERTa-large-STS-SNLI(Liu
et
al.,
2019)
github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.112284; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

are conjunctive (e.g., gene sequencing AND Harvard), and queries within facets are disjunctive
(e.g., gene sequencing OR bioassays). Each query
consists of one or more choices for each facets.
A selection automatically suggests new facets that
are frequently associated with the original query,
suggesting more groups and topics to explore.
The problem of finding relevant communities to
a query has been explored to a certain extent under
the rubric of community search (Sozio and Gionis,
2010; Fang et al., 2020), in which given a graph
G and a set of query nodes in the graph, the objective is to find a subgraph of G that contains the
query nodes and is also densely connected. The
problem of community search in heterogeneous
networks has only recently been explored (Fang
et al., 2020), and only for one query node. In
addition, in our setting we aim to retrieve highrelevance groups, with ranked topics, authors and
affiliations. We propose to retrieve relevant results
for a user’s query with two simple approaches. In
the first, we compute the overlap between query
facets q and the top-K salient facets f for each
group, and rank groups by normalized overlap size
∣{q∶q∈f }∣
. In the second approach, we compute
∣f ∣
weighted PageRank scores (Xing and Ghorbani,
2004) over a graph with meta-nodes representing
groups, and meta-edges as described earlier in this
section. We do so separately for both types of
edges: one for topical affinity, and the other for
social proximity. At query time, we compute the
average of these scores and the facet overlap score.

which led to “spotting an interferon with relevant
and interesting studies, very useful.” P4 discovered a link between broad-spectrum antivirals and
MERS, providing a “new and strongly relevant
idea”. P5 was able to find associations considered
new and interesting between the TNF inflammatory cytokine and ERK1/2, a type of protein kinase
(relevant to P5’s interest in cytokine profiles).
Finding new groups and directions. P1 gave
an example of a group (lab) using assays to identify which proteins antibodies bind to in order to
to neutralize HIV, and connecting to other groups
working on serum utilization for SARS to potentially collaborate. When searching for groups tied
with a prominent scientist, P2 found a group associated with the scientist with recent work (Yuan
et al., 2020) revealing a new direction regarding
SARS-CoV-2 epitopes. P2 also found a group in
China with shared focus on epitopes but no social
ties, revealing “new perspectives that I would not
have found otherwise” on virus evolution.
Limitations: more information and features.
P1, P4 suggested that user-inputted concepts be
combined with existing concepts/terms on-the-fly,
and that edges could be removed by the user. P3
and P4 suggested ranking associations by “measures of novelty” to allow users to focus on emergent knowledge. Participants mentioned a diverse
range of other entities to explore, e.g., patient
weight, metabolic speed, drug dosages, vaccines,
mutation mechanisms, and various techniques.

5 Conclusion
4 Informal user studies and findings
We conduct preliminary user studies with four researchers and one practitioner. P1 is a research
scientist in virology, whose work also studies the
Zika virus; P2 is a postdoctoral fellow in the area
of virology, working on viral infections and human antibody responses, and P3 is a postdoctoral
fellow and MD working primarily in Oncology.
P4 is a medical professional and PharmD. P5 is a
researcher working on viral diseases and proteins.
Discovering unknown associations. Based on
interest in a the CR3022 antibody , P2 searched
for it with SciSight’s collocation feature, finding
“very relevant associations” and also “two potentially surprising and interesting publications. I’m
going to look into those papers.” P1 searched
for cells linked to a type of cytopathic effect and
found Calu-3 (a human lung cancer cell line),

In this paper we presented SciSight, an evolving
system for scientific literature search and exploration. We demonstrate SciSight’s use on a large
corpus of papers related to the COVID-19 pandemic and previous coronaviruses. We use stateof-the-art scientific language models to extract entities such as proteins, drugs and diseases, and
an overlapping community detection approach for
identifying groups of researchers. To visualize
groups we display group “cards” with a novel link
scheme capturing topical and social affinities between communities, designed to identify socially
disjoint groups working on similar topics. Preliminary user interviews suggest that SciSight can
help complement standard search and may pave
new research directions. In future work, we plan
to conduct extensive studies to validate SciSight
and better understand its potential and limitations.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.112284; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References
Matt Apuzzo and David D. Kirkpatrick. 2020.
Covid-19 changed how the world does science,
together. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/
01/world/europe/coronavirus-scienceresearch-cooperation.html.

Michael E Bales, David R Kaufman, and Stephen B
Johnson. 2009. Evaluation of a prototype search and
visualization system for exploring scientific communities. In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings,
volume 2009, page 24. American Medical Informatics Association.

Milad Haghani, Michiel CJ Bliemer, Floris Goerlandt,
and Jie Li. 2020. The scientific literature on coronaviruses, covid-19 and its associated safety-related
research dimensions: A scientometric analysis and
scoping review. Safety Science.
Marti A Hearst. 2006. Clustering versus faceted categories for information exploration. Communications of the ACM, 49(4):59–61.
Tom Hope, Joel Chan, Aniket Kittur, and Dafna Shahaf. 2017. Accelerating innovation through analogy
mining. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining, pages 235–243.

Michael E Bales, Drew N Wright, Peter R Oxley, and
Terrie R Wheeler. 2020. Bibliometric visualization
and analysis software: State of the art, workflows,
and best practices.

IBM. 2020.
Watson insights for medical literature — covid-19 navigator. https://covid-19navigator.mybluemix.net/search.
Last accessed 2020-05-12.

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022.

Sanjay Kairam, Nathalie Henry Riche, Steven Drucker,
Roland Fernandez, and Jeffrey Heer. 2015. Refinery: Visual exploration of large, heterogeneous networks through associative browsing. In Computer
graphics forum, volume 34, pages 301–310. Wiley
Online Library.

Christine L Borgman and Jonathan Furner. 2002.
Scholarly communication and bibliometrics. Annual review of information science and technology,
36(1):2–72.
Horatiu Bota, Ke Zhou, and Joemon M Jose. 2016.
Playing your cards right: The effect of entity cards
on search behaviour and workload. In Proceedings
of the 2016 ACM on Conference on Human Information Interaction and Retrieval, pages 131–140.
Pierre Le Bras, Azimeh Gharavi, David A. Robb,
Ana F. Vidal, Stefano Padilla, and Mike J. Chantler.
2020. Visualising covid-19 research.
Ronald S Burt. 2004. Structural holes and good ideas.
American journal of sociology, 110(2):349–399.
RK Buter, ECM Noyons, M Van Mackelenbergh, and
T Laine. 2006. Combining concept maps and bibliometric maps: First explorations. Scientometrics,
66(2):377–387.
Elsevier. 2020. Elsevier coronavirus research repository. https://coronavirus.1science.com/
search. Last accessed 2020-05-12.
Alessandro Epasto, Silvio Lattanzi, and Renato
Paes Leme. 2017. Ego-splitting framework: From
non-overlapping to overlapping clusters. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 145–154.
Yixiang Fang, Yixing Yang, Wenjie Zhang, Xuemin
Lin, and Xin Cao. 2020. Effective and efficient community search over large heterogeneous information
networks. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
13(6):854–867.

Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka,
Yuka Tateisi, and Nigel Collier. 2004. Introduction
to the bio-entity recognition task at jnlpba. In Proceedings of the international joint workshop on natural language processing in biomedicine and its applications, pages 70–75. Citeseer.
Molly M King, Carl T Bergstrom, Shelley J Correll,
Jennifer Jacquet, and Jevin D West. 2017. Men set
their own cites high: Gender and self-citation across
fields and over time. Socius, 3:2378023117738903.
Aniket Kittur, Lixiu Yu, Tom Hope, Joel Chan, Hila
Lifshitz-Assaf, Karni Gilon, Felicia Ng, Robert E
Kraut, and Dafna Shahaf. 2019. Scaling up analogical innovation with crowds and ai. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(6):1870–
1877.
Sukwon Lee, Sung-Hee Kim, Ya-Hsin Hung, Heidi
Lam, Youn-ah Kang, and Ji Soo Yi. 2015. How do
people make sense of unfamiliar visualizations?: A
grounded model of novice’s information visualization sensemaking. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 22(1):499–508.
Jure Leskovec, Kevin J Lang, Anirban Dasgupta, and
Michael W Mahoney. 2009. Community structure
in large networks: Natural cluster sizes and the absence of large well-defined clusters. Internet Mathematics, 6(1):29–123.
Jiao Li, Yueping Sun, Robin J Johnson, Daniela Sciaky, Chih-Hsuan Wei, Robert Leaman, Allan Peter
Davis, Carolyn J Mattingly, Thomas C Wiegers, and
Zhiyong Lu. 2016. Biocreative v cdr task corpus:
a resource for chemical disease relation extraction.
Database, 2016.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.112284; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Kyle Lo, Lucy Lu Wang, Mark Neumann, Rodney Kinney, and Daniel S. Weld. 2020. S2ORC: The Semantic Scholar Open Research Corpus. In Proceedings of ACL.
Michael Loevinsohn, Lyla Mehta, Katie Cuming, Alan
Nicol, Oliver Cumming, and Jeroen HJ Ensink.
2015. The cost of a knowledge silo: a systematic
re-review of water, sanitation and hygiene interventions. Health policy and planning, 30(5):660–674.
Microsoft. 2020.
Azure cognitive search
- covid-19 search demo.
https://
covid19search.azurewebsites.net/.
Last
accessed 2020-05-12.
2020.
Nih litcovid.
https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/
coronavirus/. Last accessed 2020-05-12.

Jingxuan Tu, Marc Verhagen, Brent Cochran, and
James Pustejovsky. 2020. Exploration and discovery of the covid-19 literature through semantic visualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.01800.
Daniel Tunkelang. 2009. Faceted search, volume 5.
Morgan & Claypool Publishers.
Nees Van Eck and Ludo Waltman. 2010. Software survey: Vosviewer, a computer program for bibliometric mapping. Scientometrics.
Daril A Vilhena, Jacob G Foster, Martin Rosvall,
Jevin D West, James Evans, and Carl T Bergstrom.
2014. Finding cultural holes: How structure and
culture diverge in networks of scholarly communication. Sociological Science, 1:221.
Caroline S Wagner and Loet Leydesdorff. 2005. Network structure, self-organization, and the growth of
international collaboration in science. Research policy, 34(10):1608–1618.

NIH.

Raj Kumar Pan, Kimmo Kaski, and Santo Fortunato.
2012. World citation and collaboration networks:
uncovering the role of geography in science. Scientific reports, 2:902.
Olle Persson, Rickard Danell, and J Wiborg Schneider.
2009. How to use bibexcel for various types of bibliometric analysis. Celebrating scholarly communication studies: A Festschrift for Olle Persson at his
60th Birthday.
Connie Schardt, Martha B Adams, Thomas Owens,
Sheri Keitz, and Paul Fontelo. 2007. Utilization of
the pico framework to improve searching pubmed
for clinical questions. BMC medical informatics and
decision making, 7(1):16.
Arnab Sinha, Zhihong Shen, Yang Song, Hao Ma, Darrin Eide, Bo-June Hsu, and Kuansan Wang. 2015.
An overview of microsoft academic service (mas)
and applications. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on world wide web, pages 243–
246.
Mauro Sozio and Aristides Gionis. 2010.
The
community-search problem and how to plan a successful cocktail party. In Proceedings of the 16th
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 939–948.
Marie B Synnestvedt, Chaomei Chen, and John H
Holmes. 2005. Citespace ii: visualization and
knowledge discovery in bibliographic databases. In
AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings. American
Medical Informatics Association.
Franck Touret and Xavier de Lamballerie. 2020. Of
chloroquine and covid-19. Antiviral Research, page
104762.

Byron C Wallace, Joël Kuiper, Aakash Sharma, Mingxi
Zhu, and Iain J Marshall. 2016. Extracting pico sentences from clinical trial reports using supervised
distant supervision. The Journal of Machine Learning Research. Available from drevidence.com.
Lucy Lu Wang, Kyle Lo, Yoganand Chandrasekhar,
Russell Reas, Jiangjiang Yang, Darrin Eide, Kathryn
Funk, Rodney Kinney, Ziyang Liu, William Merrill,
et al. 2020a. Cord-19: The covid-19 open research
dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10706.
Qingyun Wang, Xuan Wang, Manling Li, Heng Ji,
and Jiawei Han. 2020b. Knowledge extraction
to assist scientific discovery from corona virus
literature. http://blender.cs.illinois.edu/
covid19/. Last accessed 2020-05-12.
Jevin D West, Jennifer Jacquet, Molly M King, Shelley J Correll, and Carl T Bergstrom. 2013. The role
of gender in scholarly authorship. PloS one, 8(7).
Ryen W White and Resa A Roth. 2009. Exploratory
search: Beyond the query-response paradigm. Synthesis lectures on information concepts, retrieval,
and services, 1(1):1–98.
Peace Ossom Williamson and Christian IJ Minter.
2019. Exploring pubmed as a reliable resource for
scholarly communications services. Journal of the
Medical Library Association: JMLA, 107(1):16.
Wenpu Xing and Ali Ghorbani. 2004. Weighted pagerank algorithm. In Proceedings. Second Annual Conference on Communication Networks and Services
Research, 2004., pages 305–314. IEEE.
Ka-Ping Yee, Kirsten Swearingen, Kevin Li, and Marti
Hearst. 2003. Faceted metadata for image search
and browsing. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 401–408.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.112284; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Meng Yuan, Nicholas C Wu, Xueyong Zhu, ChangChun D Lee, Ray TY So, Huibin Lv, Chris KP Mok,
and Ian A Wilson. 2020. A highly conserved cryptic
epitope in the receptor binding domains of sars-cov2 and sars-cov. Science, 368(6491):630–633.

