bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

Pericyte-specific vascular expression of SARS-CoV-2 receptor
ACE2 – implications for microvascular inflammation and
hypercoagulopathy in COVID-19
Authors:
Liqun He1*, Maarja Andaloussi Mäe1*, Lars Muhl2*, Ying Sun1*, Riikka Pietilä1, Khayrun
Nahar1, Elisa Vázquez Liébanas1, Malin Jonsson Fagerlund3 Anders Oldner3, Jianping
Liu2, Guillem Genové2, Lei Zhang4, Yuan Xie4, Stefanos Leptidis2, Giuseppe Mocci2,
Simon Stritt1, Ahmed Osman5, Andrey Anisimov6, Karthik Amudhala
Hemanthakumar6, Markus Räsänen6, Olivier Mirabeau7, Emil Hansson2, Johan
Björkegren2,8,9,10, Michael Vanlandewijck2, Klas Blomgren5,11, Taija Mäkinen1, XiaoRong Peng12, Thomas D. Arnold13, Kari Alitalo6, Lars I Eriksson3, Urban Lendahl2,14,
Christer Betsholtz1,2,15,§
*

Shared contribution

§

Correspondence: christer.betsholtz@ki.se or christer.betsholtz@igp.uu.se

Affiliations:
1

Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala,

Sweden
2

Integrated Cardio Metabolic Centre (ICMC), Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge,

Sweden
3

Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section for Anesthesiology and

Intensive Care Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Solna and Function Perioperative
Medicine and Intensive Care, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
4

Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Medicinal Plant Resource and Natural

Pharmaceutical Chemistry, National Engineering Laboratory for Resource Developing
of Endangered Chinese Crude Drugs in Northwest of China, College of Life Sciences,
Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an, China
5

Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis
6

5 July, 2020

Wihuri Research Institute and Translational Cancer Medicine Program, Biomedicum

Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Finland.
7

Chemin des demoiselles Melson 2, 92160 Antony, France

8

Institute of Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Department of Genetics and Genomic

Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, US
9

Department of Pathophysiology, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational

Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
10

Clinical Gene Networks AB, Stockholm, Sweden

11

Department of Pediatric oncology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,

Sweden
12

Cardiovascular, Renal and Metabolism (CVRM), IMED Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca

BioPharmaceuticals R&D, Gothenburg, Sweden
13

Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, USA

14

Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden

15

Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

Accumulating clinical observations implicate vascular inflammation as an
underlying cause of coagulopathy in severely ill COVID-19 patients and it was
recently suggested that SARS-CoV-2 virus particles infect endothelial cells. Here,
we show that endothelial cells do not express angiotensin-converting enzyme-2
(ACE2), the SARS-CoV-2 receptor. Instead, pericytes and microvascular smooth
muscle cells express ACE2 in an organotypic manner. Pericyte deficiency leads to
increased endothelial expression and release of Von Willebrand factor and
intravascular platelet and fibrin aggregation, suggesting that pericytes limit
endothelial pro-thrombotic responses. That pericytes and not endothelial cells
express ACE2 may provide important clues to the pathology of COVID-19, as
pericytes are normally shielded behind an endothelial barrier and may get infected
only when this barrier is compromised by COVID-19 risk factors.

COVID-19 has currently been diagnosed in more than 11.0 million people worldwide
and resulted in more than 530,000 deaths (as of July 5, 2020; Johns Hopkins
University COVID-19 case tracker https://coronavirus.jhu.edu). COVID-19 is caused
by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2). Like other
coronaviruses 1, SARS-CoV-2 infects cells through binding of its spike (S) protein to
cell surface receptors, followed by S protein cleavage, fusion of viral and cellular
membranes and viral RNA entry into the cytoplasm. ACE2 has been identified as the
cell surface receptor for SARS-CoV-2, and the proteases TMPRSS2 and cathepsin B/L
(CTSB/L) have been shown to mediate SARS-CoV-2 S cleavage 2. SARS-CoV-2 thereby
appears to utilize the same molecular pathway for cellular entry as SARS–CoV-1,
which caused the SARS epidemic in 2002-2003

3,4

. ACE2 normally functions in the

renin/angiotensin pathway by cleaving angiotensin-2 to angiotensin 1-7, a peptide
with multiple reported functions 5,6.
Several types of epithelial cells in the nasal cavities, lung, gastrointestinal
tract and eye were recently shown to express ACE2 and TMPRSS2 or CTSL, indicating
susceptibility for SARS-CoV-2 infection 7-9. These cellular targets offer explanation for
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

the initial range of COVID-19 symptoms, including cough, fever, respiratory
impairment, lost sense of smell and taste, nausea and diarrhea. Later in the disease
course, however, some COVID-19 patients, experience a second round of severe
symptoms and complications, including venous and arterial thrombosis with
pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction and stroke, acute kidney injury and
neurological manifestations 10-16. Moreover, some patients display severe hypoxemia
without concomitant respiratory dysfunction early in the disease course

17

. These

severe and partly paradoxical manifestations pose questions about possible vascular
involvement secondary to the initial viral pneumonia. Laboratory blood tests reveal
coagulation abnormalities that differ from those observed in certain other severe
diseases. The COVID-19-associated coagulopathy (CAC) appears distinct from
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), for example 18-20. In addition, severely
ill COVID-19 patients display indicators of systemic inflammation

21,22

. The

pathophysiological basis of these problems is not known, but involvement of the
vascular endothelium has been suspected, posing the question if SARS-CoV-2 virus
infects endothelial cells. Endothelial ACE2 expression has been reported based on
immunodetection

5,23,24

, and recently the presence of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles in

endothelial cells in COVID-19 patients was proposed

25,26

, but also questioned

27

.

Recent single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNAseq) studies have implicated low-level
ACE2 expression by endothelial cells across multiple organs 8 but also vascular mural
cells (pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC)) have been suggested to
express ACE2 based on immunodetection

23

and RNA sequencing

28-32

. However,

these interpretations are clouded by ambiguities concerning antibody specificity and
cell contaminations in scRNAseq data.
To know what (if any) vascular cell types express ACE2 is important for the
understanding of COVID-19 vascular pathophysiology. If endothelial cells carry ACE2
receptors, their infection would likely only require viral dissemination from the
primary infected cells into the blood (viremia), which has been reported for SARSCoV-2 33,34. However, infection of pericytes or other perivascular cells would require
virus passage across the endothelial barrier, something that seems unlikely in a
healthy vasculature given that corona virus particles are larger than the physiological
endothelial pore size of most, if not all, blood vessels. However, in a number of
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

pathophysiological conditions, including hypertension, inflammation, diabetes and
obesity, the endothelial barriers are compromised and vascular permeability
increased

35-39

. Notably, these conditions are also recognized as risk factors for

severe COVID-19 disease 40,41.
Here, we report that there is strong and specific ACE2 expression in
microvascular mural cells in a highly organotypic fashion, while vascular endothelial
cells are consistently ACE2 mRNA and protein negative. We also find that pericyte
deficiency promotes endothelial synthesis and release of Von Willebrand factor,
platelet aggregation and fibrin deposition, showing that pericyte injury may trigger
endothelial pro-coagulant responses.

Results
Ace2/ACE2 is specifically expressed in microvascular mural cells of the central
nervous system
It is an emerging view that COVID-19 patients in hospital care often display CAC and
systemic inflammation, both associated with poor prognosis

10,11,42-48

. To assess the

pathology spectrum in a Swedish patient cohort, we studied 20 critically ill patients
admitted to the intensive care unit at the Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden with positive diagnostic test for COVID-19. These patients uniformly
displayed indicators of systemic inflammation, including markedly elevated Creactive protein (CRP) and high circulating levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such
as IL-6. They also displayed a typical CAC biochemistry and symptomatology,
including elevated D-dimer levels and pulmonary embolism despite prophylactic
anticoagulation therapy (Extended Data Table 1).
To explore the molecular basis for a direct infection of vascular cells by SARSCoV-2 as a putative underlying case of CAC and systemic inflammation, we analyzed
the expression of ACE2 and S priming proteases by vascular cells. Mice and humans
frequently share gene and protein expression patterns across cell types, and we
therefore first assessed the expression and distribution of Ace2/ACE2 in the mouse
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

vasculature. Using our previously published scRNAseq database of adult mouse brain
vascular gene expression patterns 29,30, we found that Ace2 mRNA is highly enriched
in pericytes and venous VSMC, qualifying Ace2 among the top 15 specific markers for
these

cells

(Extended

Data

Fig

1a,b

and

http://betsholtzlab.org/VascularSingleCells/database.html). At lower levels, Ace2
was also found in VSMCs negative for Cnn1 and other arterial VSMC markers
(Extended Data Fig 1c,d). A subpopulation of Ace2-positive type-2 fibroblasts (FB2)
cells and a few Ace2-positive endothelial cells were noted, however these cells coexpressed Kcnj8 (Extended Data Fig 1c) and several other pericyte markers
(Extended Data Fig 1c, e), suggesting that they were pericyte-contaminated. Deep
analysis of the 23 Ace2-positive endothelial cells in this dataset revealed that 20
expressed at least one additional pericyte marker and 18 expressed multiple pericyte
markers, whereas these markers were generally absent from Ace2-negative
endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig 1e). We failed to find any distinguishing gene
expression pattern beyond the addition of pericytes markers onto the
transcriptomes of FB2 and endothelial cells, respectively (Extended Data Fig 1f-h),
together arguing that the presence of Ace2 RNA sequences in FB2 and endothelial
cells is caused by pericyte contamination.
To deepen the analysis of brain vascular cells, we devised a computational
pipeline for meta-analysis of scRNAseq data generated using SmartSeq2 and
DropSeq (10x Genomics) platforms (see Methods). We used this pipeline to merge
two published
The

29,30,49

combined

and one unpublished dataset generated using both platforms.

data

are

available

for

analysis

gene-by-gene

http://betsholtzlab.org/Publications/BrainIntegration/search.html

(login

at
ID:

reviewer, password: reviewer). This analysis confirmed that Ace2 is specifically
expressed in brain pericytes, venous VSMCs and Cnn1-negative arteriolar VSMCs (Fig
1a-c). An additional Ace2-positive cell cluster contributed uniquely from the DropSeq
dataset (cluster #17 in Fig 1a-c) contained both pericyte and endothelial markers but
lacked other unique transcripts, and we therefore concluded that it was composed
of pericyte-contaminated endothelial cells.
We next assessed the localization of ACE2 protein-expressing cells in the
mouse brain vasculature by immune-fluorescence (IF) analysis. In agreement with
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

the scRNAseq data, we found the brain ACE2 IF signal was concentrated to periendothelial cells with typical morphology of pericytes: a distinct cell soma, primary
longitudinally oriented processes and secondary short club-like extensions (Fig 1
d,e). The endothelial cells were invariably ACE2 IF negative. As expected for a cell
membrane-bound protein, ACE2 showed a similar sub-cellular distribution as
platelet-derived growth factor receptor-beta (PDGFRB) and N-aminopeptidase
(CD13), (Fig 1d and Extended Data Fig 2a) and a slightly distinct localization
compared to the cytoplasmic Pdgfrb-GFP reporter (Extended Data Fig 2b). Focusing
on the cortex where the arterio-venous vascular hierarchy is readily distinguishable
by morphology and marker expression

29

, we found strongly ACE2-positive mural

cells associated with capillaries and veins/venules (Fig 1d) and weakly ACE2-positive
VSMCs at terminal arterioles (Fig 1d and Extended Data Fig 2c), whereas calponin
(CNN1)-positive mural cells around larger arteries/arterioles were ACE2-negative (Fig
1d and Extended Data Fig 2c). This ACE2 IF pattern thus matched the zonation of
Ace2-positive brain mural cells predicted from the scRNAseq data, revealing ACE2 as
more specific to micro-vascular mural cells than other commonly used protein
markers for mural cell (e.g. PDGFRB, CD13, and NG2), which also label arterial VSMC
50

.
To investigate the generality of the microvascular pattern of mural cell ACE2

expression in the central nervous system (CNS), we additionally analyzed spinal cord
and eye. Similar to the brain, spinal cord ACE2 was concentrated to cells with the
typical morphology and marker expression of pericytes (Extended Data Fig 2d) and
weaker ACE2 expression was noted also in alpha-smooth muscle actin (αSMA)positive VSMCs at terminal arterioles, whereas CNN1-positive VSMCs of larger
arteries were ACE2-negative (Extended Data Fig 2e,f). Analysis of the eye (Extended
Data Fig 3a-t) showed that also retinal pericytes were strongly ACE2-positive
(Extended Data Fig 3c,g,k,o) and αSMA–positive VSMC in small diameter retinal
arterioles were weakly ACE2-positive, whereas larger diameter arterioles/arteries
were ACE2-negative (Extended Data Fig 3k). Also the choriocapillaris harbored
strongly ACE2-positive pericytes (Extended Data Fig 3q-t), whereas αSMA–positive
vessels feeding this capillary plexus were ACE2-negative (Extended Data Fig 3c,k,s).
ACE2-positive pericytes were further found in the ciliary body (Extended Data Fig
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

3h). Together, these analyses reveal a common pattern and zonation of ACE2
expression in CNS mural cells. Endothelial cells were consistently ACE2-negative at
all analyzed locations. Intriguingly, pericytes located in the extra-ocular skeletal
muscle, hence residing outside of the CNS, were ACE2-negative (Extended Data Fig
3d), demonstrating that mural cell ACE2 expression is highly organotypic. We further
noted that the surface epithelium of the conjunctiva and cornea was ACE2-positive
(Extended Data Fig 3g), confirming recent observations by others 8.
To extend the analysis of Ace2 expression to non-vascular cell types in several
regions of the brain, we explored the mousebrain.org atlas, which confirmed that
Ace2 is not appreciably expressed outside of the vasculature across >250 different
central

and

peripheral

nervous

system

cell

types

51

(http://mousebrain.org/genesearch.html). More specifically, the mousebrain.org
atlas report Ace2 mRNA in cells annotated as pericytes, but also in a cluster of
endothelial cells
markers

51

, which, however, we found to co-express numerous pericyte

(including

Pdgfrb

and

Notch3)

suggesting

contamination.

The

mousebrain.org atlas denotes weak Ace2 expression also in neurons in dorsal root
ganglia 51.
To analyze ACE2 expression in mural cells of the human CNS is currently
challenging, given the scarcity of scRNAseq data for these cells. However, in a
dataset representing the developing human prefrontal cortex

52

, we identified six

ACE2-positive cells expressing at least one pericyte marker, and three of them
expressed multiple pericyte markers (Extended Data Fig 4a). We also assessed a
human glioblastoma Drop-Seq (10 x Genomics) scRNAseq dataset consisting of
69,125 endothelial and immune cells sorted using anti-CD31 antibodies (Zhang et al,
unpublished). Among these, we found only two ACE2-positive cells, both of which
had pericyte markers (Extended Data Fig 4b), suggesting that the ACE2 mRNA
sequences were derived by pericyte contamination, and that endothelial cells were
ACE2-negative. Finally, we assessed the scRNAseq data from an analysis of human
retinas

53

and found enrichment for ACE2 in pericytes as compared to other retinal

cells types, including endothelial cells (data not shown). Together, these
observations indicate that pericytes express ACE2 in the human brain, but additional

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

analysis are needed to confirm these conclusions. We failed to find any indications
for endothelial ACE2 expression in the analyzed human datasets.
ACE2 is specifically expressed in pericytes of the heart
We next analyzed Ace2/ACE2 expression in mouse and human heart. Based on
scRNAseq and single-nucleus (sn)RNAseq data, it was recently suggested that ACE2
expression

occurs

across

multiple

human

cardiac

cell

types,

including

cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells, pericytes, fibroblasts and macrophages

8,31,32

.

When examining adult mouse heart scRNAseq data enriched for mesenchymal cells
collected by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) from Pdgfrb-GFP transgenic
mice (Muhl et al, in press), we found prominent expression of Ace2 in pericytes,
whereas we could not detect Ace2 mRNA in fibroblasts and VSMC (data not shown).
To expand this analysis to additional cardiac cell types, we used our meta-analysis
pipeline to integrate three unpublished and one published
combined

data,

available

for

49

gene-by-gene

http://betsholtzlab.org/Publications/HeartIntegration/search.html,

datasets. These
search

at

(login

ID:

reviewer, password: reviewer) provided comprehensive coverage of the principal cell
types in the mouse heart, including cardiomyocytes, different types of endothelial
cells (blood vascular and endocardial), mural cells (pericytes, VSMCs), and subtypes
of fibroblasts and macrophages (Fig 2a). Of these, only pericytes expressed Ace2
substantially (Fig 2b, c). As in the brain, rare endothelial cells displayed RNAseq
counts for Ace2, however, out of 21 cells in total, 18 expressed at least one pericyte
marker and 15 expressed multiple pericyte markers (Extended Data Fig 5a,b), in
contrast to Ace2-negative endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig 5b,c), together
suggesting that the rare Ace2-sequences found in cardiac endothelial cells were
contributed by pericyte-contamination.
Cardiac ACE2 protein IF signal was detected only in cells with the typical
location and morphology of pericytes: a round cell body and long processes
adherent to the endothelial cells (Fig 2d). The ACE2 IF signal overlapped with PdgfrbGFP, albeit with the expected difference in subcellular localization: ACE2 in cell
membrane and processes and GFP in cytoplasm and nucleus. While ACE2 IF signal
was thus confined to pericytes in both CNS and heart, we noticed two differences
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

between these organs. First, in heart Ace2 mRNA and protein was found only in
capillary pericytes (Fig 2c, d), whereas in CNS small arteriolar and venous mural cells
were also positive. Second, not all cardiac capillary pericytes were strongly ACE2
positive; some were weakly positive and some were negative (Fig 2d).
In order to assess ACE2 expression in the human heart, we re-analyzed
scRNAseq data from healthy adult human hearts 54 identifying a cluster of cells with
substantially higher ACE2 expression compared to other clusters (Extended Data Fig
6a,b). Based on canonical markers and inference from gene expression patterns in
mouse where the transcriptomes of pericytes, VSMCs and fibroblasts have been
deeply analyzed (Muhl et al, in press), the ACE2-high cluster was unambiguously
identified as cardiac pericytes (Extended Data Fig 6b). A second cluster identified as
fibroblasts contained a minor proportion of ACE2-positive cells (cluster 5 in Extended
Data Fig 6b). One of the endothelial clusters contained a few ACE2-positive cells
(cluster 2 in Extended Data Fig 6b), which, however, also expressed pericyte markers
and were therefore concluded to be pericyte-contaminated (Extended Data Fig 6c).
All other cardiac cells were ACE2-negative with the possible exception of
cardiomyocytes, which although displaying lower ACE2 levels than pericytes did not
show signs of pericyte contamination. Collectively, our analysis of scRNAseq data
from mouse and human healthy hearts establishes pericytes as the major cellular
source of Ace2/ACE2 in the adult heart, with putative low expression also in human
fibroblasts and cardiomyocytes. ACE2 expression was consistently undetectable in
cardiac endothelial cells in both mouse and human.
In the lung, airway epithelial cells form the major Ace2/ACE2 expression site
Lung epithelial cells are known primary targets for SARS-CoV-2 infection, but it has
recently been proposed that also lung endothelial cells may become virus infected
26,55

. Our previously published scRNAseq dataset of pulmonary vascular cells

29

did

not reveal Ace2 expression in lung vascular cells but showed a distinct Ace2 signal in
epithelial

cells

displaying

markers

of

multiciliation

(http://betsholtzlab.org/VascularSingleCells/database.html}. To provide deeper
insight into the Ace2 expression by different pulmonary cell types, we used our
meta-analysis pipeline to integrate three published 29,30,49 and two unpublished adult
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

mouse lung scRNAseq datasets (Fig 3a). This analysis is available for gene-by-gene
browsing at http://betsholtzlab.org/Publications/LungIntegration/search.html (login
ID: reviewer, password: reviewer). The Ace2 mRNA distribution in this combined
data showed significant expression only in alveolar type-2 (AT-2) (surfactant protein
C (Sftpc)-positive) and multiciliated airway epithelial cells (Foxj1-positive) (Fig 3a-c).
No significant Ace2 expression was observed in any of the subtypes of vascular
endothelial cells (Pecam1 positive), mural cells (Notch3 positive), fibroblasts (Pdgfrb
positive, Notch3 negative), alveolar macrophages or other hematopoietic cells (Ptprc
positive) (Fig 3c). A strong ACE2 IF signal was observed in the bronchial epithelium
throughout the bronchial tree (Fig 3d). In the alveolar region distal to the terminal
bronchioles, we found ACE2 IF signal in SFTPC-positive AT-2 cells (Fig 3d). We failed
to find ACE2 in any endothelial populations in the lung, including alveolar capillaries
and large vessels (Fig 3d and Extended Data Fig 7). Also CD68-positive alveolar
macrophages were ACE2-negative (Extended Data Fig 7). While the vast majority of
lung pericytes were ACE2 IF negative, particularly in the alveolar region, we found a
few ACE2 positive pericytes close to larger bronchi and abundantly in trachea
capillaries (Extended Data Fig 7).
In order to assess ACE2 expression in human lungs, we re-analyzed scRNAseq
data from the lungs of adult human transplant donors and lung fibrosis patients 56.
Here, AT-2 cells constituted the major cellular source of ACE2 transcripts, but
expression was detected also in basal, club and multiciliated cells (Extended Data Fig
8). Immune cells, endothelial cells and fibroblasts were ACE2-negative, but the
vascular cell number was too small for a comprehensive analysis. Mural cells, for
example, were not present in the dataset.
We also analyzed the expression of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein priming
proteases in brain, heart and lung (Extended Data Fig 9). We observed Ace2 and
Tmprss2 co-expression in epithelial cells across the mouse lung dataset, whereas Ctsl
and Ctsb were more broadly expressed (albeit weakly in hematopoietic cells)
(Extended Data Fig 9). However, Tpmrss2 was not expressed in brain and heart
pericytes, which instead exhibited co-expression of Ace2 with Ctsb and Ctsl
(Extended Data Fig 9).

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

Taken together, these observations reveal that in contrast to brain and heart
and similar to ocular muscle, most vascular mural cells in the lung do not express
ACE2. Instead our data show that in both mouse and human lung bronchial epithelial
cells and alveolar AT-2 cells are the primary expression sites for ACE2 mRNA and
protein. Furthermore, our data reveal differences in the S protein priming proteases
that are expressed in pulmonary epithelial cells (TMPRSS2) versus brain and heart
pericytes (CTSB/L).
Pericyte hypoplasia elicits an endothelial pro-coagulant response
We identify pericytes as the predominant Ace2-expressing cells in CNS and heart.
Given the roles of pericytes in vascular barrier formation and in restraining proinflammatory responses in endothelial cells 57-60 (Mäe et al, submitted), we analyzed
pro-thrombotic responses in adult mice with constitutive hypoplasia of pericytes
caused by decreased PDGF-B signaling via PDGFR-β (Pdgfbret/ret mice) 61. In addition
to the pericyte loss and development of dilated capillaries reported previously for
the Pdgfbret/ret brain

57

, we found increased levels of Von Willebrand Factor mRNA

(Vwf) and protein (VWF) compared to Pdgfbret/+ littermate control mice, which had
normal microvascular pericyte coverage (Fig 4a,b). Increased capillary VWF
expression was observed also in Pdgfbret/ret heart in comparison with Pdgfbret/+
littermate controls (Fig 5), which correlated with decreased pericyte coverage also in
this organ (Extended Data Fig 10). VWF promotes platelet adhesion and blood
coagulation in wounds through binding and stabilization of factor VIII. In controls,
VWF mRNA and protein were mainly confined to arterioles and venules with limited
or undetectable presence in capillaries, whereas the dilated capillaries showing signs
of pro-inflammatory activation in Pdgfbret/ret mice

57

(Mäe et al, submitted) were

strongly and uniformly VWF-positive (Fig 4a,b). The VWF IF signal was primarily
localized to intracellular rod-shaped vesicles (Weibel-Palade bodies) (Extended Data
Fig 10, Extended Data 11 and Extended Data Video 1), but it was also frequently
observed as a “halo” around vessels in the Pdgfbret/ret brain parenchyma, presumably
due to local VWF release (Fig 4b,c). We next assessed platelet adherence and
aggregation in the Pdgfbret/ret vessels by analyzing CD41 IF and fibrinogen (FBG)
leakage and fibrin deposition (Extended Data Fig 12). Sites displaying both platelet
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

aggregation and fibrin deposition were commonly observed in brain sections from
Pdgfbret/ret mice (Extended Data Fig 12), whereas in controls, we observed only rarely
individual adhered platelets, but no signs of platelet aggregation or FBG/fibrin
deposition (data not shown). We also found that VWF release coincided with 70 kDa
dextran tracer leakage into the brain parenchyma, demonstrating a local impairment
of the blood-brain barrier at these sites (Extended Data Fig 12). In summary, these
data reveal an important role for pericytes in restricting pro-coagulant responses
concomitant with vascular leakage in endothelial cells.

Discussion
The “COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis”
Our results lead us to posit a COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis, schematically illustrated
in Fig 6. This hypothesis has two key components: 1) The specific organotypic
expression of ACE2 together with sufficient S priming proteases in microvascular
mural cells should make these cells susceptible for SARS-CoV-2 infection, but their
location outside of the endothelium suggests that infection can only occur when the
endothelial barrier is broken, allowing blood-borne virus to reach the pericytes. 2)
Infection of pericytes may render them dysfunctional, leading to activation of proinflammatory and pro-thrombotic responses in neighboring endothelial cells.
Immune-attack 62 on the infected pericytes would cause microvascular inflammation,
which may exacerbate leakage and pro-inflammatory and pro-thrombotic responses
by the endothelium. Increased vascular leakage would allow more virus to
extravasate, infect additional pericytes and intensify and propagate microvascular
inflammation and thrombosis. Below, we elaborate the COVID-19-pericyte
hypothesis step-by-step, the evidence supporting it, as well as remaining gaps.
Finally, we discuss implications of the hypothesis for COVID-19 pathogenesis and
therapy.
ACE2 is expressed by pericytes but not endothelial cells or other perivascular cell
types

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

Accumulating data from analysis of single-cell or single-nucleus transcriptomes
suggest that ACE2 is expressed by several epithelial subtypes in the lung, nasal
cavity, cornea and conjunctiva and gastrointestinal (GI) tract 7-9, arguing that one or
more of these surface epithelia serve as the entry points for SARS-CoV-2 virus
infection. Infection of airway and GI-tract epithelium indeed offers plausible
explanation for some of the early and common symptoms of COVID-19 infection, e.g.
cough, loss of smell, pneumonia and diarrhea. However, they do not adequately
explain the subsequent systemic inflammation and CAC. We surmise that SARS-CoV2 disseminates into the blood from the sites of primary infection. SARS-CoV-2 RNA
has indeed been detected in blood

63

, and, relevant for the COVID-19-pericyte

hypothesis, detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in blood correlates with further clinical
severity 64.
A cornerstone of the COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis is that pericytes (along
with venous and arteriolar VSMCs) are the only ACE2-positive cells in the
vasculature. It has been reported that endothelial cells express ACE2 protein 24, but
the data did not distinguish between ACE2 in endothelial versus mural cells. Recent
scRNAseq studies also report ACE2 mRNA expression in cells annotated as
endothelial cells 8. In those cases where we have been able to assess the primary
data, we have consistently found evidence for pericyte contamination of endothelial
cells. We observe this also in the rare Ace2/ACE2 mRNA-positive endothelial cells
present in our own datasets. Mechanical and enzymatic separation of endothelial
cells and pericytes for scRNAseq analysis is problematic because the two cell types
are firmly adhered through their joint basement membrane and thereby hard
separate without compromising cell viability

29

(Muhl et al, in press). Without

optimized cell-dissociation protocols and positive-negative selection, a substantial
proportion of heterotypic endothelial cell-pericyte doublets and cellular fragments
will inevitably contaminate the sample 29.
Besides endothelial cells, we also did not find Ace2/ACE2 expression in tissue
macrophages or other hematopoietic cells, which have been reported to express
ACE2

8,65,66

. A small subgroup of Ace2-positive fibroblasts in the brain were most

likely pericyte-contaminated, and this may also be the case for the ACE2-positive
fibroblasts reported by the Human Cell Atlas Consortium 8. Moreover, our data show
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

that while pericytes in heart and brain express high levels of Ace2/ACE2 mRNA,
pericytes in lung alveoli and ocular muscle do not express Ace2. While additional
organs need to be investigated for their mural ACE2 expression, we conclude that
vascular Ace2/ACE2 expression occurs primarily in microvascular mural cells, that the
pattern is organotypic, and that there is heterogeneity also within organs,
exemplified herein by the heart.
If pericytes become SARS-CoV-2 infected in COVID-19 patients remains to be
demonstrated. Pericytes reside within the microvascular basement membrane
outside of the microvascular endothelial barrier, and they are therefore normally not
in direct contact with blood

50

. The virus particles would reach pericytes only by

passing of the endothelial barrier, which is formed by tight and adherens junctions
connecting the endothelial cells. In principle, macromolecular passage through the
endothelial layer occurs via paracellular paths (where endothelial junctions are
discontinuous), transcellular routes (such as endothelial fenestrations) or vesicular
transcytosis

67

. However, SARS-CoV2 transport across a healthy endothelial barrier

by any of these routes appears unlikely considering the absence of ACE2 in
endothelial cells. Given the reported diameter range of 70-150 nm for both SARSCoV-2

and

(https://www.flickr.com/photos/niaid/albums/72157712914621487)

SARS-CoV-1
25,68,69

,

the

virus should not be able to pass passively through the pores of a healthy
endothelium. The physiological upper limit pore size is ≈ 5-12 nm in most types of
capillaries including non-sinusoidal fenestrated blood capillaries with diaphragmcontaining fenestrae 70. For brain capillaries with blood-brain barrier, the upper pore
size limit is <1 nm. Although the diameter of endothelial fenestrae is comparable to
that of the coronavirus particle (i.e. ≈ 100 nm) 71, the physiological upper pore size
limit is ≈ 15 nm in kidney glomeruli and ≈ 60 nm in bone marrow sinusoids, lymph
nodes and liver

70,72,73

. Furthermore, even if the virus were able to pass through

endothelial pores, it would face a basement membrane with a pore size smaller than
the virus diameter

74

. For viral infection of renal proximal tubular epithelial cells,

which express ACE2 75, and for SARS-CoV-2 dissemination into urine 76, it is therefore
conceivable that the virus must translocate through a damaged endothelium located
either in the glomerular, or in the peritubular capillaries. In the context of risk factors
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

for severe COVID-19, it is noteworthy that both of these capillary beds are
dysfunctional in diabetes 77,78.
While it appears unlikely that SARS-CoV-2 reaches pericytes in individuals
with healthy microvasculature, the situation is different when the endothelial barrier
is pathologically disrupted. Breakdown of endothelial junctions and transcytosis has
been described in numerous inflammatory conditions

79

, and increased vascular

leakage and resulting edema are hallmarks of inflammation. Low-level tissue
inflammation, endothelial dysfunction and increased vascular permeability and
leakage have been reported in hypertension, diabetes, obesity and aging, and locally
in ischemic heart and brain disease, cancer and neurodegenerative diseases 80-88. All
these conditions are risk factors and co-morbidities of severe COVID-19 disease.
An important question that we still lack an answer to is whether severely ill
COVID-19 patients have SARS-CoV-2 infected pericytes. Expression of ACE2 with
either TMPRSS2 or CTSB/L is sufficient to allow S protein processing and viral entry
into cultured cells

2

and because pericytes express ACE2 and CTSB/L it is plausible

that pericytes can become infected if they come in direct contact with virus.
Nevertheless, this remains to be demonstrated experimentally or by examination of
tissue samples from patients. A recent study showed that SARS-CoV-2 can infect and
multiply in human microvascular organoids composed of both endothelial and mural
cells

89

, but the exact cellular tropism of the virus in this model remains to be

established.
Pathological consequences of pericyte infection by SARS-CoV-2
While we still lack evidence that pericytes can become infected by SARS-CoV-2 in
vitro and in vivo, we have provided evidence that pericytes regulate prothrombogenic responses in the microvascular endothelium. It has previously been
shown in mouse models with pericyte hypoplasia that pericyte function is critical for
endothelial quiescence, barrier integrity and inhibition of leukocyte adhesion
60,90,91

57-

. Herein, we report that endothelial cells in pericyte-deficient mouse

microvasculature increase VWF production and release, which would be predicted to
promote platelet aggregation and blood coagulation, something we also observe.
SARS-CoV-2 infection of pericytes may similarly cause upregulation of VWF
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

production and release in the neighboring capillary endothelial cells. Indeed,
increased levels of VWF protein, activity and coagulation factor VIII (which is
stabilized by VWF) have been demonstrated in COVID-19 patients with severe
disease 11.
In a recent analysis of the endothelial reaction to pericyte loss, we also found
upregulation of several other pro-inflammatory mediators, including angiopoietin-2
(Mäe et al, submitted). However, such pro-inflammatory endothelial changes appear
to occur in the absence of severe vascular inflammation. If pericytes become
infected by SARS-CoV-2, it is conceivable that they become targets of immune attack
62

, turning a pro-inflammatory endothelial response into fulminant inflammation.

Propagation of microvascular inflammation might cause the surge in inflammatory
mediators observed in severe COVID-19 cases

92

, including those in the Stockholm

region intensive care cohort reported here (Extended Data Table 1). Because the
COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis infers that an inflammatory condition, irrespective of
cause, would trigger SARS-CoV-2 extravasation, also normally mild inflammation
associated with for example mild irritations of the skin or local trauma may be
enhanced in SARS-CoV-2 carriers 93.
We posit the COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis on the basis of a combination of
clinical data, single-cell transcriptomics and observations in pericyte-deficient mice.
The hypothesis is testable, and will hopefully inform and stimulate additional work
aiming at filling the gaps in our data that eventually proves or disproves our
hypothesis. The currently missing evidence for pericyte infection by SARS-CoV-2 is an
obvious gap that would likely require engagement from the broad research
community to be unequivocally filled. A deeper analysis of the range of
thrombogenicity and hypercoagulation states in severely ill COVID-19 patients is also
warranted, as are detailed morphological analysis of the microvascular morphology
with special emphasis on inflammatory hallmarks in multiple organs of deceased
COVID-19 patients.
The COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis calls for expanded discussions on the most
suitable anticoagulant therapy against CAC

47

. Moreover, the hypothesis calls for

introduction of much sought-after preventive therapy among at-risk patients
(considering both premorbid risk factors and risk environments). The hypothesis has
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

bearing also on the considerations of type of anti-viral therapy and its modality. As
the development of vaccines is sometimes a protracted and uncertain process,
systemic delivery of virus-trapping molecules, such as a soluble ACE2 protein

89

,

stand out as particularly attractive in a scenario where virus spread through the
blood is a disease culprit.

Methods
Single cell RNAseq data analysis
Mouse heart single cell data integration
ScRNAseq data were obtained from internal mouse heart single cell projects and the
published Tabula Muris heart dataset

49

, collectively including diverse cell types in

the heart. All samples were obtained from 6-20 weeks old C57Bl6 mice. FACS-based
cell capture into 384-well plates with subsequent scRNAseq data generation was
conducted using the SMART-Seq2 protocol

94

and by microfluidic-droplet-based

capture by the 10X Genomics protocol. Data processing and clustering were
performed using the Seurat package (v. 3.1.1). Cells containing less than 200
expressed genes were filtered out. For the SMART-Seq2 data, cells that generated
less than 50,000 reads were filtered out; for the droplet platform, cells containing
less than 1000 UMIs were filtered out. Furthermore, genes that were expressed by
less than three cells in a dataset were removed. After removing low quality cells
from the dataset, the data were normalized using the LogNormalize function, by
which feature counts for each cell are divided by the total counts for that cell and
multiplied by a scale factor (1 million) and then logarithmically transformed. For
integration of different datasets, the integration workflow “Reciprocal PCA” in the
Seurat package was implemented, which integrated overall datasets using the
mutual nearest neighbor (MNN) cell pairs that shared a common set of molecular
features in their PCA spaces. After integration, we obtained a total of 18,378 genes
and 10,101 cells for downstream analysis. The function “FindClusters” in the Seurat
package was used to identify the clusters with a resolution parameter of 0.5.
Mouse lung single cell data integration
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

The mouse lung datasets were obtained from internal lung single cell projects and
the published Tabula Muris lung resource 49. All samples were from 10-19 weeks old
C57Bl6 mice. Data integration and clustering analysis for the lung were performed
with the same methods as for the mouse heart data described above. We obtained a
total of 20,114 genes and 11,085 cells in the integrated lung dataset.
Mouse brain single cell data integration
Mouse brain datasets were integrated from two internal brain single-cell projects
and one published (the Tabula Muris brain resource)

49

. The internal datasets

included one unpublished and one previously published brain vasculature dataset 30.
The cells were from 10-19 weeks old C57Bl6 mice. Data integration and clustering
analysis were performed with the same methods as for the mouse heart and lung
data described above. We obtained a total of 12,940 cells and 17,779 genes in the
integrated brain dataset.
Bar plot visualization of integrated datasets
In order to provide detailed visualizations of the primary gene expression data cellby-cell for each cluster of the integrated dataset, we created bar plots using the
normalized counts from each cell. In these graphs, a bar represents a cell and is
colored according to its data source. The data source abbreviations “ss2” and
“droplet” in the legend represent the SMART-Seq2 protocol and microfluidicdroplet-based capture by the 10X Genomics protocol, respectively. For the
integrated dataset of lung, “TJA_ss2”, “CBZ_ss2” and “H_droplet” represent in-house
unpublished datasets; “TM_ss2” and “TM_droplet” represent published Tabula
Muris data 49. For the integrated dataset of heart, “L_ss2”, “S_ss2” and “H_droplet”
represent in-house unpublished datasets; “TM_ss2” and “TM_droplet” represent
published Tabula Muris data. For the integrated dataset of brain, “C_ss2” and
“K_droplet” represent in-house unpublished datasets; “TM_ss2” represents
published Tabula Muris data.
Human heart

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

The human heart single cell data were extracted from a published study 54, and only
cells from healthy donors were included in the current analysis. The Seurat package
(version 3.1.1) was used for raw data processing, filtering, normalization, clustering
and further downstream analysis

95

. Cells that had less than 500 expressed genes

were filtered out. Genes expressed in less than 10 cells were also filtered out. In
total, 8383 single cells from 14 previously healthy organ donors (12 males and 2
females) qualified for downstream analysis. The gene expression levels in each cell
were normalized to a total read counts of 100,000 per cell. The top 2,000 variable
genes in the dataset were used for linear dimensional reduction of the data using
the PCA method. The first 30 principal components were used for UMAP
visualization and clustering of the cells using default parameters in Seurat pipeline.
Human lung
The human lung single cell data were obtained from a published study

56

. In total,

there were 76,070 qualified single cells from 16 individuals (8 donors and 8 lung
fibrosis patients). The Seurat package (v3.1.1) was used for data processing. The cell
type annotations shown are the same as in the original paper

56

. To generate the

UMAP layout of the data, the reciprocal PCA method in the Seurat integration
pipeline was used.
Identification of pericyte contamination of other cell types
To identify pericyte contamination in other cell types, including endothelial cells,
fibroblast-like cells and cardiomyocytes, we examined the expression of several
previously well-characterized pericyte-specific markers, including Kcnj8, Pdgfrb and
Abcc9. Their expression profiles in Ace2-positive and Ace2-negative cells were
compared in a random selection of equal numbers of cells, and the heat map results
were visualized with pheatmap package (version 1.0.12) in R software.
Mice
The following mouse strains were used: Pdgfbret (Pdgfb-tm(ret))

61

, Cspg4-DsRed

(The Jackson Laboratory, Tg(Cspg4-DsRed.T1)1Akik/J, Pdgfrb-GFP (Gensat.org.
Tg(Pdgfrb-eGFP) JN169Gsat/Mmucd)

28

, Cldn5-GFP (Tg(Cldn5-GFP)Cbet/U), Acta2GFP
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis
(The

Jackson

Laboratory,

Tg(Acta2-GFP)1Pfk),

5 July, 2020
Prox1-GFP

(Tg(Prox1-

EGFP)KY221Gsat/Mmcd). All mice were backcrossed on a C57BL6/J genetic
background. Adult mice, about 3 months of age and of both sexes, were used for
experiments. Animal protocols were approved by either the Uppsala Ethical
Committee on Animal Research (permit numbers C224/12, C115/15, C111515/16),
or by the Stockholm/Linköping Ethical Committee on Animal Research (permit ID
729). All animal experiments were carried out in accordance with their guidelines.
Immunofluorescence staining
Pdgfbret/+ and Pdgfbret/ret brains
Mice under full anesthesia were euthanized by transcardial perfusion with Hanks
balanced salt solution (HBSS, cat. #14025092, GIBCO) followed by 4% buffered
formaldehyde (cat. #02178, Histolab). Brains were removed and post-fixed in 4%
buffered formaldehyde for 4 h at 4 °C. Sagittal and coronal vibratome sections (5075 μm) were incubated in blocking/permeabilization solution (1% bovine serum
albumin, 2.5% donkey serum, 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS) overnight at 4 °C, followed
by incubation in primary antibody solution for two nights at 4 °C, and subsequently
in secondary antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch and Invitrogen) solution, overnight
at 4 °C. A list of the used primary antibodies is presented in Extended Dataementary
Table 1. Sections were mounted in ProLong Gold Antifade mounting medium (cat.
#P36930, Life Technologies). Micrographs were taken with a Leica TCS SP8 confocal
microscope (Leica Microsystems). All confocal images are represented as maximum
intensity projections and were adjusted for brightness and contrast using Fiji v1.52p
and Adobe Photoshop CC 2019.
Blood-brain barrier permeability
For blood-brain barrier integrity assessment, dextran (100 μg/g body weight)
conjugated to tetramethylrhodamine (cat. #D1818, Life Technologies) was injected
intravenously into the tail vein 16 hours before sacrifice, respectively 57. For tracer in
situ analysis, anaesthetized animals were perfused transcardially for 5 min with HBSS

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

followed by 4 min with 4% buffered formaldehyde. Where after the brains were
processed as described under Immunofluorescence staining.
Cryo-sections from brain, heart and lung
Tissues were harvested from euthanized mice without perfusion and fixed by
immersion in 4% formaldehyde for 4-12h at 4 °C, followed by immersion in 20%
sucrose/PBS solution for at least 24h at 4°C. Thereafter, tissues were embedded for
cryo-sectioning and sectioned on a CryoStat NX70 (ThermoFisher Scientific) to 14 or
30 µm thick sections collected on SuperFrost Plus glass slides (Metzler Gläser).
Sections were allowed to thaw at RT and thereafter blocked for > 60 min at RT with
blocking-buffer (serum-free protein blocking solution, DAKO), supplemented with
0.2% Triton X-100 (Sigma Aldrich), followed by sequentially incubation with primary
antibodies (overnight at 4 °C) (Extended Data Table 1) and corresponding
fluorescently conjugated secondary antibodies (1h at RT) together with 10 µg/ml
Hoechst 33342 (trihydrochloride, trihydrate, ThermoFisher Scientific). Sections were
mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade mounting medium, and micrographs acquired
and graphically handled as described above.

Legends to Main Figures
Figure 1: ACE2 expression in adult mouse brain.
a, UMAP display of integrated mouse brain scRNASeq data. Coloring is based on
cluster assignment and cellular annotations are based on canonical marker
expression

available

http://betsholtzlab.org/Publications/BrainIntegration/search.html

at
b.

The

same

UMAP display as in a with Ace2 expression overlay (dark color represents higher
expression and grey color represents Ace2-negative cells). c. Bar plots of the
normalized expression levels of Ace2 in each cluster. Cell type annotations for each
cluster are indicated. Individual bars represent single cells and are colored according
to the data source (see Methods) as indicated together with cell numbers
contributions below the x-axis. Arrows of different colors in a-c indicate the
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

corresponding Ace2-positive clusters in the UMAP and bar plot displays. d,e. IF
detection of ACE2 in adult mouse brain in combination with the indicated markers.
Insets indicate magnified areas. Left-right shows the same microscopic field with
different antibody stainings. CD31 and COL4 are used as markers for the
endothelium and basement membrane, respectively. PDGFRB marks mural cells.
Note the similar expression of ACE2 and PDGFRB in pericytes and venous/venular
VSMC, the absence of ACE2 from large arterioles and weak presence at terminal
arterioles (arrowhead in d’). In d’’ and e, the arrows point at the pericyte cell soma
and the arrowheads at its primary processes. In the insets in e, the arrowhead point
at the pericyte’s secondary processes. A, arteriole; V, venule. Scale bars: 100 µm in d
and 10 µm in e.
Figure 2: ACE2 expression in the adult mouse heart.
a. UMAP display of integrated mouse heart scRNASeq data. Coloring is based on
cluster assignment and cellular annotations are based on canonical marker
expression

available

at

http://betsholtzlab.org/Publications/HeartIntegration/search.html. b. The same
UMAP display as in a with Ace2 expression overlay (dark color represents higher
expression and grey color represents Ace2-negative cells). c. Bar plots of the
normalized expression levels of Ace2 in each cluster. Cell type annotations for each
cluster are indicated. Individual bars represent single cells and are colored according
to the data source (see Methods) as indicated together with cell numbers
contributions below the x-axis. Arrows of different colors in a-c indicate the
corresponding Ace2-positive clusters in the UMAP and bar plot displays. d. IF
detection of ACE2 in adult mouse brain in combination with the indicated markers.
Each row of images shows the same microscopic field with different combinations of
label, as indicated. CD31 is used as a marker for endothelium. NG2 and Pdgfrb-GFP
marks mural cells. Note the overlapping expression of ACE2 and NG2 in a proportion
but not all pericytes and that arterial and venous VSMC are ACE2-negative. The
bottom row shows an example of three neighboring pericytes with different levels of
ACE2 expression. Note also the different subcellular distribution of cell membrane
associated ACE2 and cytoplasmic GFP expressed from the Pdgfrb promoter. A,
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

artery; V, vein Scale bars: 100 µm, 50 µm and 25 µm respectively in top, middle and
lower rows of images.
Figure 3: ACE2 expression in adult mouse lung.
a. UMAP visualization of the integrated scRNASeq data from mouse lung (left) with
Ace2 expression overlay (right, darker color represents higher expression and grey
color represents Ace2-negative cells). Colors indicate cluster assignment.
Annotations were based on the expression of canonical markers for each indicated
cell

type

available

http://betsholtzlab.org/Publications/LungIntegration/search.html.

at
b.

The

same

UMAP display as in a with Ace2 expression overlay (dark color represents higher
expression and grey color represents Ace2-negative cells). For all panels, green
arrows point at the AT-2 cell cluster, blue arrows on the multiciliated cell cluster and
red arrows at the pericyte cluster. c. Bar plots depict the expression of indicated
genes across clusters. Each bar represents a single cell and is colored according to
the indicated data source as indicated together with cell numbers below the bottom
x-axis (see Methods). c. IF staining for indicated proteins in adult mouse lung.
Prominent ACE2 signal is observed in bronchial epithelium. Asterisks mark end of
terminal bronchioles. The lower panels show the same microscopic field of the
alveolar region with different labels visualized. Arrows provide land marks and point
at four AT-2 cells as indicated by the SFTPC staining. Note the overlap between ACE2
and SFTPC in the alveolar region and lack of ACE2 staining of pericytes (labeled by
PDGFRB). No ACE2 IF signal was observed in endothelial cells. Br: bronchi, BV: blood
vessel. Alv: alveolar region Scale bars: 100 µm.
Figure 4. Increased Von Willebrand Factor expression in Pdgfbret/ret brain.
a. Bar plot illustrating Vwf expression in endothelial cells from Pdgfb+/+, Pdgfbret/+
and Pdgfbret/ret brains. b-c. IF staining of mouse cortex vasculature in Pdgfbret/+ and
Pdgfbret/ret mice with antibodies against (b) VWF, PDGFRB and ACTA2, and (C) PODXL,
PDGFRB and VWF). a, arterioles. v, venules. Note that in controls, capillaries covered
by PDGFRB-positive pericytes are VWF-negative, whereas the dilated pericytedeficient capillaries in Pdgfbret/ret brain are strongly VWF-positive. c. Normal brain
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

capillaries (PODXL labels endothelial cells) covered by PDGFRB-positive pericytes are
essentially VWF-negative (arrow points at location of a few Weibel-Palade bodies). In
contrast, the pericyte-deficient capillaries in Pdgfbret/ret brain show dense content of
Weibel-Palade bodies and local “halo” (arrows) of VWF released into the tissue
interstitium. Scale bars: 50 µm.
Figure 5. Increased Von Willebrand Factor expression in Pdgfbret/ret heart.
Confocal microscopy images of sections from adult control Pdgfbret/+ (a) and mutant
Pdgfbret/ret (b) mouse hearts IF stained with the indicated antibodies. Horizontal
image pairs depict the same microscopic field with different label. Note the VWF
expression in control veins and arteries, with few CD31 positive capillary endothelial
cells being VWF positive. In pericyte-deficient Pdgfbret/ret hearts, VWF expression is
increased in capillary endothelium (compare insets in the upper and lower panels).
A: artery/arteriole, V: vein. Scale bars: 50 µm.
Figure 6. The COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis. The schematic illustration of the
COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis depicts a healthy vasculature with low risk of pericyte
infection (1), a vasculature in an individual in a COVID-19 risk group with a disrupted
endothelial barrier (2); and a SARS-CoV-2 infection of pericytes leading to enhanced
expression of Von Willebrand Factor (VWF), platelet aggregation, fibrin deposition
and eventually vascular inflammation (3). In the normal, healthy vasculature (1), the
intact endothelial barrier precludes SARS-CoV-2 virus to get in contact with the Ace2expressing pericytes localized behind the endothelial barrier. In individuals with a
leaky barrier (2), SARS-CoV-2 can infect pericytes, which in turn causes neighboring
endothelial cells to upregulate VWF production, eventually leading to the vascular
symptoms observed in many severely ill COVID-19 patients (3).

Legends to Extended Data Tables and Figures and Videos
Extended Data Table 1: Clinical, inflammatory and coagulation parameters in 20
ICU-admitted Covid-19 patients.
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

The ICU patients had a median age of 63 years (range 40-73), the majority being
male (90%) and having one or more risk factors prior to admission (85%). The length
of ICU stay and duration of invasive mechanical ventilation reveal the severity of
disease and treatment challenge. Most of them required mechanical ventilation in
prone position due to critical hypoxia with periods of high-inspired fractions of
oxygen (FiO2) and a low arterial oxygen tension to FiO2 ratio index (PFI). Continuous
parameters are depicted as median (range) and categorical parameters as number
(%). Intensive Care Unit (ICU), ratio arterial oxygen tension (kPa)/ fraction inspired
oxygen (FiO2) (PFI), C-reactive protein (CRP), procalcitonin (PCT), interleukin-6 (IL-6),
interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), internationalized
normalized ratio (INR), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT). Risk factors
include renal disease, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus,
chronic pulmonary disease and immunosuppressive therapy 15,41,42.
Extended Data Figure 1. Ace2 mRNA in brain cells other than mural cells is due to
pericyte-contamination
a. Top enriched transcripts (red arrow indicates Ace2 at 15th place) in pericytes and
venous SMC as compared to other vascular and perivascular cell types deduced from
the

brain

vascular

scRNAseq

database

at

b.

Bar

plot

excerpt

from

http://betsholtzlab.org/VascularSingleCells/database.html showing the expression of
Ace2 in different vascular and perivascular cell types. c. Magnified view of indicated
part of a comparing the expression of Ace2, Cnn1 and Kncj8. The abbreviations are
as follows: PC, Pericytes; SMC, Smooth muscle cells; MG, Microglia; FB, Vascular
fibroblast-like cells; OL, Oligodendrocytes; EC, Endothelial cells; AC, Astrocytes; v,
venous;

capil,

capillary;

a,

arterial;

aa,

arteriolar.

d.

Excerpts

from

http://betsholtzlab.org/VascularSingleCells/database.html showing bar plots across
VSMC subtypes of arterial VSMC-specific genes that anti-correlate with Ace2. Red
arrows point at the Ace2-negative part of the cluster. Cell type abbreviations: SMC,
Smooth muscle cells; v, venous; a, arterial; aa, arteriolar. e. Expression of selected
known brain pericyte specific markers in 23 Ace2-positive endothelial cells (top) and
23 randomly selected Ace2-negative endothelial cells (bottom). Colors indicate
pericyte marker as shown, and the frequency of their expression is provided in the
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

tables. f. Heat map display of pericyte and fibroblast markers in Ace2-positive
(Ace2+) and Ace2-negative (Ace2-) FB2 fibroblasts and enriched genes in the Ace2+
cells. g. Heat map display of brain cell type specific markers of different vascular and
perivascular cells in Ace2+ and randomly selected equal number of Ace2- endothelial
cells. Only pericyte markers are enriched in Ace2+ endothelial cells, not arterial
VSMCs or astrocyte markers. h. Heat map display of the 50 top enriched genes in the
three Ace2+ cells (black arrowheads) without pericyte marker expression does not
reveal a statistically significant commonality between these cells. Most of the genes
listed in d are highly expressed in neurons, suggesting an RNA smearing artifact.
Extended Data Figure 2. ACE2 protein expression in the adult mouse brain cortex
and spinal cord.
a-c. Confocal microscopy images of sections from brain cortex (a-c) and spinal cord
(d-f) IF stained using antibodies and Pdgfrb-GFP marker as indicated. Horizontal
image pairs depict the same microscopic field with different label. Note the strong
ACE2 staining of capillary pericytes and the co-expression with CD13 (a) and PdgfrbGFP (b). Mural cells in terminal arterioles are weakly ACE2 positive (c, arrowheads
and e, arrow), whereas mural cells of larger arterioles are ACE2 negative (arrows in c
and f).
Extended Data Figure 3. ACE2 protein expression in the adult mouse eye.
Confocal microscopy images of cross-sections of adult mouse eyes. Each row of four
images shows the same microscopic field with different combinations of label, as
indicated. Double insets display the same field with different label as indicated,
aiming to illustrate: (b) that Pdgfrb-GFP-positive pericytes in ocular skeletal muscles
are ACE2-negative; (d,l) that capillary pericytes in the choriocapillaris are ACE2positive but the VSMC of its feeding arteries are ACE2-negative; that the feeding
arterioles of the ciliary body vasculature are ACE2-negative (g) but the ciliary body
pericytes ACE2-positive (h); that the retinal pericytes and VSMC of terminal
arterioles are ACE2-positive but the larger arteries are ACE2-negative (k). Asterisks in
c,g,k,o, indicate ACE2-positive retinal pericytes. Arrowheads in c,k,s point at ACE2-

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

positive pericytes in the choriocapillaris. Arrow in t points at an ACE2-negative artery
in the choriocapillaris.
Extended Data Figure 4. ACE2 expression in human brain pericytes.
a. The expression of known pericyte markers in ACE2+ cells from developing human
prefrontal cortex. b. Heat map display of gene expression in two ACE2+ cells and five
endothelial cells retrieved from a human glioblastoma scRNAseq dataset.
Extended Data Figure 5. Ace2 expression in mouse heart endothelial cells is due to
pericyte contamination.
a. Heat map overview of the expression of pericyte and endothelial markers in Ace2+
pericytes and Ace2+ and Ace2- endothelial cells in the adult mouse heart. Arrows
indicate the position of three Ace2+ cells without other known pericyte markers. b.
The expression of known pericyte-specific markers in the 21 Ace2-positive
endothelial cells (top) and 21 randomly selected Ace2-negative endothelial cells
(bottom). The expression of markers in the same cell is piled up. c. Heat map
overview of the top enriched genes in the three Ace2-positive cells (arrow
highlighted) without other known pericyte marker expression. There was no
apparent common gene profile among the three cells, suggesting that they do not
represent a specific cell type or cell state.
Extended Data Fig 6: ACE2 expression in pericytes in the adult human heart.
a. UMAP visualization of human heart cells. Colors indicate cluster assignment.
Annotations were based on the expression of canonical markers for each indicated
cell type. Red rrow indicates the pericyte cluster. b. Bar plots of the normalized
expression levels of ACE2 and the indicated cell type markers in the same clusters as
displayed in the UMAP plot. Each bar represents a cell. The pericyte cluster (#4) is
denoted by a red arrow. The endothelial cluster (#2) is denoted by a black arrow. c.
The expression of known pericyte markers in 70 ACE2 -positive endothelial cells (top)
and 70 ACE2-negative endothelial cells (bottom). Each bar is a cell and marker
expression is piled up. For each group, statistics of pericyte (PC) markers is
summarized in the corresponding table, including numbers and percentages of cells
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

with no pericyte marker expressed, one or more pericyte marker, and two or more
pericyte markers (indicated by # and *), respectively.
Extended Data Figure 7. ACE2 protein expression in the adult mouse lung.
Confocal microscopy images of sections from adult mouse lung stained with the
indicated antibodies (ACE2, CD31 for endothelium, NG2 for mural cells, CD68 for
macrophages) and the transgenic reporter Pdgfrb-GFP for mural cells. Each row of
images depicts the same microscopic field with different labels. ACE2 IF signal is only
detected in bronchial epithelium (strong) and AT-2 cells (weak). Note the absence of
ACE2 IF signal in endothelial cells, in mural cells in the alveolar region and in CD68
positive macrophages. Double insets depict the same region, one with multiple IF
labels and one with ACE2 only. Arrows point at rare ACE2:Pdgfrb-GFP double
positive mural cells located close to large bronchi. Bottom panels show tracheal
capillaries with attached ACE2-positive pericytes. Arrowheads in the magnified inset
point at four pericyte somata. Scale bars: 100 µm.
Extended Data Figure 8. ACE2 expression in the human lung.
a. UMAP visualization of human lung scRNAseq data (left) with cluster annotations
taken from the original paper and its marker basis in the text box (top 10 markers for
each cell type) 56. ACE2 expression superimposed onto the UMAP image (right, dark
color represents higher expression and grey color represents Ace2- cells). b. Bar plot
display of ACE2 mRNA shows that it is localized to the clusters annotated as AT-2
(SFTPC+), basal (KRT5+), multiciliated (FOXJ1+) and club (SCGB1A+) cells.
Extended Data Figure 9. Co-expression analysis of Ace2, Tmrpss2, Ctsl and Ctsb in
mouse lung, brain and heart.
Bar plots overview of Ace2, Tmrpss2, Ctsl and Ctsb expression across the scRNAseq
meta-analysis datasets of lung, brain and heart. Each bar represents a single cell and
is colored according to the indicated data source (see Materials and Methods).
Cluster annotations have been described in previous figures. Arrows point at the
Ace2+ clusters, which in lung represent AT-2 (left) and multiciliated cells (right), in

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

brain: from left to right, pericytes, arteriolar VSMCs, venous VSMCs and pericytecontaminated endothelial cells, and in heart: pericytes.
Extended Data Figure 10. Pericyte loss in Pdgfbret/ret heart.
Confocal microscopy images of sections from adult mouse Pdgfbret/+ and Pdgfbret/ret
hearts stained with the indicated antibodies, CD31 for endothelial cells and NG2 for
mural cells. Areas were selected from the left ventricular wall. Horizontal pairs of
images depict the same microscopic field with different labels as indicated. The
bottom panels show magnified view of marked insets. Note the reduced density of
NG2 positive cells in the Pdgfbret/ret microvasculature. Scale bars: 100 µm.
Extended Data Figure 11. VWF immunofluorescence analysis shows specific
localization to Weibel–Palade bodies. Localization of VWF staining to rod-shaped
vesicles (Weibel-Palade bodies) in the endothelial cytoplasm, i.e. underneath the
CD31-positive endothelial membrane, which in turn is underneath the ACTA2positive VSMC coat of a brain arteriole in a control (Pdgfbret/+) mouse. This staining
served as a control for the specificity of the antibody and quality of the
immunofluorescence analysis. See also Extended Data Video 1. Scale bar: 50 µm.
Extended Data Figure 12. Platelet adhesion and aggregation in Pdgfbret/ret vessels.
a. Visualization of platelets using anti-CD41 and fibrinogen (FBG) leakage and fibrin
deposition in blood vessels (CD31; PECAM1) of Pdgfbret/ret mouse brains. Arrows in
the top panel point at a fibrin clot. Arrows in the bottom panel highlight platelets
and local fibrin deposition. b. VWF release into the interstitium coincides with 70
kDa dextran tracer leakage (red) into the brain parenchyma (yellow arrows) and
COL4 (COL4A1) visualizes the basement membrane of the vasculature. CD13 (ANPEP)
visualizes residual mural cells. Note the anti-correlation between presence of mural
cells and VWF expression. Scale bars: 25 µm in a and 50 µm in b.
Extended Data Video 1. VWF immunofluorescence analysis shows specific
localization to Weibel–Palade bodies. Z-scan of the arteriole shown in Extended
Data Figure 11 provides a clear view of the localization of the VWF-positive vesicles
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis
in

the

endothelial

cytoplasm.

Video

5 July, 2020
download

is

available

at

http://betsholtzlab.org/Publications/2020/Extended DataVideo1.html

Acknowledgements
We thank Cecilia Olsson, Pia Peterson, Jana Chmielniakova, Helene Leksell, Sonja
Gustafsson, Byambajav Buyandelger and Elisabeth Raschperger for technical help.
This study was supported by grants from the Swedish Cancer Society (C.B., U.L.), the
Swedish Research Council (C.B., U.L), the Swedish Brain Foundation (C.B., U.L.), the
Erling-Persson Family Foundation (C.B., U.L.), Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation
(C.B., T.M.), The European Union (C.B.), the Leducq Foundation (C.B.), the Louise
Jeantet Prize (C.B.), The Anders Jahre Medical Prize (C.B.) and ERC advanced grant
(C.B.) and consolidator grant (T.M.). C.B. and E.H. were supported by grants from
AstraZeneca through the ICMC. S.S. was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (STR 1538/1-1) and a non-stipendiary longterm fellowship from the European Molecular Biology Organization (ALTF 86-2017).

Author contributions
C.B. conceived the COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis and developed it together with
T.A., X-R.P., L.I.E. and U.L. L.H. did the bioinformatics analysis. M.A.M., E.V.L. and
K.N performed analyses of Pdgfb mutant mice. Y.S. designed the scRNAseq metaanalysis pipeline and applied it together with R.P. M.A.M., L.M. and R.P. performed
ACE2 immunofluorescence analysis. M.J.F and A.O. explored and analyzed ICU
patient data. L.M., M.A.M., J.L., G.G., L.Z., Y.X., S.L., G.M. S.S., A.O., M.R., A.A., J.B.
M.V., K.B., E.H., K.A. and T.M. provided unpublished scRNAseq data. C.B. assembled
the data. C.B. and U.L. wrote the manuscript with significant input fro K.A. All
authors reviewed and edited the text.

Declaration of conflicts
C.B. is a consultant for AstraZeneca BioPharmaceuticals R&D. X.-R. P. is an employee
of AstraZeneca BioPharmaceuticals R&D.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis

5 July, 2020

References

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

9

10
11
12

Fehr, A. R. & Perlman, S. Coronaviruses: an overview of their replication and
pathogenesis. Methods Mol Biol 1282, 1-23, doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-24387_1 (2015).
Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2
and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell 181, 271-280
e278, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052 (2020).
Li, W. et al. Receptor and viral determinants of SARS-coronavirus adaptation
to human ACE2. EMBO J 24, 1634-1643, doi:10.1038/sj.emboj.7600640
(2005).
Matsuyama, S. et al. Efficient activation of the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus spike protein by the transmembrane protease
TMPRSS2. J Virol 84, 12658-12664, doi:10.1128/JVI.01542-10 (2010).
Lovren, F. et al. Angiotensin converting enzyme-2 confers endothelial
protection and attenuates atherosclerosis. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
295, H1377-1384, doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00331.2008 (2008).
Ohishi, M., Yamamoto, K. & Rakugi, H. Angiotensin (1-7) and other
angiotensin peptides. Curr Pharm Des 19, 3060-3064,
doi:10.2174/1381612811319170013 (2013).
Sungnak, W. et al. SARS-CoV-2 entry factors are highly expressed in nasal
epithelial cells together with innate immune genes. Nat Med,
doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0868-6 (2020).
Muus, C. et al. Integrated analyses of single-cell atlases reveal age, gender,
and smoking status associations with cell type-specific expression of
mediators of SARS-CoV-2 viral entry and highlights inflammatory programs in
putative target cells. bioRxiv, doi:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254
(2020).
Ziegler, C. G. K., Allon, S. J., Nyquist, S. K. & et.al. SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2 is
an interferon-stimulated gene in human airway epithelial cells and is
detected in specific cell subsets across tissues. Cell, CELL 11384,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.035 (2020).
Tang, N., Li, D., Wang, X. & Sun, Z. Abnormal coagulation parameters are
associated with poor prognosis in patients with novel coronavirus
pneumonia. J Thromb Haemost 18, 844-847, doi:10.1111/jth.14768 (2020).
Helms, J. et al. High risk of thrombosis in patients with severe SARS-CoV-2
infection: a multicenter prospective cohort study. Intensive Care Med,
doi:10.1007/s00134-020-06062-x (2020).
Mao, L. et al. Neurologic Manifestations of Hospitalized Patients With
Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Wuhan, China. JAMA Neurol,
doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.1127 (2020).

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis
13
14
15

16
17
18
19
20
21

22
23
24
25
26
27
28

5 July, 2020

Diao, B. & al., e. Human kidney is a target for novel severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 [SARS-CoV-2] infection. MedRxiv,
doi:doi:10.1101/2020.03.04.20031120 (2020).
Batlle, D. et al. Acute Kidney Injury in COVID-19: Emerging Evidence of a
Distinct Pathophysiology. J Am Soc Nephrol, doi:10.1681/ASN.2020040419
(2020).
Yang, X. et al. Clinical course and outcomes of critically ill patients with SARSCoV-2 pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a single-centered, retrospective,
observational study. Lancet Respir Med 8, 475-481, doi:10.1016/S22132600(20)30079-5 (2020).
Klok, F. A. et al. Confirmation of the high cumulative incidence of thrombotic
complications in critically ill ICU patients with COVID-19: An updated analysis.
Thromb Res, doi:10.1016/j.thromres.2020.04.041 (2020).
Leisman, D. E., Deutschman, C. S. & Legrand, M. Facing COVID-19 in the ICU:
vascular dysfunction, thrombosis, and dysregulated inflammation. Intensive
Care Med, doi:10.1007/s00134-020-06059-6 (2020).
Spiezia, L. et al. COVID-19-Related Severe Hypercoagulability in Patients
Admitted to Intensive Care Unit for Acute Respiratory Failure. Thromb
Haemost, doi:10.1055/s-0040-1710018 (2020).
Panigada, M. et al. Hypercoagulability of COVID-19 patients in Intensive Care
Unit. A Report of Thromboelastography Findings and other Parameters of
Hemostasis. J Thromb Haemost, doi:10.1111/jth.14850 (2020).
Becker, R. C. COVID-19 update: Covid-19-associated coagulopathy. J Thromb
Thrombolysis, doi:10.1007/s11239-020-02134-3 (2020).
Quartuccio, L., Semerano, L., Benucci, M., Boissier, M. C. & De Vita, S. Urgent
avenues in the treatment of COVID-19: Targeting downstream inflammation
to prevent catastrophic syndrome. Joint Bone Spine 87, 191-193,
doi:10.1016/j.jbspin.2020.03.011 (2020).
Lazzerini, P. E., Boutjdir, M. & Capecchi, P. L. COVID-19, Arrhythmic Risk and
Inflammation: Mind the Gap! Circulation,
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.047293 (2020).
Hamming, I. et al. Tissue distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor
for SARS coronavirus. A first step in understanding SARS pathogenesis. J
Pathol 203, 631-637, doi:10.1002/path.1570 (2004).
Sluimer, J. C. et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) expression and
activity in human carotid atherosclerotic lesions. J Pathol 215, 273-279,
doi:10.1002/path.2357 (2008).
Varga, Z. et al. Endothelial cell infection and endotheliitis in COVID-19. Lancet
395, 1417-1418, doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30937-5 (2020).
Ackermann, M. et al. Pulmonary Vascular Endothelialitis, Thrombosis, and
Angiogenesis in Covid-19. N Engl J Med, doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2015432 (2020).
Goldsmith, C. S., Miller, S. E., Martines, R. B., Bullock, H. A. & Zaki, S. R.
Electron microscopy of SARS-CoV-2: a challenging task. Lancet,
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31188-0 (2020).
He, L. et al. Analysis of the brain mural cell transcriptome. Sci Rep 6, 35108,
doi:10.1038/srep35108 (2016).

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis
29
30
31

32
33
34
35
36

37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44

5 July, 2020

Vanlandewijck, M. et al. A molecular atlas of cell types and zonation in the
brain vasculature. Nature 554, 475-480, doi:10.1038/nature25739 (2018).
He, L. et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing of mouse brain and lung vascular and
vessel-associated cell types. Sci Data 5, 180160, doi:10.1038/sdata.2018.160
(2018).
Chen, L., Li, X., Chen, M., Feng, Y. & Xiong, C. The ACE2 expression in human
heart indicates new potential mechanism of heart injury among patients
infected with SARS-CoV-2. Cardiovasc Res 116, 1097-1100,
doi:10.1093/cvr/cvaa078 (2020).
Nicin, L. et al. Cell type-specific expression of the putative SARS-CoV-2
receptor ACE2 in human hearts. Eur Heart J 41, 1804-1806,
doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa311 (2020).
Zhou, P. et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of
probable bat origin. Nature 579, 270-273, doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7
(2020).
Zheng, S. et al. Viral load dynamics and disease severity in patients infected
with SARS-CoV-2 in Zhejiang province, China, January-March 2020:
retrospective cohort study. BMJ 369, m1443, doi:10.1136/bmj.m1443 (2020).
Chistiakov, D. A., Orekhov, A. N. & Bobryshev, Y. V. Endothelial Barrier and Its
Abnormalities in Cardiovascular Disease. Front Physiol 6, 365,
doi:10.3389/fphys.2015.00365 (2015).
van Sloten, T. T., Sedaghat, S., Carnethon, M. R., Launer, L. J. & Stehouwer, C.
D. A. Cerebral microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes: stroke,
cognitive dysfunction, and depression. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 8, 325336, doi:10.1016/S2213-8587(19)30405-X (2020).
Madonna, R., Balistreri, C. R., Geng, Y. J. & De Caterina, R. Diabetic
microangiopathy: Pathogenetic insights and novel therapeutic approaches.
Vascul Pharmacol 90, 1-7, doi:10.1016/j.vph.2017.01.004 (2017).
Mundi, S. et al. Endothelial permeability, LDL deposition, and cardiovascular
risk factors-a review. Cardiovasc Res 114, 35-52, doi:10.1093/cvr/cvx226
(2018).
Yuan, S. Y. et al. Microvascular permeability in diabetes and insulin
resistance. Microcirculation 14, 363-373, doi:10.1080/10739680701283091
(2007).
Richardson, S. et al. Presenting Characteristics, Comorbidities, and Outcomes
Among 5700 Patients Hospitalized With COVID-19 in the New York City Area.
JAMA, doi:10.1001/jama.2020.6775 (2020).
Fang, L., Karakiulakis, G. & Roth, M. Are patients with hypertension and
diabetes mellitus at increased risk for COVID-19 infection? Lancet Respir Med
8, e21, doi:10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30116-8 (2020).
Guan, W. J. et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in
China. N Engl J Med 382, 1708-1720, doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2002032 (2020).
Sardu, C. et al. Is COVID-19 and endothelial disease? Clinical and basic
evidence. Researchgate, doi:DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.17295.74407 (2020).
Zhou, F. et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients
with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 395,
1054-1062, doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30566-3 (2020).
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis
45
46
47

48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60

5 July, 2020

Poissy, J. et al. Pulmonary Embolism in COVID-19 Patients: Awareness of an
Increased Prevalence. Circulation, doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.047430
(2020).
Le Berre, A., Marteau, V., Emmerich, J. & Zins, M. Concomitant acute aortic
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism complicating COVID-19 pneumonia.
Diagn Interv Imaging 101, 321-322, doi:10.1016/j.diii.2020.04.003 (2020).
Cattaneo, M. et al. Pulmonary Embolism or Pulmonary Thrombosis in COVID19? Is the Recommendation to Use High-Dose Heparin for
Thromboprophylaxis Justified? Thromb Haemost, doi:10.1055/s-00401712097 (2020).
Bikdeli, B. et al. COVID-19 and Thrombotic or Thromboembolic Disease:
Implications for Prevention, Antithrombotic Therapy, and Follow-up. J Am
Coll Cardiol, doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2020.04.031 (2020).
Tabula Muris, C. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics of 20 mouse organs creates
a Tabula Muris. Nature 562, 367-372, doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0590-4
(2018).
Armulik, A., Genove, G. & Betsholtz, C. Pericytes: developmental,
physiological, and pathological perspectives, problems, and promises. Dev
Cell 21, 193-215, doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2011.07.001 (2011).
Zeisel, A. et al. Molecular Architecture of the Mouse Nervous System. Cell
174, 999-1014 e1022, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.021 (2018).
Zhong, S. et al. A single-cell RNA-seq survey of the developmental landscape
of the human prefrontal cortex. Nature 555, 524-528,
doi:10.1038/nature25980 (2018).
Voigt, A. P. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics of the human retinal pigment
epithelium and choroid in health and macular degeneration. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 116, 24100-24107, doi:10.1073/pnas.1914143116 (2019).
Wang, L. et al. Single-cell reconstruction of the adult human heart during
heart failure and recovery reveals the cellular landscape underlying cardiac
function. Nat Cell Biol 22, 108-119, doi:10.1038/s41556-019-0446-7 (2020).
Teuwen, L. A., Geldhof, V., Pasut, A. & Carmeliet, P. COVID-19: the
vasculature unleashed. Nat Rev Immunol, doi:10.1038/s41577-020-0343-0
(2020).
Reyfman, P. A. et al. Single-Cell Transcriptomic Analysis of Human Lung
Provides Insights into the Pathobiology of Pulmonary Fibrosis. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 199, 1517-1536, doi:10.1164/rccm.201712-2410OC (2019).
Armulik, A. et al. Pericytes regulate the blood-brain barrier. Nature 468, 557561, doi:10.1038/nature09522 (2010).
Daneman, R., Zhou, L., Kebede, A. A. & Barres, B. A. Pericytes are required for
blood-brain barrier integrity during embryogenesis. Nature 468, 562-566,
doi:10.1038/nature09513 (2010).
Török, O. et al. Pericytes regulate vascular immune homeostasis in the CNS.
bioRxiv, doi:doi.org/10.1101/644120 (2019).
Hong, J. et al. Role of Tumor Pericytes in the Recruitment of Myeloid-Derived
Suppressor Cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 107, doi:10.1093/jnci/djv209 (2015).

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72

73
74
75
76

5 July, 2020

Lindblom, P. et al. Endothelial PDGF-B retention is required for proper
investment of pericytes in the microvessel wall. Genes Dev 17, 1835-1840,
doi:10.1101/gad.266803 (2003).
Perlman, S. & Dandekar, A. A. Immunopathogenesis of coronavirus
infections: implications for SARS. Nat Rev Immunol 5, 917-927,
doi:10.1038/nri1732 (2005).
Wang, W. et al. Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in Different Types of Clinical
Specimens. JAMA, doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3786 (2020).
Chen, W. et al. Detectable 2019-nCoV viral RNA in blood is a strong indicator
for the further clinical severity. Emerg Microbes Infect 9, 469-473,
doi:10.1080/22221751.2020.1732837 (2020).
Zou, X. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq data analysis on the receptor ACE2
expression reveals the potential risk of different human organs vulnerable to
2019-nCoV infection. Front Med, doi:10.1007/s11684-020-0754-0 (2020).
Tucker, N. R. & al., e. Myocyte Specific Upregulation of ACE2 in
Cardiovascular Disease: Implications for SARS-CoV-2 mediated myocarditis.
MedRxiv, doi:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059204 (2020).
Claesson-Welsh, L. Vascular permeability--the essentials. Ups J Med Sci 120,
135-143, doi:10.3109/03009734.2015.1064501 (2015).
Neuman, B. W. et al. Supramolecular architecture of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus revealed by electron cryomicroscopy. J Virol 80, 79187928, doi:10.1128/JVI.00645-06 (2006).
Kim, J. M. et al. Identification of Coronavirus Isolated from a Patient in Korea
with COVID-19. Osong Public Health Res Perspect 11, 3-7,
doi:10.24171/j.phrp.2020.11.1.02 (2020).
Sarin, H. Physiologic upper limits of pore size of different blood capillary
types and another perspective on the dual pore theory of microvascular
permeability. J Angiogenes Res 2, 14, doi:10.1186/2040-2384-2-14 (2010).
Braet, F. & Wisse, E. Structural and functional aspects of liver sinusoidal
endothelial cell fenestrae: a review. Comp Hepatol 1, 1, doi:10.1186/14765926-1-1 (2002).
Wisse, E., Jacobs, F., Topal, B., Frederik, P. & De Geest, B. The size of
endothelial fenestrae in human liver sinusoids: implications for hepatocytedirected gene transfer. Gene Ther 15, 1193-1199, doi:10.1038/gt.2008.60
(2008).
Aird, W. C. Phenotypic heterogeneity of the endothelium: I. Structure,
function, and mechanisms. Circ Res 100, 158-173,
doi:10.1161/01.RES.0000255691.76142.4a (2007).
Liliensiek, S. J., Nealey, P. & Murphy, C. Characterization of endothelial
basement membrane nanotopography in rhesus macaque as a guide for
vessel tissue engineering. 2643-2651 (Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., 2009).
Lely, A. T., Hamming, I., van Goor, H. & Navis, G. J. Renal ACE2 expression in
human kidney disease. J Pathol 204, 587-593, doi:10.1002/path.1670 (2004).
Peng, L. et al. SARS-CoV-2 can be detected in urine, blood, anal swabs, and
oropharyngeal swabs specimens. J Med Virol, doi:10.1002/jmv.25936 (2020).

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92

5 July, 2020

Singh, D. K., Winocour, P. & Farrington, K. Mechanisms of disease: the
hypoxic tubular hypothesis of diabetic nephropathy. Nat Clin Pract Nephrol 4,
216-226, doi:10.1038/ncpneph0757 (2008).
Lindenmeyer, M. T. et al. Interstitial vascular rarefaction and reduced VEGF-A
expression in human diabetic nephropathy. J Am Soc Nephrol 18, 1765-1776,
doi:10.1681/ASN.2006121304 (2007).
Bonetti, P. O., Lerman, L. O. & Lerman, A. Endothelial dysfunction: a marker
of atherosclerotic risk. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 23, 168-175,
doi:10.1161/01.atv.0000051384.43104.fc (2003).
Sun, H. J., Wu, Z. Y., Nie, X. W. & Bian, J. S. Role of Endothelial Dysfunction in
Cardiovascular Diseases: The Link Between Inflammation and Hydrogen
Sulfide. Front Pharmacol 10, 1568, doi:10.3389/fphar.2019.01568 (2019).
Cai, H. & Harrison, D. G. Endothelial dysfunction in cardiovascular diseases:
the role of oxidant stress. Circ Res 87, 840-844, doi:10.1161/01.res.87.10.840
(2000).
Weis, S. M. Vascular permeability in cardiovascular disease and cancer. Curr
Opin Hematol 15, 243-249, doi:10.1097/MOH.0b013e3282f97d86 (2008).
Viazzi, F. et al. Microalbuminuria, blood pressure load, and systemic vascular
permeability in primary hypertension. Am J Hypertens 19, 1183-1189,
doi:10.1016/j.amjhyper.2006.04.012 (2006).
Iantorno, M. et al. Obesity, inflammation and endothelial dysfunction. J Biol
Regul Homeost Agents 28, 169-176 (2014).
Kwaifa, I. K., Bahari, H., Yong, Y. K. & Noor, S. M. Endothelial Dysfunction in
Obesity-Induced Inflammation: Molecular Mechanisms and Clinical
Implications. Biomolecules 10, doi:10.3390/biom10020291 (2020).
Virdis, A. Endothelial Dysfunction in Obesity: Role of Inflammation. High
Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev 23, 83-85, doi:10.1007/s40292-016-0133-8
(2016).
Nation, D. A. et al. Blood-brain barrier breakdown is an early biomarker of
human cognitive dysfunction. Nat Med 25, 270-276, doi:10.1038/s41591018-0297-y (2019).
Sweeney, M. D., Kisler, K., Montagne, A., Toga, A. W. & Zlokovic, B. V. The
role of brain vasculature in neurodegenerative disorders. Nat Neurosci 21,
1318-1331, doi:10.1038/s41593-018-0234-x (2018).
Monteil, V. et al. Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 Infections in Engineered Human
Tissues Using Clinical-Grade Soluble Human ACE2. Cell,
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.004 (2020).
Lindahl, P., Johansson, B. R., Leveen, P. & Betsholtz, C. Pericyte loss and
microaneurysm formation in PDGF-B-deficient mice. Science 277, 242-245
(1997).
Bell, R. D. et al. Pericytes control key neurovascular functions and neuronal
phenotype in the adult brain and during brain aging. Neuron 68, 409-427,
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2010.09.043 (2010).
Jose, R. J. & Manuel, A. COVID-19 cytokine storm: the interplay between
inflammation and coagulation. Lancet Respir Med, doi:10.1016/S22132600(20)30216-2 (2020).

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.088500; this version posted July 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Running title: COVID-19-pericyte hypothesis
93
94
95

5 July, 2020

Galvan Casas, C. et al. Classification of the cutaneous manifestations of
COVID-19: a rapid prospective nationwide consensus study in Spain with 375
cases. Br J Dermatol, doi:10.1111/bjd.19163 (2020).
Picelli, S. et al. Full-length RNA-seq from single cells using Smart-seq2. Nat
Protoc 9, 171-181, doi:10.1038/nprot.2014.006 (2014).
Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Integrating singlecell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and
species. Nat Biotechnol 36, 411-420, doi:10.1038/nbt.4096 (2018).

38

