bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.14.296327; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

The Coronavirus Network Explorer: Mining a
large-scale knowledge graph for effects of
SARS-CoV-2 on host cell function
Andreas Krämer1, , Jean-Noël Billaud1 , Stuart Tugendreich1 , Dan Shiffman1 , Martin Jones1 , and Jeff Green1,
1

QIAGEN Digital Insights, Redwood City, CA 94063, USA

Building on recent work that identified human host proteins
that interact with SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins in the context
of an affinity-purification mass spectrometry screen, we use a
machine learning-based approach to connect the viral proteins
to relevant biological functions and diseases in a large-scale
knowledge graph derived from the biomedical literature. Our
aim is to explore how SARS-CoV-2 could interfere with various host cell functions, and also to identify additional drug targets amongst the host genes that could potentially be modulated
against COVID-19. Results are presented in the form of interactive network visualizations, that allow exploration of underlying
experimental evidence. A selection of networks is discussed in
the context of recent clinical observations.
Correspondence: andreas.kramer@qiagen.com, jeff.green@qiagen.com

Availability
The Coronavirus Network Explorer (CNE) has been made
freely available to the scientific community as a web-based
resource at https://digitalinsights.qiagen.com/coronavirusnetwork-explorer. Each interactive network has an individual URL that can be shared independently. In addition to the CNE, networks have also been made available within QIAGEN Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA)
(https://www.qiagen.com/qiagen-ipa) to allow exploration in
the context of other datasets.

Introduction
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2), a member of the coronavirus family, is the etiologic agent of the pandemic COVID-19. Like other positivestranded RNA viruses, its encoded proteins interact with proteins of the infected host cell at various stages of the replicative cycle, including with those involved in the immune response. Such proteins therefore represent possible targets
for the development of antiviral strategies. Recently Gordon et al. (1) identified human host proteins that bind to
overexpressed SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins in immortalized
human cells using an affinity-purification mass spectrometry
screen. Proteins identified were functionally characterized
and screened for existing drug targets to identify drugs that
could potentially be repurposed against COVID-19 (1).
Our goal is to illuminate possible molecular mechanisms permitting viral proteins to affect a range of host cell and immune functions that have been shown to be relevant in the

context of COVID-19. For this purpose we integrate SARSCoV-2 viral proteins into a large-scale knowledge graph (KG)
through the viral-host protein interactions identified in Gordon et al. (1). The KG represents existing experimental evidence from the biomedical literature mostly in the form of
signed cause-effect relationships (edges). These edges connect different entities (nodes) including genes, drugs, microRNAs, biological functions, diseases, and pathways; and
they relate to different underlying functional mechanisms
such as expression/transcription, activation/inhibition, phosphorylation, protein-protein binding among others. Each relationship has a positive or negative sign indicating the direction of the effect, i.e. whether it leads to an increase or
decrease (2). Underlying the KG is the QIAGEN Knowledge
Base (KB), a large structured collection of biomedical content that has been manually curated from the literature for
the past 20 years, and also integrates content from third-party
databases. At present, the KB contains over 7 million findings, a large subset of which are represented in the KG with
approximately 120,000 nodes and 3.7 million edges.

Approach
The outline of our approach is shown in Figure 1. For
each member of a pre-selected set of biologically relevant
endpoint functions (including some diseases and signaling
pathways), we construct a network (a subgraph of the KG)
that connects viral proteins to the specified endpoint through
causal paths. These causal paths involve genes (or other
molecules) that are important in the given functional context,
and therefore indicate a possible mechanism with which viral
proteins may affect the particular host function. Because of
the high connectivity of the KG, a large number of molecules
may be associated with the host function, so in order to construct focused networks, care must be taken regarding the
choice of intermediary genes and molecules. For this reason, we use a machine learning model trained on prior knowledge, that computes a signed score for each gene indicating
the likelihood of an activating or inhibiting effect on the endpoint function, where the direction of the effect is given by
the sign of the score. The purpose of the model is twofold:
(1) the prediction of novel gene-function associations independent of whether direct literature evidence is available or
not, and (2) the prioritization of genes predicted to be most
relevant in the given functional context.
Krämer et al.

|

bioRχiv

|

September 13, 2020

|

1–6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.14.296327; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

(1) Determine top-scoring genes G (shown
in color) for given endpoint function F

(2) Intersect G with protein-protein
binding network neighborhood of viral
proteins V

(3) Connect V through directed shortest
paths in the KG to F involving highest
scoring genes

V

gene
viral protein
endpoint function

(2)

(c)

G

gene expression

functions

low-rank approximation
of the co-activity matrix

“training data”

(b)

increase/activation/upregulation
decrease/inhibition/downregulation

(d)
Signed score for
gene-function
relationship

(3)
N-dimensional
gene embedding

Fig. 1. High-level outline of the network algorithm (see also Methods section). Network creation involves three major steps: (1) the selection of top-scoring genes
in the context of the given endpoint function as described in the Methods section
and shown in Figure 2, (2) the intersection of this set of genes with network neighborhoods of viral proteins, and (3) the connection of viral proteins to the endpoint
function through shortest paths in the knowledge graph.

genes

prior knowledge
represented in
bipartite graphs

activation/increase
inhibition/decrease

(1)

F

genes

(a)

linear model

Fig. 2. Outline of the prior knowledge-based machine learning approach for scoring
gene-function relationships as described in the Methods section. The algorithm
assumes that gene expression changes caused by a given gene encode its effect
on biological function. N -dimensional embeddings are computed for each gene
from literature-derived gene expression relationships. These in turn are used as
feature vectors in a linear regression model trained on gene-function effects from
the literature.

Implementation
Connections from the viral proteins to the selected endpoint
functions were made through short directed paths in the
KG involving the highest scoring genes in the given context, where protein-protein binding edges can be traversed
in both ways. Therefore, in every network there will always be at least one causal path from any viral protein to
the endpoint function through edges supported by literature
evidence. Since viral proteins are connected through proteinprotein binding edges to the rest of the network it is impossible to make predictions about their direction of effect on the
endpoint function. However, we can use other available information to make inferences about the activation status of the
intermediary genes. For instance, recent research (3–7) indicates that SARS-Cov-2 has an activating effect on coagulation of blood (severe coagulopathy has been detected in many
patients with severe disease) which allows us to infer that network proteins predicted to have an activating effect on coagulation would potentially need to be inhibited to counteract
viral effects, i.e. drugs targeting those proteins would need to
be antagonists. Many of the intermediary genes found in our
networks are already targets for existing drugs that could potentially be repurposed against COVID-19. Considering the
direction of the effect is an important criterion for the selection of most promising candidates.
Existing network-based approaches in the context of COVID19 mostly focus on protein-protein and co-expression networks using standard enrichment-based functional and pathway analysis, or employing network topology measures to
identify possible targets (8–12). Gysi et al. (13), based on
the Gordon et al. (1) dataset in conjunction with the human interactome, provide a systematic exploration of stateof-the art network algorithms (proximity-based, diffusionbased, and based on graph convolutional networks) with the
primary goal of ranking candidate drugs for repurposing. To
our knowledge, none of these approaches currently leverages
the direction of effects, i.e. activation vs. inhibition.
2

|

bioRχiv

We implemented a web-based interface through which networks computed with the algorithm outlined above can be
accessed for interactive exploration. This interface enables
the user to select a particular endpoint function, as well as
the direction of the effect (activating or inhibiting) that infection with SARS-CoV-2 is thought to have on this function.
In the resulting displayed networks (for examples see Figures 3-5) the user can click on any entity (node or edge) to
reveal underlying findings from the literature, or a description of the selected entity itself. Colors of gene nodes indicate whether that particular gene is inferred to be activated
(orange) or inhibited (blue) in order to achieve the preselected effect on the endpoint function. In addition, we also
annotated genes with associated signaling pathways, colored
according to their predicted activation state. Nodes whose
activation status cannot be inferred, either because they are
only connected by unsigned binding edges, or do not meet a
required score threshold, are shown in white. Genes that are
targets for existing drugs are marked with a purple border.
Selecting such a node will display the drugs targeting that
gene along with each drug’s predicted effect on the endpoint
function. The web application also allows the user to search
for specific genes or pathways in order to narrow down the
number of networks to peruse.

Methods
Prior knowledge-based machine learning model for
scoring gene-function relationships. Prediction and

scoring of causal gene-function relationships involves two
parts, an unsupervised step to construct gene embeddings in a
high-dimensional vector space, and a supervised step to make
predictions about the gene-function relationships themselves.
Building on an assumption that expression relationships encode information about gene function, the unsupervised step
builds gene feature vectors by leveraging downstream causal
gene expression signatures derived from the literature. It is
important to distinguish this from gene expression patterns
Krämer et al.

|

The Coronavirus Network Explorer

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.14.296327; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Table 1. Endpoint functions and pathways for which networks were computed. These networks represent the large spectrum of the host biology affected by the viral infection,
including immunological signaling pathways, biological endpoints observed in severe or critically-ill COVID-19 patients, the viral life cycle and its counterpart host response,
and host functions that are possibly hijacked by the virus itself for its replication/multiplication or transmission.

AMPK Signaling
Antiviral response
Apoptosis
Asthma
Autophagy
Budding of virus
CDK5 Signaling
CXCR4 Signaling
Cell cycle progression
Cellular homeostasis
Chemotaxis
Clathrin mediated endocytosis
Coagulation of blood
Concentration of cholesterol
Degradation of Golgi apparatus
Degranulation of cells
Diabetes mellitus
Edema of pericardial cavity
Endocytosis
Endoplasmic reticulum stress response of cells
Engulfment of cells
Entrance of virus
Exocytosis
Fibrosis

Fragmentation of Golgi apparatus
Fusion of cells
Fusion of phagosomes
Fusion of vesicles
G Beta Gamma Signaling
Glycolysis of cells
HIV infection
HMGB1 Signaling
Hemoglobinopathy
Hemostasis
Hypertension
I-κB kinase/NF-κB cascade
IGF-1 Signaling
IL-1 Signaling
IL-2 Signaling
IL-6 Signaling
IL-8 Signaling
Import of protein
Infection by RNA virus
Inflammation of respiratory system
Inhibition of ARE-Mediated mRNA Degradation Pathway
Internalization of protein
Interphase
M phase

found in expression datasets: Here, expression signatures are
created from individual published gene-to-gene expression or
transcription relationships, not from datasets. The supervised
step then employs a linear least-square regression model for
each function using observed signed causal gene-function relationships from the literature as training data. Below we provide a brief description of the steps involved in this method,
a deeper discussion and evaluation of the approach will be
given elsewhere (manuscript in preparation).
Causal gene expression signatures are represented by a
signed bipartite adjacency matrix W where rows represent
the genes (or other molecules) for which we wish to compute
embeddings, and columns represent genes of the downstream
expression signature (Figure 2a). The matrix elements are
1/2
Wij = ±1/Ni if an observation of gene i regulating gene
j exists in the literature, where the positive sign stands for
observed up-regulation and the negative sign for observed
down-regulation. It is Wij = 0 if there is no recorded relationship, and Ni denotes the total number of genes found
to be regulated by gene i. From W we construct the "coactivity" matrix
S = WW

T

(1)

which is positive definite with diagonal elements being equal
to one. We then take the low-rank approximation of S,
S̃ = U ΛU T

|

The Coronavirus Network Explorer

Causal gene-function effects from the literature are captured
similarly in a signed bipartite adjacency matrix Y , with rows
representing genes, and columns representing downstream
functions (Figure 2c). It is Yij = ±1 if the gene-function
effect is activating (+1), or inhibiting (−1), else Yij = 0 if
there is no observed effect. We build a model predicting the
effect of gene i on function j from the gene feature vector ~xi
by using linear regression, i.e. minimizing the least-squares
loss
X
L=
|x~i β~j − Yij |2
(3)
ij

~j is determined for each funcwhere the parameter vector β
tion j. It follows that
β~j = (U T U )−1 U T ~yj = U T ~yj ,

(4)

so that predicted signed scores Pij can then be expressed as
orthogonal projections of the column vectors ~yj of Y onto the
subspace spanned by the top eigenvectors of S (Figure 2d),
P = UUT Y

(5)

In order to determine top-scoring genes for a given function
j, we sort the elements of row vectors p~j of P by their absolute value. A meaningful cutoff is obtained by looking at
the distribution of values in p~j , i.e. applying a transformatin
to z-scores,

(2)

where Λ is an N -dimensional diagonal matrix containing the
top N eigenvalues of S, and column vectors of U are the
corresponding N normalized eigenvectors. The row vectors
of U form the desired N -dimensional feature representations
of genes (Figure 2b). In the model used for this application
we included 2314 genes, and set N = 100.
Krämer et al.

Macroautophagy of cells
Macropinocytosis
Mitosis
Myocarditis
PDGF Signaling
PTEN Signaling
Phagocytosis
Pneumonia
Production of reactive oxygen species
Pulmonary Hypertension
Release of virus
Replication of RNA virus
Replication of coronavirus
Respiratory failure
SAPK/JNK Signaling
Stabilization of mRNA
Synthesis of lipid
Synthesis of phospholipid
Synthesis of reactive oxygen species
Transport of virus
Viral Infection
Viral life cycle

zij =

Pij − mean(~
pj )
.
std(p~j )

(6)

Network algorithm. The network-generating algorithm

consists of the following steps (see Figure 1):
For each endpoint function F we determine the set of topscoring genes associated with F where each gene g meets a
bioRχiv

|

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.14.296327; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

cut off |zgF | ≥ 2. Then, for each viral protein V we construct the network neighborhood of V by collecting all genes
directly connected to V (through edges from Gordon et al.
(1)), and additionally genes that can be reached from V by
traversing two subsequent protein-protein binding edges ("2
hops") but also obey a "specificity" criterion ensuring that
connections do not occur through network hubs, and providing an external parameter to control network size. In particular, for a given gene g that is connected through 2 hops to V
we calculate the quantity
−1

X 2E
 ,
s=
0 dg
d
g
0

(7)

g

where E is the total number of protein-protein binding edges,
dg is the node degree of g, and the sum runs over all intermediate genes g 0 connecting V to g. For the application, we
imposed a cut off s ≤ 0.001, which led to reasonable network
sizes.
For any given function F from Table 1 we collect all viral
proteins Vi for which the intersection Gi of the set of topscoring genes of F and the network neighborhood of Vi is
not empty, and together they form the "core" of the network
for function F . Apart from the protein-protein binding edges,
this core network can still be unconnected as a subgraph of
the KG. In the next step, in order to show supporting evidence from the literature, we therefore include additional
genes from the KG (with emphasis on high-scoring ones w.r.t.
F ) to create a connected subgraph. For the subset of gene
nodes g in the KG that were assigned a z-score zgF , and that
are connected by an edge, we define edge weights
w(g1 , g2 ) = (|zg1 F ||zg2 F |)−1/2 ,

(8)

which are used to compute shortest paths from genes in the
sets Gi to the endpoint function F within the KG (similarly
gene-function edges are assigned a weight w = |zgF |−1/2 ).
Shortest paths constructed this way are enriched in highscoring genes. In addition to shortest paths we also add
slightly longer paths (based on a heuristic) to control network
size. In a final step, in order to provide additional context,
some network genes are also connected to nodes representing signaling pathways in which these genes play a role.

Discussion
Endpoint functions and pathways for which networks were
computed are shown in Table 1. These networks represent
the large spectrum of the host biology affected by the viral infection. Immunological signaling pathways (IL-1, IL6, IL-8 to name a few) are included as they describe broadly
the impact of the inflammatory setting in COVID-19 patients.
We have also included networks that display biological endpoints observed in severe or critically-ill COVID-19 patients
such as pneumonia, respiratory failure, myocarditis. A set of
networks presents the complex viral life cycle and its counterpart host response (Replication of coronavirus, budding of
virus, entrance of virus, antiviral response, etc.) and finally a
4

|

bioRχiv

Fig. 3. Network: Promotion of coagulation of blood. See Discussion section.

set of networks that are possibly hijacked by the virus itself
for its replication/multiplication or transmission (endocytosis, endoplasmic reticulum stress response, etc.).
Below we discuss three of the networks as examples.
Network: Promotion of coagulation of blood. Most peo-

ple infected with SARS-CoV-2 will experience mild to moderate respiratory illness and recover promptly. However, in
some cases, severe disease occurs with major pathophysiological and sometimes lethal outcomes. Co-morbidities such
as cardiovascular, renal, and respiratory preexisting conditions contribute to the severity seen in these patients. One
drastic impact seen is the change in hemostasis after SARSCoV-2 infection. Severe coagulopathy can arise and is associated with increased fatality rates in severely ill patients. The
SARS-CoV-2 infection induces a pro-coagulative state and
may result in vascular leakage and disseminated intravascular coagulation. The proinflammatory unbalance is thought
to be one of the key factors of this uncontrolled clotting consequence seen in severe COVID-19 (3–7, 14). The network
presented here (Figure 3) displays the interrelations between
some of the key host molecules involved in the coagulation
cascade, such as F3/tissue factor, F10, PLAT/plasminogen
activator, and angiogenic factors or molecules related to angiogenesis balance such as F2RL1/proteinase-activated receptor 2 and EDN1/endothelin 1, PF4/Platelet factor 4 and
several viral proteins (nsp9, nsp13, orf3a, orf9c, orf8). The
severity of COVID-19 is generally a consequence of hypercytokinemia ("cytokine storm") with its dramatic increase of
chemokines and their cellular consequences (e.g. increase of
neutrophils, thrombocytopenia, endothelialitis). Therefore,
this network also displays the contribution of increased proinflammatory molecules or signaling pathways (IL1B, IL6,
IL8, IL17a) and upregulated chemokine signaling (CXCR4
Krämer et al.

|

The Coronavirus Network Explorer

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.14.296327; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

signaling, CCL5) observed in severe COVID-19 outcomes.
This network highlights the importance of understanding the
molecular interplay between the players, and as shown recently, anticoagulant treatment appears to decrease mortality
in severe COVID-19 patients.
Network: Promotion of pneumonia. Viral pneumonia

with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is one of
the extreme consequences of COVID-19, a condition requiring mechanical ventilation as treatment. Patients with these
severe conditions develop progressive respiratory failure following dramatic cascades of events. Dysfunctional immune
responses in these patients will induce these events and are
characterized by low IFN type I, III, a high pro-inflammatory
setting, elevated chemokine secretion, high infiltration of
myeloid and T cells in the lung, and finally severe pulmonary
edema and pneumonia (15–17). This network (Figure 4)
shows the possible interplay among type I Interferons, interleukins, the glucocorticoid receptor, sensors of viral infections and elements of the JAK/STAT pathway or the coagulation cascade and key coronaviral proteins that might promote
pneumonia.
Network: Promotion of IL6 signaling. IL6 is an important

pleiotropic interleukin that signals through the JAK/STAT
(JAK1 and STAT3 in particular) and the MAPK pathway. It
is expressed by immune cells (dendritic cells, macrophages,
B cells and also epithelial cells) and it is involved in many
biological processes including cell survival, apoptosis, maturation of T cells, TH1/Th2/Th17 differentiation/balance, and
inflammation. IL6 is described as a pro-inflammatory cytokine, secreted in response to IL1B and TNF stimulation.
The severe or critical cases of COVID-19 correlate with high
levels of IL6 (during the cytokine storm) and low lymphocyte
counts (18–21). Furthermore, higher levels of IL6 correlate
with the risk of developing ARDS. As such, clinical trials are
now ongoing and are designed to target IL6 using monoclonal
antibody therapy (Tocilizumab and Sarilumab) as IL6 seems
to be one of the key promoters of fatal outcomes. IL6 signaling described in this network (Figure 5) includes all the major
proinflammatory cytokines (IL1B, IL17, TNF and IL6,). Several key molecules of inflammation signaling are also present
such as RELA, IKBKB, RIPK1 as well as MAPK signaling.
It is thought that all these genes are either upregulated or predicted to be activated and would participate in the general
increase of IL6 signaling and its unfortunate consequences in
COVID-19.

Fig. 4. Network: Promotion of pneumonia. See Discussion section.

Conclusion
We have presented the Coronavirus Network Explorer
(CNE), a tool to explore how SARS-CoV2 may interfere
with various cell functions through interactions with host
genes. The CNE also suggests potential novel drug targets
as well as existing drugs that could be repurposed against
COVID-19. Our approach involves "mining" of a large-scale
literature-derived knowledge graph by finding host genes that
are predicted by a machine learning algorithm to be most relKrämer et al.

|

The Coronavirus Network Explorer

Fig. 5. Network: Promotion of IL6 signaling. See Discussion section.

bioRχiv

|

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.14.296327; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

evant in a given functional context, and that are also closely
associated with viral proteins through network interactions.
These genes, connected viral proteins, and impacted biological pathways and processes are displayed together in a
network in which edges generally represent experimentally
observed relationships between nodes, illuminating potential underlying molecular mechanisms. We have discussed a
small selection of these networks in order to demonstrate that
our approach can identify biologically plausible hypotheses.
These hypotheses are grounded in actual immunological, virological and pathological observations seen in SARS-CoV2 infected patients as demonstrated by underlying literature
findings. In future work, our plan is to further improve on
these networks, making mechanisms more explicit by adding
more relevant, possibly inferred causal connections, and taking into account specifc cell type or tissue contexts.
Interestingly, some of the drugs identified in our networks
have been mentioned as potential therapeutic, or have been
identified using other methods (22), validating our own approach. For instance, Baricitinib is a JAK1/2 inhibitor approved for Rheumatoid Arthritis and it is now tested in phases
III clinical trial for treatment of moderate to severe COVID19 patients (23, 24). Baricitinib’s mechanism proposal includes inhibition of viral entry via ACE2-mediated endocytosis. Our algorithm highlighted other potential mechanisms to counteract SARS-CoV-2 infection such as interfering with PDGF signaling in addition to the known inhibition of the gp130 cytokines (IL-6, IL-12, etc.). Anakinra, a
known IL1-R antagonist has been also identified in two of our
networks describing potential pathological consequences or
co-morbidities factoring into COVID-19 (asthma, fibrosis).
Anakinra is now tested in phases III clinical trials (25). Finally, we have also identified Siltuximab, an anti-IL6, present
in 28 of 70 networks, this monoclonal antibody is currently
being tested for potential COVID-19 treatment (26).
In conclusion, using a network algorithm combined with a
machine learning model based on prior knowledge, we have
explored possible molecular mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2
infection and proposed a set of networks that describe the
pathogenesis of COVID-19. More validation will be required
but evidence from on-going clinical trials confirm the wellfoundedness of our proposal to discover new avenues for existing drugs.

5. Becker R. C. et al (2020) COVID-19 update: Covid-19-associated coagulopathy. Journal of
thrombosis and thrombolysis, 50(1), 54-67.
6. Costanzo, L. et al (2020) Coagulopathy, thromboembolic complications, and the use of heparin in COVID-19 pneumonia. Journal of vascular surgery. Venous and lymphatic disorders,
8(5), 711-716.
7. Terpos, E. et al (2020) Hematological findings and complications of COVID-19. American
journal of hematology, 95(7), 834-847.
8. Prasad, K. et al. (2020) Targeting hub genes and pathways of innate immune response in
COVID-19: A network biology perspective. International journal of biological macromolecules,
163, 1-8.
9. Kumar, N. et al. (2020) Integrative Network Biology Framework Elucidates Molecular Mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2. Pathogenesis SSRN, 3581857.
10. Zhou, Y. et al. (2020) Network-based drug repurposing for novel coronavirus 2019nCoV/SARS-CoV-2. Cell discovery, 6, 14.
11. Nunnari, G. et al. (2020) Network perturbation analysis in human bronchial epithelial cells
following SARS-CoV2 infection. Experimental cell research, 395(2), 112204.
12. Messina, F. et al. (2020) COVID-19: viral-host interactome analyzed by network basedapproach model to study pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Journal of translational
medicine, 18(1), 233.
13. Gysi, D. M. et al (2020) Network Medicine Framework for Identifying Drug Repurposing
Opportunities for COVID-19. arXiv:2004.07229v1.
14. Tang, N. et al (2020) Anticoagulant treatment is associated with decreased mortality in
severe coronavirus disease 2019 patients with coagulopathy. Journal of thrombosis and
haemostasis : JTH, 18(5), 1094-1099.
15. Hadjadj, J. et al (2020) Impaired type I interferon activity and inflammatory responses in
severe COVID-19 patients. Science, 369(6504), 718-724.
16. Lee, J. S. et al (2020) Immunophenotyping of COVID-19 and influenza highlights the role of
type I interferons in development of severe COVID-19. Science immunology, 5(49), eabd1554.
17. Schulte-Schrepping, J. et al (2020) Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid
Cell Compartment. Cell, S0092-8674(20) 30992-2.
18. Herold, T. et al (2020) Elevated levels of IL-6 and CRP predict the need for mechanical
ventilation in COVID-19. The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology, 146(1), 128-136.e4.
19. Weiskopf, D. et al (2020). Phenotype and kinetics of SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells in COVID19 patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome. Science immunology, 5(48), eabd2071.
20. Chen, Z. and John Wherry, E. (2020) T cell responses in patients with COVID-19. Nature
reviews Immunology, 20(9), 529-536.
21. Giamarellos-Bourboulis, E. J. et al (2020) Complex Immune Dysregulation in COVID-19
Patients with Severe Respiratory Failure. Cell host and microbe, 27(6), 992-1000.e3.
22. Richardson, P. et al (2020) Baricitinib as potential treatment for 2019-nCoV acute respiratory
disease. Lancet, 395(10223), e30-e31.
23. Barret, L. (2020) Treatment of Moderate to Severe Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) in
Hospitalized Patients. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04321993
24. Hospital of Prato (2020) Baricitinib in Symptomatic Patients Infected by COVID-19: an
Open-label, Pilot Study. (BARI-COVID). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04320277
25. Swedish Orphan Biovitrum (2020) Efficacy and Safety of Emapalumab and Anakinra in
Reducing Hyperinflammation and Respiratory Distress in Patients With COVID-19 Infection.
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04324021
26. University Hospital, Ghent (2020) Treatment of COVID-19 Patients With Anti-interleukin
Drugs (COV-AID). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04330638

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Bob Rebres and Andreea Pasare for
guidance and discussion. We thank Shawn Bauer for critical
reading of the manuscript, and especially thank Craig Upson
for helping to build the CNE.

References
1. Gordon, D. E. et al. (2020) A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug
repurposing. Nature, 583(7816), 459-468.
2. Krämer, A. et al. (2014) Causal analysis approaches in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Bioinformatics, 30(4), 523-530.
3. Teuwen, L. A. et al (2020) COVID-19: the vasculature unleashed. Nature reviews Immunology, 20(7), 389-391.
4. Ackermann, M. et al (2020) Pulmonary Vascular Endothelialitis, Thrombosis, and Angiogenesis in Covid-19. The New England journal of medicine, 383(2), 120-128.

6

|

bioRχiv

Krämer et al.

|

The Coronavirus Network Explorer

