bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.040667; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

XXXXXXXXX​, YYYY, 0–0
doi: XXXXXXX/XXXXXXX/xxxxx
Advance Access Publication Date: DD Month 2020
XXXXXXXXXXX

COVID-19 Knowledge Graph: a computable,
multi-modal, cause-and-effect knowledge
model of COVID-19 pathophysiology
Daniel Domingo-Fernández​1,2*​, Shounak Baksi​3*​, Bruce Schultz​1*​, Yojana
Gadiya​1,2​, Reagon Karki​1,2​, Tamara Raschka​1,2​, Christian Ebeling​1​, Martin
Hofmann-Apitius​1,2​, and Alpha Tom Kodamullil​1,2*
(1) Department of Bioinformatics, Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and Scientific Computing (SCAI),
53754 Sankt Augustin, Germany, (2) Bonn-Aachen International Center for Information Technology
(B-IT), University of Bonn, 53113 Bonn, Germany, (3) Causality Biomodels, Kinfra Hi-Tech Park,
Kalamassery, Cochin, Kerala 683503, India
*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Associate Editor: XXXXXXX
Received on XXXXX; revised on XXXXX; accepted on XXXXX

Abstract
Summary: The past few weeks have witnessed a worldwide mobilization of the research community
in response to the novel coronavirus (COVID-19). This global response has led to a burst of
publications on the pathophysiology of the virus, yet without coordinated efforts to organize this
knowledge, it can remain hidden away from individual research groups. By extracting and
formalizing this knowledge in a structured and computable form, as in the form of a knowledge
graph, researchers can readily reason and analyze this information on a much larger scale. Here, we
present the COVID-19 Knowledge Graph, an expansive cause-and-effect network constructed from
scientific literature on the new coronavirus that aims to provide a comprehensive view of its
pathophysiology. To make this resource available to the research community and facilitate its
exploration and analysis, we also implemented a web application and released the KG in multiple
standard formats.
Availability: The COVID-19 Knowledge Graph is publicly available under CC-0 license at
https://github.com/covid19kg​ and ​https://bikmi.covid19-knowledgespace.de​.
Contact:​ ​alpha.tom.kodamullil@scai.fraunhofer.de
Supplementary information:​ ​Supplementary data ​are available online.

1. Introduction
The COVID-19 crisis has prompted a response of the scientific
community that is unparalleled in history. Research organizations have
dedicated their entire workforce to combat the pandemic. Tens of
thousands of researchers in hundreds of universities, governmental
laboratories, and industrial research departments have entirely focused
their efforts on understanding the virus pathophysiology, finding drugs
that interfere with its life cycle and developing immunization strategies
for future vaccines (Chahrour e​ t al., ​2020).
While the steep increase in research activities in the COVID-19
context has led to an unprecedented increase of scientific publications, it
becomes challenging to identify genuine novel findings and discern them
from those that are already known. The process of discriminating
“known knowns” from “unknown knowns” can be supported by
knowledge graphs (KGs), as they provide a means to capture, represent
and formalize structured information (Nelson ​et al., 2019). Furthermore,
although these KGs were originally developed to describe interactions
between entities, they are complemented by a broad range of algorithms
that have been proven to partially automate the process of knowledge
discovery (Cowen ​et al.​, 2017; Humayun ​et al., 2020). Importantly,
novel machine learning techniques can generate latent, low-dimensional

representations of the KG which can then be utilized for downstream
tasks such as clustering or classification (Hamilton ​et al​., 2015).
In this paper, we present an approach to lay the foundation for a
comprehensive KG in the context of COVID-19. Our work is
complemented by a web application that enables users to
comprehensively explore the information contained in the KG. To
facilitate the ease of usage and interoperability of our KG, we have
released its content in various standard formats in order to promote its
adoption and enhancement by the scientific community.

2.

Material and Methods

In this section, we outline the methodology used to: i) select the corpus,
ii) generate the COVID-19 KG, and iii) develop the web application for
exploring the KG.

2.1 Selection​ ​of Scientific Literature
For the creation of the KG, scientific literature related to COVID-19 was
retrieved from open access and freely available journals
(Supplementary Information)​. This corpus was then filtered based on

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.040667; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

available information about potential drug targets for COVID-19,
biological pathways in which the virus interferes in order to replicate in
its human host, and information on the various viral proteins along with
their functions. Finally, the articles were prioritized based on the level of
information that could be captured in the modeling language used to
build the KG.

2.2 Constructing the COVID-19 Knowledge Graph
Evidence text from the prioritized corpus was manually encoded in
Biological Expression Language (BEL) as a triple (i.e., source node relation - target node) including metadata about the nodes and their
relationships as well as corresponding provenance and contextual
information. BEL scripts generated from this curation work are freely
available at ​https://github.com/covid19kg along with their network
representations in several other standard formats (e.g., SIF, GraphML,
and NDEx). By making this data available in multiple formats, we are
seeking to facilitate the analysis of the KG with a broad range of
methods/software as well as promote its integration into other biological
databases and web services such as the one presented in the following
subsection.

2.3 Web Application
In order to better aid the exploration and usage of the generated
COVID-19 Knowledge Graph, a web application was developed using
Biological Knowledge Miner (BiKMi), an in-house software package
designed for exploring pathways and molecular interactions within a
BEL-derived network. The front-end of the application was constructed
using the Python Django web framework, while the back-end of the
software is implemented using OrientDB, a multi-model database
management system that allows for both relational and graph queries to
be made against a database via its API ​(Supplementary Information)​,
which opens the avenue towards systematic comparison of different
COVID models.

3.

Results

We introduce a KG that comprises mechanistic information on
COVID-19 published in 145 ​original research articles. In its current
state, the COVID-19 KG incorporates 3954 nodes, covering 10 entity
types (e.g., proteins, genes, chemicals, and biological processes) and
9484 relationships (e.g., increases, decreases, and association), forming a
seamless interaction network ​(Supplementary Information)​. Given the
selected corpora, these cause-and-effect relations primarily denote
host-pathogen interactions as well as comorbidities and symptoms
associated with COVID-19. Furthermore, the KG contains molecular
interactions related to host invasion (e.g., spike glycoprotein and its
interaction with the host via receptor ACE2) and the effects of the
downstream inflammatory, cell survival, and apoptosis signaling
pathways.
A key aspect of the COVID-19 KG is in its large coverage of
drug-target interactions along with the biological processes, genes and
proteins associated with the novel coronavirus. We have identified over
300 candidate drugs currently being investigated in the context of
COVID-19 ​(Supplementary Information)​, including proposed
repurposing candidates and drugs under clinical trial.
Along with the KG, we implemented a web application
(​https://bikmi.covid19-knowledgespace.de​) for querying, browsing, and
navigating the KG ​(Figure 1)​. The visualization enables users to explore
and query the network (e.g., filtering nodes or edges, or calculating paths
between nodes of interest). Additionally, it enables users to upload ​omics
data and validate its signals against the knowledge contained in the
network. To demonstrate this feature, the web application is loaded with
the transcriptomics experiments conducted by Blanco-Melo ​et al.​ (2020).

Figure 1​. (Left) Visualization of the COVID-19 KG in BiKMi. (Right) Querying paths between
two nodes and verifying their consistency with transcriptomics data .

4.

Discussion

The novel coronavirus has motivated a profound response by the
scientific community and has led to the rapid publishing of COVID-19
research. As an attempt to organize and formally represent the most
current knowledge of the virus, we have introduced a KG comprising
mechanistic
information
around
COVID-19
biology
and
pathophysiology. The presented KG provides a comprehensive overview
of relevant viral protein interactions and their downstream molecular
mechanisms. Additionally, it also includes the vast majority of potential
drug-targets as well as clinical manifestations associated with
comorbidities and symptoms. Given the biological complexity and the
sparse information we currently have on the pathophysiology of the
virus, mechanistic knowledge contained in the KG could be promising
for the discovery of as of yet hidden interactions. The COVID-19 KG
presented here is part of a bigger ecosystem that integrates disease maps
with three of the largest pathway databases (Domingo Fernandez ​et al​.,
2019).
Not only do we provide a web application to make the content
accessible to the research community, but we also have released the KG
in a variety of standard formats. In doing so, we aim to foster an
exchange of information across similar integration approaches
(Waagmeester ​et al., ​2020) as well as to facilitate its analytic use on both
knowledge- and data-driven methods. Finally, we plan to make future
releases of the KG to ensure the most up-to-date content as well as to
benefit from its integration and crosstalk with other similar activities
(i.e., #covidpathways).

Funding
This work has been supported by the MAVO program of the Fraunhofer
Society.
Conflict of Interest:​ none declared.

References
Blanco-Melo, D., ​et al. ​(2020). SARS-CoV-2 launches a unique
transcriptional signature from in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo systems.
bioRxiv 2020.03.24.004655.
Chahrour, M., ​et al. (2020). A Bibliometric Analysis of COVID-19
Research Activity: A Call for Increased Output. ​Cureus​, ​12​(3).
Cowen, L., ​et al. (2017). Network propagation: a universal amplifier of
genetic associations. ​Nature Reviews Genetics​ 18.9: 551.
Domingo-Fernández, D., ​et al. (2019). PathMe: Merging and exploring
mechanistic pathway knowledge. ​BMC bioinformatics​, 20(1), 243.
Hamilton, W. L., ​et al. ​(2017). Representation Learning on Graphs:
Methods and Applications. ​IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin.​
Humayun, F., ​et al. (2020). A computational approach for mapping heme
biology in the context of hemolytic disorders. ​Frontiers in
Bioengineering and Biotechnology​, ​8​, 74.
Nelson, W., ​et al. (2019). To embed or not: network embedding as a
paradigm in computational biology. ​Frontiers in genetics​, ​10​:381.
Waagmeester, A., ​et al. ​(2020). A protocol for adding knowledge to
Wikidata, a case report. ​bioRxiv​ 2020.04.05.026336.

