bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Deep immune profiling of COVID-19 patients reveals patient heterogeneity and distinct
immunotypes with implications for therapeutic interventions
Divij Mathew1,2*, Josephine R. Giles1,2,13*, Amy E. Baxter1,2*, Allison R. Greenplate1,2*, Jennifer E.
Wu1,2,13*, Cécile Alanio1,2,13*, Derek A. Oldridge1,3*, Leticia Kuri-Cervantes1,4, M. Betina
Pampena1,4, Kurt D’Andrea5, Sasikanth Manne1,2, Zeyu Chen1,2, Yinghui Jane Huang1,2, John P.
Reilly12, Ariel R, Weisman12, Caroline A.G. Ittner12, Oliva Kuthuru1,2, Jeanette Dougherty1,2, Kito
Nzingha1,2, Nicholas Han1,2, Justin Kim1,2, Ajinkya Pattekar1,6, Eileen C. Goodwin1,4, Elizabeth M.
Anderson1,4, Madison E. Weirick1,4, Sigrid Gouma1,4, Claudia P. Arevalo1,4, Marcus J. Bolton1,4,
Fang Chen7, Simon F. Lacey7,8, Scott E.Hensley1,4, Sokratis Apostolidis1,9, Alexander C.
Huang1,10, Laura A. Vella1,11, The UPenn COVID Processing Unit, Michael R. Betts1,4, #, Nuala J.
Meyer12,,# E. John Wherry1,2,13,#
1

Institute for Immunology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine
Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine
3
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine
4
Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine
5
Division of Translational Medicine and Human Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania
6
Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine
7
Center for Cellular Immunotherapies,University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine
8
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine
9
Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine
10
Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine
11
Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia
12
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine
13
Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy at University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine
2

* These authors contributed equally
#
Co-corresponding authors. Direct correspondence to Nuala.Meyer@pennmedicine.upenn.edu;
betts@pennmedicine.upenn.edu; or wherry@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
COVID-19 has become a global pandemic. Immune dysregulation has been implicated, but
immune responses remain poorly understood. We analyzed 71 COVID-19 patients compared to
recovered and healthy subjects using high dimensional cytometry. Integrated analysis of ~200
immune and >30 clinical features revealed activation of T cell and B cell subsets, but only in
some patients. A subgroup of patients had T cell activation characteristic of acute viral infection
and plasmablast responses could reach >30% of circulating B cells. However, another subgroup
had lymphocyte activation comparable to uninfected subjects. Stable versus dynamic
immunological signatures were identified and linked to trajectories of disease severity change.
These analyses identified three “immunotypes” associated with poor clinical trajectories versus
improving health. These immunotypes may have implications for therapeutics and vaccines.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

MAIN TEXT
The COVID-19 pandemic has to date caused >4 million infections resulting in over 300,000
deaths. Following infection with SARS-CoV2, COVID-19 patients can experience mild or even
asymptomatic disease, or can present with severe disease requiring hospitalization and
mechanical ventilation. The case fatality rate can be as high as ~10%(1). Some severe COVID19 patients display an acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), reflecting severe respiratory
damage. In acute respiratory viral infections, pathology can be mediated by the virus directly, by
an overaggressive immune response, or both(2–4). However, in severe COVID-19 disease, the
characteristics of and role for the immune response as well as how these responses relate to
clinical disease features remain poorly understood.
SARS-CoV2 antigen-specific T cells have been identified in the central memory (CM), effector
memory (EM), and CD45RA+ effector memory (EMRA) compartments(5) but the characteristics
of these cells and their role in infection/pathogenesis remain unclear. Recovered subjects more
often have evidence of virus-specific CD4 T cell responses than virus-specific CD8 T cell
responses, though pre-existing CD4 T cell responses to other coronaviruses also appear to
have been present in a subset of subjects prior to the COVID-19 pandemic(6). Inflammatory
responses have been reported, including increases in IL-6- or GM-CSF-producing CD4 T cells
in the blood(7) or decreases in immunoregulatory subsets such as regulatory T cells (Treg) or
ɣδ T cells(8–10). T cell exhaustion(11, 12) or increased inhibitory receptor expression on
peripheral T cells has also been reported(7, 13), though these receptors are also increased
following T cell activation(14). Moreover, although there is evidence of T cell activation in
COVID-19 patients(15), some studies have found decreases in polyfunctionality (11, 16) or
cytotoxicity(11); however, this has not been observed in other similar studies(12). Furthermore,
how this activation should be viewed in the context of COVID-19 lymphopenia(17–19) remains
unclear.
Most patients seroconvert within 7-14 days of onset of infection and increases in plasmablasts
have been reported(15, 20–22). However, the role of humoral responses in the control of SARSCoV2 and pathogenesis of COVID-19 disease remains unclear. Whereas IgG levels reportedly
drop around 8 weeks after symptom onset(23, 24), IgA remains high and may correlate with
disease severity(24, 25). Furthermore, neutralizing antibodies can control SARS-CoV2 infection
in vitro and in vivo(4, 26, 27). Indeed, some COVID-19 ICU patients receiving convalescent

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

plasma

containing

neutralizing

antibodies

experienced

an

improvement

in

clinical

symptoms(28). However, neutralizing antibodies are also detected in patients with severe
COVID-19 disease(28), a phenomenon also observed in SARS infection (29). This work
suggests a complex and poorly understood relationship between humoral responses and
disease progression and/or protection in COVID-19 patients.
Taken together, this work provokes questions about the potential diversity of immune responses
to SARS-CoV2 and the relationship of this immune response diversity to clinical disease
manifestation. However, many of these studies describe small cohorts or even single patients,
limiting a comprehensive interrogation of this diversity. The relationship of different immune
response features to clinical parameters, as well as the changes in immune responses and
clinical disease over time, remain poorly understood. Because potential therapeutics for COVID19 patients include approaches to inhibit, activate, or otherwise modulate immune function, it is
essential to define the immune response characteristics related to disease features in welldefined patient cohorts.
Acute SARS-CoV2 infection in humans results in broad changes in circulating immune
cell populations
To interrogate the immune response during SARS-CoV2 infection in humans, we conducted an
observational study of hospitalized patients with COVID-19 at the University of Pennsylvania
(UPenn IRB 808542). We included 90 adult hospitalized patients with laboratory confirmed
SARS-CoV2 infection (denoted as COVID-19 patients). Blood was collected at enrollment
(typically within 24hrs of hospital admission; Figure 1A). Additional samples were obtained from
patients who remained hospitalized on day 7. Blood was also collected from non-hospitalized
patients who had recovered from documented SARS-CoV2 infection (Recovered Donors (RD);
n=29), as well as from healthy donors (HD; n=44) (UPenn IRB 834263) (Figure 1A). Clinical
metadata is available from all individuals in these cohorts; however, PBMC were analyzed by
flow cytometry from n=71, 25, and 37 patients or subjects in each cohort, respectively (Figure
1A and Tables S1-3).
The median age of COVID-19 patients analyzed by cytometry was 60 years old (range 29-85),
and was similar to HD and RD (Figure 1A). For COVID-19 patients, median BMI was 28 (range
20-60), and 65% were African American (Table S1). Comorbidities in COVID-19 patients were
dominated by cardiovascular risk factors (92% of the cohort). Half suffered from chronic kidney
disease and 20% had a previously thromboembolic event. A subset of patients (15%) were

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

treated with immunosuppressive drugs and ~10% had cancer or another pre-existing pulmonary
condition. Half of the patients were treated with hydroxychloroquine, a third with steroids, and
~25% with remdesivir. Mortality was 8% in our cohort. The majority of the patients were
symptomatic at diagnosis and hospitalized ~9 days after initiation of symptoms. Approximately
25% of patients required mechanical ventilation at presentation, with additional extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation (ECMO) in one case.
In line with published data(30), this COVID-19 cohort presented with a clinical inflammatory
syndrome. Non-cardiac C reactive protein (CRP) was elevated in all but 1 patient; LDH and Ddimer were increased in the vast majority, whereas ferritin was above normal in ~75% of
COVID-19 patients (Figure 1B and S1A). Similarly, troponin and NT-proBNP were increased in
some patients (Figure S1A). Although white blood cell counts (WBC) were mostly in the normal
range, individual leukocyte populations were altered in COVID-19 patients compared to controls
(Figure 1B). A subset of patients had high PMN counts (Figure S1A) consistent with previous
work(8, 31) and a companion study showing elevated neutrophils in COVID-19 patients(32).
Furthermore, approximately half of the patients were clinically lymphopenic (Figure 1B). In
contrast, monocyte, eosinophil and basophil counts were mostly normal (Figure 1B and S1A).
To examine potential associations between these clinical features, we performed integrated
correlation mapping (Figure 1C and S1B). This analysis revealed correlations between changes
in immune cell numbers, including monocytes and lymphocytes (Figure 1C) and identified
potential relationships between ferritin and WBC counts (Figure S1B). Furthermore, D-dimer
was associated with both WBC and PMN counts, although the later relationship was not
significant (Figure S1B). IL-6 levels were variable across the 16 patients analyzed for
suspected increased inflammation: normal in 1 patient, moderately elevated in 4 subjects (5-20
pg/ml), and high in 11 patients (21-738 pg/ml) (Figure S1A). Thus, COVID-19 patients present
with varied pre-existing comorbidities, complex clinical phenotypes, evidence of inflammation in
many patients, and clinically altered leukocyte counts.
To begin to dissect the effect of acute SARS-CoV2 infection on immune response, we
compared peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of COVID-19 patients, RD, and HD
subjects using high dimensional flow cytometry. We first focused on the major lymphocyte
populations. B cell frequencies were comparable to RD or HD subjects (Figure 1D, 1E). In
contrast, the vast majority of COVID-19 patients had lower frequencies of CD8 T cells compared
to HD, with similar though less pronounced decreases in CD4 T cells (Figure 1E). Indeed,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

examining only CD3+ T cells, there was preferential loss of CD8 T cells compared to CD4 T
cells (Figure 1F and S1C); this pattern was also reflected in the absolute counts that showed
lower CD8 T cell numbers compared to CD4 T cell numbers (Figure S1D). Despite an apparent
greater loss of CD8 compared to CD4 T cells, the frequency of these two lymphocyte
populations correlated in the majority of patients (Figure 1G). These findings are consistent with
previous reports of lymphopenia during COVID-19 disease(16–19) but highlight a preferential
impact on CD8 T cells. As a result of the decrease in T cells, the relative frequency of non-B
and non-T cells in the PBMC was elevated (Figure 1E). These major alterations in lymphocyte
compartments were not observed in RD compared to HD.
Given the variation in lymphopenia and changes in the lymphocyte compartment between
patients, we next asked if changes in the frequency of these lymphocyte populations was
related to clinical metrics (Figure 1H). In general, lower WBC counts were associated
preferentially with lower frequencies of CD4 and CD8 T cells, but not with the frequency of B
cells or non-T non-B cells (Figure 1H). These lower T cell counts were generally associated
with clinical markers of inflammation including ferritin, D-dimer, and hsCRP (Figure 1H). Thus,
hospitalized COVID-19 patients present with a complex constellation of clinical features that
may be associated with altered lymphocyte populations.
SARS-CoV2 infection is associated with CD8 T cell activation in a subset of patients
We next applied this high-dimensional flow cytometric platform to further investigate lymphocyte
activation and differentiation during COVID-19 disease. We first used principal component
analysis to examine the general distribution of immune profiles from 71 COVID-19 patients, 25
RD, and 37 HD using ~200 immune parameters identified by high-dimensional flow cytometry.
COVID-19 patients clearly segregated from RD and HD in PCA space, whereas RD and HD
largely overlapped (Figure 2A). Although it is perhaps not surprising that blood lymphocyte
populations in patients with an acute viral infection are globally distinct from those in HD and
RD, we next investigated the immune features driving this COVID-19 immune signature. Given
their role in response to viral infection, we first focused on CD8 T cells. Six major CD8 T cell
populations were examined using the combination of CD45RA, CD27, CCR7, and CD95 to
define naïve (CD45RA+CD27+CCR7+CD95-), central memory (CD45RA-CD27+CCR7+ [CM]),
effector memory (CD45RA-CD27+CCR7- [EM1], CD45RA-CD27-CCR7+ [EM2], CD45RA-CD27CCR7- [EM3]), and EMRA (CD45RA+CD27-CCR7-) (Figure 2B) CD8 T cells. Among the CD8 T
cell populations, there was an increase in the EM2 and EMRA populations with a concomitant

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

decrease in EM1 (Figure 2C). Furthermore, the frequency of PD1+ or CD39+ cells was
increased among non-naïve CD8 T cells from COVID-19 patients compared to HD (Figure 2D),
suggesting CD8 T cell activation. This increase in PD1 was found in all subsets of non-naïve
CD8 T cells (FIgure S2A). Although the major CD8 T cell naive/memory populations in RD were
comparable to HD (Figure 2C), non-naïve CD8 T cells from RD expressed higher PD1 but not
CD39 (Figure 2D).
Most acute viral infections induce proliferation and activation of CD8 T cells that can be
detected by increases in KI67 or co-expression of CD38 and HLA-DR(33, 34). There was a
significant increase in the frequency of KI67+ and also HLA-DR+CD38+ non-naïve CD8 T cells in
COVID-19 patients compared to HD or RD (Figure 2E, 2F). In COVID-19 patients, KI67
expression was increased compared to HD and RD across all subsets of non-naïve CD8 T cells,
including in populations that are typically more quiescent, such as CM, and even in EM1, which
were significantly decreased in frequency (Figure S2B). These data indicate broad T cell
activation, potentially driven by bystander activation and/or homeostatic proliferation in addition
to the antigen-driven activation of virus-specific CD8 T cells. This activation phenotype was
confirmed by HLA-DR and CD38 co-expression that was significantly increased across many
CD8 T cell subsets (Figure 2F and S2C). However, for both KI67+ and CD38+HLA-DR+ CD8 T
cells, there was a diverse range of responses in this cohort. Although the frequency of KI67+
CD8 T cells correlated with the frequency of CD38+HLA-DR+ CD8 T cells (Figure S2D), only
~60% of patients had KI67+ CD8 T cells above the level found in HD, with a similar pattern
found for CD38+HLA-DR+ CD8 T cells (Figure 2E, 2F). This activation state of CD8 T cells
based on CD38+HLA-DR+, but not KI67+, was elevated in COVID-19 patients who had
concomitant infection with another microbe (Figure S2E), but was not impacted by pre-existing
immunosuppression (Figure S2F) or treatment with steroids (Figure S2G). Moreover, these
changes in CD8 T cell subsets in COVID-19 patients did not show obvious correlations with
individual metrics of clinical disease such as ferritin, hsCRP, or D-dimer (Figure S2H). Thus,
although robust CD8 T cell activation was a clear characteristic of many hospitalized COVID-19
patients, a substantial fraction of patients had little evidence of CD8 T cell activation in the blood
compared to controls.
To gain more insight into CD8 T cell responses in COVID-19 patients, we applied global highdimensional mapping of the 27-parameter flow cytometry data. These analyses revealed clear
changes in COVID-19 patients compared to RD and HD (Figure 2G). A tSNE representation of
the data highlighted key clusters of non-naïve CD8 T cells found preferentially in COVID-19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

patients (Figure 2G). A major region of this tSNE map found in COVID-19, but not HD or RD,
CD8 T cells was enriched for expression of CD38, HLA-DR, KI67, CD39, and PD1 (Figure 2G),
in line with the analysis above, but also highlighting the co-expression of these activation
markers with other features including ICOS and CD95 (i.e FAS). Notably, although non-naïve
CD8 T cells from RD were highly similar to those from HD, subtle differences existed, including
in the region highlighted by T-bet and CX3CR1 (Figure 2G). To further define and quantify
these differences between COVID-19 patients and controls, we performed FlowSOM clustering
to identify regions of the tSNE map (Figure 2H) and compared expression of sixteen major CD8
T cell markers to identify the populations in each cluster (Figure 2I). This approach identified an
increase in cells in Clusters 3 and 10 in COVID-19 patients, reflecting a CD45RA+CD27-CCR7TEMRA-like population that expressed some CX3CR1, T-bet, and Granzyme B and a
CD27+HLA-DR+CD38+KI67+ activated, proliferating CD8 T cell subset (Figure 2J). In contrast,
the CD45RA-CD27+CCR7+ CM-like Cluster 7 population was decreased in COVID-19 patients
compared to controls. Thus, CD8 T cell responses in COVID-19 patients were characterized by
robust populations of activated, proliferating CD8 T cells in a subgroup of patients. In the ~2/3 of
patients with evidence of this robust CD8 T cell response, these cells had the phenotype of a
typical effector CD8 T cell response observed for other acute viral infections.
SARS-CoV2 infection is associated with heterogeneous CD4 T cell responses and
activation of CD4 T cell subsets
We next examined six well-defined CD4 T cell subsets as above for the CD8 T cells, including
naïve (CD45RA+CD27+CCR7+), effector memory (CD45RA-CD27+CCR7- [EM1], CD45RA-CD27CCR7+ [EM2], CD45RA-CD27-CCR7- [EM3]), central memory (CD45RA-CD27+CCR7+ [CM]),
and EMRA (CD45RA+CD27-CCR7-) (Figure 3A). Given the potential role of antibodies in the
response to SARS-CoV2(25, 27), we also analyzed circulating Tfh (CD45RA-PD1+CXCR5+
[cTfh] (35)) and activated circulating Tfh (CD38+ICOS+ [activated cTfh]), the latter of which may
be more reflective of recent antigen encounter and emigration from the germinal center(36,
37)(Figure 3A). These analyses revealed a relative loss of naïve CD4 T cells compared to
controls, but increased EM2, EM3, and EMRA populations (Figure 3B). The frequencies of total
cTfh among CD4 T cells was not increased in COVID-19 patients compared to HD and RD.
However, activated cTfh were statistically increased in the COVID-19 group, though this effect
appeared to be driven by a subgroup of patients (Figure 3B), suggesting ongoing germinal
center responses in at least some patients. It is worth noting that activated cTfh frequencies
were also higher in RD compared to HD (Figure 3B), perhaps reflecting residual effects of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

COVID-19 infection in that group. Frequencies of KI67+ or CD38+HLA-DR+ non-naïve CD4 T
cells were increased in COVID-19 patients (Figure 3C, 3E); however this expression was not
equivalent across all CD4 T cell subsets. The most substantial increases in both KI67 and HLADR/CD38 co-expression were found in the effector memory populations (EM, EM2, EM3) and in
cTfh, whereas CM populations had moderate increases (Figure S3A, S3B). Although some
subjects had increased activation of EMRA, this was less pronounced. In contrast, PD1
expression was increased in EMRA and all other non-naïve populations compared to HD or RD
(Figure S3C). Co-expression of CD38 and HLA-DR by non-naïve CD4 T cells correlated with
KI67 expression by non-naïve CD4 T cells (Figure S3D). Moreover, the frequency of total nonnaïve CD4 T cells that were CD38+HLA-DR+ correlated with the frequency of activated cTfh
(Figure S3E). In general, the activation of CD4 T cells was correlated with the activation of CD8
T cells (Figure 3D, 3F). However, whereas ~2/3 (45/71) of patients had KI67+ non-naïve CD4 or
CD8 T cells, ~1/3 had no increase in KI67 in CD4 or CD8 T cells above the baseline of that
observed in HD (Figure 3D, 3F). Moreover, although most patients fell close to the diagonal
with similar activation of CD4 and CD8 T cells, there was a subgroup of patients that appeared
to have disproportionate activation of CD4 T cells compared to CD8 T cells, an observation
found for both KI67+ and CD38+HLA-DR+ (Figures 3D, 3F). CD38+HLA-DR+ non-naïve CD4 T
cell frequencies were higher in patients with coinfection, but this was not true for KI67+ nonnaïve CD4 T cells (Figure S3F). Immunosuppression or treatment with steroids did not impact
CD4 T cell activation (Figure S3G, S3H). There were also minimal associations between
changes in CD4 T cell populations and clinical parameters, with the exception of EM2, which
was positively correlated with D-dimer (Figure S3I). Together, these data highlight T cell
activation in COVID-19 patients similar to what has been observed in other acute infections or
vaccinations(36, 38, 39), but also identify patients with high, low, or essentially no T cell
response based on KI67+ or CD38+HLA-DR+ compared to control subjects.
Projection of the global CD4 T cell differentiation patterns into high-dimensional tSNE again
identified major alterations in the CD4 T cell response during COVID-19 infection compared to
HD and RD (Figure 3G). HD and RD were similar, though not identical, in tSNE space (Figure
3G). In COVID-19 infection, there was notable increase in density in tSNE regions that mapped
to expression of CD38, HLA-DR, PD1, CD39, KI67, and CD95 (Figure 3G), similar to CD8 T
cells. An area on the tSNE map of increased representation for COVID-19 patients also
included a central region of low CD45RA, but intermediate to high CD27 where low CD95
expression was also apparent (Figure 3G). To gain more insight into these CD4 T cell changes

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

we took a similar FlowSOM clustering approach as with CD8 T cells (Figure 3H) and similarly
compared expression of sixteen major CD4 T cell markers to delineate the populations identified
in each cluster (Figure 3I). This analysis identified an increase in Cluster 3 and 4 cells in
COVID-19 patients compared to HD and RD controls, both of which represent a CD45RACCR7+CD27+ CM-like CD4 T cell population, where Cluster 3 in particular had increased
expression of activation markers including HLA-DR, CD38, PD1, KI67, CD95, and ICOS. This
increased activation phenotype was also reflected in the increase in Cluster 6 in COVID-19
patients, which was CD45RA-CCR7-CD27+, but also expressed activation markers suggesting
an activated, proliferating EM1 population. In line with Figure 3B, Cluster 1, representing
CD45RA+CCR7+CD27+ naive cells, was decreased in COVID-19 patients compared to controls.
A cTfh-like cluster (Cluster 10, CXCR5+CD45RA-CCR7+CD27+) was also decreased in COVID19 patients. Taken together, this multidimensional analysis revealed distinct populations of
activated/proliferating CD4 T cells that were enriched in COVID-19 patients, limited cTfh
responses in COVID-19 patients, and potential lingering changes in RD after disease resolution.
A key feature of COVID-19 disease is thought to be an inflammatory response that, at least in
some patients, is linked to clinical disease manifestation(2, 4) and high levels of
chemokines/cytokines, including CXCL10 and IL1RA(40). To investigate the potential
connection of inflammatory pathways to T cell responses, we performed 31-plex Luminex
analysis on plasma and paired supernatants of anti-CD3/anti-CD28 stimulated PBMC from a
subset of COVID-19 patients and HD controls. In line with the heterogeneity observed in
immune cell populations, we found multiple patterns of chemokines and cytokines in plasma
from COVID-19 patients (Figure S4A). A subset of COVID-19 patients had CXCL10
concentrations that were 6-8-fold higher than HD controls, whereas a second group showed
more moderate increase (Figure S4B). A similar pattern was observed for CXCL9, CCL2, and
ILRA. In contrast, chemokines involved in the recruitment of eosinophils (eotaxin) or activated T
cells (CCL5) were decreased in plasma from COVID-19 patients. IL-6 was not elevated in this
group of patients, in contrast to the subset of individuals tested clinically (Figure S1D),
potentially because IL-6 is only measured in the hospital when systemic cytokine elevation is
suspected. Following stimulation in vitro, T cells from COVID-19 patients produced cytokines
such as IFN-ϒ, TNF, GM-CSF, IL-2, and others (Figure S4C). High concentrations of CXCL9
and CXCL10 were detected in some patients, likely due to T cell-produced IFN-ϒ (Figure S4C,
S4D). In addition, elevated CCL2 was detected in culture supernatants suggesting a potential
role for T cell stimulation driving recruitment of myeloid cells. Indeed, the concentrations of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

CXCL10 and CCL2 were correlated between the matched supernatant from stimulated PBMC
and plasma samples (Figure S4E). Taken together, these data support the notion that a
subgroup of COVID-19 patients have elevated systemic cytokines and chemokines and suggest
a possible relationship between T cell stimulation and myeloid recruiting chemokines.
COVID-19 infection is associated with increased frequencies of plasmablasts and
proliferation of memory B cell subsets
B cell subpopulations were also altered in COVID-19 disease. Whereas naïve B cell frequencies
were similar in COVID-19 patients and RD or HD, the frequencies of class-switched (IgD-CD27+)
and not-class-switched (IgD+CD27+) memory B cells were significantly reduced (Figure 4A).
Conversely, the frequency of CD27+CD38+ PB was often robustly increased (Figure 4B). In
some cases, PB represented >30% of circulating B cells, similar to what has been observed in
acute Ebola or Dengue virus infections(41, 42). However, these PB responses were only
observed in ~2/3 of patients, with the remaining patients displaying PB frequencies similar to
HD and RD (Figure 4B). KI67 expression was markedly elevated in all B cell subpopulations
(naïve, switched memory and not-switched memory B cell, and PB populations) in COVID-19
patients compared to either control group (Figure 4C). This observation suggests a role for
either a direct response to infection (i.e. antigen-driven) or lymphopenia-driven proliferation (i.e.
of the naïve B cells). In contrast, PD1 expression was only significantly higher on PB in COVID19 patients compared to controls, although there was a wide range of expression, particularly by
not-switched and switched memory B cells (Figure S5A). Higher KI67 and PD1 in PB may
reflect the recent generation of these PB in the COVID-19 patients compared to the small
number of PB detected in HD or RD. CXCR5 expression was also reduced on all four major B
cell subsets in COVID-19 patients (Figure 4D). Loss of CXCR5 was not specific to B cells,
however, as expression was also decreased on non-naïve CD4 T cells (Figure 4E). Changes in
the B cell subsets were not associated with coinfection (Figure S5B), immune suppression
(Figure S5C), or treatment with steroids (Figure S5D). Furthermore, there were limited
associations with clinical features of severe disease (Figure S5E), suggesting that the B cell
response phenotype of COVID-19 disease was not simply due to systemic inflammation.
During acute viral infections or vaccination, plasmablast (PB) responses are transiently
detectable in the blood and these responses correlate with cTfh responses(39). Given the
limited changes identified in the cTfh compartment during COVID-19 disease (Figure 3B), we
next asked how the robust PB response observed in some patients related to cTfh responses.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Comparing the frequency of PB to the frequency of total cTfh or activated cTfh revealed no clear
correlation between these cell types, though it is notable that there appeared to be some
patients with robust activated cTfh responses but PB frequencies similar to controls and,
conversely, other patients with robust PB responses but relatively low frequencies of activated
cTfh (Figure 4F, 4G). Given this lack of association and the high levels of CD4 activation
observed, we next asked if there was an association between PB frequency and CD38+HLADR+ CD4 T cells (Figure S5F) that might reflect a role for non-CXCR5+ CD4 T cell help.
However, although some individuals with a high PB response had elevated frequencies of
CD38+HLA-DR+ CD4 T cells, COVID-19 subjects appeared to segregate into two groups: one
with high PB responses and low CD4 T cell activation and a second with lower PB responses
and higher CD4 T cell activation. One further possibility was that these PB responses were
unrelated to SARS-CoV2 infection, driven perhaps instead by inflammation. However, using a
previously reported assay(43), 86% of patients who made PB responses also were positive for
antibodies (IgM; 76% for IgG) against the SARS-CoV2 spike protein receptor binding domain
(Figure 4H, 4I). Though defining the precise specificity of the robust PB populations will require
future studies, these data suggest that at least some of this response is specific for SARSCoV2.
We again employed tSNE dimensionality reduction to gain deeper insights into the highdimensional flow cytometric data for B cells in COVID-19 patients versus controls. Projecting the
flow cytometry data for B cells from HD, RD, and COVID-19 patients in tSNE space revealed an
almost non-overlapping picture of B cell populations in COVID-19 compared to controls,
whereas RD and HD were similar (Figure 4J, S5G). The COVID-19 patient B cell phenotype
was dominated by loss of CXCR5 and IgD compared to B cells from HD and RD (Figure 4J).
Moreover, the robust PB response was apparent in the upper right section, highlighted by
CD27, CD38, CD138, and KI67 (Figure 4J). The expression of KI67 and CD95 in these
CD27+CD38+CD138+ PB (Figure 4J) could suggest recent generation and/or emigration from
germinal centers. We next asked whether there were different groups of COVID-19 patients (or
HD and RD) with global differences in the B cell response. We used Earth Movers Distance
(EMD) to calculate similarities between the probability distributions within the tSNE map (Figure
4J) and clustered so that individuals with the most similar distributions grouped together (Figure
4K). The majority of COVID-19 patients fell into two distinct clusters (EMD Clusters 1 and 3,
Figure 4L), suggesting that there were two major “immunotypes” of the B cell response in these
patients. The remainder of the COVID-19 patients (~25-30%) clustered with the majority of the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

HD and all of the RD controls, supporting the observation that some individuals had limited
evidence of response to infection in their B cell compartment. To identify the population
differences between these three EMD clusters, we performed FlowSOM clustering on the tSNE
map, then projected each individual EMD cluster onto this map (Figure 4M, 4N). Despite EMD
Clusters 1 and 3 both containing a majority of COVID-19 patients, they showed distinct patterns
across the FlowSOM clusters. B cells from COVID-19 patients in EMD Cluster 1 were identified
by FlowSOM Clusters 2 and 6, with some contribution of Cluster 8 that contained CD27 IgD+CXCR5dim naïve-like B cells (Cluster 2 and 6) or PB (Cluster 8) (Figure 4O, 4P). In contrast,
B cells from individuals in EMD Cluster 3 were enriched for the FlowSOM Clusters that fell on
the top right of the tSNE projection; FlowSOM Cluster 5 included T-bet+ memory phenotype B
cells whereas FlowSOM cluster 8 was even more enriched here and contained the
CD27+CD38+CD138+KI67+ PB (Figure 4O, 4P). Thus, B cell responses were evident in many
hospitalized COVID-19 patients, most often characterized by elevated PB, decreases in
memory B cell subsets, enrichment in a T-bet+ B cell subset, and loss of CXCR5 expression.
Whether all of these changes in the B cell compartment are due to direct antiviral responses is
unclear. However, the vast majority of hospitalized patients seroconverted and made SARSCoV2 spike-specific antibodies, indicating that at least some of this activity is antigen-specific.
Overall, there was heterogeneity in the B cell responses and COVID-19 patients fell into two
distinct patterns based on whether or not robust B cell and PB responses were formed.
Temporal changes in immune cell populations during COVID-19 disease
A key question for hospitalized COVID-19 patients is how immune responses change over time.
However, there is limited data on temporal changes during COVID-19 disease on cohorts of
patients large enough to comprehensively heterogeneity of the immune response. Thus, we
used the global tSNE projections of overall CD8 T cell, CD4 T cell, and B cell differentiation
states to interrogate temporal changes in these populations between d0 and d7 of
hospitalization (Figure 5A). We observed considerable stability of the tSNE distributions
between d0 and d7 in CD8 T cell, CD4 T cell, and B cell populations, particularly for key regions
of interest. For CD8 T cells, the lower region of the t-SNE map associated with activation
markers was enriched in COVID-19 patients compared to HD at d0 (Figure 2), and this was
preserved at d7 (Figure 5A). A similar temporal stability of T cell activation was observed for
CD4 T cells with the tSNE region associated with high expression of KI67, HLA-DR, and CD38
at d0 as well as d7 for COVID-19 patients (Figure 5A). B cells also showed considerable

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

stability from d0 to d7 with major tSNE changes observed compared to HD and RD, including
areas of T-bet+ B cells and PB, largely preserved over time (Figure 5A).
Given this apparent stability between d0 and d7, we next investigated temporal changes in
specific lymphocyte subpopulations of interest. Focusing first on T cell responses, temporal
changes were limited on a population level. For example, in CD8 T cells, there was only a
significant change in the frequencies of EM2 (Figure S6A) and KI67+ non-naïve (Figure S6A)
CD8 T cells, further highlighting the sustained CD8 T cell proliferative response to this infection.
The equivalent memory and activated/proliferating populations in the CD4 T cell subset were
not changed (Figure 5B, 5C), nor were frequencies of cTfh (Figure 5B), suggesting a large
amount of stability in CD4 T cell responses during COVID-19 disease. In the B cell
compartment, although there were changes in the frequency of not-switched and switched
memory B cells, the frequency of PB was stable (Figure 5D).
However, in all cases, these temporal patterns were complex, with frequencies of
subpopulations in individual patients appearing to increase, decrease, or stay the same over
time. To quantify these inter-patient changes, we used a previously described data set (44) to
define the stability of populations of interest in healthy individuals over time. We then used the
range of this variation over time to identify COVID-19 patients with changes in immune cell
subpopulations beyond that expected over time in healthy subjects (see methods). Using this
approach, ~60% of patients had an increase in HLA-DR+CD38+ non-naive CD4 T cells over
time, whereas in ~24% of patients these cells were stable and in ~16% they decreased (Figure
5E). For KI67+ non-naïve CD8 T cells, there were no individuals in which the response
decreased. Instead, this proliferative CD8 T cell response stayed stable (~60%) or increased
(~40%; Figure S6B). Notably, for those patients in the stable category, the frequencies of KI67+
non-naïve CD8 T cells were typically almost 5-fold higher than for HD and RD subjects (Figure
S6B), suggesting a sustained CD8 T cell proliferative response to infection. A similar pattern
was observed for HLA-DR+CD38+ non-naïve CD8 (Figure S6C), where only ~8% of patients
had a decrease in this population, while ~48% were stable and ~44% increased. The high and
even increasing activated or proliferating CD8 and CD4 T cell responses over ~1 week during
acute viral infection contrast with the sharp peak of KI67 in CD8 and CD4 T cells during acute
viral infections including smallpox vaccination with live vaccinia virus(45), yellow fever vaccine
YFV-17D(46), acute influenza virus infection(47) and acute HIV infection(34). PB responses
were similar (Figure 5F), with 42% patients displaying sustained PB responses over one week,
at high levels (over 10% of B cells) in many cases. Thus, there were dynamic changes in key

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

lymphocyte subsets over time during COVID-19 disease (Figure S6D). Clearly, some patients
displayed dynamic changes in T cell or B cell activation over 1 week in the hospital, but there
were also other patients who remained stable. In the latter case, some patients remained stable
without clear activation of key immune populations whereas others sustained T and or B cell
activation or numerical perturbation.
We next asked whether these dynamic T and B cell changes related to clinical measures of
COVID-19 disease. First separating patients into those who had increasing, stable, or
decreasing populations of activated CD4 or CD8 T cells or PB from d0 to d7, we then
investigated whether changes in these lymphocyte populations correlated with changes in
clinical variables over time (Figure 5G). These analyses revealed distinct patterns of correlation
between changes in immune cell populations and clinical metrics of disease. For example,
increasing KI67+ CD8 T cells over time correlated inversely with disease severity at d7, whereas
stable KI67+ in CD8 T cells was associated with worse disease. Conversely, stable PB over time
correlated with worse disease score at d7, whereas PB going down over time correlated
inversely with APACHE III score (a measure of multiorgan failure; Figure 5G). Moreover, 100%
of patients who had decreasing CD38+HLA-DR+ CD8 T cells from d0 to d7 were treated with
early vasoactive medication, inhaled nitric oxide or early steroids, whereas it was rare for a
patient with stable or increasing CD38+HLA-DR+ CD8 T cells to have these clinical criteria
(Figure 5H). In contrast, vasoactive medication, inhaled nitric oxide, and early steroid treatment
were equally common in patients with increasing or decreasing PB (Figure 5H). However,
hyperlipidemia was present in 100% of patients whose PB responses decreased, but was found
in <50% of patients who had increasing PB responses over time (Figure 5H). We observed
similar patterns in other T cell populations with respect to these categorical clinical data (Figure
S6E). Thus, the trajectory of change in the T and B cell response in COVID-19 patients was
strongly connected to clinical metrics of disease.
Identifying “immunotypes” and relationships between circulating B and T cell responses
with disease severity in COVID-19 patients
To further investigate the relationship between immune responses and COVID-19 disease
trajectory, we stratified the 71 COVID-19 patients into eight different categories based on clinical
severity score according to the NIH Ordinal Severity Scale ranging from COVID 1 (death) and
COVID 2 (requiring maximal clinical intervention) to COVID 8 (at home with no required
care)(Figure 6A). We then asked how changes in T and B cell populations defined above on d0

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

were related to disease severity. More severe disease was associated with lower frequencies of
CD8 and CD4 T cells, with a greater effect on CD8 T cells in less severe disease and with a
compensatory increase in non-T non-B cells (Figure 6B). Examining individual CD8 T cell
subsets, COVID-19 patients displayed trends towards an increase in activated (CD38+HLADR+), and proliferating (KI67+) CD8 T cells in patients with more severe disease, but these
differences were not significant (Figure S7A). Similarly, the effects on CD4 T cells and B cells
were mixed, although activated (CD38+HLA-DR+) CD4 T cells were increased with more severe
disease (Figure S7B, S7C).
There were two challenges with extracting meaning from these data. First, there was
considerable inter-patient heterogeneity for each of these immune features related to disease
severity score. Second, these binary comparisons (e.g. one immune subset versus one disease
or clinical feature) vastly underutilized the high dimensional immunological and clinical
information in this dataset. Thus, we next visualized major T and B cell subpopulation data as it
related to clinical disease severity score (Figure 6C, S7A-C). Data were clustered based on
immune features and then overlaid with the disease severity score over time for each patient.
This analysis revealed groups of patients with similar composite immune signatures of T and B
cell populations (Figure 6C). For example, groups of patients were apparent with high CD4 T
cell activation and proliferation (group 4), versus patients with robust PB but less T cell
activation (group 1). Two middle groups were enriched in EM subpopulations and KI67+ CD8 T
cells (group 2) or CM and relatively low CD4 T cell activation (group 3). When individual CD8 T
cell, CD4 T cell or B cell populations were examined, a similar concept emerged (Figure S7AC). Although the pattern for patient grouping for CD8 T cells was perhaps less obvious than for
CD4 T cells and B cells, patients with activated and proliferating CD8 T cells as well as EMRA
separated from patients with less CD8 T cell activation (Figure S7A). For CD4 T cells, a group
of patients with robust activation and proliferation contrasted with a second group with minimal
CD4 T cell activation (Figure S7B) and B cells separated patients into those with robust versus
minimal PB responses (Figure S7C). These data suggest the idea of “immunotypes” of COVID19 patients based integrated responses of T and B cells, though some individual cell types
and/or phenotypes separated patients more clearly than others.
These approaches provided insight into potential immune phenotypes associated with patients
with severe disease and poor disease trajectories, but suffer from the use of a small number of
manually selected T or B cell subsets or phenotypes. We therefore next developed an unbiased
approach, Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP), to distill the ~200 flow

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

cytometry features representing the immune landscape of COVID-19 disease into two
dimensional space, creating compact meta features (or Components) that could then be
correlated with clinical outcomes. This analysis revealed a clear trajectory from HD to COVID-19
patients (Figure 6D). Because the origin and coordinate orientation of a two-dimensional UMAP
projection are arbitrary, we centered and aligned the disease trajectory with the horizontal axis
(“Component 1”) to facilitate downstream analysis (Figure 6E). This repositioning also created
an orthogonal, vertical axis coordinate (“Component 2”) that did not align with severity but
captured non-overlapping aspects of the immune landscape. We next calculated the mean of
Component 1 for each patient group, with COVID-19 patients separated by severity (Figure
6E). The contribution of Component 1 clearly increased in a stepwise manner with increasing
disease severity, where HD had the lowest mean and patients with the most severe COVID-19
disease had the highest mean (Figure 6F). Interestingly, RD were subtly positioned between
HD and COVID-19 patients.
We next investigated how the UMAP Components were associated with the immunotype
concept above. We visualized the contribution of T cell and B cell features to the UMAP
components separately, partly because there were more T cell features than B cell features in
the model. Indeed, UMAP Component 1 correlated with immune features that were themselves
strongly correlated with disease severity, most notably CD4 T cell activation (Figure 6G, 6H,
S8, S9). In contrast, Component 2 showed enrichment of multiple features of CD8 T cells
including EM and EMRA subsets and some activation (Figure 6I, S10, S11). This dichotomy
was consistent with some separation of CD4 and CD8 T cell activation in Figure 6C. Examining
B cell features revealed a similar segregation between the two components. Component 1
contained a signal for T-bet+ PB populations (Figure 6G, and S8, S9). In contrast, Component 2
was enriched for signatures of T-bet+ memory B cells, consistent with the FlowSOM cluster 5
observed above (see Figure 4J, 4P), and CD138+ and KI67+ PB populations (Figure 6G, S9,
S11). Given the association of the UMAP Components with patient immunotypes, we next
asked how these components correlated with clinical features. In line with the segregation of
immune features, Components 1 and 2 showed distinct association patterns. Whereas
Component 1 correlated with several clinical measurements of inflammation, coinfection, organ
failure, and acute kidney disease (Figure 6J), Component 2 correlated instead with pre-existing
immunosuppression and mortality (Figure 6J), though mortality should be interpreted with
caution given the small number of observed deaths (n=5) in the dataset.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Thus, 3 patient immunotypes appear to exist in COVID-19 disease (Figure 6K): Immunotype 1
with CD4 T cell activation and proliferation and T-bet+ PB captured by UMAP Component 1 and
related to disease severity; Immunotype 2 with CD8 T cell EM and EMRA subsets, some CD8 T
cell activation and CD138+ and KI67+ PB responses captured by UMAP Component 2. UMAP
component 2 was independent of disease severity score but correlated with pre-existing
immunosuppression, AB+ blood type, and potentially mortality. An Immunotype 3 also exists
that is not visualized well by the UMAP, but is seen throughout Figures 1-5 and includes
patients with low to undetectable activation of T and B cell responses. These data further
emphasize the different ways patients can manifest and possibly succumb to COVID-19
disease, perhaps related to pre-existing conditions in combination with immune response
characteristics. It is likely that adding additional immune features, such as comprehensive
serum cytokine measurements, will improve this model. Nevertheless, the current computational
approach integrating deep immune profiling with disease severity trajectory and other clinical
information revealed distinct patient immunotypes linked to distinct clinical outcomes.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

DISCUSSION
The T and B cell response to SARS-CoV2 infection remains poorly understood. Some studies
suggest an overaggressive immune response leading to immunopathology(48). In contrast,
other reports suggest T cell exhaustion or dysfunction(11–13). At autopsy, patients who
succumbed to infection all had high virus levels in the respiratory tract and other tissues (49),
suggesting an ineffective, underdeveloped, or off-target immune response. Nevertheless, nonhospitalized subjects who recovered from COVID-19 had evidence of T cell memory to the
virus(50). SARS-CoV2 specific antibodies are also found in convalescent subjects and patients
are currently being treated with convalescent plasma therapy(28, 51). However, COVID-19 ICU
patients have SARS-CoV2-specific antibodies(28), raising the question of why patients with
these antibody responses are not controlling disease. In general, these studies report on single
patients or small cohorts and, as such, comprehensive deep immune profiling of a large number
of COVID-19 hospitalized patients does not yet exist. Such knowledge would address the critical
question of whether there is a common profile of immune dysfunction in critically ill patients.
Such data would also help guide testing of therapeutics to enhance, inhibit, or otherwise
appropriately tailor the immune response in COVID-19 patients.
To interrogate the immune response patterns of COVID-19 hospitalized patients, we studied a
large cohort of 70+ COVID-19 patients. We used high dimensional flow cytometry to perform
deep immune profiling of individual B and T cell populations, with temporal analysis of immune
changes during infection, and combined this profiling with extensive clinical data to understand
the relationships between immune responses to SARS-CoV2 and disease severity. Using this
approach, we made several key findings. First, a defining feature of COVID-19 disease in
hospitalized patients was the heterogeneity of the immune response. Many COVID-19 patients
displayed robust CD8 T cell and/or CD4 T cell activation and proliferation, though a
considerable subgroup of patients (~1/3) had no detectable response compared to controls. B
cell responses were also heterogeneous and, in some patients, PB responses were >30% of B
cells whereas, in other patients, PB were undetectable above controls. These observations
suggest multiple ways that COVID-19 disease can manifest immunologically. Furthermore, even
within those patients who mounted detectable B and T cell responses during COVID-19
disease, the immune characteristics of this response were heterogeneous. By deep immune
profiling, we identified three immunotypes in hospitalized COVID-19 patients including: (i)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

patients with robust activation and proliferation of CD4 T cells, together with modest activation
of CD8 T cells and a signature of T-bet+ PB; (ii) an immunotype characterized by CD8 T cell EM
and EMRA subsets, modest CD8 T cell activation, T-bet+ memory B cells and CD138+ PB; and
(iii) a third immunotype largely lacking evidence of lymphocyte response to infection, suggesting
a failure of immune activation. These immunotypes may reflect fundamental differences in the
ways patients respond to SARS-CoV2 infection due to pre-existing differences in immune
fitness, differences in timing of analysis relative to initial infection, level of viral replication,
background patient comorbidities, or all of the above. A UMAP embedding approach further
resolved the T cell activation immunotype, suggesting a link between CD4 T cell activation,
immunotype 1, and increased severity score.
A second key observation from these studies was the robust PB response observed in some
patients and the identification of a distinct immunotype dominated by this PB signature. Some
patients had PB frequencies rivaling those found in acute Ebola or Dengue infection(33, 41, 42,
52). Furthermore, blood PB frequencies are typically correlated with blood activated cTfh
responses(39). However, in COVID-19 patients, this relationship between PB and activated cTfh
was weak. The lack of relationship between these two cell types in this disease could be due to
T cell-independent B cell responses, lack of activated cTfh in peripheral blood at this time point,
or lower CXCR5 expression observed across lymphocyte populations, making it more difficult to
identify cTfh. Indeed, activated (CD38+HLA-DR+) CD4 T cells could play a role in providing B
cell help, perhaps as part of an extrafollicular response, but such a connection was also not
robust in the current data. One possibility was that the PB response was not antigen-specific.
Although future studies are needed to address this issue comprehensively, most ICU patients
made SARS-CoV2-specific antibodies, suggesting that at least part of the PB response was
antigen-specific. The highly robust PB responses in some patients suggests a potential
connection to disease manifestation. Future studies will be needed to address the antigen
specificity, ontogeny, and role in pathogenesis for these robust PB responses.
A striking feature of some patients with strong T and B cell activation and proliferation was the
durability of this response. This T and B activation was interesting considering clinical
lymphopenia in many patients. This lymphopenia, however, was preferential for CD8 T cells with
a lesser effect on CD4 T cells and almost no impact on B cells. It may be notable that such focal
lymphopenia preferentially affecting CD8 T cells is also a feature of acute Ebola infection of
macaques and is associated with CD95 expression and severe disease(52). Nevertheless, the
magnitude of the KI67+ or CD38+HLA-DR+ CD8 and CD4 T cell responses in COVID-19 patients

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

was similar in magnitude to other acute viral infections or live attenuated vaccines in
humans(45–47). However, during many acute viral infections, the periods of peak CD8 or CD4
T cell responses in peripheral blood, as well as the window of time when PB are detectable, are
relatively short (42, 53, 54). The stability of CD8 and CD4 T cell activation and PB responses
during COVID-19 disease suggests a prolonged period of peak immune responses at the time
of hospitalization or perhaps a failure to appropriately downregulate lymphocyte responses in
some patients. These ideas would fit with an overaggressive immune response and/or “cytokine
storm”(2). Indeed, in some patients, we found elevated serum cytokines and that stimulation of
T cells in vitro provoked cytokines and chemokines capable of activating and recruiting myeloid
cells. Thus, it is possible that prolonged T cell activation in a subset of COVID-19 patients is
connected to dysregulated inflammation, recruitment of inflammatory myeloid cells, and
perpetuation of organ damage. A key question will be how to identify these patients for selected
immune regulatory treatment while avoiding treating patients with already weak T and B cell
responses.
Lastly, a major finding was the ability to connect immune features not only to disease severity at
the time of sampling but also to the trajectory of disease severity change over time. Using
correlative analyses, we observed relationships between features of the different immunotypes,
patient comorbidities, and clinical features of COVID-19 disease. By integrating ~200 immune
features with extensive clinical data, disease severity scores, and temporal changes, we were
able to build an integrated computational model that connected patient immune response
phenotype to disease severity. Moreover, this UMAP embedding approach allowed us to
connect these integrated immune signatures back to specific clinically measurable features of
disease. The integrated immune signatures captured by Components 1 and 2 in this UMAP
model provided independent validation of immunotypes 1 and 2. These analyses suggested that
immunotype 1, comprised of robust CD4 T cell activation with moderate CD8 T cell and T-bet+
PB involvement, was connected to more severe disease whereas immunotype 2, characterized
by CD8 T cell subsets, memory B cell responses, and PB, was better captured by UMAP
Component 2. Immunotype 3, in which little to no detectable lymphocyte response was
observed, may represent >30% of COVID-19 patients and is a potentially important scenario to
consider. This UMAP integrated modeling approach could be improved in the future with
additional data on other immune cell types and/or comprehensive data for circulating
inflammatory mediators for all patients. Nevertheless, these findings provoke the idea of the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

tailoring clinical treatments or future immune-based clinical trials to patients whose immunotype
suggests greater potential benefit.
Respiratory viral infections can cause pathology as a result of too weak of an immune response
that results in virus-induced pathology, or too strong of an immune response that leads to
immunopathology(55). The temporal patterns of the response also matter. A delay in initiating
an effective immune response, for example due to viral immune evasion, can lead to viral
spread and then extensive tissue damage by an otherwise appropriate immune response
attempting to control the infection. Our data suggest that the immune response of hospitalized
COVID-19 patients may fall across this spectrum of immune response patterns, presenting as
distinct immunotypes linked to clinical features, disease severity, and temporal changes in
response and pathogenesis. This study provides a resource of a large compendium of immune
response data and also an integrated framework as a “map” for connecting immune features to
disease. By localizing patients on an immune topology map built on this dataset, we can begin
to infer which types of therapeutic interventions may be most useful in specific patients.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Materials and Methods
Patients, subjects, and clinical data collection
Patients admitted to the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania with a SARS-CoV2 positive
result were screened and approached for informed consent within 3 days of hospitalization.
Healthy donors and recovered COVID-19 subjects were recruited with online surveys and
invited to participate. Peripheral blood samples were collected from COVID-19+ individuals,
recovered donors (RD, and COVID-19- healthy donors (HD). RD with a prior positive SARSCoV2 test and HD were recruited initially by word of mouth and subsequently through a
centralized University of Pennsylvania resource website for COVID-19-related studies. All
participants or their surrogates provided informed consent in accordance with protocols
approved by the regional ethical research boards and the Declaration of Helsinki. Peripheral
blood was collected from all subjects. For inpatients, clinical data were abstracted from the
electronic medical record into standardized case report forms. ARDS was categorized in
accordance with the Berlin definition reflecting each subject’s worst oxygenation level and with
physicians adjudicating chest radiographs. APACHE III scoring was based on data collected in
the first 24 hours of ICU admission or the first 24 hours of hospital admission for subjects who
remained in an inpatient unit. Clinical laboratory data was collected from the date closest to the
date of research blood collection. HD and RD completed a survey about symptoms. All
participants or their surrogates provided informed consent in accordance with protocols
approved by the regional ethical research boards and the Declaration of Helsinki.
Sample processing
Peripheral blood was collected into sodium heparin tubes (BD, Cat#367874). Tubes were spun
(15min, 3000 rpm, RT), plasma removed, and banked. Remaining whole blood was diluted 1:1
with 1% RPMI (Table S4) and layered into a SEPMATE tube (STEMCELL Technologies,
Cat#85450) pre-loaded with lymphoprep (Alere Technologies, Cat#1114547). SEPMATE tubes
were spun (10min, 1200xg, RT) and the PBMC layer collected, washed with 1% RPMI (10min,
1600rpm, RT) and treated with ACK lysis buffer (5min, ThermoFisher, Cat#A1049201). Samples
were filtered with a 70μm filter, counted, and aliquoted for staining.

Antibody panels and staining

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Approximately 1-5x106 freshly isolated PBMCs were used per patient per stain. See Table S4
for buffer information and Table S5 for antibody panel information. PBMCs were stained with
live/dead (100μl, 10min, RT), washed with FACS buffer, and spun down (1500rpm, 5min, RT).
PBMCs were incubated with 100μl of Fc block (RT, 10min) before a second wash (FACS buffer,
1500rpm, 5min, RT). Pellet was resuspended in 25μl of chemokine receptor staining mix, and
incubated at 37oC for 20 min. Following incubation, 25μl of surface receptor staining mix was
directly added and the PBMCs were incubated at RT for a further 45 min. PBMCs were washed
(FACS buffer, 1500rpm, 5min, RT) and stained with 50μl of secondary antibody mix for 20min at
RT, then washed again (FACS buffer, 1500rpm, 5min, RT). Samples were fixed and
permeabilized by incubating in 100μl of Fix/Perm buffer (RT, 30min) and washed in Perm Buffer
(1800rpm, 5min, RT). PBMCs were stained with 50μl of intracellular mix overnight at 4oC. The
following morning, samples were washed (Perm Buffer, 1800rpm, 5min, RT) and further fixed in
50μl of 4% PFA. Prior to acquisition, samples were diluted to 1% PFA and 10,000 counting
beads added per sample (BD, Cat#335925).

Flow Cytometry
Samples were acquired on a 5 laser BD FACS Symphony A5. Standardized SPHERO rainbow
beads (Spherotech, Cat#RFP-30-5A) were used to track and adjust PMTs over time. UltraComp
eBeads (ThermoFisher, Cat#01-2222-42) were used for compensation. Up to 2x106 live PBMC
were acquired per each sample.
Luminex
PBMCs from patients were thawed and rested overnight at 37oC in complete RPMI (cRPMI,
Table S4). 96-well flat bottom plates were coated with 1μg/mL of anti-CD3 (UCHT1, #BE0231,
BioXell) in PBS at 4oC overnight. The next day, cells were collected and plated at 1x105/well in
100μl in duplicate. 2μg/mL of anti-human CD28/CD49d was added to the wells containing platebound anti-CD3 (Clone L293, 347690, BD). PBMCs were stimulated or left unstimulated for
16hrs, spun down (1200rpm, 10min) and 85μL/well of supernatant was collected. Plasma from
matched subjects was thawed on ice, spun (3000rpm, 1min) to remove debris, and 85μl
collected in duplicate. Luminex assay was run according to manufacturer’s instructions, using a
custom human cytokine 31-plex panel (EMD Millipore Corporation, SPRCUS707). The panel
included: EGF, FGF-2, Eotaxin, sIL-2Ra, G-CSF, GM-CSF, IFN-α2, IFN-γ, IL-10, IL-12P40, IL12P70, IL-13, IL-15, IL-17A, IL-1RA, HGF, IL-1β, CXCL9/MIG, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7,
CXCL8/IL-8, CXCL10/IP-10, CCL2/MCP-1, CCL3/MIP-1α, CCL4/MIP-1β, RANTES, TNF-α, and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

VEGF. Assay plates were measured using a Luminex FlexMAP 3D instrument (Thermofisher,
Cat#APX1342).
Data

acquisition

and

analysis

were

done

using

xPONENT

software

(https://www.luminexcorp.com/xponent/). Data quality was examined based on the following
criteria: The standard curve for each analyte has a 5P R2 value > 0.95 with or without minor
fitting using xPONENT software. To pass assay technical quality control, the results for two
controls in the kit needed to be within the 95% of CI (confidence interval) provided by the vendor
for >25 of the tested analytes. No further tests were done on samples with results out of range
low (<OOR). Samples with results that were out of range high (>OOR) or greater than the
standard curve maximum value (SC max) were not tested at higher dilutions without further
request.
Longitudinal analysis day 0 - day 7 and patient grouping
To identify subjects where the frequency of specific immune cell populations increased,
decreased or stayed stable over time (day 0 - day 7), where data was available we used a
previously published dataset to establish a standard range of fold change over time in a healthy
cohort (44). A fold change greater than the mean fold change ± 2 standard deviations was
considered an increase, less than this range was considered a decrease, and within this range
was considered stable. Where this data was not available, a fold change from day 0 to day 7 of
between 0.5 and 1.5 was considered stable. A fold change <1.5 was considered decreased,
and >1.5 was considered increased.

Correlation plots and heatmap visualization
Pairwise correlations between variables were calculated and visualised as a correlogram using
R function corrplot displaying the positive correlations in red and negative correlations in blue.
Spearman p-value significance levels were shown. Heatmaps were created to visualize variable
values using R function pheatmap using row scaling and row and column clustering using
average cluster method and euclidean distance metric.

Statistics
Due to the heterogeneity of clinical and flow cytometric data, non-parametric tests of association
were preferentially used throughout this study unless otherwise specified. Correlation
coefficients between ordered features (including discrete ordinal, continuous scale, or a mixture
of the two) were quantified by the Spearman rank correlation coefficient and significance was

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

assessed by the corresponding non-parametric methods (null hypothesis: ρ = 0). Tests of
association between mixed continuous versus non-ordered categorical variables were
performed by Mann-Whitney U test (for n = 2 categories) or by Kruskal-Wallis test (for n > 2
categories). Association between categorical variables was assessed by chi-squared test. All
tests were performed two-sided, using a nominal significance threshold of P < 0.05 unless
otherwise specified. When appropriate to adjust for multiple hypothesis testing, false discovery
rate (FDR) correction was performed by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure at the FDR < 0.05
significance threshold unless otherwise specified.
Statistical analysis of flow cytometry data was performed using R package rstatix. Other
statistical analysis was performed using Prism software (GraphPad). Other details, if any, for
each experiment are provided within the relevant figure legends.
High dimensional data analysis of flow cytometry data
viSNE and FlowSOM analysis were performed on Cytobank (https://cytobank.org). B cells, nonnaïve CD4 T cells, and non-naïve CD8 T cells were analyzed separately. viSNE analysis was
performed using equal sampling of 1000 cells from each FCS file, with 5000 iterations, a
perplexity of 30, and a theta of 0.5. For B cells, the following markers were used to generate the
viSNE maps: CD45RA, IgD, CXCR5, CD138, Eomes, TCF-1, CD38, CD95, ICOS, CCR7,
CD21, KI67, CD27, CX3CR1, CD39, T-bet, HLA-DR, and CD20. For non-naïve CD4 and CD8 T
cells, the following markers were used: CD45RA, PD1, CXCR5, TCF-1, CD38, CD95, ICOS,
CCR7, KI67, CD27, CX3CR1, CD39, T-bet, and HLA-DR. Resulting viSNE maps were fed into
the FlowSOM clustering algorithm(56). For each cell subset, a new self-organizing map (SOM)
was generated using hierarchical consensus clustering on the tSNE axes. For each SOM, 100
clusters and 10 metaclusters were identified.
To group individuals based on B cell landscape, pairwise Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) value
was calculated on the B cell tSNE axes for all COVID-19 day 0 patients, healthy donors, and
recovered donors using the emdist package in R as previously described(57). Resulting scores
were hierarchically clustered using the hclust package in R.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank all patients and blood donors, their families and surrogates, as well as the
medical personnel in charge of patient care. We thank L. Bershaw for recruitment of HD and
RD. We thank Shin Ngiow for essential infrastructure support and Christopher Ash for donation
of computational equipment and design of schematic figures. We thank the Wherry lab for
discussions and critically reading the manuscript. This work was supported by the University of
Pennsylvania Institute for Immunology Glick COVID-19 research award (MRB), NIH AI105343,
AI08263, and the Allen Institute for Immunology (EJW). ACH was funded by grant CA230157
from the NIH. NJM reports funding to her institution from Athersys, Inc., Biomarck, Inc., and the
Marcus Foundation for Research. EJW is supported by the Parker Institute for Cancer
Immunotherapy which supports the Cancer Immunology program at the University of
Pennsylvania. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
The UPenn COVID Processing Unit: A unit of individuals from diverse laboratories at the
University of Pennsylvania who volunteered time and effort to enable study of COVID-19
patients during the pandemic: Zahidul Alam, Mary Addison, Katelyn Byrne, Aditi Chandra,
Hélène Descamps, Yaroslav Kaminskiy, Julia Han Noll, Dalia Omran, Eric Perkey, Elizabeth
Prager, Dana Pueschl, Jenn Shah, Jake Shilan. All affiliated with the University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine.
Author contributions
DM, NJM, MJB, and EJW conceived the project; DM, JRG, AEB, and EJW designed
experiments. NM conceived the clinical cohort, obtained clinical samples and metadata from
COVID-19 patients and provided clinical input; OK and JD provided clinical samples from HD
and RD. AEB and KD coordinated clinical sample procurement and processing. DM, ARG, LKC,
MBP, NH, JK, AP, FC, and SFL processed patient samples. DM, ZC, and YJH stained and JEW
acquired flow cytometry samples; JRG, AEB, and KN performed downstream flow cytometry
analysis. DM, SFL, and FC performed Luminex experiments. ECG, EMA, MEW, SG, CPA, MJB,
and SEH analyzed COVID-19 patient plasma and provided antibody data. ACH and LAV
provided additional clinical data; CA compiled and CA and JRG analyzed clinical metadata with
input from ACH and LAV. JRG, DAO, SM, and EJW designed data analysis and JRG, ARG, CA,
DAO, and SM performed computational and statistical analyses. DM, JRG, ARG, CA, and DAO
compiled figures. LKC, MBP, SA, ACH, LAV, NJM and MB provided intellectual input. DM, AEB,
ARG, JEW, and EJW wrote the manuscript; all authors reviewed the manuscript.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1.

E. Iype, S. Gulati, Understanding the asymmetric spread and case fatality rate (CFR) for
COVID-19 among countries. medRxiv (2020) (available at
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.21.20073791v1.abstract).

2.

J. B. Moore, C. H. June, Cytokine release syndrome in severe COVID-19. Science. 368,
473–474 (2020).

3.

Y. Shi, Y. Wang, C. Shao, J. Huang, J. Gan, X. Huang, E. Bucci, M. Piacentini, G. Ippolito,
G. Melino, COVID-19 infection: the perspectives on immune responses. Cell Death Differ.
27, 1451–1454 (2020).

4.

N. Vabret, G. J. Britton, C. Gruber, S. Hegde, J. Kim, M. Kuksin, R. Levantovsky, L. Malle,
A. Moreira, M. D. Park, L. Pia, E. Risson, M. Saffern, B. Salomé, M. E. Selvan, M. P.
Spindler, J. Tan, V. van der Heide, J. K. Gregory, K. Alexandropoulos, N. Bhardwaj, B. D.
Brown, B. Greenbaum, Z. H. Gümüş, D. Homann, A. Horowitz, A. O. Kamphorst, M. A.
Curotto de Lafaille, S. Mehandru, M. Merad, R. M. Samstein, Immunology of COVID-19:
current state of the science. Immunity (2020), doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.05.002.

5.

D. Weiskopf, K. S. Schmitz, M. P. Raadsen, A. Grifoni, N. M. A. Okba, H. Endeman, J. P.
C. van den Akker, R. Molenkamp, M. P. G. Koopmans, E. C. M. van Gorp, Others,
Phenotype of SARS-CoV-2-specific T-cells in COVID-19 patients with acute respiratory
distress syndrome. medRxiv (2020) (available at
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.11.20062349v1.abstract).

6.

A. Grifoni, D. Weiskopf, S. I. Ramirez, J. Mateus, J. M. Dan, C. R. Moderbacher, S. A.
Rawlings, A. Sutherland, L. Premkumar, R. S. Jadi, D. Marrama, A. M. de Silva, A. Frazier,
A. Carlin, J. A. Greenbaum, B. Peters, F. Krammer, D. M. Smith.S. Crotty, A. Sette, Targets
of T cell responses to SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus in humans with COVID-19 disease and
unexposed individuals. Cell (2020), doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.015.

7.

Y. Zhou, B. Fu, X. Zheng, D. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Qi, R. Sun, Z. Tian, X. Xu, H. Wei,
Aberrant pathogenic GM-CSF+ T cells and inflammatory CD14+ CD16+ monocytes in
severe pulmonary syndrome patients of a new coronavirus. BioRxiv (2020) (available at
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.02.12.945576v1.abstract).

8.

C. Qin, L. Zhou, Z. Hu, S. Zhang, S. Yang, Y. Tao, C. Xie, K. Ma, K. Shang, W. Wang, D.S. Tian, Dysregulation of Immune Response in Patients With Coronavirus 2019 (COVID19) in Wuhan, China. Clinical Infectious Diseases (2020), , doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa248.

9.

J. Chen, Z.-Z. Zhang, Y.-K. Chen, Q.-X. Long, W.-G. Tian, H.-J. Deng, J.-L. Hu, X.-X.
Zhang, Pu-Liao, J.-L. Xiang, D.-X. Wang, P. Hu, F.-C. Zhou, Z.-J. Li, H.-M. Xu, X.-F. Cai,
D.-Q. Wang, Y. Hu, N. Tang, B.-Z. Liu, G.-C. Wu, A.-L. Huang, The clinical and
immunological features of pediatric COVID-19 patients in China. Genes Dis (2020),
doi:10.1016/j.gendis.2020.03.008.

10. S. Lei, F. Jiang, W. Su, C. Chen, J. Chen, W. Mei, L.-Y. Zhan, Y. Jia, L. Zhang, D. Liu, Z.-Y.
Xia, Z. Xia, Clinical characteristics and outcomes of patients undergoing surgeries during
the incubation period of COVID-19 infection. EClinicalMedicine. 21 (2020), p. 100331.
11. M. Zheng, Y. Gao, G. Wang, G. Song, S. Liu, D. Sun, Y. Xu, Z. Tian, Functional exhaustion

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

of antiviral lymphocytes in COVID-19 patients. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 17 (2020), pp. 533–535.
12. H.-Y. Zheng, M. Zhang, C.-X. Yang, N. Zhang, X.-C. Wang, X.-P. Yang, X.-Q. Dong, Y.-T.
Zheng, Elevated exhaustion levels and reduced functional diversity of T cells in peripheral
blood may predict severe progression in COVID-19 patients. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 17 (2020),
pp. 541–543.
13. B. Diao, C. Wang, Y. Tan, X. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Ning, L. Chen, M. Li, Y. Liu, G. Wang, Z.
Yuan, Z. Feng, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Chen, Reduction and Functional Exhaustion of T Cells
in Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Front. Immunol. 11, 827 (2020).
14. L. M. McLane, M. S. Abdel-Hakeem, E. J. Wherry, CD8 T Cell Exhaustion During Chronic
Viral Infection and Cancer. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 37, 457–495 (2019).
15. I. Thevarajan, T. H. O. Nguyen, M. Koutsakos, J. Druce, L. Caly, C. E. van de Sandt, X. Jia,
S. Nicholson, M. Catton, B. Cowie, S. Y. C. Tong, S. R. Lewin, K. Kedzierska, Breadth of
concomitant immune responses prior to patient recovery: a case report of non-severe
COVID-19. Nat. Med. 26, 453–455 (2020).
16. G. Chen, D. Wu, W. Guo, Y. Cao, D. Huang, H. Wang, T. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Chen, H. Yu,
X. Zhang, M. Zhang, S. Wu, J. Song, T. Chen, M. Han, S. Li, X. Luo, J. Zhao, Q. Ning,
Clinical and immunological features of severe and moderate coronavirus disease 2019. J.
Clin. Invest. 130, 2620–2629 (2020).
17. Q. Zhao, M. Meng, R. Kumar, Y. Wu, J. Huang, Y. Deng, Z. Weng, L. Yang, Lymphopenia
is associated with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) infections: A systemic
review and meta-analysis. Int. J. Infect. Dis. (2020), doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2020.04.086.
18. L. Tan, Q. Wang, D. Zhang, J. Ding, Q. Huang, Y.-Q. Tang, Q. Wang, H. Miao,
Lymphopenia predicts disease severity of COVID-19: a descriptive and predictive study.
Signal Transduct Target Ther. 5, 33 (2020).
19. C. Huang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Ren, J. Zhao, Y. Hu, L. Zhang, G. Fan, J. Xu, X. Gu, Z.
Cheng, T. Yu, J. Xia, Y. Wei, W. Wu, X. Xie, W. Yin, H. Li, M. Liu, Y. Xiao, H. Gao, L. Guo,
J. Xie, G. Wang, R. Jiang, Z. Gao, Q. Jin, J. Wang, B. Cao, Clinical features of patients
infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet. 395, 497–506 (2020).
20. C. Guo, B. Li, H. Ma, X. Wang, P. Cai, Q. Yu, L. Zhu, L. Jin, Tocilizumab treatment in
severe COVID-19 patients attenuates the inflammatory storm incited by monocyte centric
immune interactions revealed by single-cell …. BioRxiv (2020) (available at
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.08.029769v1.abstract).
21. M. Liao, Y. Liu, J. Yuan, Y. Wen, G. Xu, J. Zhao, L. Cheng, J. Li, X. Wang, F. Wang, L. Liu,
I. Amit, S. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Single-cell landscape of bronchoalveolar immune cells in
patients with COVID-19. Nature Medicine (2020), , doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0901-9.
22. W. Wen, W. Su, H. Tang, W. Le, X. Zhang, Y. Zheng, X. Liu, L. Xie, J. Li, J. Ye, L. Dong, X.
Cui, Y. Miao, D. Wang, J. Dong, C. Xiao, W. Chen, H. Wang, Immune cell profiling of
COVID-19 patients in the recovery stage by single-cell sequencing. Cell Discov. 6, 31
(2020).
23. E. R. Adams, R. Anand, M. I. Andersson, K. Auckland, J. K. Baillie, E. Barnes, J. Bell, T.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Berry, S. Bibi, M. Carroll, Others, Evaluation of antibody testing for SARS-Cov-2 using
ELISA and lateral flow immunoassays. medRxiv (2020) (available at
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.15.20066407v1.abstract).
24. H. Ma, W. Zeng, H. He, D. Zhao, Y. Yang, D. Jiang, P. Zhou, Y. Qi, W. He, C. Zhao, R. Yi,
X. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Yang, A. J. K. Kombe, C. Ding, J. Xie, Y. Gao, L. Cheng, Y.
Li, X. Ma, T. Jin, COVID-19 diagnosis and study of serum SARS-CoV-2 specific IgA, IgM
and IgG by chemiluminescence immunoanalysis, , doi:10.1101/2020.04.17.20064907.
25. N. M. A. Okba, M. A. Müller, W. Li, C. Wang, C. H. GeurtsvanKessel, V. M. Corman, M. M.
Lamers, R. S. Sikkema, E. de Bruin, F. D. Chandler, Y. Yazdanpanah, Q. Le Hingrat, D.
Descamps, N. Houhou-Fidouh, Chantal B E, B.-J. Bosch, C. Drosten, M. P. G. Koopmans,
B. L. Haagmans, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2−Specific Antibody
Responses in Coronavirus Disease 2019 Patients. Emerging Infectious Diseases. 26
(2020), , doi:10.3201/eid2607.200841.
26. S. Jiang, C. Hillyer, L. Du, Neutralizing Antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 and Other Human
Coronaviruses. Trends Immunol. 41, 355–359 (2020).
27. L. Ni, F. Ye, M.-L. Cheng, Y. Feng, Y.-Q. Deng, H. Zhao, P. Wei, J. Ge, M. Gou, X. Li, L.
Sun, T. Cao, P. Wang, C. Zhou, R. Zhang, P. Liang, H. Guo, X. Wang, C.-F. Qin, F. Chen,
C. Dong, Detection of SARS-CoV-2-Specific Humoral and Cellular Immunity in COVID-19
Convalescent Individuals. Immunity (2020), doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.04.023.
28. C. Shen, Z. Wang, F. Zhao, Y. Yang, J. Li, J. Yuan, F. Wang, D. Li, M. Yang, L. Xing, J.
Wei, H. Xiao, Y. Yang, J. Qu, L. Qing, L. Chen, Z. Xu, L. Peng, Y. Li, H. Zheng, F. Chen, K.
Huang, Y. Jiang, D. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Liu, Treatment of 5 Critically Ill Patients With
COVID-19 With Convalescent Plasma. JAMA (2020), doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4783.
29. L. Zhang, F. Zhang, W. Yu, T. He, J. Yu, C. E. Yi, L. Ba, W. Li, M. Farzan, Z. Chen, K.-Y.
Yuen, D. Ho, Antibody responses against SARS coronavirus are correlated with disease
outcome of infected individuals. J. Med. Virol. 78, 1–8 (2006).
30. M. Z. Tay, C. M. Poh, L. Rénia, P. A. MacAry, L. F. P. Ng, The trinity of COVID-19:
immunity, inflammation and intervention. Nat. Rev. Immunol. (2020), doi:10.1038/s41577020-0311-8.
31. F. A. Lagunas-Rangel, Neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio and lymphocyte-to-C-reactive protein
ratio in patients with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): A meta-analysis. J.
Med. Virol. (2020) (available at https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/jmv.25819).
32. A. L. Kuri-Cevantes, M. B. Pampena, W. Meng, A. M. Rosenfeld, C. A.G. Ittner, A. R.
Weisman, R. Agyekum, D. Matthews, L. Vella, S. Gouma, M. Weirick, C. P. Arevalo, M. J.
Bolton, E. C. Goodwin, E. M. Anderson, S. E. Hensley, T. K. Jones, N. S. Mangalmurti, E.
T. Luning Prak, E. J. Wherry, N. J. Meyer, M. R. Betts, Immunologic perturbations in severe
CoViD-19/SARS-CoV-2 infection.Under review.
33. C. Agrati, C. Castilletti, R. Casetti, A. Sacchi, L. Falasca, F. Turchi, N. Tumino, V. Bordoni,
E. Cimini, D. Viola, E. Lalle, L. Bordi, S. Lanini, F. Martini, E. Nicastri, N. Petrosillo, V. Puro,
M. Piacentini, A. Di Caro, G. P. Kobinger, A. Zumla, G. Ippolito, M. R. Capobianchi,
Longitudinal characterization of dysfunctional T cell-activation during human acute Ebola
infection. Cell Death Dis. 7, e2164 (2016).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

34. Z. M. Ndhlovu, P. Kamya, N. Mewalal, H. N. Kløverpris, T. Nkosi, K. Pretorius, F. Laher, F.
Ogunshola, D. Chopera, K. Shekhar, M. Ghebremichael, N. Ismail, A. Moodley, A. Malik, A.
Leslie, P. J. R. Goulder, S. Buus, A. Chakraborty, K. Dong, T. Ndung’u, B. D. Walker,
Magnitude and Kinetics of CD8+ T Cell Activation during Hyperacute HIV Infection Impact
Viral Set Point. Immunity. 43, 591–604 (2015).
35. S. Crotty, T Follicular Helper Cell Biology: A Decade of Discovery and Diseases. Immunity.
50, 1132–1148 (2019).
36. R. S. Herati, L. V. Silva, L. A. Vella, A. Muselman, C. Alanio, Vaccine-induced ICOS+
CD38+ cTfh are sensitive biosensors of age-related changes in inflammatory pathways.
bioRxiv (2019) (available at https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/711911v1.abstract).
37. R. S. Herati, M. A. Reuter, D. V. Dolfi, K. D. Mansfield, H. Aung, O. Z. Badwan, R. K.
Kurupati, S. Kannan, H. Ertl, K. E. Schmader, M. R. Betts, D. H. Canaday, E. John Wherry,
Circulating CXCR5 PD-1 Response Predicts Influenza Vaccine Antibody Responses in
Young Adults but not Elderly Adults. The Journal of Immunology. 193 (2014), pp. 3528–
3537.
38. E. J. Giamarellos-Bourboulis, M. G. Netea, N. Rovina, K. Akinosoglou, A. Antoniadou, N.
Antonakos, G. Damoraki, T. Gkavogianni, M.-E. Adami, P. Katsaounou, M. Ntaganou, M.
Kyriakopoulou, G. Dimopoulos, I. Koutsodimitropoulos, D. Velissaris, P. Koufargyris, A.
Karageorgos, K. Katrini, V. Lekakis, M. Lupse, A. Kotsaki, G. Renieris, D. Theodoulou, V.
Panou, E. Koukaki, N. Koulouris, C. Gogos, A. Koutsoukou, Complex Immune
Dysregulation in COVID-19 Patients with Severe Respiratory Failure. Cell Host Microbe
(2020), doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009.
39. R. S. Herati, A. Muselman, L. Vella, B. Bengsch, K. Parkhouse, D. Del Alcazar, J. Kotzin, S.
A. Doyle, P. Tebas, S. E. Hensley, L. F. Su, K. E. Schmader, E. J. Wherry, Successive
annual influenza vaccination induces a recurrent oligoclonotypic memory response in
circulating T follicular helper cells. Sci Immunol. 2 (2017), doi:10.1126/sciimmunol.aag2152.
40. Y. Yang, C. Shen, J. Li, J. Yuan, M. Yang, F. Wang, G. Li, Y. Li, L. Xing, L. Peng, Others,
Exuberant elevation of IP-10, MCP-3 and IL-1ra during SARS-CoV-2 infection is associated
with disease severity and fatal outcome. MedRxiv (2020) (available at
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.02.20029975v1.abstract).
41. A. K. McElroy, R. S. Akondy, C. W. Davis, A. H. Ellebedy, A. K. Mehta, C. S. Kraft, G. M.
Lyon, B. S. Ribner, J. Varkey, J. Sidney, A. Sette, S. Campbell, U. Ströher, I. Damon, S. T.
Nichol, C. F. Spiropoulou, R. Ahmed, Human Ebola virus infection results in substantial
immune activation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112, 4719–4724 (2015).
42. J. Wrammert, N. Onlamoon, R. S. Akondy, G. C. Perng, K. Polsrila, A. Chandele, M.
Kwissa, B. Pulendran, P. C. Wilson, O. Wittawatmongkol, S. Yoksan, N. Angkasekwinai, K.
Pattanapanyasat, K. Chokephaibulkit, R. Ahmed, Rapid and massive virus-specific
plasmablast responses during acute dengue virus infection in humans. J. Virol. 86, 2911–
2918 (2012).
43. D. Flannery, S. Gouma, M. B. Dhudasia, S. Mukhopadhyay, M. R. Pfeifer, E. C. Woodford,
J. S. Gerber, C. P. Arevalo, M. J. Bolton, M. E. Weirick, E. C. Goodwin, E.M. Anderson, A.
R. Greenplate, J. Kim, N. Han, A. Pattekar, J. Dougherty, O. Kuthuru, D. Mathew, A. E.
Baxter, L. A. Vella, J. Weaver, A. Verma, R. Leite, J. S. Morris, D. J. Rader, M. A. Elovitz,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

E. J. Wherry, K. M. Puopolo, S. E. Hensley, SARS-CoV-2 Seroprevalence Among
Parturient Women. Under review, preprint: ResearchSquare, doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs27402/v1.
44. A. C. Huang, M. A. Postow, R. J. Orlowski, R. Mick, B. Bengsch, S. Manne, W. Xu, S.
Harmon, J. R. Giles, B. Wenz, M. Adamow, D. Kuk, K. S. Panageas, C. Carrera, P. Wong,
F. Quagliarello, B. Wubbenhorst, K. D’Andrea, K. E. Pauken, R. S. Herati, R. P. Staupe, J.
M. Schenkel, S. McGettigan, S. Kothari, S. M. George, R. H. Vonderheide, R. K.
Amaravadi, G. C. Karakousis, L. M. Schuchter, X. Xu, K. L. Nathanson, J. D. Wolchok, T.
C. Gangadhar, E. J. Wherry, T-cell invigoration to tumour burden ratio associated with antiPD-1 response. Nature. 545, 60–65 (2017).
45. J. D. Miller, R. G. van der Most, R. S. Akondy, J. T. Glidewell, S. Albott, D. Masopust, K.
Murali-Krishna, P. L. Mahar, S. Edupuganti, S. Lalor, S. Germon, C. Del Rio, M. J. Mulligan,
S. I. Staprans, J. D. Altman, M. B. Feinberg, R. Ahmed, Human effector and memory CD8+
T cell responses to smallpox and yellow fever vaccines. Immunity. 28, 710–722 (2008).
46. R. S. Akondy, M. Fitch, S. Edupuganti, S. Yang, H. T. Kissick, K. W. Li, B. A. Youngblood,
H. A. Abdelsamed, D. J. McGuire, K. W. Cohen, G. Alexe, S. Nagar, M. M. McCausland, S.
Gupta, P. Tata, W. N. Haining, M. J. McElrath, D. Zhang, B. Hu, W. J. Greenleaf, J. J.
Goronzy, M. J. Mulligan, M. Hellerstein, R. Ahmed, Origin and differentiation of human
memory CD8 T cells after vaccination. Nature. 552, 362–367 (2017).
47. T. M. Wilkinson, C. K. F. Li, C. S. C. Chui, A. K. Y. Huang, M. Perkins, J. C. Liebner, R.
Lambkin-Williams, A. Gilbert, J. Oxford, B. Nicholas, K. J. Staples, T. Dong, D. C. Douek,
A. J. McMichael, X.-N. Xu, Preexisting influenza-specific CD4+ T cells correlate with
disease protection against influenza challenge in humans. Nat. Med. 18, 274–280 (2012).
48. B. Zhang, X. Zhou, Y. Qiu, F. Feng, J. Feng, Y. Jia, H. Zhu, K. Hu, J. Liu, Z. Liu, Others,
Clinical characteristics of 82 death cases with COVID-19. medRxiv (2020) (available at
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.02.26.20028191v1.abstract).
49. Z. Xu, L. Shi, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Huang, C. Zhang, S. Liu, P. Zhao, H. Liu, L. Zhu, Y.
Tai, C. Bai, T. Gao, J. Song, P. Xia, J. Dong, J. Zhao, F.-S. Wang, Pathological findings of
COVID-19 associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome. The Lancet Respiratory
Medicine. 8 (2020), pp. 420–422.
50. J. Braun, L. Loyal, M. Frentsch, D. Wendisch, P. Georg, F. Kurth, S. Hippenstiel, M.
Dingeldey, B. Kruse, F. Fauchere, Others, Presence of SARS-CoV-2 reactive T cells in
COVID-19 patients and healthy donors. medRxiv (2020) (available at
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.17.20061440v1.abstract).
51. L. Chen, J. Xiong, L. Bao, Y. Shi, Convalescent plasma as a potential therapy for COVID19. Lancet Infect. Dis. 20 (2020), pp. 398–400.
52. D. S. Reed, L. E. Hensley, J. B. Geisbert, P. B. Jahrling, T. W. Geisbert, Depletion of
peripheral blood T lymphocytes and NK cells during the course of ebola hemorrhagic Fever
in cynomolgus macaques. Viral Immunol. 17, 390–400 (2004).
53. F. E.-H. Lee, J. L. Halliley, E. E. Walsh, A. P. Moscatiello, B. L. Kmush, A. R. Falsey, T. D.
Randall, D. A. Kaminiski, R. K. Miller, I. Sanz, Circulating human antibody-secreting cells
during vaccinations and respiratory viral infections are characterized by high specificity and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

lack of bystander effect. J. Immunol. 186, 5514–5521 (2011).
54. G. Blanchard-Rohner, A. S. Pulickal, C. M. Jol-van der Zijde, M. D. Snape, A. J. Pollard,
Appearance of peripheral blood plasma cells and memory B cells in a primary and
secondary immune response in humans. Blood. 114, 4998–5002 (2009).
55. D. Blanco-Melo, B. E. Nilsson-Payant, W.-C. Liu, S. Uhl, D. Hoagland, R. Møller, T. X.
Jordan, K. Oishi, M. Panis, D. Sachs, T. T. Wang, R. E. Schwartz, J. K. Lim, R. A. Albrecht,
B. R. tenOever, Imbalanced Host Response to SARS-CoV-2 Drives Development of
COVID-19. Cell (2020), , doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.026.
56. S. Van Gassen, B. Callebaut, M. J. Van Helden, B. N. Lambrecht, P. Demeester, T.
Dhaene, Y. Saeys, FlowSOM: Using self-organizing maps for visualization and
interpretation of cytometry data. Cytometry A. 87, 636–645 (2015).
57. A. R. Greenplate, D. D. McClanahan, B. K. Oberholtzer, D. B. Doxie, C. E. Roe, K. E.
Diggins, N. Leelatian, M. L. Rasmussen, M. C. Kelley, V. Gama, P. J. Siska, J. C. Rathmell,
P. B. Ferrell, D. B. Johnson, J. M. Irish, Computational Immune Monitoring Reveals
Abnormal Double-Negative T Cells Present across Human Tumor Types. Cancer Immunol
Res. 7, 86–99 (2019).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. Clinical characterization of cohort, inflammatory markers, and quantification of
major immune subsets
(A) Overview of cohort in study, including healthy donors (HD), recovered patients (RD), and
COVID-19 patients enrolled, median age and range (in years), and gender distribution. (B)
Quantification of key clinical parameters of COVID-19 patients. Each dot represents an
individual COVID-19 patient; healthy donor range indicated in green. (C) Consensus
hierarchical clustering of Spearman correlation (95% confidence interval) of 25 demographic,
clinical, and immunological features of COVID-19 patients. 65 patients were included in
analysis; significance indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, and *** p < 0.001. (D) Representative
flow cytometry plots indicating gating strategy for identification of major immune cell subsets. (E)
Frequencies of major immune cell subsets (as a percentage of live singlets). (F) Ratio of
CD4:CD8 T cells within each subject group. (G) Correlation plot comparing frequencies of CD4
and CD8 T cells (both as a percentage of live cells) within the same patient. (H) Spearman
correlations of immune cell subset frequencies with various clinical features. Regression line
indicated in red, with 95% confidence area shown in shaded gray. Spearman's Rank Correlation
coefficient and associated p-value shown. (E-F) Each dot represents an individual HD donor
(green), RD donor (blue), or COVID-19 patient (red). Significance as determined by Wilcoxon
Rank-Sum Test indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, *** p < 0.001, and **** p <0.0001.

Figure 2. CD8 T cell subset skewing and activation patterns in COVID-19 patients and
potential links to T cell driven cytokines
(A) Principal component analysis of aggregated high parameter flow cytometry data. Each dot
represents an individual healthy donor (HD, green), recovered donor (RD, blue), or COVID-19
patient (red). (B) Representative flow cytometry plots indicating gating strategy for identification
of CD8 T cell subsets. (C) Frequencies of CD8 T cell subsets (as a percentage of total CD8 T
cells). (D) Frequencies of PD1+ and CD39+ (as percentages of non-naïve CD8 T cells). (E) [left]
Frequencies of KI67+ cells (as a percentage of non-naïve CD8 T cells). [right] Representative
flow cytometry plots illustrating KI67 expression in non-naïve CD8 T cells from each subject
group. For COVID-19 patients, examples of a low and high response are shown. (F) [left]
Frequencies of CD38+HLA-DR+ cells (as a percentage of non-naïve CD8 T cells). [right]
Representative flow cytometry plots illustrating CD38 and HLA-DR expression in non-naïve CD8
T cells from each subject group. For COVID-19 patients, examples of a low and high response

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

are shown. (G) [top] Global viSNE projection of non-naïve CD8 T cells for all subjects pooled,
with non-naïve CD8 T cell populations of HD, RD, and COVID-19 patients overlaid. [bottom]
viSNE projections indicating expression of various markers of interest on non-naïve CD8 T cells
for all subjects pooled. (H) viSNE projection of non-naïve CD8 T cell clusters identified by
FlowSOM clustering of tSNE axes. (I) Heatmap showing contributions of various CD8 T cell
markers to FlowSOM CD8 T cell clusters. Heat scale calculated as column z-score of MFI. (J)
Boxplots indicating percentage of HD, RD, or COVID-19 patient CD8 T cells in each FlowSOM
cluster. (CDEFJ) Each dot represents an individual healthy donor (HD, green), recovered donor
(RD, blue), or COVID-19 patient (red). Significance as determined by Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test
indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, *** p < 0.001, and **** p <0.0001.

Figure 3. CD4 T cell activation in a subset of COVID-19 patients associates with distinct
CD4 T cell subsets
(A) Representative flow cytometry plots indicating gating strategy for identification of CD4 T cell
subsets. (B) Frequencies of CD4 T cell subsets (as a percentage of live CD4 T cells); and
frequency of activated cTfh (CD38+ICOS+, as a percentage of cTfh). (C) [left] Frequencies of
KI67+ cells (as a percentage of non-naïve CD4 T cells); upper decile of healthy donor
frequencies denoted by green line. [right] Representative flow cytometry plots illustrating KI67
expression in non-naïve CD4 T cells from each subject group. For COVID-19 patients,
examples of a low and high response are shown. (D) Spearman correlation of KI67 expression
between CD4 and CD8 T cells (both as a percentage of non-naïve CD4/8 T cells) from COVID19 patients. Regression line indicated in red, with 95% confidence area shown in shaded gray.
(E) Frequencies of HLA-DR+CD38+ cells (as a percentage of non-naïve CD4 T cells); upper
decile of healthy donor frequencies denoted by green line. [right] Representative flow cytometry
plots illustrating KI67 expression in non-naïve CD4 T cells from each subject group. For COVID19 patients, examples of a low and high response are shown. (F) Spearman correlation of HLADR+CD38+ expression between non-naïve CD4 and CD8 T cells from COVID-19 patients.
Regression line indicated in red, with 95% confidence area shown in shaded gray. (G) [top]
Global viSNE projection of non-naïve CD4 T cells for all subjects pooled, with non-naïve CD4 T
cell populations of HD, RD, and COVID-19 patients overlaid. [bottom] viSNE projections
indicating expression of various markers of interest on non-naïve CD4 T cells for all subjects
pooled. (H) CD4 T cell clusters identified by FlowSOM clustering of tSNE axes. (I) Heatmap
showing contributions of various CD4 T cell markers to FlowSOM CD4 T cell clusters. Heat
scale calculated as column z-score of MFI. (J) Boxplots indicating percentage of HD, RD, or

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

COVID-19 patient CD8 T cells in each FlowSOM cluster. (BCEJ) Each dot represents an
individual HD (green), RD (blue), or COVID-19 patient (red). Significance as determined by
Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, *** p < 0.001, and **** p <0.0001.

Figure 4. Deep profiling of COVID-19 patient B cell populations compared to recovered
subjects and healthy controls reveals robust plasmablast populations and other B cell
alterations
(A) [left] Representative flow cytometry plot indicating gating strategy for naïve, class-switched
memory, and not-class switched memory B cells. [right] Frequencies of B cell populations (as a
percentage of live CD19+ non-plasmablast B cells). (B) [left] Representative flow cytometry plots
highlighting variation in plasmablast (PB) frequencies in COVID-19 patients. [right] Plasmablast
frequencies (as a percentage of live CD19+ B cells). (C) [left] Representative flow cytometry
plots illustrating KI67 expression in B cells from healthy, recovered, and COVID-19 patients.
[right] Frequencies of KI67+ cells (as a percentage of indicated B cell subsets). (D) [left]
Representative flow cytometry histograms illustrating CXCR5 expression in naïve and nonnaïve B cells from HD, RD, and COVID-19 patients. [right] Per-cell expression (GMFI) of
CXCR5 on each B cell subset. (E) Per-cell expression of CXCR5 (GMFI) on naïve and nonnaïve CD4 T cells. (F-G) Correlation between plasmablast frequencies and (F) total circulating
Tfh or (G) activated (CD38+ICOS+) cTfh frequencies. Regression line indicated in red, with 95%
confidence area shown in shaded gray. Spearman's Rank Correlation coefficient and
associated p-value shown. (H-I) Correlation between plasmablast frequencies and plasma
concentration of anti-COVID spike (H) IgM or (I) IgG in COVID-19 patients. Gray line indicates
assay limit of detection. (J) [top] Global viSNE projection of B cells for all subjects pooled, with B
cell populations of HD, RD, and COVID-19 patients overlaid. [bottom] viSNE projections
indicating expression of various markers of interest on B cells for all subjects pooled. (K)
Hierarchical clustering of Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) using Pearson correlation, calculated
pairwise for B cell populations for all patients. (L) Breakdown of EMD patient clusters by HD
(green), RD (blue), or COVID19 patients (red). (M) Global viSNE projection of B cells for all
subjects pooled, with B cell populations of EMD patient clusters 1-3 overlaid. (N) B cell clusters
identified by FlowSOM clustering of tSNE axes. (O) Heatmap showing contributions of various B
cell markers to FlowSOM B cell clusters. Heat scale calculated as column z-score of MFI. (P)
Boxplots indicating frequencies of cells in each FlowSOM cluster as a percentage of cells in
each EMD patient cluster. (A-G, P) Each dot represents an individual HD (green), RD (blue), or

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

COVID-19 patient (red). (A-E, P) Significance as determined by Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test
indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, *** p < 0.001, and **** p <0.0001.

Figure 5. Temporal relationships between immune responses and disease manifestation
(A) Global viSNE projection of non-naïve CD8 T cells, non-naïve CD4 T cells, and B cells for all
subjects pooled, with cells sampled from COVID-19 patients at D0 and D7 of hospitalization
overlaid. (B-C) Changes in frequencies of CD4 T cell subsets (as a percentage of non-naïve
CD4 T cells) in COVID-19 patients between D0 and 7 of hospitalization, including (B) EM2 and
cTfh and (C) activated CD4 T cells, shown as KI67+ and HLA-DR+CD38+. (D) Changes in
frequencies of B cell subsets (as a percentage of live B cells) in COVID-19 patients between D0
and 7 of hospitalization. (E) Longitudinal patterns of CD4 T cell activation in COVID-19 patients
between D0 and 7 of hospitalization. [left] Frequencies of HLA-DR+CD38+ (as a percentage of
non-naïve CD4 T cells) and [right] representative flow cytometry plots shown for patients
demonstrating [top] an increase, [middle] a decrease, or [bottom] no change in activated CD4 T
cells. (F) Longitudinal patterns of plasmablast frequencies in COVID-19 patients between D0
and 7 of hospitalization. [left] Frequencies of plasmablasts (as a percentage of B cells) and
[right] representative flow cytometry plots shown for patients demonstrating [top] an increase,
[middle] a decrease, or [bottom] no change. (G) Spearman correlations of clinical parameters
with fold changes in immune populations of interest. Significance is indicated by: * p < 0.05, **
p< 0.01, and *** p < 0.001. (H) Frequency of patients on treatment plans, including vasoactive
medication (black), nitric oxide (dark gray), early steroid (medium gray), and hyperlipidemia
(light gray), demonstrating fold changes in immune populations of interest. (B-D) Each dot
represents an individual healthy donor (green), recovered donor (blue), or COVID-19 patient
(red) at D0 and D7 of hospitalization (connected by black line). Significance as determined by
Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test is indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, *** p < 0.001, and **** p
<0.0001. (E-F) Donors were sorted into groups based on thresholds of fold change: patients
that showed an increase or decrease were defined by >1.5 fold change; patients that remained
stable were defined by <0.5 fold change.

Figure 6. High dimensional analysis of immune phenotypes with clinical data reveals
distinct patient immunotypes related to disease manifestation
(A) NIH ordinal scale describing COVID-19 clinical severity. (B) Frequencies of major
lymphocyte cell subsets (as a percentage of live cells). (C) Hierarchical clustering of all patients
by immune subset data. Disease severity at blood collection timepoints and/or mortality

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

indicated in red color scale across top of heatmap. (D) Unmodified UMAP projection of all
subjects, using single-positive populations of all immune cell subsets. (E) Transformed UMAP
projection of all subjects graphing “Component 1” (horizontal axis) versus “Component 2”
(vertical axis). Kernel density contours are drawn separately for HD, RD, and COVID
populations to help visualize population clusters. (F) Mean of UMAP Component 1 for each
group of subjects. Each dot represents an individual subject, with bars shaded according to
subject group and severity score. (G) Correlation matrix for top 20 (selected by P-value rank)
immune cell populations versus UMAP Components based on single gate flow features.
Performed separately for T cell versus B cell features (columns) and Component 1 and 2 (rows).
(H) Correlations between Component 1 and frequencies of example immune cell subsets. (I)
Correlations between Component 2 and frequencies of example immune cell subsets. (J)
Correlation matrix for UMAP components 1 and 2 with clinical metadata. (K) Summary table for

the three immunotypes identified, highlighting the core immune features and associations
with UMAP Components. Red up arrow represents positive association, down arrow
represents negative association. (BDEHI) Each dot represents an individual HD donor (green),
RD donor (blue), or COVID-19 patient (clinical severity from (A) indicated in red color scale). (J)
Significance as determined by Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test (binary clinical covariates) or
Spearman rank correlation test (continuous clinical covariates) is indicated by * p < 0.05, ** p<
0.01, and *** p < 0.001.

Table S1. Demographics and baseline characteristics of 71 COVID-19 patients included in
the flow cytometry study
Median and range are shown for continuous variables in Demographics and Disease
characteristics. Median and 95% coverage interval are shown for continuous variables in
Biology and Ventilation. Count and proportion are shown for categorical variable modalities.
†

cardiovascular risk is an aggregate score of obesity, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and

hyperlipidemia.

††

immunosuppression by APACHE definition, i.e. steroids equivalent to 15mg

prednisone or higher, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), hematologic malignancy,
metastatic solid malignancy, or patient receiving chemotherapy within 30 days.

†††

pulmonary

affection severity ranges from room air (RA), nasal cannula (NC), high flow nasal cannula –
non-invasive ventilation (HFNC-NIV), mild acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
moderate ARDS, severe ARDS, and severe ARDS with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO). ††††NIH ordinal scale (shown in Figure 6A) ranges from 1 to 8.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Table S2. Demographics and baseline characteristics of 25 recovered patients included
in the flow cytometry study
Median and range are shown for continuous variables in the Demographics and Disease
sections. Median and 95% coverage intervals are shown for continuous variables in the Biology
section. Count and proportion are shown for categorical variable modalities. Delay since
symptoms started/ended indicates days elapsed from onset of symptoms to study enrollment.

Table S3. Demographics and baseline characteristics of 37 healthy donors included in
the flow cytometry study
Median and range are shown for continuous variables in the Demographics. Median and 95%
coverage intervals are shown for continuous variables in the Biology section. Count and
proportion are shown for categorical variable modalities.

Figure S1. Additional clinical characterization of COVID-19 patients, recovered donors,
and healthy donors
(A) Quantification of clinical parameters of COVID-19 patients. Each dot represents an
individual COVID-19 patient; healthy donor range indicated in green. (B) Consensus
hierarchical clustering of Spearman correlation (95% confidence interval) of 33 demographic,
clinical, and immunological features of COVID-19 patients. 27 patients included in analysis;
significance indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, and *** p < 0.001. (C) Frequencies of CD4 and
CD8 T cells (as a percentage of total live T cells). Each dot represents an individual healthy
donor (HD, green), recovered donor (RD, blue), or COVID-19 patient (red). Significance as
determined by Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test is indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, *** p < 0.001,
and **** p <0.0001. (D) Absolute numbers of major immune subsets in peripheral blood from
COVID-19 patients.

Figure S2. CD8 T cell phenotype by donor, stratified by comorbidities and correlated to
clinical features
(A-C) Expression of activation markers across CD8 T cell subsets, shown as frequency of cells
expressing (A) PD1, (B)KI67, and (C) HLA-DR and CD38. (D) Correlation between frequencies
of KI67+ and HLA-DR+CD38+ non-naïve CD8 T cells within the same patient. (E-G) Frequencies
of [left] HLA-DR+CD38+ and [right] KI67+ cells (as a percentage of non-naïve CD8 T cells) in
COVID-19 patients that (E) presented with coinfection, (F) were immunosuppressed, or (G)
were treated with steroids. (H) Correlation plots indicating relationship between frequency of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

indicated CD8 T cell subset (as a percentage of live CD8 T cells) and blood concentrations of
D-dimer, hsCRP, and ferritin. (A-D) Each dot represents an individual HD (green), RD (blue), or
COVID-19 patient (red). (A-C, E-G) Significance as determined by Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test is
indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, *** p < 0.001, and **** p <0.0001. (D,H) Regression line of
COVID-19 patients indicated in red, with 95% confidence area shaded in gray. Spearman's
Rank Correlation coefficient and associated p-value shown.

Figure S3. Correlation of clinical features and comorbidities to CD4 T cell phenotype (AC) Expression of activation markers across CD4 T cell subsets, shown as frequency of cells
expressing (A) KI67, (B) HLA-DR and CD38, and (C) PD-1. (D) Correlation between non-naïve
CD4 T cells expressing KI67 and HLA-DR/CD38. (E) Correlation between non-naïve CD4 T
cells expressing HLA-DR/CD38 and aTfh. (F-H) Frequencies of [left] HLA-DR+CD38+ and [right]
KI67+ cells (as a percentage of non-naïve CD4 T cells) in COVID-19 patients that (F) present
with coinfection, (G) are immunosuppressed, or (H) are treated with steroids. (I) Correlation
plots indicating relationship between frequency of indicated CD4 T cell subset (as a percentage
of live CD4 T cells) and blood concentrations of hsCRP, ferritin, and D-dimer. (A-E) Each dot
represents an individual HD (green), RD (blue), or COVID-19 patient (red). (D-E, I) Regression
line of the COVID-19 patients indicated in red, with 95% confidence area shown in shaded gray.
Spearman's Rank Correlation coefficient and associated p-value shown. (A-C, F-H) Significance
as determined by Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test is indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, *** p < 0.001,
and **** p <0.0001.

Figure S4. Chemokines and cytokines in the plasma and in vitro culture supernatants
from COVID-19 patients
(A) Heatmap showing chemokines/cytokines detected in plasma from HD (green) and COVID19 patients (red), clustered by donor group and scaled by row. (B) Concentrations of key
chemokines and cytokines in plasma from HD (white) and COVID-19 patients (gray). (C)
Heatmap showing chemokines/cytokines detected in the supernatants of PBMCs, stimulated in
vitro with ɑCD3/ɑCD28 for 16 hrs, from HD (green) and COVID-19 patients (red), clustered by
donor group and scaled by row. (D) Concentrations of chemokines/cytokines detected in the
supernatants of PBMCs, stimulated in vitro with ɑCD3/ɑCD28 for 16 hrs, from HD (white) and
COVID-19 patients (gray). (E) Correlation plots indicating relationship between chemokine
concentrations in plasma and from supernatant of in vitro ɑCD3/ɑCD28 stimulated PBMCs.
Each dot represents an individual HD (green) or COVID-19 patient (red). Regression line

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

indicated in red, with 95% confidence area shown in shaded gray. Spearman's Rank Correlation
coefficient and associated p-value shown. (A-E) Values shown are mean of two technical
replicates per patient. (B,D) Significance as determined by Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test is
indicated by: * p < 0.05 and ** p< 0.01.

Figure S5. Phenotype of B cells examined by donor type, comorbidities, and clinical
features
(A) Expression of PD1 across B cell subsets. (B-D) Frequencies of [left] naïve, [middle] nonplasmablast, and [right] non-naïve non-plasmablast populations (as a percentage of live B cells)
in COVID-19 patients that (B) present with coinfection, (C) are immunosuppressed, or (D) are
treated with steroids. (E) Correlation plots indicating relationship between frequency of indicated
B cell subset (as a percentage of live B cells) and blood concentrations of ferritin, hsCRP, and
D-dimer. Regression line indicated in red, with 95% confidence area shown in shaded gray.
Spearman's Rank Correlation coefficient and associated p-value shown. (F) Correlation
between plasmablast (PB) frequencies and non-naïve activated (CD38+HLA-DR+) CD4 T cell
frequencies. Regression line indicated in red, with 95% confidence area shown in shaded gray.
Spearman's Rank Correlation coefficient and associated p-value shown. (G) viSNE projections
indicating expression of various markers of interest on B cells for all subjects pooled. (A-B)
Significance as determined by Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test is indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01,
*** p < 0.001, and **** p <0.0001.

Figure S6. Temporal changes in CD8 T cells from COVID-19 patients
(A) Frequencies of activated CD8 T cells, shown as [left] EM2, [middle] KI67+ and [right] HLADR+CD38+ (as a percentage of non-naïve singlets) over time with SARS-CoV2 infection. Each
dot represents an individual healthy donor (green), recovered donor (blue) or COVID-19 patient
(red) at D0 and D7 of hospitalization (connected by black line). Significance as determined by
Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test is indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, *** p < 0.001, and **** p
<0.0001. (B-C) Longitudinal patterns of CD8 T cell activation in COVID-19 patients between D0
and 7 of hospitalization. [left] Frequencies of activated cells (as a percentage of non-naïve CD8
T cells) and [right] representative flow cytometry plots shown for patients demonstrating [top] an
increase, [middle] no change, or [bottom] a decrease in activated CD4 T cells. (B) Donors were
sorted into groups based on thresholds of fold change of HLA-DR+CD38+ cells: patients that
showed an increase or decrease were defined by >1.5 fold change; patients that remained
stable were defined by <0.5 fold change. (C) Donors were sorted into groups based on

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

thresholds of fold change of HLA-DR+CD38+ cells using statistics from a previously published
data set (44): patients that showed an increase or decrease were defined by a fold change
greater than mean+2SD; patients that remained stable were defined by a fold change less than
mean+2SD. (D) Percentages of COVID-19 patients exhibiting increase (red), stable
maintenance (white), or decrease (blue) of frequencies of major immune subsets between D0
and D7 of hospitalization. (E) Frequency of patients on treatment plans, including vasoactive
medication (black), nitric oxide (dark gray), early steroid (medium gray), and hyperlipidemia
(light gray), demonstrating fold changes in immune populations of interest.

Figure S7. Clustering of CD8 T cells, CD4 T cells, and B cells by disease severity linked
to heterogeneity of COVID-19 patients
(A) [top] Frequencies of CD8 T cell subsets (as a percentage of live CD8 T cells). [bottom]
Hierarchical clustering of all patients by CD8 T cell subset data. (B) [top] Frequencies of CD4 T
cell subsets (as a percentage of live CD4 T cells). [bottom] Hierarchical clustering of all patients
by CD4 T cell subset data. (C) [top] Frequencies of B cell subsets (as a percentage of live CD4
T cells). [bottom] Hierarchical clustering of all patients by B cell subset data. (A-C, scatter plots)
Each dot represents an individual HD donor (green), RD donor (blue), or COVID-19 patient
(clinical severity from (6A) indicated in red color scale). Significance as determined by Wilcoxon
Rank-Sum Test is indicated by: * p < 0.05, ** p< 0.01, *** p < 0.001, and **** p <0.0001. (A-C,
heatmaps) Disease severity at blood collection time points and mortality indicated in red color
scale across top of heatmap.
Figure S8. T and B cell populations correlated with UMAP Component 1
Spearman correlation heatmap of positive populations by single flow gate that correlate with
Component 1 at an FDR threshold of 0.05.
Figure S9. gMFI and single positive population of all T and B cells populations correlated
with the Component 1
Spearman correlation heatmap of all measured flow populations that correlate with Component
1 at an FDR threshold of 0.001.
Figure S10. T and B cell populations correlated with UMAP Component 2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Spearman correlation heatmap of positive populations by single flow gate that correlate with
Component 2 at an FDR threshold of 0.05.
Figure S11. gMFI and single positive population of all T and B cells populations
correlated with the Component 2
Spearman correlation heatmap of all measured flow populations that correlate with Component
2 at an FDR threshold of 0.001.

was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1

A
Whole Study

Healthy Donors

1×10 1

Lymphocytes (THO/μL)

WBC (THO/μL)

1×10

1

1×10

0

1×10

0

1×10

-1

1×10

0

2

1×10

1

1×10

1

0

2

1×10

2

50

1×10

-1

1×10

-2

30 [20-61]

61 [29-85]

16 (47%) / 18 (53%) 12 (44%) / 15 (56%) 37 (45%) / 46 (55%)
37
40 [22-62]

25
29 [20-61]

71
60 [29-85]

14 (52%) / 13 (48%) 10 (43%) / 13 (57%) 31 (48%) / 33 (52%)

Gender (F/M)

AKI
WBC
PMN
APACHE III
Vasoactive med
Severity D0
Severity D7
Sex
Race Caucasian
Coag complication
iNO
Convalescent plasma
CKD
Immunosuppression
Steroid early
HTN
DM
HLD
Race Asian
Age
Mortality
Lymphs
Monos
Eos
Baso
Viral hepatitis
BMI
Race African

100

-1

1×10

1×10

1×10

0

1×10

1×10 2

150

Monocytes (THO/μL)

1×10 3

1×10

1

1×10

40 [22-62]

Age (yr)

200

hsCRP (mg/L)

D-dimer (μg/mL

Ferritin (ng/mL)

1×10 4

90

Age (yr)

Number

C
2

1×10

1×10 5

29

AKI
WBC
PMN
APACHE III
Vasoactive med
Severity D0
Severity D7
Sex
Race Caucasian
Coag complication
iNO
Convalescent plasma
CKD
Immunosuppression
Steroid early
HTN
DM
HLD
Race Asian
Age
Mortality
Lymphs
Monos
Eos
Baso
Viral hepatitis
BMI
Race African

B

COVID-19

44

Gender (F/M)

Flow Study

Recovered Donors
(RD)
COVID-19 Patients
Healthy Donors
(COVID)
(HD)

Recovered

Number

****** * *** * ** **
********************* *
* ****************** *
*********************
* ******************
** ******************
** ****************** *
* *
* ***
** *

*
* ** ** *

**
*
*

*

***

*** *
* ***

*

*
***

*

0.6

*
***

***

*

*

*

*** ** **
*
** ****** *
** ****** **
*
***
** *** *
*
* ***
**

*

*

0

*

−0.2

**
****** *
******
*
*** *
* ***

* **
*

*

***

*

***

*

* *
**

−0.4

*

−0.6
*

***

***

D

CD4 T cells

R2 = 0.018
p = 0.3

15

40

10

20

5

0

0

3

10

30

B cells

20

R2 = 0.0057
p = 0.61

15
10
5
1

10

R2 = 0.36
p = 2.2e-07

100

20

0

CD8 T cells

Non B and T cells

R2 = 0.34
p = 6.8e-07

10
0
3

50
40
30
20
10
0

30

10

30
3
10
WBC (THO/µL)

CD4 T cells
R2 = 0.19
p = 0.0019

30
20

30

CD8 T cells
R2 = 0.17
p = 0.0037

100
80
60
40
20

100
1
10
D-Dimer (ug/mL)

5
0

3

10

30

80

20

B cells

R2 = 0.036 p = 0.18

10

40
100

20
15

60

0
10

R2 = 0.34
p = 5.6e-07

Non B and T cells
100

10

1

2

R2 = 0.17
p = 0.0032

1

10

100

20
15

50
40
30
20
10
0

CD4 T cells
R2 = 0.24 p = 2e-04

R = 0.029
p = 0.39

0

10

30

CD8 T cells
R2 = 0.093 p = 0.026

10
5

30

40

Non B & T cells
,

80
60
40

R2 = 0.2
p = 0.00093

20

CD8 T cells

15

10
0

20

50

Percent of CD4 T cells in Live

Ferritin (ng/mL)

CD4 T cells
R2 = 0.28
p = 0.0047

20

50 100 150

0

0

5
0

10

10

10
0

20

20

B cells
2

30

30

30
10
0
30
10 0
0
30 0
00

0

4

Percent of CD8 T cells in Live

0

B cells

−1

40

30
10
0
30
10 0
0
30 0
00

0

6

30
10
0
30
10 0
0
30 0
00

25

50

% of Live

5

25

H 20

100

50

50

10

****
****

****
****

75

F8

Non B & T cells

CD4:CD8
(% of T cell)

****
****

CD8 T cells

30
10
0
30
10 0
0
30 0
00

% of Live

CD4 T cells

75

15

% of Live

CD20

% of Live

100

G

CD19

CD8

CD19

B cells

20

% of Live

CD4 T cells

CD4

E

−0.8

B cells

CD8 T cells

CD3

0.4
0.2

*

*
***

1
0.8

***

* ****** * **
**
* **
**
* *
* ***

*

*
*** ** **
***
* * *
** ** *

** * *

*
* **
**
*

*

*

*

**
*

R2 = 0.097
p = 0.11

0
50 100 150
0 50 100 150
hsCRP (mg/L)

90
80
70
60
50
40

Non B & Non T cells

R2 = 0.17
p = 0.031

0

50 100 150

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2
A.



B.

HD
RD
COVID

CD8+



CD45RA+CD27+

CD45RA-CD27+

Naive

EM1

CD45RA-CD27-

CM

EM3

EM2

CD45RA+CD27-

EMRA

FSC-W

FSC-W

ï

CD45RA

FSC-W



CD27

3& 

17144

CCR7

CD95

CCR7

ï

C







3& 

Naive

CM

EM1
60

50
60

% CD8

40
20

20

0

E.

10
0

0

G.

COVID
11.1

HD

****

20

20

0

Ki67

tSNE1

HLADR+CD38+

****
****

90

% of Non-Naive

****

30

Non-naive CD8 T cells
RD
COVID

FSC-W

30

F.

*

40

0

2.80

1.94

*

60

20

COVID

CD39+

PD1+

80

40

0

RD

***

tSNE2

% of Non-Naive

0

*

60

10

2.74

60

50

20

2

D.

EMRA

30

4

HD

****
****

EM3
40

6

0

KI67+
90

****

20

10

0

EM2

***

40

30

40

***

% of Non Naive

ï

HD

1.56

1.59

RD

1.23

COVID

16.3

CD45RA

CD27

CCR7

KI67

CD38

HLA-DR

EOMES

TCF1

TBET

CD95

CD39

PD1

CXCR5

ICOS

CX3CR1

COVID

CD38

60
30
0

HLA-DR

I.

FlowSOM Clusters

8
7

4

6
5
1

tSNE2

9
FlowSOM Clusters

10

3

2

tSNE1

J.

80

Cluster 1

40

20

20

0

0

Cluster 6

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0

Cluster 7
***

**

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

2
1
0
ï
ï

Cluster 3
***
****

Cluster 4

Cluster 5

60

60

50

40

40

25

20

20

0

0

0

75

40

60

% in FlowSOM Cluster

Cluster 2

CD
4
EO 5RA
M
CX ES
3
TB CR1
E
IC T
OS
CD
3
HL 8
A
CD -DR
3
KI6 9
CX7
C
CD R5
9
PD 5
1
CD
27
CC
R
TC 7
F1

H.

60
40
20
0

Cluster 8

100
75

Cluster 9
**

*

**

Cluster 10
75

50

50

25

25

0

0

****
****

was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3

CD45RA

60

% CD4

20

0

0

Activated cTfh

Tfh

PD1

CD38

cTfh

HD

30

0

RD
3.08

2.44

4

0

0

*

40
20

D.

COVID
19.4

2.31

****

**

60

8

10

COVID

Activated cTfh

12

20

0

cTfh

*

10

2

0

EMRA

*

*

20

4

10

EM3

**

ICOS

R2 = 0.45
p = 3.7e-10

30

20

FSC-W

0

10

0

Ki67

HLADR+CD38+
****
****

HD

RD

COVID

0.88

0.80

F.

COVID

CD38

0

HLADR

G.

Non-naive CD4 T cells
HD

RD

H.

COVID

80

R2 = 0.26
p = 9.5e-06

10

2

7
5

CXCR5

3

9
6

tSNE2

CCR7

5

0

0

20

40

60

HLADR+CD38+
RI1RQïQDLve CD8 T cells

CC
R
TC 7
F
CD 1
CX27
C
CD R5
9
CD 5
3
Ki. 9
6
PD 7
CD1
HL 38
AIC DR
CDOS
4
CX 5RA
3
EO CR1
M
TB ES
ET

8
4

CD27

FlowSOM Clusters

tSNE2

1

CD45RA

60

I.

FlowSOM Clusters

tSNE1

40

10

20
10

20

KI67+
RI1RQïQDLve CD8 T cells

15

9.39

1.26

0

20

HLADR+CD38+
RI1RQïQDLve CD4 T cells

% of Non-naive

**

6

20

KI67+
****
****

20

% of Non-naive

EM2

30

40

20

EM1
40

60

40

E.

EMRA

CXCR5

CM

*

40

Non-naive

CD45RA+CD27-

EM2

CCR7

Naive

C.

EM3

CM

EM1

FSC-W

CD27

Naive

B.

CD45RA-CD27-

CD45RA-CD27+

CD45RA+CD27+

% of CD4 cTfh

CD4+

KI67+
RI1RQïQDLve CD4 T cells

A.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

2
1
0
ï
ï

tSNE1

KI67

HLA-DR

CD38

CD95

J.

100

PD1

CD39

ICOS

CX3CR1

% in FlowSOM Cluster

75

***
***

50
0

Cluster 5
30
20
0

40

Cluster 2

*

80
60

30
10

20

0

0

50
40
30
20
10
0

Cluster 6
****
****

Cluster 9

EOMES
75

Cluster 3
****
****

40

20

25

10

TBET

Cluster 1

**

25
20
15
10
5
0
40
30

50

20

25

10

0

0

Cluster 4
40
30

****

**

20
10
0

Cluster 7

40
30
20
10
0

Cluster 10
***

Cluster 8

was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4

Non-Switch
Memory

****

75

% Bcell

IgD

Switch Memory

0

C.

RD

10
0

31.1%

KI67

Non-PB

CXCR5
R = 0.00032
p = 0.88

G.

****
****

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0

0

Switched
Memory

PB

40
30
20

****
****

20

20

10

10

0

0

R = 0.019
p = 0.26

***

30

30

40

****
****

**

1

****

100

**

60

CD4 T cells
Naive
*

2

PB

80

E.

40

40

10

Non-Naive

**

**

**

15

6

10

4

5

2

B cells

J.

HD

RD

COVID

PB
% of B cells

PB
% of B cells

20

20

0

5

0

10

20

cTfh
% of Non-naive CD4 T cells

H.

tSNE-1

IgD

CD38

CD27

CD138

CXCR5

KI67

TBET

EOMES

CD95

CD39

anti-SARS-CoV2 IgG
100

ug/mL

ug/mL

100

60

Activated cTfh
% of Tfh

I.

anti-SARS-CoV2 IgM

40

tSNE-2

10

10

10

10

1

20

PB
% of B cells

K.

30

40

0

10

20

PB
% of B cells

30

40

N.

L. 100

1

75

3

HD
RD
COVID

50

25

2

3

7

9
10

tSNE1

1

2

3

EMD Cluster

EMD
Cluster 2

8
6

4

0

EMD
Cluster 1

5

2

tSNE2

Frequency

1

O.

FlowSOM Clusters

CX
3
CC CR1
R
IgD 7
CD
2
CX 1
C
EO R5
ME
CD S
3
CD 9
3
KI6 8
CD 7
2
CD 7
9
CD 5
13
TC 8
F
CD 1
2
TB 0
ET

10

EMD
Cluster 3

P.

80

Cluster 1

60

120

0

0

****
****

****

75

25
0

2
1
0
ï
ï

Cluster 3

40

*

***

100
75

10

25

0

0

150
100
50
0

Cluster 4
***
****

50

20

Cluster 7

50

50

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

30

0

Cluster 6

40

****
****

40

20

80

Cluster 2

80

40

% in FlowSOM Cluster

0

FlowSOM Clusters

1

EMD Cluster

****
****

20

30

30

0

****
****

50
40
30
20
10
0

CXCR5
GMFI (x1000)

HD
RD
COVID

40

Not Switched
Memory

Naive

Non-Naive

30

Switched
Memory

CXCR5
GMFI (x100)

Naive

M.

****
****

50
Ki67+
% of Parent

2.44%

****

0

Naive

COVID

****

40

Not Switched
Memory

10

D.

PB

COVID
38.6%

CD38

IgD

F.

COVID
0.74%

20

COVID

3.36%

3.25%

*

30

0

HD

**

40

10

25

CD27

****

20

50

B.

Switched
Memory

% Bcell

Naive

Not Switched
Memory

Naive

Non-PB

CD27

A.

Cluster 8
****
****

Cluster 5
100
50
0

Cluster 9
75
50

**

**

****

****

Cluster 10
60
40

25

20

0

0

****
****

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.
Figure 5
Non-naive CD4 T cells
D0
D7

Non-naive CD8 T cells
D0
D7

B cells
D0

D7

tSNE2

A.

C.

cTfh

% of CD4 Non-naive

EM2
7.5
5.0

2

2.5

0

D0 D7

0.0

D0 D7

CD4 T cells
HLADR+CD38+

E.

30
10

5

0

D0 D7

% of Non-naive

3.02

FC 0.7

D0 D7

4.02

10
D0 D7

0

D0 D7

B cells
13.4

D0

D7

17.1

BcellPB
38.6

10
BcellCD27+CD38lo
17.8

D0

D7

D0

D7

30

5
10

28.6

2.13

30.8

30.2

20

5

10

D7
5.21

9.39

% Bcell

9

40

6
3

D0

G.

Up (n=12)
CD8 Non-naive
HLA-DR+CD38+ Stable (n=13)
Down (n=2)
CD8 Non-naive
Up (n=10)
KI67+
Stable (n=17)
CD8 Non-naive
Up (n=1)
EMRA
Stable (n=17)
Down (n=9)
CD4 Non-naive
Up (n=16)
HLA-DR+CD38+ Stable (n=6)

D7

20
10

CD38

0

30

0

HLA-DR

D0

H
T
D N
M
C
K
H D
L
Se D
Imx
m
iN un
O
Va osu
pp
C soa
re
o c
ss
C ag tiv
io
on co e
m
St va m e n
er le pl d
AK oi sc ica
d e
W I ea nt tion
rly pl
B
as
PM C
m
a
Ly N
m
M ph
on s
Eo os
Bas
Agso
BMe
AP I
M AC
o H
R rtal E I
ac ity II
R e
a A
R ce fric
ac A a
N e sia n
IH C n
N se au
IH v c
se erL asi
ve W\ an
rit '
y
D
7

% of Non-naive

0

0

10

CD4 Non-naive
KI67+

0

20

20

D7

D0

Down

20

30

% Bcell
D0

30

PB

14.2

PB
40

40

F.

D7

60

10

D0 D7

Switched
Memory
****

% Bcell

% of Non-naive

15

Stable

0

Non-naive CD4 T cells
0.65

Not Switched
Memory
****

20

10

5
0

40
30

15

20

10

D.

20

D0

Up

HLADR+CD38+

*

D7

CD38

% CD4

4

KI67+

% Bcell

tSNE1

B.

CD27

H.

Plasmablasts
Inhaled nitric Early treatment
Vasoactive
by steroids Hyperlipidemia
oxide



**
**




*
*

**
**




ï

*

ï
ï

*

ï

*

CD8 NN HLADR+CD38+

ï

Down (n=5)

Up (n=14)
Stable (n=8)
Down (n=5)

CD4 Non-naive
EMRA

Up (n=5)
Stable (n=7)
Down (n=15)

PB

Up (n=5)
Stable (n=12)
Down (n=10)

*

Vasoactive

*

*
*

*

Inhaled nitric Early treatment
oxide
by steroids Hyperlipidemia

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6

C.

Bcell

CD4

15

40

% of Live

50

10

80$3'LPHQVLRQ

NA
Mortality
Alive
Dead
Unknown

0

ï

ï

0





80$3'LPHQVLRQ

5
4
3


ï

ï

0






B cells




ï
ï
ï
ï
ï

NaivH&;&5

&'OR&;&5

Naive

6ZLWFKHG0HP&;&5

&'ï,J'ï&;&5

3%&'

Total Live B cell

3%&;&5

NaivH&'

Naive EOMES+

NaivH,&26

Naive TBET+

&'ï,J'ï&'

6ZLWFKHG0HP,&26

Switched Mem EOMES+

&'ï,J'ï(20(6

Switched Mem TBET+

PB EOMES+

&RPSRQHQW
PB TBET+
PB EOMES+
Switched Mem TBET+
&'ï,J'ï(20(6
Switched Mem EOMES+
6ZLWFKHG0HP,&26
&'ï,J'ï&'
Naive TBET+
NaivH,&26
Naive EOMES+
NaivH&'
Total Live B cell
&'ï,J'ï&;&5
Naive
3%&;&5
3%&'
6ZLWFKHG0HP&;&5
NaivH&;&5
&'OR&;&5
1RW6ZLWFKHG0HP&;&5

PB TBET+



&RPSRQHQW

/LvH&'

/LvH&'

&'1DLvH(20(6

&'(05$(20(6

&'(0(20(6

&'&0+/$'5&'

&'&0+/$'5&'

&'&0+/$'5

&'7IK+/$'5&'

&'&0,&26

&'&07%(7

&'(0+/$'5&'

&'7IK,&26

&'(0&'

&'(0+/$'5

&'6&0,&26

&'(0,&26

&'1DLve TBET+

&'1DLve CD39+

&RPSRQHQW

&RPSRQHQW
&'1DLve CD39+
&'1DLve TBET+
&'(0,&26
&'6&0,&26
&'(0+/$'5
&'(0&'
&'(0+/$'5&'
&'7IK,&26
&'(0+/$'5&'
&'&07%(7
&'&0,&26
&'7IK+/$'5&'
&'&0+/$'5
&'&0+/$'5&'
&'&0+/$'5&'
&'(0(20(6
&'(05$(20(6
&'1DLvH(20(6
/LvH&'
/LvH&'

&'(0+/$'5&'

Component 1

G.

Level


0.3
0.4

4

&RPSRQHQW

HD
RD



NA
Mortality
Alive
Dead
Unknown

0

ï

Level


0.3


4

Disease
Severity Score



5

3




F.

HD
RD

Disease
Severity Score

ï

T cells

E.

HD
RD



ï

25

0

0

&RPSRQHQW

D.

50

20

10

0

75

30

20

5

nonTnonB

40

30

10

0
ï

CD8

Groups
Mortality
Disease Severity D14
Disease Severity D7
Disease Severity D0
Donor Type
Bcell Naive
CD8 Naive
CD4 Naive
Bcell Not Switched Memory
Bcell Switched Memory
CD8 EM1
CD4EM1
CD8 EMRA
CD4 EMRA
CD8 EM3
CD4 EM3
CD8 CM
CD4 CM
CD4 cTfh
CD8 EM2
CD4 EM2
PB
CD4 HLADR+CD38+
CD4 Ki67+
CD8 HLADR+CD38+
CD8 Ki67+



Based off NIH Ordinal Scale

20

IV

COVID
Severity Score
5
4
3

NA

0

ï

H.


50






ï

50

40

HLA-DR+ % of CD4 EM1

B.

III

Component 1

Mild

Death
Invasive mechanical ventilation
Non-invasive ventilation
Supplemental Oxygen
No supplemental Oxygen; Requires medical care
No supplemental Oxygen; No medical care
Limitation in activities and/or requiring Oxygen
No limitation in activities

II

CD4 T cells % of Live

COVID 1
COVID 2
COVID 3
COVID 4
COVID 5
COVID 6
COVID 7
COVID 8

I

1RW6ZLWFKHG0HP&;&5

Death

Hospitalization

A.

40

30

30

20

20

10

ï
ï

10
0
ï

0

1

2

Component 1

ï

3

ï

4

0

1

2

Component 1

3

4

ï

J.



ï

B cells



ï
ï
ï
ï

Component 1
Component 2

*** ***
**

*

**

*
*

*
*

*

**

*

**

&'OR&'

3%&;&5

3%&'

1RW6ZLWFKHG0HP&;&5

6ZLWFKHG0HP&;&5





ï
ï
ï

100
60

75
40

50

20

25

0
ï

ï

0

Component 2

1

0

ï

** ***
*

NaivH&;&5

&'OR&;&5

3%

&'OR

3%(20(6

3%,&26

&'ï,J'ï,&26

3%&'

&'ï,J'ï(20(6

6ZLWFKHG0HP7%(7

&'ï,J'ï7%(7

1RW6ZLWFKHG0HP7%(7

&'OR7%(7

1RW6ZLWFKHG0HP&'



&'3%



I.


EOMES+ % of EM2 CD8 T cells



&RPSRQHQW
&'ï,J'ï&'
1RW6ZLWFKHG0HP&'
&'OR7%(7
1RW6ZLWFKHG0HP7%(7
&'ï,J'ï7%(7
6ZLWFKHG0HP7%(7
&'ï,J'ï(20(6
3%&'
&'ï,J'ï,&26
3%,&26
3%(20(6
&'OR
3%
&'OR&;&5
NaivH&;&5
6ZLWFKHG0HP&;&5
1RW6ZLWFKHG0HP&;&5
3%&'
3%&;&5
&'OR&'

&'ï,J'ï&'



&RPSRQHQW

&'6&0(20(6

&'(0(20(6

&'(0(20(6

&'&0(20(6

&'(07%(7

&'1DLvH(20(6

&'(05$(20(6

&'(0(20(6

&'(05$(20(6

&'(05$7%(7

&'(0(20(6

&'(07%(7

&'&0(20(6

&'(07%(7

&'(0(20(6

&'(05$&'

&'(05$+/$'5&'

&'(0&'

&'(0+/$'5&'

&'6&0&;&5

&RPSRQHQW

&RPSRQHQW
&'6&0&;&5
&'(0+/$'5&'
&'(0&'
&'(05$+/$'5&'
&'(05$&'
&'(0(20(6
&'(07%(7
&'&0(20(6
&'(07%(7
&'(0(20(6
&'(05$7%(7
&'(05$(20(6
&'(0(20(6
&'(05$(20(6
&'1DLvH(20(6
&'(07%(7
&'&0(20(6
&'(0(20(6
&'(0(20(6
&'6&0(20(6

WB
PM C
N
Ly
m
Mo phs
no
Eo s
s
Ba
s
Se o
x
Ag
e
Va
s
Mo oacti
v
r
HT tality e me
d
N
DM
HL
D
CK
D
Vir
a
Im l hep
m
a
iNO uno titis
su
pp
Dd
res
i
sio
Fe mer
n
rrit
LD in
H
PC
T
AB
O
AB T\S
O
H
AB Typ Dï
O
e
AB Typ a+
O
ea
AB Typ b+
O
e
Co Typ b+
in
e
AP fect o+
io
A
BM CHE n
I
III
Co
a
Co g co
m
n
Ste vale plica
sc
t
r
AK oid e ent ion
I
arl pla
sm
y
a

T cells

Component 2

**

**

K.

IMMUNE SIGNATURE

K.

IMMUNOTYPE 1

!
!

CD4 ACTIVATION AND PROLIFERATION
T-BET+ PB

IMMUNOTYPE 2

!
!
!
!

CD8 EM SUBSETS & EMRA
CD8 ACTIVATION
T-BET+ MEMORY B
CLASSICAL CD138+ AND KI67+ PB

IMMUNOTYPE 3

!

LOW/NO T CELL OR B CELL ACTIVATION

ï

0

Component 2



UMAP
COMPONENT
1

2

!
"

"
!

"

"

