bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Cryptic SARS-CoV2-spike-with-sugar interactions revealed by ‘universal’ saturation
transfer analysis
Charles J. Buchanan2ψ, Ben Gaunt1ψ, Peter J. Harrison3,12, Audrey Le Bas3, Aziz Khan2,
Andrew M. Giltrap1,2, Philip N. Ward3, Maud Dumoux1, Sergio Daga5, Nicola Picchiotti8,9,
Margherita Baldassarri5, Elisa Benetti7, Chiara Fallerini5, Francesca Fava5,6, Annarita
Giliberti5, Panagiotis I. Koukos11, Abirami Lakshminarayanan2, Xiaochao Xue2,4, Georgios
Papadakis2, Lachlan P. Deimel4, Virgínia Casablancas-Antràs2, Timothy D.W. Claridge2,
Alexandre M.J.J Bonvin11, Quentin J. Sattentau4, Simone Furini7, Marco Gori8,10,
Jiangdong Huo1,3, Raymond J. Owens1,3, Alessandra Renieri5,6, GEN-COVID Multicenter
Study, James H. Naismith*1,3, Andrew Baldwin*2, Benjamin G. Davis*1,2
1

The Rosalind Franklin Institute, Harwell Science & Innovation Campus, OX11 0FA, UK

2

Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3TA

3

Division of Structural Biology, University of Oxford, The Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics,

Headington, Oxford, OX3 7BN, UK
4

Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, South Parks Road, Oxford, UK

5

Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy

6

Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy

7

Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy

8

Department of Information Engineering and Mathematics, University of Siena, Italy

9

Department of Mathematics, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy

10

Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S, Maasai

11

Bijvoet Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Netherlands

12

Diamond Light Source, Harwell Science & Innovation Campus, Oxfordshire, UK

ψ These authors contributed equally.
* Correspinding authors: naismith@strubi.ox.ac.uk, andrew.baldwin@chem.ox.ac.uk,
ben.davis@chem.ox.ac.uk

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract
~400 words
Host-expressed proteins on both host-cell and pathogen surfaces are widely exploited by
pathogens, mediating cell entry (and exit) and influencing disease progression and transmission.
This is highlighted by the diverse modes of coronavirus entry into cells and their consequent
differing pathogenicity that is of direct relevance to the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Hostexpressed viral surface proteins bear post-translational modifications such as glycosylation that are
essential for function but can confound or limit certain current biophysical methods used for
dissecting key interactions. Several human coronaviruses attach to host cell-surface N-linked
glycans that include forms of sialic acid. There remains, however, conflicting evidence as to if or
how SARS-associated coronaviruses might use such a mechanism. Here, we show that novel
protein NMR methods allow a complete and comprehensive analysis of the magnetization transfer
caused by interactions between even heavily modified proteins and relevant ligands to generate
quantitative binding data in a general manner. Our method couples direct, objective resonanceidentification via a deconvolution algorithm with quantitative analysis using Bloch-McConnell
equations to obtain interaction parameters (e.g. KD, kEx), which together enable structural
modelling. By using an automated and openly available workflow, this method can be readily
applied in a range of systems. This complete treatment of so-called ‘saturation transfer’ between
protein and ligand now enables a general analysis of solution-phase ligand-protein binding beyond
previously perceived limits of exchange rates, concentration or system – this allows ‘universal’
saturation transfer analysis (uSTA). uSTA proves critical in mapping direct interaction between
natural sialoside sugar ligands and SARS-CoV-2-spike glycoprotein by quantitating ligand signal in
spectral regions otherwise occluded by resonances from mobile spike-protein glycans (that also
include sialosides). Using uSTA, ‘end on’-binding by SARS-CoV-2-spike protein to sialoside glycan
is revealed, which contrasts with an observed ‘extended surface’-binding for previously validated
heparin sugar ligands. Quantitative use of uSTA-derived restraints pinpoints likely binding modes
to an intrinsically disordered region of the N-terminal domain of SARS-CoV-2-spike trimer.
Consistent with this, glycan binding is minimally perturbed by antibodies that neutralize via binding
the ACE2-binding domain (RBD) but strongly disrupted in the B1.1.7 and B1.351 variants-ofconcern that possess hotspot mutations around the identified site. An analysis of beneficial genetic
variances in cohorts of patients from early 2020 suggests a possible model in which A-lineageSARS-CoV-2 may have exploited a specific sialylated-polylactosamine motif found on
tetraantennary human N-linked-glycoproteins in deeper lung. Since cell-surface glycans are widely
relevant to biology and pathology, uSTA can now provide a ready, quantitative method for
widespread analysis of complex, host-derived and post-translationally modified proteins with
putative ligands relevant to disease even in previously confounding complex systems.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Introduction
~800 words
Both SARS-CoV-11-3 and SARS-CoV-24,5 gain entry to host cells through the use of
receptor-binding domains (RBDs) of their respective spike proteins that bind human cell-surface
protein ACE2. Although other coronaviruses that infect humans, including MERS,6 are thought to
use cell-surface sugar sialosides6-10 as initial attachment points prior to binding entry receptor
proteins, the corresponding interaction (despite predictions10,11) has remained unclear for either of
the SARS-causing viruses to date. In preliminary disclosures, contradictory format-dependent
observations have been made12,13 as to whether complex sialosides are or are not bound.12,14
Instead, glycosaminoglycans on proteoglycans, such as heparin, have been suggested as a
primary cooperative glycan attachment point.14,15 Those studies suggesting sugar binding have all,
to date, implicated possible binding sites in or close to the RBD. Nonetheless, the region of the
spike protein that binds sialosides in other coronaviruses, the N-terminal domain (NTD), also
appears in SARS-CoV-2-spike to display a putative glycan binding groove in currently determined
structures (Supplementary Figure S1).4,16,17 The unresolved role of host cell surface sialosides in
this pathogen has been highlighted as an important open question.15 Clear and more detailed
elucidation of sugar-binding by SARS-CoV-2-spike is therefore needed.
The classical ‘saturation transfer difference’ (STD) NMR experiment18 is a widely-used
method to reveal interactions between putative small molecule ligands and proteins19 without the
need for labelling/modification of the ligand or protein, or the need to attach either ligand or protein
to a surface or sensor. In the STD experiment the nuclear spin systems inside a given protein are
moved out of equilibrium using a ‘saturation’ pulse. When a ligand binds to the protein, the two
cross-relax, which results in magnetization being passed from the ligand to the protein
(Supplementary Figure S2,3). In a dynamic binding equilibrium, the two then dissociate and the
cycle repeats during the saturation pulse. Although ‘saturation’ is not itself a measurable
phenomenon, after a pre-set duration, the remaining reduced signal on the ligand is recorded, and
the difference in signal for each resonance (the ‘saturation transfer difference’) from a reference
spectrum indicates that ligand and protein have made contact. This magnetization transfer has
often been colloquially described in terms of modes of ‘saturation transfer’ and, indeed, sometimes
given an interpreted converse direction of ‘saturation transfer’ from protein-to-ligand20 although, in
practice, signal on the ligand is in fact reduced by this process.
Complex, highly-modified protein systems prove difficult to analyze by current STD
methods for several reasons. Firstly, mammalian proteins, or those derived from expression in
mammalian hosts such as SARS-CoV-2-spike, often bear large and highly mobile glycans.
Critically, in the case of glycoproteins that may themselves bind glycans this leads to contributions
to the spectra that overlap with putative ligand resonances thereby obscuring signal. Secondly, the
NMR spectra of glycan ligands are themselves complex, comprising many overlapped resonances
and their multiplets. This can limit the accurate determination of intensities needed in STD. Finally,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

it has long been perceived that STD is only possible under certain kinetic regimes and/or under
certain limiting assumptions about the ligand-to-protein binding equilibrium. This has meant that
certain regimes and systems have been considered inaccessible to STD.
Here, by devising a new, complete formulation of magnetization / ‘saturation’ transfer
(Supplementary Figures S5, S6, S8), we demonstrate that the range of regimes for which the
experiment can be considered reliable is substantially larger than generally assumed
(Supplementary Figure S4). By implementing a rigorous theoretical description of the experiment,
coupled with a computational approach based on a Bayesian deconvolution algorithm to accurately
extract data, it proved possible to reliably and quantitatively determine precise on and off rates and
KDs describing the interaction.
This ‘universal’ saturation transfer analysis (uSTA) then only requires a series of specific
simplified magnetization transfer spectra to be acquired on a protein-only sample, and then with a
range of ligand concentrations (Supplementary Figures S5, S6, S8). The signal intensity from
individual resonances in these spectra are obtained automatically. These are then converted into
on and off rates (and KDs) via complete theoretical treatment. These can also provide per
resonance transfer efficiencies that, when used as constraints to high-level (e.g. HADDOCK)
computational modelling environments provide exact structural models. In this way, uSTA analysis
provides an automated pipeline from raw NMR free induction decay (FID) signals all the way to
protein•ligand structures in a freely available form for the non-expert.
uSTA proves effective in a range of model ligand-protein systems and, by evaluating
multiple glycan ligands, identifies a glycan-binding pocket in the NTD of A-lineage21 SARS-CoV-2
spike as the most potent, and distinct from other SARS-CoV-2-spike interactions. Notably, this
binding is strongly ablated in B1.1.7 and B1.351 lineage21 variants of SARS-CoV-2 spike providing
now an additional, potential molecular explanation for widely different infectivities. These data also
prove to be consistent with observations made through correlative genetic analyses with disease
severity in SARS-CoV-2-positive patients infected in early 2020 with A-lineage21 virus, suggesting a
model by which cell-surface glycans and the modulation of binding by spike-to-sialosides plays a
role in infection, disease progression and disease evolution.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Results
~ 4500 words
Analysis of the Current Limits to ‘STD’
As noted, the classical ‘STD’ experiment cannot be reliably applied to mammalian-derived
proteins to quantitatively survey ligand binding (Supplementary Figures S6,S8). Our theoretical
analyses (Supplementary Figure S4), however, suggested that many common assumptions or
limits that are thought to govern the applicability of the current STD experiment might in fact be
circumvented and we set out to devise a complete treatment that might accomplish this
(Supplementary Figures S5,S6,S8).
First, and perhaps most notably, appreciable transfer of signal can in fact occur for a wider
range of timescales and strength of protein•ligand interaction than previously recognised
(Supplementary Figures S2,S4). The sensitivity of such experiments is strictly independent of
chemical exchange, in that the chemical shift difference between the free and bound ligand
conformation is not in itself relevant to the mechanism of ‘saturation’/magnetization transfer.
Instead, such modes are governed by the number of ligands that come into contact with protein
and the cross relaxation between the two – this does not restrict the saturation transfer to the ‘fast’
exchange regime, as is commonly argued.20
Second, in seeking to precisely quantitate ‘STD’, our analysis also reveals that it is vital to
systematically vary both the protein and the ligand concentration in order to robustly separate the
exchange parameters from concentration-independent relaxation processes (Supplementary
Figure S4).20,22 In this way, forward and backward rates (and KD) can be consistently obtained via
experiments at multiple concentrations coupled with global, complete analyses of cross-relaxation.
Third, as in the case of heavily glycosylated human-derived proteins covered by highly
mobile sugars23 such as SARS-CoV-2 spike, the problems may be greatly exacerbated. The
conformational flexibility of these groups is such that their R2 relaxation rates become extremely
short23-25 leading to greatly confounded difference spectra. In conventional STD experiments, using
for example the ‘group epitope’ method,26 relaxation filters are added at the end of an experiment
where protein signal is hoped to evenly decay away, ideally leaving only signal from ligands.
However, in a protein that contains both mobile modifications as well as mobile disordered regions,
such as SARS-CoV-2-spike, this approach is no longer viable since protein signal remains even
after aggressive use of such relaxation filters (Supplementary Figures S5,S6,S8). Moreover,
relaxation filters inevitably result in reduced overall sensitivity and effects of intra-ligand crossrelaxation via the nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) and ROE inhibit the elucidation of atom-specific
data. In principle, relaxation filters however would not be necessary at all with reliable extraction of
ligand-only signal. We considered that baseline subtraction of residual signal transfer using
reference to samples containing only protein could prove possible if methods for precise resonance
identification could be developed.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Finally, NMR spectra from biological ligands such as sugars can be extremely complex,
containing a large number of multiplets across diverse chemical shifts, each of which can be highly
overlapped. In order to accurately quantify such a spectrum for use in saturation transfer methods,
it is necessary to accurately determine the degree of magnetization (and its change) for each and
all observed proton resonances. This too would be addressed by precise resonance identification
(Supplementary Figures S5,S6,S8).
Design of uSTA based on a Comprehensive Treatment of nOe
In order to completely and quantitatively model signal intensity via uSTA we first considered
full aspects of the appropriate spin physics (Supplementary Figure S2). In brief, initially, the
protein and ligand resonances are at equilibrium. Saturation transfer experiments18 then move spin
systems inside the protein that are within the bandwith of the ‘pulse’ out of equilibrium (via a
‘saturation pulse’, Supplementary Figure S2). These resonances then cross-relax with adjacent
spins in the protein (spin-diffusion) which results in wide-ranging sets of spin systems within the
protein that are effectively out of equilibrium. During this period, previously free ligand binds the
protein and the two molecules cross relax via NOE (magnetization is passed from ligand that is in
equilibrium to protein that is not). Modelling the degree to which signal has passed between the
ligand and protein is complex; transfer depends on the on and off rates (and hence the KD), and
the intrinsic cross-relaxation rates, which depend on the tumbling time of the complex
(Supplementary Figure S4). A model for the complex signal transfer suitable for fitting to data has
therefore not, to our knowledge, been addressed to date. However, these factors would, in
principle, be straightforward to accommodate in a theoretical analysis of the transfer, using fully
comprehensive numerical approaches. In this approach, all relevant interactions could be fully and
hence quantitatively described by modified Bloch-McConnell equations. Indeed, Bloch-McConnell
approaches prove successful in other protein NMR methods involving dynamical processes such
as CEST27,28 or DEST.29 Although it is more parametrically complex to analyze such magnetization
transfer data using this formalism, all that would be required, in principle, is calculation30 of the ratio
of signal loss before and after the saturation pulse for each and every identified resonance as well
as the total concentration of protein and ligand (Supplementary Figure S5, S6, S8). In this way,
the theoretical description of the experiment would allow calculation of the expected transfer of
signal with varying Kex and KD values (see Methods).
Second, as noted above, central to this process is precise resonance identification and
accurate extraction of signal intensity. This was made possible by the design of a Bayesian
computational method31 to detect ligand and protein resonances in the raw spectral data, even
when these are highly complex and/or obscured by competing signals (Supplementary Figure S5,
S6, S8). By this method, spectra could be automatically reduced to a series of constituent peaks
and intensities (Figure 1A,B).32,33 To accomplish this, it was necessary to accurately sum the
intensity from each multiplet that the resonances are split into via scalar coupling. On a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

fundamental mathematical level these resonances in the NMR spectrum can be described as a
convolution between a peak shape and a set of weighted delta functions (a ‘delta matrix’, see
Figure 1A,B and Methods). The uSTA algorithm was therefore also designed to exploit this
relationship to allow automatic detection of resonances and iteratively return a set of unique delta
functions that describe the peak position and intensities; this process is executed simultaneously
for both spectra acquired (pulse on and pulse off) in order to exactly and precisely determine not
only peak positions, but the change in intensity due to magnetization transfer. Pleasingly, the
algorithm successfully returned reconvolved spectra that were close to identical to the original
spectra (Figures 1, 2, 3).
The consequence was not only resonance identification (‘peak-picking’) but also combined
multiplicity-determination and overall signal quantification (the latter being critical to precise uSTA,
see below) (Figure 1B). The results of this algorithm were also demonstrated/tested in the analysis
of overlapped 1D spectra (Figures 1B – see also overlaps in all subsequent analyses), where
the algorithm successfully returned the locations and intensities of the 3 source functions used
to simulate the overlapped spectrum shown. In this way, and in an iterative manner, a ‘near
perfect’ peak shape was supplied to give an accurate representation of the spectrum (Figure 1A).
Moreover, when sufficient peaks are combined, then this process also allows the determination of
multiplicities for a given more complex resonance through the combination of multiple peaks that
may be similarly re-convolved and compared (Figure 1B). The success of the method was
immediately evident from the ‘raw’ (unperturbed/reference) data; raw data and algorithmicallyderived spectra were essentially identical in all cases (see all Figures for such overlaps). The peak
positions identified by the algorithm also mapped exactly to the expected positions of resonances
as established using conventional, manual NMR assignment (see Supporting Methods).
Importantly, in the highlighted context of precise resonance identification this enabled signal
intensity determination in the background of other (possibly confounding) resonances
(Supplementary Figure S5, S6, S8). Moreover, those background resonances themselves could
be similarly analyzed. In this way the two contributing components found in any saturation transfer
experiment (i.e. protein (P) and ligand (L)) were therefore determined with dramatically improved
precision (Figure 1C). With prior knowledge of the peak positions following analysis of the 1D
NMR spectrum, only these positions could then be considered as possibilities for providing signal
in the difference spectrum. This approach thereby provided precision and enabled a detailed
quantitative analysis via uSTA by revealing signals that would be otherwise ‘hidden’.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. Development of the uSTA Method.
A),B): Schematic of process for automatically quantifying the signal intensities in NMR spectra
using deconvolution. The analysis determined the number of peaks that can give rise to the signal,
and return a simulated spectrum by convolving these with a peak shape function. Precise peak
positions and their intensities are returned, which can be attributed to single protons observed in a
spectrum.
C): The STD NMR experiment compares two 1D NMR spectra, where the second involves a
specific saturation pulse that aims to hit the protein but miss the ligand. The uSTA method requires
these two spectra to be analysed in pairs, one that contains the raw signal, and the second that is
the difference between the two. We define the ‘transfer efficiency’ as the fractional signal that has
passed from the ligand to the protein. This measurement allows us to perform a detailed and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

quantitative analysis that enables us to obtain structural, kinetic and thermodynamic information
about the interaction between small molecules and proteins.
D),E), F): Application of uSTA to study the interaction between bovine serum albumin (BSA) and LTryptophan (Trp). In D the 1D 1H-NMR spectrum of the mixture at 200 µM Trp and 5 µM BSA (=
p+L, blue) is dominated by ligand but yet the ligand (L) and protein (P) can still be deconvolved
using universal deconvolution, using a reference obtained from a sample containing protein only.
This reveals contributions from individual multiplets originating from the ligand (yellow) and the
protein only baseline (black) allowing precise recapitulation of the sum (red). In E application of
universal deconvolution to STD spectra with varying concentrations of tryptophan allows uSTA
analysis using ligand resonances identified in D. This, in turn allows signal intensity in the STD
spectrum (p + L STD, light blue) to be determined with high precision. While signal-to-noise in the
STD increases considerably with increasing ligand concentration, the measured atom-specific
transfer efficiencies as determined by uSTA (C) are remarkably similar (D, middle bar charts and
right transfer efficiency ‘maps’), showing that the primary contact between protein and ligand
occurs on the C4a-C7a bridge of the indole aromatic ring.
G): Application of the same uSTA workflow allows precise determination of even weakly binding
sugar ligand trehalose (Glc-α1,1α-Glc) to E. coli trehalose repressor TreR. Again, the uSTA allows
determination of transfer efficiencies with atom-specific precision.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Validation of uSTA’s Precision in Model Systems
To fully establish a working system and test the full potential of the putative uSTA method
(Figure 1C) we chose next to examine an archetypal, yet challenging, ligand-to-protein interaction.
This was implemented in an automated manner through software that governed the uSTA workflow
and that therefore reduced artefacts arising from subjective, manual analyses (Supplementary
Figure S6). The binding of L-tryptophan (Trp) to bovine serum albumin (BSA, Figure 1D) is a longstanding benchmark34 in STD analyses due to the plasticity of this interaction based on supposed
hydrophobicity but also due to a lack of corresponding fully-determined, unambiguous crystal
structures. This is therefore a system that standard NMR/STD methods are perceived20,35 to have
already delineated well. We therefore set out to see if we could improve upon this benchmark
through even more precise analyses via uSTA (Figure 1D-F).
As for a standard STD experiment, 1D 1H-NMR spectra were determined for both ligand
and protein. In addition, mixed spectra (p + L) containing both protein and excess ligand were
determined with and without irradiation at frequencies corresponding to prominent resonance
within the protein. Using the newly designed uSTA protocol, each of these spectra were processed
automatically (see Supplementary Figure S6 and Methods). The deconvolved spectrum for
ligand determined in the presence of protein was matched with high accuracy by uSTA (Figure
1D). Moreover, we were able to achieve highly consistent ‘heat maps’, comprising atom-specific
transfer efficiencies over a range of ligand concentrations that describe the pose of the ligand in
the presence of the protein (Figure 1F see also Supplementary Figures S7,10) – these were
determined not only at a single concentration but a variety of concentrations, even as low as 40 µM
where the ability of uSTA to extract accurate signal proved critical (Figure 1F, left). These maps
used observed proton data mapped onto heteroatoms to enable visual comparison of binding
modes. Maps were strikingly consistent across a range of concentrations suggesting that a single,
consistent pose was adopted by Trp when bound by BSA. The determined ‘maps’ of this pose
suggested much stronger interaction of protein with the heteroaromatic indole side-chain of Trp,
consistent with prior observations and known crystal structures with other hydrophobic ligands.36
They also revealed quantitative subtleties to this interaction, suggesting that a stronger interaction /
‘grip’ is felt by the centre of the indole ring (across bond C4a–C7a) than at its periphery, an
observation that to our knowledge had not been previously possible using standard methods.
Next, having demonstrated high precision of the method in a benchmark system and
greater capability enabled by automated workflow (Supplementary Figure S6,S8) that gives rise
to consequent quantitative analysis, we chose to analyze a more testing system based instead
upon sugar-protein interaction. The trehalose repressor system has been analyzed previously by
STD methods.37 The sugar ligand trehalose binds only weakly in this system and gives rise to a
more challenging ligand-to-protein interaction analysis. Nonetheless, the uSTA workflow again
successfully and rapidly determined atom-specific transfer efficiencies with high precision and
resolution (Figure 1G). It also revealed hotspots of binding around OH-3 and OH-4 in a subtle,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

atom-precise manner with graduation to reduced binding around both pyranoside rings with only
minimal/less binding of the primary hydroxyl (Figure 1G). This p+L interaction also proved
consistent with prior X-ray crystal structural analysis,38 although it should be noted that very low
ligand occupancy in these prior analyses means that uSTA once again revealed greater detail than
could be confidently gained previously.

Determination of KD in a direct manner using uSTA.
In this way, via uSTA, variation of concentration also allowed determination of binding
constants directly from spectra. The transfer of magnetization between ligand and protein here was
quantitatively analyzed using modified Bloch-McConnell equations,39 (see Methods) that account
for intrinsic relaxation, cross-relaxation and protein-ligand binding to directly provide
measurements of equilibrium binding KD and associated kinetics (kex). In the Trp•BSA system this
readily revealed a KD = 32 ± 12 µM and kon = 6300 ± 2300 M-1s-1, koff = 0.20 ± 0.08 s-1, consistent
with a prior determination of KD = 40 µM by isothermal calorimetry.35 It should be noted that this
direct method proved only possible due to the ability of the uSTA method to deconvolute a true
signal with sufficient precision, even at the lower concentrations used despite lower signal (Figure
1F); uSTA through its precision vitally enabled atom-mapping and quantitation for ligand binding
over previous methods. Critically, these values were fully consistent with all observed NMR data
and independently obtained measures of KD.

uSTA allows observation of Cryptic Sugar-Binding with SARS-CoV-2 Spike
As noted above, the binding of glycans as a pre-attachment mode during COVID-19
infection has been predicted, although not yet clearly delineated. Our analysis of the 1D protein 1HNMR spectrum of the purified prefusion-stabilised ectodomain construct4 of intact trimeric SARSCoV-2-spike protein (see Supplementary Figure S7 for preparation details) revealed extensive
glycosylation on the protein with sufficient mobility to generate a strong 1H-NMR resonance in the
region 3.4-4.0 ppm (Figure 2B(i)). Whilst lacking detail, these resonances displayed chemical
shifts consistent with the described mixed patterns of oligomannose, hybrid and complex Nglycosylation found on SARS-CoV-2-spike after human expression.40 As such, these mobile
‘internal’ glycans on SARS-CoV-2-spike contain glycan residues – i.e. sialosides – that are also
potential competing ligands for any putative pre-attachment interactions. Therefore, their presence
in the protein NMR analysis presented clear confounding issues for typical STD analyses. As such,
SARS-CoV-2-spike represented a stringent and important test of the uSTA method.
We evaluated a representative panel of both natural and site-specifically-modified unnatural
sialosides (Figure 2A and Figure 3). Strikingly, whilst use of standard methods provided an
ambiguous assessment (Supplementary Figure S11), use of uSTA immediately revealed binders

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

and non-binders (Figure 3 and Supplementary Figures S8,S10,S11 and Supplementary Table
S7).
First, the simplest sialioside, N-acetyl-neuraminic acid (1), was tested as a mixture of its
mutarotating anomers (1α ⇔ 1β). When analyzed using uSTA, these revealed (Figure 4 and
Supplementary Table S7 and Supplementary Figures S11) low affinity but clear interactions by
1α as a ligand, mediated primarily by NHAc-5, but no measurable interactions by 1β. It should be
noted that the detection of selective α-anomer interaction, despite the great dominance of the βanomer in solution, provided yet another further demonstration of the precision of the uSTA
method (Figure 4 and 5A and Supplementary Figure S11). Together these data not only
unambiguously confirmed interaction of SARS-CoV-2-spike with the smallest natural sialoside
sugar but also revealed striking configurational selectivity (α over β) by the protein. This αselectivity is notably consistent with the near-exclusive occurrence of α-sialosides on host cell
surfaces as their α- but not β-linked conjugates (Figure 4).
Next, having confirmed simple, selective monosaccharide α-sialoside binding we explored
extended, α-sialoside ligands that might give further insight into natural endogenous human sugar
ligands that could be bound by SARS-CoV-2, as well as unnatural variants that could potentially
modulate and even interrupt such binding. First, oligosaccharides of α-sialic acid were explored.
Sialosides are often found appended to galactosyl (Gal/GalNAc) residues in either α2,3- (2) linked
or α2,6- linked form (3); both were tested (Figure 3A(i,ii)). Both exhibited consistent, more
extended binding surfaces with greater potential for protein interaction. Qualitatively this suggested
a stronger binding affinity (see below for quantitative analysis). Common features of both binding
modes were observed: as for monosaccharide 1, NHAc-5 acetamide group at C5 of the terminal
sialic acid residues (Sia) proved to be a key binding hotspot for both 2 and 3. Differences between
2 and 3 were also observed: the α2,6-trisaccharide (3) system displayed a more extended binding
face yet with less intense binding hot-spots (Figure 3A, and corresponding lower overall
interaction, see below) engaging additionally the side-chain glycerol moiety (C7-C9) of the terminal
Sia acid as the OH-4 C4 hydroxyl of the galactosyl (Gal) residue. The interaction with α2,3trisaccharide (2) was tighter (see below) and more specific to NHAc-5 of the Sia.
The extended interaction displayed by the C7-C9 Sia side-chain in some of these natural
ligands caused us to consider whether modification of this side-chain might engage further and/or
alternative binding modes. To this end, we also constructed modified unnatural sialosides to
explore this possibility (4-6, Figure 2A). In the simplest variant we replaced the OH-9 hydroxyl
group of sialic acid Sia to generate deoxygenated azide 4; this too interacted in an anomer-specific
manner with only the α-variant displaying interaction, despite again the dominance of the β-anomer
in solution, as for 1. The atom-specific map of 4 (Figure 4C and Supplementary Table S7)
suggested that some interaction was lost through the removal of OH-9 (consistent also with binding
analysis – see below). Notably, however, when C9 was instead extended by a biphenyl-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

carboxamide (BPC) moiety to generate 5, a strong additional interaction was generated with this
introduced hydrophobic portion (Figure 2B,C,D and Figure 3B,C). It is particularly noteworthy that
uSTA allowed exquisite detail to be determined in this unusual hybrid ligand (Figure 2B,C,D) that
could not have been determined using standard methods, as these would have been dominated
simply by the most potent hydrophobic interaction (with ligand sugar protons lost within
glycoprotein sugar responses). In this way, we could demonstrate that such modified ligands bind
through all portions of their surfaces but a distinct difference of interaction is observed in hybrid
ligands: a greater contact was seen with the hydrophobic moiety than with the carbohydrate
moiety. Such is the precision of uSTA, graded binding even within these two portions of the ligand
was also determined (see atom-specific scoring, Figure 2C,D). For example in 5, greatest binding
for the hydrophobic moiety was seen at the tip with lowering, graduated binding towards the amide
junction at C9. In the sugar portion, despite a quite different contact type, individual gradation was
also observed: the C7-C9 sidechain bound most strongly but a clear significant contribution from
the NHAc-5 group can also be discerned (Figure 2C,D). Finally, a variant 6 that is a hybrid with
both hydrophobic BPC-moiety and extended unnatural trisaccharide was also synthetically
generated (Supplementary Figure S12) to test the relative dominance of the two most potent
moieties identified by uSTA. Interestingly, significantly extended binding interfaces were seen in
both, suggesting a generated synergy in binding. In this way, uSTA rapidly allowed the mapping
and iterative design of natural and unnatural sugar ligands for SARS-CoV-2-spike.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. uSTA Reveals Interaction of Sialosides with SARS-CoV-2-spike Protein
A): A panel of natural, unnatural and hybrid variant sialoside sugars 1-6 was used to probe
interaction between sialic acid moieties and spike. Unnatural variations (4-6, green) allowed
mapping of C7-C9 side-chain interactions in the sialoside whilst use of extended sugars probed
differing cell-surface glycan structures.
B): Application of the uSTA workflow (Supplementary Figure S6) to SARS-CoV-2-spike protein
(shown in detail for 5, see also Figure 3) i) The 1D 1H-NMR of SARS-CoV-2-spike protein shows
considerable signal in the glycan-associated region despite protein size, indicative of mobile
internal glycans in spike protein. This effectively masks traditional analyses, as without careful
subtraction of the protein’s contributions to the spectrum (Supplementary Figure S8), the ligand
cannot be effectively studied. The uSTA process of: ii) ligand peak assignment and deconvolution
→ iii) p + L peak assignment and deconvolution → iv) application to p + L STD yields precise
atom-specific transfer efficiencies (Supplementary Figure S6). Note how in ii) individual multiplet
components, have been assigned (yellow); the back-calculated deconvolved spectrum (red) is an
extremely close match for the raw data (purple). In iii) the spectrum is a complex superposition of
the ligand spectrum (and protein only yet uSTA again accurately deconvolves the spectrum
revealing the contribution of protein only (black) and the ligand peaks (yellow). Using these data,
uSTA analysis of the STD spectrum in iv) pinpoints ligand peaks and signal intensities.
C),D): Using these intensities, atom-specific transfer efficiencies can be determined with high
precision and reveal in hybrid 5 the details of both the unnatural BPC moiety and the natural sialicacid moiety. Although the aromatic BPC dominates the interaction for the unnatural ligand 5, the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

subtleties of the associated sugar contribution in this ligand can nonetheless be determined
(Supplementary Figure S5,S6).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Observation of Sialoside Binding to SARS-CoV-2-spike Protein via uSTA.
Application of the uSTA workflow (Supplementary Figure S6) reveals atom-specific binding
modes to spike protein for both natural e.g. sialoside trisaccharides Siaα2,3Galβ1,4Glc (A) and
Siaα2,6Galβ1,4Glc (B) and unnatural hybrid variants 9-BPC-Sia (C) and 9-BPCSiaα2,6Galβ1,4Glc (D). uSTA deconvolution of the 1D spectrum of the p + L mixture (green),
together with the STD spectrum (blue) allows atom- specific transfer efficiencies to be calculated,
and rendered onto the molecules as ‘maps’ (Supplementary Figure S6,S8). Notably, even when
protein preparations contain protein reagents such as glycerol (*), this could be effectively included
in the analysis and subtracted.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Simultaneous observation of binding even within dominated equilibria using uSTA
In the spectra of sialic acid (1) and azido-sialic acid (4), both α and β anomeric forms could be
readily identified, with the overall population being dominated by the β form (94 and 95%,
respectively). Even despite this strong population difference, application of the uSTA method
following assignment of resonances from the two forms allowed determination of binding surfaces
simultaneously. Spike shows strong binding preference for the α anomers, as revealed by surfaces
(A, C) even though its population is minor overall; both surfaces were highly similar for these two
simpler monosaccharides but closely resemble those of extended trisaccharides 2 and 3 (Figure
3). While the β form is dominant in terms of population and overall contribution to the 1D NMR
spectra, its ability to bind spike (B, D), and hence its proportional contribution to the STD spectrum,
was found to be significantly lower than the α form.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Determination of binding potency of sialosides to spike protein.
Through the use of uSTA and complementary methods we also sought to assess the
relative binding affinity of spike trimer to our ligands. First, the uSTA method allowed a rapid and
ready comparison of the relative binding efficiencies of all of the sialosides at pinpointed ligand
sites (Figure 5B). These revealed that when judged by the level of engagement of the tip-sugar
sialoside NHAc-5 group, the natural α2,3-trisaccharide 2 and the hybrid, unnatural
monosaccharide 5 were the most potent ‘end-on’ binders. They also confirmed the conclusions
drawn from the qualitative analysis (see above): that loss of the OH-9 (to form azide in 4) was
detrimental to this binding, whereas extension through the BPC moiety proved enhancing (in both
6 > 3 and 5 >> 1). Interestingly, the hybrid BPC-trisaccharide 6 displayed apparently lower relative
binding affinity than the simple hybrid monosaccharide 5.
Next, using variable concentrations of the most potent natural ligands, α2,3-trisaccharide 2
[6µM spike, 2 at 12µM, 60µM, 1mM and 2mM excitation at 5.3 ppm] and variable concentrations of
spike protein we used the uSTA method to directly determine an affinity constant (Figure 5C), KD =
32 ± 12 µM with kon = 630 ± 230 M-1s-1, koff = 0.08 s-1. We also probed binding in a different mode
by measuring the affinity of spike trimer to the α2,3-trisaccharide 2 when displayed in an
unorganized form on a modified surface (see Supplementary Figure S13) using surface plasmon
resonance analysis; the latter generated a corresponding KD = 23 ± 6 µM (kon = 1030 M-1s-1).
These similar determined values for either single soluble glycan binding to spike protein or when
displayed on a surface suggests combined avidity for attachment through multivalency41,42 might
require proper organization on a cell-surface to prove physiologically relevant in infection (see also
Discussion).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. uSTA Reveals Selectivity Modes for SARS-CoV-2-spike Protein Sugar-Binding. A):
uSTA reveals strong alpha over beta selectivity in sialosides for 1 and 4. Ligand 1 exists in a
mutarotating mixture of configurational isomers. Despite the strong concentration dominance of 1β
> 1α (top) in this equilibrium, uSTA shows the strong selective binding of 1α > 1β (bottom). See
also Figure 4.
B): Normalized uSTA transfer efficiencies of the NAc methyl protons can be determined for each
ligand studied here. We see not only the same selectivity for Siaα > Siaβ for 1 and 4, but also the
enhancing effect of unnatural modification BPC (6 > 3 and 5 >> 1). The specific uSTA value for 5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

and 6 for the biphenylcarboxamide (BPC) moiety ring is approximately 10x that of the NAc, and we
see no preference for α / β forms, raising the possibility that the BPC may be interacting with the
protein via a different site (see also Discussion). Errors were determined through a boot-strapping
procedure where mixing times were sampled with replacement, allowing for the construction of
histogram of values in the various parameters that robustly reflect their fitting errors.
2mM overall concentration of Siaalpha is 100 µM. The observed transfer efficiency of Sia αanomer at this concentration is similar to that observed for 2,3-SiaLac at 100 µM suggesting similar
KDs. By contrast, the Sia β-anomer is 1.9mM, and at this concentration its transfer efficiency is
extremely small.
C): Quantitative analysis of the STD build up curves using a modified set of Bloch-McConnell
equations that account for binding and cross relaxation allow us to determine thermodynamic and
kinetic parameters that describe the interaction, KD, kon, and koff. The values obtain are indicated,
where the errors come from a boot-strapping procedure. BSA•Trp system (left); SARS-CoV-2•2
system (right).
D): Coupling uSTA with an integrative modelling approach such as HADDOCK (High Ambiguity
Driven DOCKing)43,44 allows generation and, by quantitative scoring against the experimental uSTA
data, selection of models that provide atomistic insights into the binding of sugars to the SARSCoV-2-spike protein. as shown here by superposition of uSTA ‘map’ onto cluster. uSTA mapping
the interaction between SARS-CoV- 2-spike (based on PDB ID PDB 7c2l, 17) with ligands 1a, 2 and
3 identifies the NHAc-5 methyl group of the tip sialic acid residue making the strongest interaction
with the protein. By filtering HADDOCK models against this information, we obtain structural
models that that describe the interaction between ligand and protein (Supplementary Figure
S14). Most strikingly, we see the same pattern of interactions between protein and sialic acid
moiety in each case, where the NAc methyl pocket is described by F79, L77, L18 and R78,
supported by S255. Additionally, the OH-2 of the galactosyl residue and the COO--1 carboxylate of
the sialic acid both interact with R21, which is only possible for the α form, not the β form, thus
explaining the selectivity. Although sequence and structural homology are low (Supplementary
Figure S1), MERS-spike protein also appears to possess a corresponding NHAc-binding pocket
characterized by an aromatic (F39)–hydrogen-bonding (D36)–hydrophobic (I132) triad.9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

uSTA Allows delineation of spike sugar-binding site.
The uSTA method also allowed use of atom-specific data describing binding to be
combined with detailed modelling algorithms. uSTA analyses of ligands 1-4 identified a series of
atoms as consistently providing the highest transfer efficiencies, most notably the acetamide
methyl group of the sialic acid residue in all. We sought to combine our measurements with the
information-driven HADDOCK (High Ambiguity Driven DOCKing) method as an example a highly
flexible, information-driven docking approach43,44 capable of creating detailed atomistic models for
binding interactions. Having identified likely sets of interacting residues using sequence alignment
(Supplementary Figure S1) and structural homology of SARS-CoV-2-spike to other coronavirus
spikes (PDB ID 6q06, ref. 9), models were generated with HADDOCK for 1α (the alpha anomer of
sialic acid), and the two natural trisaccharides 2 , 3. The resulting ensembles of models were
quantitatively scored against the uSTA data (Supplementary Figure S14). In each case, a single
narrow cluster of poses emerged (Figure 5D) where the acetamide NHAc methyl group of the
sialic acid moiety is held within a pocket delineated by a SARS-CoV-2-spike sidechain triad of F79,
T259 and L18 that appear to mediate aromatic, carbonyl-hydrogen-bonding and hydrophobic
interactions, respectively. Additionally, the OH-2 of the galactosyl residue and the COO--1
carboxylate of the sialic acid are predicted to both interact with R21 providing a structural rationale
for why the α anomer binds but the β anomer does not. Notably, C1 carboxylate is a known, key
recognition point in certain Sia-specific lectins.45 Interestingly, although the sequence and
structural homology to MERS coronavirus spike protein in this region is seemingly low, the MERSspike protein possesses a corresponding NHAc-binding pocket characterized by an aromatic
(F39), hydrogen-bonding (D36) and hydrophobic (I132) triad.9 uSTA analysis therefore unlocked
relevant distance restraints that revealed consistent ligand poses in a set of model complexes that
now pinpoints a glycan binding pocket in the NTD. Notably, this site corresponds to the sites of
reported hotspot mutations in SARS-CoV-2 variants (see below).
uSTA allows comparison of SARS-CoV-2 glycan attachment mechanism and evolution.
Several suggested SARS-CoV-2 glycan attachment mechanisms have to date focused on
the role of spike RBD.13,15 First, we compared the relative potency of the sialoside binding identified
here to previously identified15 binding of heparin motifs (Figure 6A,B). Heparin tetrasaccharides 7
and 8 (Figure 6A) were selected to allow a near residue-for-residue comparison with our identified
trisaccharide (and extended trisaccharide) motifs; 7 and 8 differ from each other only at a single
glycan residue (residue 2) site. Unlike the ‘end-on’ binding of sialosides, uSTA revealed an
extended non-localized binding interface (Figure 6B).
Next, we examined the possible evolution of sialoside binding over emerging lineages of
SARS-CoV-2 that have been observed to date.21 Two notable ‘variants of concern’ B1.1.7 (socalled Kent) and B1.351 (so-called South African) have seen some of the highest levels of
enhanced transmission and/or infectivity in current phases of the pandemic. Strikingly, structural

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

analysis revealed that key mutational hotspots in these variants sit around or in the glycan binding
pocket identified by uSTA (Figure 6C). When corresponding B1.1.7 and B.1.351 spike-protein
variants were probed by uSTA, these displayed dramatically ablated binding towards sialoside 2
as compared to A-lineage spike (Figure 6D and Supplementary Figure S15).
Finally, to explore the possible role of sialoside binding in relation to ACE2 binding we also
used uSTA to test the effect upon binding in the presence of a known potent neutralising antibody
of ACE2•spike binding, C5 (Figure 6D,E and Supplementary Figure S16).46 Notably, assessment
of binding to sialoside 2 in the presence and absence of antibody at a concentration sufficient to
saturate the RBD led to only slight reduction in binding. Uniformly modulated atomic transfer
efficiencies were consistent with a maintained glycan binding pocket with undisrupted topology and
mode of binding. This suggested that sialoside binding is a mechanism that operates in addition to
and potentially cooperatively with ACE2 binding in SARS-CoV-2. It also confirmed that the primary
sialoside glycan binding site SARS-CoV-2-spike is distinct from the RBD.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. Comparison of SARS-CoV-2 glycan attachment mechanism and evolution.
A)i, B)i The binding of two heparin-derived tetrasaccharides (7, 8) to A-lineage SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein is demonstrated through a protein and ligand STD response and a corresponding lack of
ligand only STD response A)iii, B)iii. Atom specific bindings are shown A)ii, B)ii. The
assignments are shown in green, with a * indicating overlapped, ambiguous assignments.

C): Mutations to the glycan binding pocket identified by uSTA are found in the B.1.351
(blue) and B.1.1.7 (red) lineage variants of SARS-CoV-2-spike.
D): These ablated binding of the 2,3-alpha sialyllactoside 2 as measured by the transfer
efficiency of the NAc protons.
E,F): When uSTA was used in the presence of the potent neutralizing nanobody C5 to
probe A-lineage SARS-CoV-2 spike (spike (E i), nanobody-plus-spike (E ii)) essentially
similar binding pattern was observed with uniformly modulated the atomic transfer
efficiencies (F).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Identification of sialoside trisaccharide as a putative ligand in A-lineage SARS-CoV-2 correlates
with genetic variation in clinical samples.
The identification of a putative binding site glycan in sialoside trisaccharide 2 as a functional
ligand and hence potential attachment point for SARS-CoV-2 highlights a sugar motif (and related
structures) found commonly on cell surfaces (attached both as glycolipid and glycoprotein glycoconjugates). This, in turn, suggested that there may be impact of glycosylation function in humans
upon infection by SARS-CoV-2 and hence in the presentation and pathology of COVID19 disease.
Strikingly, analysis following whole exome sequencing of an early 2020 cohort of 533 COVID-19positive patients (see Supplementary Table S1) identified two glycan-associated genes within the
top five most-influential genes upon disease severity. Specifically, recursive feature elimination
applied to a Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO)-based47 logistic regression
model identified: LGALS3BP (4th out of >18000 analyzed genes) and B3GNT8 (5th out of >18000)
(Figure 7A and Supplementary Figure S17). Rare variants in these two genes were beneficially
associated with less severe disease outcome (Figure 6B,C, see also Supplementary Tables S26 for specific B3GNT8 and LGALS3BP genetic variants, B3GNT8 chi-squared five categories,
B3GNT8 chi-squared 2x2, LGALS3BP chi-squared five categories, LGALS3BP chi-squared 2x2,
respectively).
LGALS3BP encodes for a secreted protein Galectin-3-binding-protein (Gal-3-BP, also
known as Mac-2-BP) that is an apparent partner and blocker of a specific member (Gal-3) of the
galectin class of carbohydrate-binding proteins.48 Galectins are soluble, typically secreted and
implicated in a wide-range of cellular functions.49 Notably Gal-3 binds the so-called poly-N-acetyllactosamine [polyLacNAc or (Gal-GlcNAc)n] chain-extension variants found in tetraantennary Nlinked glycoproteins (Figure 7D), including those displaying sialyl-Gal-GlcNAc motifs, close
analogues of our discovered ligands for SARS-CoV-2 spike 2 and 3.50,51 Notably, rare variants in
LGALS3BP were present in in 9/114 (~8%) of a/pauci-symptomatic subjects or mildly-affected
patients compared to 8/419 (< 2%) of the remaining 419 patients who required more intensive
care: oxygen support, CPAP/BiPAP or intubation; none of the 69 most seriously affected patients
(intubated) carried variants of LGALS3BP (Figure 7B). Intact LGALS3BP-gene-product Gal-3-BP
therefore appears correlated with more severe COVID19 outcome.
The other implicated gene, B3GNT8 encodes for a protein glycosyltransferase β-1,3-Nacetyl-glucosaminyltransferase-8 (GlcNAcT8 or β3GnT8) that is responsible for the anchor-point
initiation of poly-N-acetyl-lactosamine (polyLacNAc) synthesis from tetraantennary N-linked
glycoproteins (Figure 7D).52 Again, rare variants in B3GNT8 were present in in 11/114 (~10%) of
a/pauci-symptomatic subjects or mildly-affected patients compared to 10/419 (~2%) of the
remaining 419 patients who required more intensive care (Figure 7C).
Finally, to test the possible roles of sialosides in mediating viral entry suggested by this
model (Figure 7D), we tested the consequences of reducing cell-surface sialosides. Consistent
with this model, when ACE-2-expressing mammalian (MDCK) cells were treated with a broad-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

activity sialidase (Arthrobacter ureafaciens neuraminidase, see Methods), the consequent uptake
of pseudovirus displaying SARS-CoV-2-lineage-A-spike and capable of expressing luciferase
reporter was significantly reduced (Figure 7E).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

A

B

B

C

C

p.S186F

p.W387X

(M 70)

p.R514P

p.S222L

p.C9S

(M 82)

p.Q465X

(M 58)

p.P189L

(M 88)

p.V534I

(M 58)

69

(M 67)

132

p.D87E

(M 57)

(M 48)

p.I486L

(M 42)

(M 36)

p.W108S

p.T419R

(M 71)

p.S186F x4 p.R204H
(F 80)

p.F70L

(F 47)

(M 51)

217

(M 61; F 72; M 91; M 60)

G
0

125

25

260

p.D102N
(M 31)

p.C93R

600

360

p.T327I
(M 32)

p.Y366X
(F 70)

p.R436P
(F 33)

(F 46)

p.G505S
(F 25)
p.L548Q
(M 41)

0 10

20

170

p.C9S
(M 67)

360

x2
p.E28K p.F70L
(M 65; F 25)
(M 54)

p.R315H

p.D549A

(M 70)

75

(F 47)

(F 82)

p.S411L

420

p.E24K
(F 48)

p.E28K
(M 37)

p.C94Lfs*14
(M 59)

p.S186F x2 p.A191V
(F 25; F 58)

(F 48)

Figure 7. Analyses of Early 2020 SARS-CoV-2-positive Patients Reveals Glycan-Associated
Genes Suggesting a Model of Glycan Interaction Consistent with uSTA Observations of
Sialoside Binding in Lineage-A SARS-CoV-2.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

A): Histogram of the LASSO-based Logistic Regression weightings after Recursive Feature
Elimination analysis of 533 SARS-CoV-2-positive patients. Positive weights score susceptible
response of gene variance to COVID19 disease, whereas negative weights confer protective
action through variance. Variation in glycan-associated genes B3GNT8 and LGALS3BP score 2nd
and 3rd out of all (>18000) genes as the most protective, respectively (highlighted red).
B),C): Distribution of rare variants in B3GNT8 and LGALS3BP. B) Rare beneficial mutations
distributed along the Gal-3-BP protein product of LGALS3BP, divided into the Scavenger Receptor
Cysteine-Rich (SRCR)-domain (light blue) and the BACK domain (light orange). C) Rare
beneficial mutations distribution along the βGlcNAcT8 protein product of B3GNT8 divided into the
predicted transmembrane (TM) domain (light blue) and glycosyltransferase catalytic (GT) domain
(light orange) which catalyzes the transfer of polyLacNAc-initiating GlcNAc onto tetraantennary Nlinked glycoproteins (see also D). The different colours of the mutation bands (top to bottom) refer
to the severity grading of the COVID19-postive patients who carried that specific mutation (red:
Hospitalized intubated; orange: Hospitalized CPAP/BiPAP; pink: Hospitalized Oxygen Support;
light blue: Hospitalized w/o Oxygen Support; blue: Not hospitalized a/paucisymptomatic).
D): A proposed coherent model consistent with observation of implicated B3GNT8 and LGALS3BP
genes and observed Sia-Gal-Glc trisaccharide as ligand by uSTA. Strikingly, although
independently identified, B3GNT8 and LGALS3BP produce gene products βGlcNAcT8 and Gal-3BP, respectively, that manipulate and/or engage with processes associated with a common
polyLacNAc-extended chain motif found on tetraantennary N-linked glycoproteins. A model
emerges in which any associated loss-of-function from variance leads either to loss of polyLacNAcextended chain (due to loss of initiation by βGlcNAcT8) or enhanced sequestration of by Gal-3
polyLacNAc-extended chain (which is antagonized by Gal-3-BP). Both, would potentially lead to
reduced access of virus spike to uSTA-identified motifs. E): ACE-2-expressing MDCK cells were
pre-treated with sialidase before a 4 h pulse with SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus. After 48 h,
pseudoviral entry was evaluated via luciferase reporter assay. Data are represented as the fitted
logarithmic curve ± the 95% confidence intervals (n = 3).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Discussion
~800 words
Prior analyses of sugar interaction with coronavirus spike proteins have generated varied
observations and conclusions as to possible mechanisms. These have largely employed more
traditional, surface-display biophysical methods for analyzing interaction (e.g. ‘glycochip’/glycanarray binding analyses). We have devised a protein saturation transfer difference method (uSTA)
for assessing ligand•protein binding applied here to SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (Supplementary
Figures S5,S6). Such mammal-derived pathogen proteins are typically a challenging problem in
NMR analysis, complicated by the presence and signal arising from mobile, protein-linked glycans,
However, uSTA has effectively and robustly identified intermolecular sugar spike interactions. Our
workflow does not require the use of relaxation filters and is automated by freely distributed
software. With these data we have derived structural models for three biologically relevant ligands
that reveal the sialic acid to be in a consistent binding pose in each.
Intriguingly we find a clear link between our data and genetic analyses in patients that have
been correlated with severity of disease. This suggests not only that cell-surface glycans and the
modulation of binding to spike-to-sialosides may have played a role in infection and disease
progression but also now identifies two glycan-associated genes. Genetic variations of LGALS3BP
(which produces galectin-blocker Gal-3-BP) and B3GNT8 (which produces glycosyltransferase
β3GnT8) that reduce corresponding gene products (Gal-3-BP and β3GnT8, respectively) prove
beneficial. Strikingly, despite their independent identification here, both Gal-3-BP and β3GnT8
interact around a common glycan motif: the polyLacNAc chain-extension variants found in
tetraantennary N-linked glycoproteins (Figure 7D). The simplest explanation is thus that
modulation of such glycoproteins have played a role in infection and disease progression.
Consistent with the sialoside ligands we identify here, these glycoproteins contain Sia-Gal-GlcNAc
motifs within N-linked-polyLacNAc-chains. Notably, these motifs have recently been identified in
the deeper human lung.53
These data lead us to suggest that A-lineage SARS-CoV-2 virus may have exploited
glycan-mediated attachment to host cells (Figure 7D) using N-linked-polyLacNAc-chains as a
foothold. Reduction of Gal-3-BP function would allow its target, the lectin Gal-3, to bind more
effectively to N-linked-polyLacNAc-chains, thereby competing with SARS-CoV-2 virus. Similarly,
loss of β3GnT8 function would ablate the production of foothold N-linked-polyLacNAc-chains
directly denying the virus a foothold. We cannot exclude other possible mechanisms including, for
example, the role of N-linked-polyLacNAc-chains in T-cell regulation.54 Notably, this analysis of the
influence of genetic variation upon susceptibility to virus was confined to ‘first wave’ patients
infected with A-lineage SARS-CoV-2. Our discovery here also that in B-lineage virus such binding
to certain sialosides may be ablated further highlights the dynamic role that sugar binding may play
in virus evolution and may be linked, as was previously suggested for H5N1 influenza A virus, to
changing sugar preference during zoonotic transitions.55

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Analyses of the glycosylation of spike protein itself suggests at least 66 N-linked
glycosylation sites on Asn are occupied in the complete spike trimer40 with some O-glycosylation.
This glycosylation, at least as determined from mammalian cell expression, appears to be of a
variety of types including oligomannose, hybrid and complex type – the latter two displaying tip
sialic acid residues. Comparison of the glycosylation states of viral surfaces reveals56 that SARSCoV-2 is more lightly glycosylated than other viruses suggesting, at least in part, that an evolved
role of these glycans is not to shield the virus for immune evasion, unlike other viruses such as
heavily glycosylated HIV-1. Recently, advanced simulations have suggested a role of N-glycans in
altering the conformational dynamics of the RBD with functional consequence.57 Moreover, the
glycans in the N-terminal region of spike protein are located on highly mobile loops, and it is likely
that the sugars are also themselves dynamic and flexible with potential for various additional
modes of interaction with not only receptors but potentially even with spike protein itself intramolecularly. This raises the intriguing possibility that in SARS-CoV-2 such a mechanism could
modulate inter-molecular glycan attachment affinity through intra-molecular use of its own ‘internal
glycans’ (also sialosides) as competitors. If so, any such interaction may have therefore further
contributed to the cryptic nature of sialoside binding by SARS-CoV-2. Notably, titration of
trisaccharide 2 into spike trimer had no measurable effect upon thermal denaturation, suggesting
that any binding does not grossly affect protein stability or structure (Supplementary Figure S18).
More generally, uSTA now provides a comprehensive treatment of saturation transfer that
is a ready method for not only identifying ligands and their binding parameters but that can also be
linked to identifying binding sites even in relevant heavily-modified proteins. It could also potentially
be used to similarly restrain structure calculation refinements where atomic resolution in the vicinity
of a ligand is not possible. Overall, therefore, the uSTA method provides a new pipeline to provide,
with minimal user input, multi-faceted analysis of ligand engagement even for previously
challenging protein systems, such as those exploited by pathogens.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Author Contributions
BG, CJB, TDWC and AJB ran NMR experiments. Under the supervision of AJB, CJB developed
the underlying deconvolution algorithm, UnidecNMR. AJB developed the modified BlochMcConnell KD analysis method. CJB performed the processing, uSTA applications and
surrounding analysis. CJB and AK assigned key uSTA spectra. PH, ALB purified spike protein and
prepared samples for NMR analysis; PH and ALB conducted thermal denaturation assays. AK
synthesized 9-BPC-Neu5Ac, expressed and purified NmCSS and Pd2,6ST, assigned proton peaks
in 1H NMR spectra of sialosides, designed TOCSY NMR experiments and performed the SPR
experiments. AMG and AK designed and synthesized 9-BPC-Sia2,6Lac, AMG generated reagents
for SPR studies. AK, AMG and AJB analysed SPR data. JH cloned spike-BAP; PW and MD
expressed spike protein. AL aided design of protein-ligand NMR experiments, prepared samples
and contributed to data analysis. AR is coordinating the GEN-COVID Consortium and supervised
the genotype-phenotype correlation of glycosylation-associated genes. AG performed WES
experiments. EB performed WES alignment and joint call which was supervised by SF. NP
performed logistic regression analysis which was supervised by MG. MB and FF collected and
supervised the collection of clinical data. CF and SD perform specific analysis on B3GNT8 and
LGALS3BP genes. LPD and QJS assisted with experimental design and conducted viral
pseudotype assays. AMJJB and PIK performed the structural modelling of the SARS-CoV-2spike•sugar interactions. AJB and AMJJB scored these against the NMR data to obtain structural
models for the complex. VCA, CJB, AJB and BGD produced figures. BGD, AJB, TDWC and JHN
supervised and designed experiments, analyzed data and wrote the manuscript. All authors read
and commented on the manuscript.

Acknowledgments
Upgrades of the 600 MHz and 950 MHz spectrometers were funded by the Wellcome Trust (Grant
Ref: 095872/Z/10/Z) and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (Grant Ref:
EP/R029849/1), respectively, and by the University of Oxford Institutional Strategic Support Fund,
the John Fell Fund, and the Edward Penley Abraham Cephalosporin Fund. We thank the
Wellcome Trust for support (20289/Z16/Z). The Rosalind Franklin Institute is supported by the
EPSRC.
AMJJB and PIK acknowledge financial support from the European Union Horizon 2020
projects BioExcel (823830) and EOSC-Hub (777536) and the IMI-CARE project (101005077)
We would like to thank Professor Xi Chen at the University of California at Davis for
providing the plasmid encoding for Pd2,6ST; Mikhail Kutuzov and Omer Dushek for useful
discussions and assistance with SPR experiments; Dr Andrew Quigley and Nadisha Gamage
(Diamond Light Source) for help with thermal stability assays; Professor Christina Redfield for
assistance with high field Bruker instrumentation and Dr Lindsay Baker for insights into the
structural models.
Data Availability Statement
Raw spectral data for Figures 1, 2, 3, and 4A, the data used to plot Figures 4B, C and
relevant uSTA code have been deposited on the University of Oxford ORAdata server
at https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:121699de-68d5-4b6f-b77e-cee85895da6c All associated
spectral data is also shown in Supplementary Table S7. HADDOCK datasets and results for this
work can be found at https://github.com/haddocking/SARS-COV2-NTD-SIAmodelling and https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4271288. All associated clinical data have been
supplied in Supplementary Tables S1-S6, conducted under trial
(NCT04549831, www.clinicaltrial.org).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Methods
Protein expression and purification.
The gene encoding amino acids 1-1208 of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein ectodomain [with
mutations of RRAR > GSAS at residues 682-685 (the furin cleavage site) and KV > PP at residues
986-987, as well as inclusion of a T4 fibritin trimerisation domain], using the construct previously
described as template,58 was cloned into the pOPINTTGneo-BAP vector using the forward primer
(5'- GTCCAAGTTTATACTGAATTCCTCAAGCAGGCCACCATGTTCGTGTTCCTGGTGCTG -3')
and the reverse primer (5'- GTCATTCAGCAAGCTTAAAAAGGTAGAAAGTAATAC -3'), resulting in
an aviTag plus 6His in the 3' terminus of the construct.
Expi293 cells (Thermofisher Scientific) were used to express the Spike-Bap protein. The
cells were cultured in expi293 expression media (Thermofisher Scientific) and were transfected
using PEI MAX 40kDa (Polyscience) if cells were >95% viable and had reached a density of
between 1.5 - 2 x 106 cells per ml. Following transfection, cells were cultured at 37 ˚C and 5% CO2
at 120rpm for 17h. Enhancers (6mM Valproic Acid, 6.5mM Sodium Propionate, 50mM Glucose Sigma) were then added and protein was expressed at 30 ˚C for 5 days before purification.
The media in which the protein spike-bap was secreted was supplemented with 1x PBS
buffer at pH 7.4 (1:1 v/v) and 5mM NiSO4. The pH was adjusted with NaOH to pH 7.4 and filtered
using a 0.8um filter. The mixture was stirred at 150 rpm for 2 hours at room temperature. The
Spike protein was purified on an Akta Express system (GE Healthcare) using a 5mL His trap FF
GE Healthcare column in PBS, 20mM imidazole pH 7.4 and eluted in PBS, 300mM imidazole pH
7.4. The protein was then injected on a High load superdex 200 16/600 gel filtration column (GE
Healthcare) in deuterated PBS buffer pH 7.4. The eluted protein was concentrated using an
Amicon Ultra-4 100kDa concentrator at 2000 RPM, 16°C, pre-washed multiple times with
deuterated PBS) to a concentration of roughly 1 mg/mL.

Errors
The errors in the transfer efficiencies were estimated using a bootstrapping procedure. Specifically
sample STD spectra were assembled through taking random combinations with replacement of
mixing times, and the analysis to obtain the transfer efficiency was performed on each. This
process was repeated 100 times to enable evaluation of the mean and standard deviation transfer
efficiency for each residue. Mean values correspond well with the value from the original analysis,
and so we take the standard deviation as our estimate in uncertainty.

Reagent sources.
6'-Sialyllactose sodium salt and 3'-Sialyllactose sodium salt were purchased from Carbosynth and
used directly: 6'-Sialyllactose sodium salt- CAS-157574-76-0, 35890-39-2, 3'-Sialyllactose sodium
salt - CAS-128596-80-5,35890-38-1. Bovine serum Albumin (BSA) and L-tryptophan were
purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Heparin sodium salt, from porcine intestinal mucosa, IU≥100/mg
was purchased from Alfa Aesar. All other chemicals were purchased from commercial suppliers
(Alfa Aesar, Acros, Sigma Aldrich, Merck, Carbosynth, Fisher, Fluorochem, VWR) and used as
supplied, unless otherwise stated.

Synthesis of 9-BPC-6’-Sialyllactose (6).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

H
N

O

O HO
O
OH HO

O
OH

AcHN

O

OH

O

OH

HO HO
PD2-6ST
NMCSS
CTP
100 mM tris 15 mM MgCl2

OH
HO
HO

OH

OH

Lactose

H
N

O

OH

AcHN
HO HO

O
O

OH
OH
O
HO

HO
O
OH HO
9-BPC-2,6-SiaLac
O

O
OH OH

Lactose (30 mg, 0.087 mmol, 1 eq), BPC-Neu5Ac (48 mg, 0.0974 mmol, 1.12 eq, prepared using a
procedure adapted from ref. 59) and CTP disodium salt (92 mg, 1.74 mmol, 2 eq) were dissolved in
buffer 100 mM Tris, 15 mM MgCl2 pH 8.5, 8.39 mL- to give achieve a final concentration of 10 mM
with respect to the lactose acceptor. Pd-26ST enzyme (261 mL, 1.2 wt%, 1.38 mg/mL) and
NmCSS enzyme (107.4 mL, 1 wt %, 2.73 mg/mL) were added to the reaction and the mixture
shaken at 37 oC. After 22 h the reaction mixture was concentrated in vacuo and then purified via
column chromatography (EtOAc:IPA:H2O 3:2:1à2.5:2:1 and then EtOAc:IPA:H2O: 4:2:1).
Fractions containing the desired compound were concentrated, redissolved in water and
lyophilised to yield the product as a white powder (17.7 mg, 0.0218 mmol, 25%) – Note: the
reaction conversion was very high, however the yield is reflective of difficult isolation of the product.
LRMS: m/z (ES-) 811 [M-H]-; HRMS: m/z (ESI-): calc. for C36H47O19N2 [M-H]- 811.2779, found
811.2773; 1H NMR (400 MHz, D2O) δ 7.90 (2H, d, J = 8.5 Hz, ArH), 7.82 (2H, d, J = 8.3 Hz, ArH),
7.80 – 7.71 (2H, m), 7.61 – 7.53 (2H, m), 7.53 – 7.45 (1H, m), 5.16 (0.4H, d, J = 3.8 Hz, H-1a
(alpha)), 4.63 (1H, d, J = 8.0 Hz, H-1a (beta)), 4.41 (1H, d, J = 7.8 Hz, H-1b), 4.09 (1H, ddd, J =
8.8, 7.2, 3.2 Hz, H-8c), 4.04 – 3.48 (m, 16H), 3.35 – 3.26 (1H, m, H-2a (beta)), 2.73 (1H, dd, J =
12.4, 4.7 Hz, H-3ceq), 2.02 (3H, s, NCOCH3), 1.77 (1H, t, J = 12.2 Hz, H-3cax).

Synthesis of Heparin Tetrasaacharides (7, 8).
Heparin sodium salt (UFH, 100mg) was dissolved in the enzyme preparations in 100mM Tris
Acetate, 5Mm Ca(OAc)2, pH 6.8 to achieve a final concentration of 30 mg/mL UFH and 1.5mg/mL
Hep-1-SUMO. The reaction was incubated in a water bath at 28°C and terminated after 36hrs by
heating at 95 ˚C for 5 min. Upon centrifugation (2000g, 2min), the supernatant was filtered using a
0.2µm filter (Regenerated Cellulose, Sartorius) and lyophilised to yield a mixture of heparin
oligosaccharides as a foam. These were then fractionated based on their degree of polymerisation
on a Superdex Peptide 10/300 column (GE-Healthcare), following a procedure adapted from the
procedure adapted from ref. 60,61. Briefly, the column was equilibrated before each run with 2CV of
0.5M (NH4)2CO3 and the elution was monitored at 232nm. Sample application (100uL injection per
run, ~10mg in sugar content) was followed by an isocratic elution with 0.5M (NH4)2CO3 at a flow
rate of 0.6mL/min. The fraction collector was set to collect 1mL fractions until well-resolved peaks
were detected; at that point, fractionation was manually controlled and tetrasaccharide-containing
fractions from sequential chromatographic runs were pooled together and subjected to serial
lyophilisation rounds. Approximately 15mg of heparin tetrasaccharides were recovered upon
removal of the volatile salt; these were further analysed with strong anion exchange HPLC on a
SAX Propac PA1 column (9x250mm, Thermo Scientific) using H2O, pH 3.5 as solvent A and 2M
NaCl (HPLC grade) pH 3.5 as solvent B. The column was equilibrated with solvent A for 30min
prior to sample application (500uL injection per run, 10mg/mL) and the target oligosaccharides
were eluted following a linear gradient from 30% to 70% solvent B over 180min, at a flow rate of
1mL/min. Fractions corresponding to the same retention times were pooled, neutralized with
saturated NaHCO3 (HPLC grade) and lyophilized. Desalting was performed on an AKTA Purifier
system (GE healthcare) by connecting three 5mL HiTrap Desalting columns (GE Healthcare) in a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

row. Elution with water was performed at a flow rate of 6mL/min and monitored at 232nm; UV
absorbing fractions were pooled and lyophilized to yield the pure target tetrasaccharides.

Compound 7. White solid. 1H NMR (700 MHz, D2O) δ 5.91 (dd, J4’’’,3’’’ 4.7 Hz, J4’’’,2’’’ 1.4 Hz, 1H, H4’’’), 5.50 (d, J1’’,2’’ 3.8 Hz, 1H, H-1’’), 5.43 (d, J1’’’,2’’’ 2.6 Hz, 1H, H-1’’’), 5.39 (d, J1,2 3.5 Hz, 1H, H-1),
4.55 (m, 1H, H-2’’’), 4.52 (d, J1’,2’ 8.0 Hz, 1H, H-1’), 4.29 – 4.26 (m, 3H, H-6a’’, 6a, 6b), 4.25 (dd,
J3’’’,4’’’ 4.8 Hz, J3’’’,2’’’ 2.1 Hz, 1H, H-3’’’), 4.13 (dd, J6b’’, 6a’’ 11.3 Hz, J6b’’,5’’ 2.0 Hz, 1H, H-6b’’), 4.08
(ddd, J5,4 9.7 Hz, J5,6a 4.2 Hz, J5,6b 2.7 Hz, 1H, H-5), 3.91 (ddd, J5’’,4’’ 10.1 Hz, J5’’,6a’’ 4.2 Hz, J5’’,6b’’
2.2 Hz, 1H, H-5’’), 3.79 – 3.70 (m, 4H, H-3’, H-4’, H-5’, H-4’’), 3.68 – 3.59 (m, 2H, H-4, H-3), 3.56
(dd, J3’’,2’’ 10.6 Hz, J3’’,4’’ 8.8 Hz, 1H, H-3’’), 3.31 (dd, J2’,3’ 9.5 Hz, J2’,1’ 7.9 Hz, 1H, H-2’), 3.23 (dd,
J2’’,3’’ 10.6 Hz, J2’’,1’’ 3.8 Hz, 1H, H-2’’), 3.20 (dd, J2α,3α 10.2 Hz, J2α,1α 3.6 Hz, 1H, H-2), 2.97 (dd, J2β,3β
10.0 Hz, J2β,1β 8.4 Hz, H-2β). 13C NMR (176 MHz, D2O) δ 169.3 (C-6’’’ - COOH), 160.2 (C-6’ –
COOH), 144.8 (C-5’’’), 106.0 (C-4’’’), 102.1 (C-1’), 97.7 (C-1’’), 97.1 (C-1’’’), 91.0 (C-1), 78.8 (C-4),
78.0 (C-4’’), 77.5 (C-4’), 76.4, 75.9 (C-3’,5’), 74.5 (C-2’’’), 72.9 (C-2’), 69.53 (C-3’’), 69.3 (C-3), 68.7
(C-5’’), 68.1 (C-5), 66.7 (C-6), 66.1 (C-6’’), 62.8 (C-3’’’), 57.6 (C-2), 57.5 (C-2’’). Data consistent
with previous reports4. LRMS m/z (ESI-): Found 535.5 [M-2H]2-; HRMS: m/z (ESI-) calc. for
C24H36N2O35S52- [M-2H]2- 535.9857, found 535.9858.

Compound 8. White solid. 1H NMR (700 MHz, D2O) δ 5.91 (dd, J4’’’,3’’’ 4.8 Ηz, J4’’’,2’’’ 1.4 Hz, 1H, Η4’’’), 5.43 (d, J1’’’,2’’’ 1.9 Hz, 1H, Η-1’’’), 5.38 (dd, J 3.6, 1.7 Hz, 2H, H-1, H-1’’), 5.13 (d, J1’,2’ 3.4 Hz,
1H, H-1’), 4.67 (d, J5’,4’ 3.0 Hz, 1H, H-5’), 4.62 (d, J1β,2β 8.3 Hz, 0.1H, H-1β), 4.55 (m, 1H, Η-2’’’),
4.30 (dd, J6a,6b 11.4 Hz, J6a,5 4.9 Hz, 1H, H-6a), 4.27 (dd, J6b’’,6a’’ 10.7 Hz, J6b’’,5’’ 1.6 Hz, 1H, H-6b’’),
4.25 – 4.21 (m, 3H, H-6b, H-2’, H-3’’’), 4.18 (dd, J6a’’,6b’’ 11.3 Hz, J6a’’,5’’ 2.0 Hz, 1H, H-6a’’), 4.12 (dd,
J3’,2’ 6.7 Hz, J3’,4’ 3.9 Hz, 1H, H-3’), 4.07 – 4.02 (m, 2H, H-4’, H-5), 3.97 (m, 1H, H-5’’), 3.75 (at, J
9.5 Hz, 1H, H-4’’), 3.67 (at, J 9.4 Hz, 1H, H-4), 3.62 (dd, J3,2 10.4 Hz, J3,4 8.9 Hz, 1H, H-3), 3.55
(dd, J3’’,2’’ 10.6 Ηz, J3’’,4’’ 8.8 Hz, 1H, H-3’’), 3.22 (dd, J2’’,3’’ 10.6 Hz, J2’’,1’’ 3.6 Hz, 1H, Η-2’’), 3.18 (dd,
J2α,3 10.3 Hz, J2α,1α 3.6 Hz, 1H, Η-2α), 2.97 (dd, J2β,3 10.1 Ηz, J2β,1β 8.4 Hz, H-2β, 0.1H). 13C NMR
(176 MHz, D2O) δ 174.4 (C-6’ – COOH), 169.2 (C-6’’’ – COOH), 144.8 (C-5’’’), 105.8 (C-4’’’), 99.4
(C-1’), 97.2 (C-1’’’), 96.5 (C1’’), 91.0 (C-1), 78.1 (C-4’’), 76.9 (C-4), 76.6 (C-2’), 76.3 (C-4’), 74.4 (C2’’’), 69.7 (C-5’), 69.6 (C-3’), 69.5 (C-3’’), 69.4 (C-3), 68.8 (C-5’’), 68.4 (C-5), 67.0 (C-6), 66.2 (C6’’), 62.7 (C-3’’’), 57.9 (C-2), 57.6 (C-2’’). Data consistent with previous reports4. LRMS m/z (ESI-):
Found 575.5 [M-2H]2-; HRMS: m/z (ESI-) calc. for C24H36N2O38S62- [M-2H]2- 575.9641, found
575.9651.

Protein NMR Experiments.
All NMR experiments in NMR Methods Table 1 were conducted at 15 °C on a Bruker AVANCE
NEO 600 MHz spectrometer with CPRHe-QR-1H/19F/13C/15N-5mm-Z helium-cooled cryo-probe.
Samples were stored in a Bruker SampleJet sample loader while not in magnet, at 4 °C.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

1D 1H NMR spectra with w5 water suppression were acquired using the Bruker pulse
sequence zggpw5, using the smooth square Bruker shape SMSQ.10.100 for the pulsed field
gradients. The spectrum was centered on the water peak, and the receiver gain adjusted. Typical
acquisition parameters were sweep width of 9615.39 Hz, 16 scans per transient (NS), with 4
dummy scans, 32768 complex points (TD) and a recycle delay (d1) of 1 s for a total acquisition
time of 54 s. Reference 1D spectra of protein only were acquired similarly with 16384 scans per
transient with a total acquisition time of 12.5 hrs.
An STD experiment with excitation sculpted water suppression was developed from the
Bruker pulse sequence stddiffesgp.2. The saturation was achieved using a concatenated series of
50ms Gaussian shaped pulses to achieve the desired total saturation time (d20). The shape of the
pulses was specified by the Bruker shape file Gaus.1.1000, where the pulse is divided into 1000
steps and the standard deviation for the Gaussian shape is 165 steps. The field of the pulse was
set to 200Hz, which was calculated internally through scaling the power of the high power 90o
pulse.
The total relaxation delay was set to 5s, during which the saturation pulse was applied. The
experiment was acquired in an interleaved fashion, with each individual excitation frequency being
repeated 8 times (L4) until the total desired number of scans was achieved. Again, the spectrum
was centred on the water peak, and the receiver gain optimised. Following recording of the fid, and
prior to the recycle delay, a pair of water selective pulses are applied to destroy any unwanted
magnetisation. For all gradients (excitation sculpting and spoil), the duration was 3 ms using the
smooth-square shape SMSQ10.100. Typical acquisition parameters were sweep width of 9615.39
Hz with typically 128 scans per transient (NS=16 * L4=8), 32768 complex points in the direct
dimension and 16 dummy scans were executed prior to data acquisition.
In a typical experiment, two excitation frequencies were required, one exciting protein, and
one exciting far from the protein (+20,000Hz, +33ppm from the carrier). A range of mixing times
were acquired to allow us to carefully quantify the buildup curve to obtain KD values. A typical set
of values used was 0.1s, 0.3s, 0.5s, 0.7s, 0.9s, 1.1s, 1.3s, 1.5s, 1.7s, 1.9s, 2.0s, 2.5s, 3.0s, 3.5s,
4.0s and 5.0s.
Off and on-resonance spectra were acquired for 16 saturation times, giving a total
acquisition time of 8.7 hrs
The experiment was acquired as a pseudo 3D experiment, with each spectrum being
acquired at a chosen set of excitation frequencies and mixing times. Relaxation delays were set to
10 s for BSA + tryptophan STDs, and were 5 s otherwise.

NMR Methods Table 1:
Sample:

Ligand
conc / µM

Protein
conc / µM

BSA + Tryp
STD

1000

5

STD 10 ms Gaussian duration
STD 25 ms Gaussian duration
STD 50 ms Gaussian duration
BSA + Tryp
STD

200

BSA + Tryp
STD

40

BSA
1D
STD

None

SPIKE
1D

None

On-resonance
frequency /
ppm

Total
acquisition
time

Used in

5.44

13.4hrs

Fig 1 D &
F i)

5.44
5.44
5.44

6.7hrs
6.7hrs
6.7hrs

5.44

13.4hrs

Fig 1 F ii)

5.44

13.4hrs

Fig 1 F iii)

5.44

12.5hrs
13.4hrs

5
5
5

1.5
12.5hrs

Fig 1D, F i),
F ii) & F iii)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

STD

5.44

8.7hrs

5.44

8.7hrs

5.44

8.7hrs

5.44

8.7hrs

Fig 2 B iii),
B iv) & C
Fig 3 B i)

5.44
5.44

2.5hrs
9.83hrs

Fig 3 A ii)
Fig 3 A ii)

5.44
5.44
5.44

2.5hrs
9.83hrs
8.7hrs

5.44

8.7hrs

Fig 3 B ii)

5.44
8.00
List1

8.7hrs
7.8hrs
29.3hrs

S8
Fig 3 A i)

5.44
List2

8.7hrs
14.1hrs

Fig 5 C

5.44

8.7hrs

STD

8.00

7.8hrs

Fig 5 C
S6 & S8
Fig 3 A i)
S6 & S8

STD var freq 3

List3

14.7hrs

5.44

8.7hrs

Fig 5 C

5.44

8.7hrs

Fig 5 C

SPIKE + Neu5Ac 1
STD

200

SPIKE + 9-azidoNeu5Ac 4
STD

200

SPIKE + BPCNeu5Ac 5
STD

200

SPIKE + 6-SiaLac 3
STD
STD

200

SPIKE + 3-SiaLac 2
STD
STD
STD

200

SPIKE + BPC-6SiaLac 6
STD

200

SPIKE
STD
STD
STD var freq 1

None

SPIKE + 3-SiaLac 2
STD
STD var freq 2

2000

SPIKE + 3-SiaLac 2
STD

1000

SPIKE + 3-SiaLac 2
STD

60

SPIKE + 3-SiaLac 2
STD

12

Neu5Ac 1
1D

1000

3-SiaLac 2
1D
STD
STD

1000

Fig 2 B i),
B iii), B iv)
&C
Fig 3 A ii),
B i) & B ii)

1.5
1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

1.5

6

6

6

6
6
None
1 minute
None
5.44
8.00

1 minute
8.7hrs
7.8hrs

S6 & S8
Fig 3 A i)
S6 & S8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

STD var freq 2
STD var freq 3
6-SiaLac 3
1D
STD
STD

1000

BPC-6-SiaLac 6
1D

500

9-azido-Neu5Ac 4
1D

1000

BPC-Neu5Ac 5
1D
B.1.1.7-SPIKE
STD

1000

None

None

6

B.1.1.7-SPIKE + 3SiaLac 2
STD

2000

List2
List3

14.1hrs
14.7hrs

5.44
8.00

1 minute
8.7hrs
7.8hrs

None
Fig 3 A ii)

None
18 minutes
None
1 minute
1 minute
8.00

7.8 h

8.00

7.8 h

Fig 2 B ii)

6

For STD 10-50 ms Gaussian experiments, the saturation times used were every other time from
the default STD: 0.1 s, 0.5 s, 0.9 s, 1.3 s, 1.7 s, 2 s, 3 s, 4 s.
List1: For STD var freq 1, the on-resonance frequencies in Hz relative to an offset of 2820.61 Hz
are: 337.89, 422.36, 524.93, 736.11, 914.10, 1276.12, 1336.46, 1380.21, 1458.64, 1556.69,
1693.96, 2494.93, 2597.50, 2790.58, 2930.86, 3362.27, 3663.95, 3986.75, 4099.88, 4326.15,
4484.53, 4703.25, 4896.33, 5824.01, 6006.53 and 6208.65. The saturation times used were 2 s, 3
s, 4 s and 5 s.
List2: For STD var freq 2, the on-resonance frequencies in Hz relative to an offset of 2820.61 Hz
are: -2399.99, -1979.99, -1530.00, -1050.01, -330.021, 338.096, 1679.95, 1829.94, 1979.94,
2129.94, 2279.94 and 2579.93. The saturation times used were 0.1 s, 0.5 s, 2 s and 5 s.
List3: For STD var freq 3, the on-resonance frequencies in Hz relative to an offset of 2820.61 Hz
are: -2579.98, -2459.99, -2339.99, -2039.99, -1488.00, -1120.03,
-345.02, 311.97, 1079.96, 1379.95, 1679.95, 1979.94, 2279.94 and 2579.93. The saturation times
used were 0.1 s, 0.3 s, 0.5 s and 0.9 s.
List4: For STD var freq 4, the on-resonance frequencies in Hz relative to an offset of 2820.61 Hz
are: -2461.55, -1973.77, -1518.69, -1270.72, -693.69, -274.80, 280.08, 808.02, 1047.05, 2055.57,
2630.61 and 2979.65. The saturation times used were 0.1 s, 0.5 s, 0.9 s, 2 s, 3 s and 4 s.
Spectra were also acquired on a 600 MHz spectrometer with Bruker Avance III HD console and
5mm TCI CryoProbe, running TopSpin 3.2.6, recorded in NMR Methods Table 2, and a 950 MHz
spectrometer with Bruker Avance III HD console and 5mm TCI CryoProbe, running TopSpin 3.6.1,
recorded in NMR Methods Table 3. The 950 used a SampleJet sample changer. Samples were
stored at 15 °C. The parameters used for the STD experiments were the same as above, with the
following varying by instrument:
On the 600, typical acquisition parameters were sweep width of 9615.39 Hz with typically 128
scans per transient (NS=16 * L4=8), 32768 complex points in the direct dimension and 2 dummy
scans, executed prior to data acquisition.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

On the 950, typical acquisition parameters were sweep width of 15243.90 Hz with typically 128
scans per transient (NS=16 * L4=8), 32768 complex points in the direct dimension and 2 dummy
scans, executed prior to data acquisition.

NMR Methods Table 2:
Sample:

Ligand
conc. / µM

Protein
conc. / µM

Trp
STD var freq 4

1000

None

BSA
STD var freq 4

None

BSA
STD

None

BSA + Trp
STD var freq 4

1000

BSA + Trp
STD

25

SPIKE + Neu5Ac 1
STD

2000

SPIKE
STD

None

Heparin B
STD

500

Heparin C
STD

500

SPIKE + Heparin B
STD

500

SPIKE + Heparin C
STD

500

SPIKE B.1.351
STD
STD

None

3-SiaLac 2
STD

1000

SPIKE B.1.351 + 3SiaLac 2
STD

60

SPIKE B.1.351 + 3SiaLac 2
STD

200

SPIKE B.1.351 + 3SiaLac 2
STD

1000

On-resonance
frequency /
ppm

Total acquisition
time

Used in

List 4

19.2hrs

S7

List 4

19.2hrs

S7

5.44

7.9hrs

List 4

19.2hrs

5.44

11.9hrs

8.00

7.9hrs

-1.00

7.9hrs

-1.00

7.9hrs

-1.00

7.9hrs

-1.00

7.9hrs

-1.00

7.9hrs

-1.00
5.44

7.9hrs
7.9hrs

-1.00

7.9hrs

-1.00

7.9hrs

-1.00

7.9hrs

-1.00

7.9hrs

5
10
5
10
3
3
None
None
3
3
6

None
6

6

6

S7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

SPIKE B.1.351 + 3SiaLac 2
STD

2000

6
-1.00

7.9hrs

NMR Methods Table 2.1:
Sample:
SPIKE
STD

Ligand
conc. /
µM
None

3-SiaLac 2
STD

2000

C5 Nanobody
STD

None

SPIKE + 3SiaLac 2
STD

2000

SPIKE + C5
Nanobody
STD

None

SPIKE + 3SiaLac 2 + C5
Nanobody
STD

2000

3-SiaLac 2 +
C5 Nanobody
STD

2000

Protein
conc. /
µM
6
None
None
None

6

6

None

Nanobody
conc. / µM

On-resonance
frequency / ppm

Total acquisition
time

8.00

7.9hrs

8.00

7.9hrs

8.00

7.9hrs

8.00

7.9hrs

8.00

7.9hrs

8.00

7.9hrs

8.00

7.9hrs

Used in

None
None
6
6

6

6

6

NMR Methods Table 3:
Sample:

Ligand
conc / µM

Protein
conc / µM

SPIKE
STD

None

6

SPIKE + Neu5Ac
STD

2000

SPIKE + 9-AzidoNeu5Ac
STD

2000

On-resonance
frequency /
ppm

Total
acquisition
time

Used in

8.00

7.2hrs

Fig 4 A-D
S9 A & B

5.44

7.2hrs

Fig 4 A & B
S9 A

5.44

7.2hrs

Fig 4 C & D
S9 B

3

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Neu5Ac
STD

2000

Neu5Ac
STD

5000

9-Azido-Neu5Ac
STD

2000

None
5.44

7.2hrs

5.44

7.2hrs

5.44

7.2hrs

Fig 4 A & B
S9 A

None
None
Fig 4 C & D
S9 B

uSTA Data Analysis.
NMR spectra with a range of excitation frequencies and mixing times were acquired on
ligand only, protein only, and mixed protein/ligand samples (Supplementary Figure S6).
To analyse an STD dataset, two projections were created by summing over all 1D spectra,
and summing over all corresponding STD spectra. These two projections provide exceptionally
high signal to noise, suitable for detailed analysis and reliable peak detection. The UnidecNMR
algorithm was first executed on the raw spectra, to identify peak positions and intensities. Having
identified possible peak positions, the algorithm then analyses the STD spectra but only allowing
resonances in places already identified in the 1D spectrum. Both analyses are conducted using the
protein only baselines for accurate effective subtraction of the protein baseline without the need to
use relaxation filters (Supplementary Figure S8).
The results for the ligand only spectra were first analysed. In each case, excellent
agreement with the known assignments was obtained, providing us with confidence in the
algorithm. The mixed protein/ligand spectrum was then analysed, which returns very similar results
to ligand only case. Contributions from the protein, although small however, are typically evident in
the spectra justifying the explicit inclusion of the protein only baseline during the analysis. When
analysing the mixture, we included the protein only background as a peak shape whose
contribution to the spectrum can be freely adjusted. In this way, the spectra of protein/ligand
mixtures could be accurately and quickly deconvolved, with the identified ligand resonances
occurring in precisely the positions expected from the ligand only spectra. The results from the
previous steps were then used to analyse the STD spectra. As these have much lower signal to
noise, we fixed the ligand peak positions to be only those previously identified. Otherwise the
protocol performed as described previously, where we used a protein only STD data to provide a
baseline.
These analyses allow us to define a ‘transfer efficiency’, which is simply the ratio of the
signal from a given multiplet in the STD spectrum, to the total expected in the raw 1D experiment.
To obtain ‘per atom’ transfer efficiencies, signal from the various pre-assumed components on the
multiplets from each resonance were first summed before calculating the ratio. In the software, this
is achieved by manually annotating the initial peak list using information obtained from independent
assignment experiments (see Supplementary Figures S19,S20).
Over the course of the project, it became clear that subtracting the transfer efficiencies
obtained from a ligand only sample was an essential part of the method (Supplementary Figure
S9,S10). Depending on the precise relationship between the chemical shift of excitation, the
location of the ligand peaks, and the excitation profile of the Gaussian train, we observed small
apparent STD transfer in the ligand only sample that cannot be attributed to ligand binding, arising
from a small residual excitation of ligand protons, followed by internal cross relaxation. It is likely
that this excitation occurs at least in part via resonances of the ligand that are exchange
broadened, such as OH protons, which are not directly observed in the spectrum. When exciting
far from the protein, zero ligand excitation is observed, as we would expect, but when exciting
close to the methyls, or in the aromatic region, residual ligand excitation could be detected in
ligand only samples (Supplementary Figure S9,S10). Without the ligand only correction, the
uSTA surface may appear to be highly dependent on choice of excitation frequency. However, with
the ligand correction, the relative uSTA profiles become invariant with excitation frequency. In

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

general therefore, we advise acquiring these routinely, and so the uSTA analysis assumes the
presence of this data (Supplementary Figure S6,S8). The invariance of relative transfer efficiency
with excitation frequency suggest that the internal evolution of magnetization within the protein
during saturation (likely on the ms timescale) is much faster than the effective cross relaxation rate
between protein and ligand (occurring on the seconds timescale).
Having identified the relevant resonances of interest, and performed both a protein, and
residual ligand subtraction, the spectra were then re-analysed without first summing over the
different mixing times, in order to develop the quantitative atom-specific build-up curves. These
were quantitatively analyzed as described below to obtain KD and koff rates. The values we obtain
performing this analysis on BSA/Trp closely match those measured by ITC, and the values we
measure for ligand 2 and SPIKE are in good agreement with those measured by SPR as described
in the text.
The coverage of protons over the ligands studied here was variable, as for example, there
are no protons on carboxyl groups. To enable a complete surface to be rendered, the transfer
efficiencies for each proton were calculated as described above, and the value is then transferred
to the adjacent heteroatom. For heteroatoms not connected to an observed proton, a 1/r6 weighted
average score was calculated. This approach allows us to define a unique surface. Caution should
be exercised when quantitatively interpreting such surfaces where there are no reliable
measurements of the heteroatom.
In practice, raw unformatted fids are submitted to the uSTA pipeline, and the various steps
are performed largely automatically, where a user needs to manually adjust processing settings
such as phasing and choosing which regions to focus on, iteratively adjust the peak shape to get a
good match between the final reconvolved spectrum and the raw data, and input manual atomic
assignments for each observed multiplet. The uSTA analysis pipeline then provides a user with a
report that shows the results of the various stages of analysis, and uses pymol to render the
surfaces. The final transfer efficiencies delivered by the program can be combined with a folder
containing a series of HADDOCK models to provide final structural models (Figure 5).

Quantitative analysis via uSTA.
In principle, a complete description of the saturation transfer experiment can be achieved via the
Bloch-McConnell equations. If we can setup a density matrix describing all the spins in the system,
their interactions and their rates of chemical change in an evolution matrix R, then we can follow
the system with time according to:

ρ(t) = ρ(0)e−Rt
The challenge comes from the number of spins that needs to be included, and the need to
accurately describe all the interactions between them, which will need to also include how these
are modulated by molecular motions in order to get an accurate description of the relaxation
processes. This is illustrated by the CORCEMA method,62 that takes a static structure of a
protein/ligand complex and estimates STD transfers. The calculations performed to arrive at cross
relaxation rates assumes the complex is rigid, which is a poor approximation for a protein, and
because of the large number of spins involved, the calculation is sufficiently intensive such that this
calculation cannot be routinely used to fitted to experimental data.
It would be very desirable to extract quantitative structural parameters, as well as chemical
properties such as interaction strengths and association/dissociation rates directly from STD data.
In what follows we develop a simple quantitative model for the STD experiment to achieve this
goal. We will treat the system as comprising just two spins, one to represent the ligand and one to
represent the protein, and we allow the two spins to exist either in isolation, or in a bound state. We
can safely neglect scalar coupling and so we only need to allow the x,y and z basis operators for
each spin, together with an identity operator to ensure the system returns to thermal equilibrium at
long times. As such, our evolution matrix R will be square matrices with 13 x 13 elements.
For the spin part, our model requires us to consider the chemical shift of the ligand in the
free and bound states, and the chemical shifts of the protein in the free and bound states. In
practice however, it is sufficient to set the free protein state on resonance with the pulse, and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

ensure that the free ligand chemical shift is far removed from the pulse as we would expect to have
in the experiment.
The longitudinal and transverse relaxation rates are calculated for the free and bound
states using a simple model assuming in each state there are two coupled spins separated by a
distance R. In addition, cross relaxation between ligand and protein is allowed only when the two
are bound. The relaxation rates are characterised by an effective distance, and an effective
correlation time.

1
K ( J (0) + 3J (ω) + 6J (2ω))
4
⎞
1 ⎛5
9
R2 = K ⎜⎜ J (0) + J (ω) + 3J (2ω)⎟⎟⎟
⎟⎠
4 ⎜⎝ 2
2
R1 =

1
K (6J (2ω)− J (0))
4
1
µ = K (2J (0) + 3J (2ω))
4
σ=

2

⎛ µ !γ 2 ⎞⎟
⎜
Which are each parameterized in terms of an interaction constant K = ⎜⎜ 0 3H ⎟⎟ and a spectral
⎜⎝ 4πr ⎟⎠
density function J (ω) =

2
τ
. The longitudinal and transverse relaxation rates R1 and R2
5 1+ ω 2τ 2

describe auto-relaxation of diagonal z, and xy elements respectively. The cross-relaxation rates
describes cross relaxation and couples z elements between the ligand and protein in the bound
state. We ensure that the system returns to equilibrium at long times by adding elements of the

σ

form R1 M 0 or σ M 0 linking the identify element, and the z matrix elements. Overall, the relaxation
part of the model is parametised by two correlation times, one for the ligand, and one for the
protein/complex, and three distances, one for the ligand auto relaxation rates, one for protein auto
relaxation rates, and one for the protein/ligand separation.
Finally, the chemical kinetics govern the rates at which the spins can interconvert. We will
take a simple model where PL ! P + L , whose dissociation constant is given by:

K D = kon / koff = [P][L] / [PL]
The free protein concentration can be determined from knowledge of the KD, and the total ligand
and protein concentrations:

1⎛
[P] = ⎜⎜ PTot − LTot − K D +
2 ⎜⎝

( LTot + K D − PTot )

2

⎞
+ 4PTot K D ⎟⎟⎟
⎠

From which the bound protein concentration, and the free and bound ligand concentrations can be
easily calculated.
The density matrix is initialised with the free and bound protein/ligand concentrations
assigned to the relevant z operators. It was found to be important to additionally include a factor
that accounts for the increased proton density within the protein. The saturation pulse is then
applied either as a concatenated series of Gaussian pulses whose duration and peak power in Hz
needs to be specified, exactly matching the pulse shapes and durations used in the experiment
(see NMR methods above).
Build up curves and transfer efficiencies can be easily simulated using this model and
compared to data, and the various parameters can be optimized to fit to the data. In total, the
model is characterized by nine parameters: KD, koff, the correlation times of the ligand and the
protein, the three distances described above and the proton density within the protein. There is
substantial correlation between the effects of the various parameters. By obtaining data at various

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

protein and ligand concentrations however, it is possible to break this degeneracy and obtain well
described values as described in the text.
In practical terms, the initial rate of the buildup curve is predominantly affected by the crossrelaxation rate and the off rate, and the final height of the buildup curve is mostly influenced by the
proton density in the protein and KD. Software to perform this analysis has been directly
incorporated into the uSTA software.
Parameters Fitted by the Model
Overall the model is parameterised by a set of values that characterise the intrinsic and cross
relaxation. From tG and rIS(ligand) we estimate R1 and R2 of the ligand, from tE, rIS(protein) we
obtain R1 and R2 of the protein, and from tE and rIS(complex) we calculate the cross relaxation
rate. These values are combined with a factor that accounts for the larger number of spins present
in the protein, ‘fac’, and the on and off rates, to complete a set of 8 parameters that specify our
model. The distances should be considered ‘effective’ values that parasitize the relaxation rates
though in principle it should be possible to obtain physical insights form their interpretation. The
concentration independent relaxation rates can be separated from the exchange rates by
comparing the curves as a ruction of ligand and protein concentration. By treating the system as
comprising of two spins we are effectively assuming that the cross relaxation within the protein is
very efficient. In the STD experiment, saturation pulses are applied for several second, which is
sufficient for near-saturating spin diffusion within a protein.

Thermostability assays.
Thermal stability assays were performed using a NanoTemper Prometheus NT.48 (Membrane
Protein Laboratory, Diamond Light Source). To 11 uL of 2 uM Spike (deuterated PBS), 2 uL of
trisaccharide 2 (deuterated PBS) was titrated to give final concentrations of 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, 0.8, 1.6
and 2.0 mM. Samples were then loaded into capillaries and heated from 15 to 95 ˚C. Analysis was
performed using PR.ThermControl v2.3.1 software.

SPR binding measurement assays.
All experiments were performed on a Biacore T200 instrument. For the immobilisation of SiaLac
onto sensor chip a flow rate 10 µL/min was used in a buffer solution of HBP-EP (0.01 M HEPES
pH 7.4, 0.15 M NaCl, 3 mM EDTA, 0.005% v/v Surfactant P20). A CM5 sensor chip
(carboxymethylated dextran) was equilibrated with HBS-EP buffer at 20°C. The chip was activated
by injecting a mixture of N-hydroxysuccinimide (50 mM) and EDC-HCl (200 mM) for 10 min
followed by a 2 min wash step with buffer. Ethylenediamine (1 M in PBS) was then injected for 7
min followed by a 2 min wash step followed by ethanolamine-HCl (1 M, pH 8.5) for 10 min and then
a further 1 min wash step. Finally, SiaLac-IME (5.6 mM in PBS) was injected over 10 min and a
final 2 min wash step was performed (see Supplementary Figure S13)
For analysis of spike binding a flow rate 10 µL/min was used at 16 °C. Serial dilutions of
spike (0.19, 0.50, 1.36, and 3.68 µM) were injected for 30 s association and 150 s dissociation
starting with the lowest concentration. Buffer only runs were carried out before injection of spike
and after the first two dilutions. BSA (3.03 µM in PBS) was used as a negative control and a
mouse serum in a 100-fold dilution was used as a positive control.

Analysis of SPR Data.
To analyse the SPR data, we assume an equilibrium of the form PL ! P + L characterised by a
dissociation constant K D =

kon
[PL]
=
. To follow the kinetics of binding and dissociation, we
koff [P][L]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

assume the SPR response Γ is proportional to the bound complex Γ = κ[PL] , which leads to the
following kinetic equation:

k
dΓ koff
+
Γ − on [P][L] = 0
dt
κ
κ
This can be solved when restrained by the total number of binding sites, Ltot = [L]+[PL] . Under
conditions of constant flow, we assume the free protein concentration is constant, which leads to
the following:

Γ on =

κkon Ltot [P]
−( k +k [ P])t
1− e off on
koff + kon [P]

(

)

And similarly, for dissociation where we take the concentration of free protein to be zero:
−koff t

Γoff = κRe

The recovery of the chip was not complete after each protein concentration and wash step, as has
been observed for shear-induced lectin-ligand binding with glycans immobilised onto a chip
surface.63 Nevertheless, the data were well explained by a global analysis where the on and off
rates were held to be identical for each replicate, but the value of k was allowed to vary slightly
between runs, and an additional constant was introduced to

Γ off to account for incomplete

recovery of the SPR signal following standard approaches. Concentration of spike was insufficient
to get the plateau region of the binding, and so the specific time values taken for the on rate affect
the fitted values.

Modelling of the N-terminal Domain of SARS-CoV-2 with Glycans.
We modelled the structure of the N-terminal domain (NTD) on Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 7c2l
17
since it provided significantly better coverage of the area of interest when compared to the
majority of the templates available on the PDB as of July 15th 2020. The models were created with
Modeller 64, using the ‘automodel’ protocol without refining the ‘loop’. We generated 10 models
and ranked them by their DOPE score 65, selecting the top 5 for ensemble docking.
Docking of 3’-sialyllactose to SARS-CoV-2 NTD
We docked 3’-sialyllactose to NTD with version 2.4 of the HADDOCK webserver. 43,44 The
binding site on NTD was defined by comparison with PDB entry 6q06 9, a complex of MERS-CoV
spike protein and 2,3-sialyl-N-acetyl-lactosamine. The binding site could not directly be mapped
because of conformational differences between the NTDs of MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2, but by
inspection a region with similar properties (aromatics, methyl groups and positively charged
residues) could be identified. We defined in HADDOCK the sialic acid as ‘active’ and residues 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 68, 76, 77, 78, 79, 244, 254, 255, 256, 258 and 259 of NTD as ‘passive’, meaning
the sialic acid needs to make contact with at least one of the NTD residues but there is no penalty
if it doesn’t contact all of them, thus allowing the compound to freely explore the binding pocket.
Since only one restraint was used we disabled the random removal of restraints. Following our
small molecule docking recommended settings 66 we skipped the ‘hot’ parts of the semi-flexible
simulated annealing protocol (‘initiosteps’ and ‘cool1_steps’ set to 0) and also lowered the
starting temperature of the last two substages to 500 and 300K, respectively (‘tadinit2_t’ and
‘tadinit3_t’ to 500 and 300, respectively). Clustering was performed based on ‘RMSD’ with a
distance cut-off of 2Å and the scoring function was modified to:
HADDOCKscore = 1.0 ∗ E!"# + 0.1 ∗ E!"!# + 1.0 ∗ E!"#$% + 0.1 ∗ E!"#

All other settings were kept to their default values. Finally, the atom-specific transfer efficiencies
determined by uSTA were used to filter cluster candidates.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Genetic analysis of clinical samples.
Variant calling: Reads were mapped to the hg19 reference genome by the Burrow-Wheeler
aligner BWA. Variants calling was performed according to the GATK4 best practice guidelines.
Namely, duplicates were first removed by MarkDuplicates, and base qualities were recalibrated
using BaseRecalibration and ApplyBQSR. HaplotypeCaller was used to calculate Genomic VCF
files for each sample, which were then used for multi-sample calling by GenomicDBImport and
GenotypeGVCF. In order to improve the specificity-sensitivity balance, variants quality scores were
calculated by VariantRecalibrator and ApplyVQSR, and only variants with estimated truth
sensitivity above 99.9% were retained. Variants were annotated by ANNOVAR.
Rare variant selection: Missense, splicing and loss of function variants with a frequency
lower than 0.01 according to ExAC_NFE (Non Finnish European ExAC Database) were
considered for further analyses. A score of 0 was assigned to each samples where the gene is not
mutated and the score of 1 was assigned when at least one variant is present on the gene.

Genes prioritization by Logistic regression.
Discriminating genes in COVID-19 disease were interpreted in a framework of feature selection
analysis using a customized feature selection approach based on the recursive feature elimination
algorithm applied to the LASSO (Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator) logistic
regression model. Specifically, for a set of 𝑛 samples 𝑥! , 𝑦! (𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛) each of which consists of
𝑝 input features 𝑥!,! ∈ 𝜒! 𝑘 = 1, . . . , 𝑝 and one output variable 𝑦! ∈ 𝑌, these features assumed the
meaning of genes, whereas the samples were the patients involved in the study. The space
𝜒 = 𝜒! ×𝜒! . . .×𝜒! was denoted “input space”, whereas the “hypothesis space” was the space of all
the possible functions 𝑓: 𝜒 → 𝑌 mapping the inputs to the output. Given the number of features (𝑝)
is substantially higher than the number of samples (𝑛), LASSO regularization47 has the effect of
shrinking the estimated coefficients to zero, providing a feature selection method for sparse
solutions within the classification tasks. Feature selection methods based on such regularization
structures (Embedded methods) were most applicable to our scope because they were
computationally tractable and strictly connected with the classification task of the ML algorithm.
As the baseline algorithm for the embedded method, we adopted the Logistic Regression
(LR) model that is a state-of-the-art ML algorithm for binary classification tasks with probabilistic
interpretation. It models the log-odds of the posterior success probability of a binary variable as the
linear combination of the input:

log

𝑃𝑟(𝑌 = 1|𝑋 = 𝒙)
= 𝛽! +
1 − 𝑃𝑟(𝑌 = 1|𝑋 = 𝒙)

!
!!!

𝛽! 𝑥! ,

where 𝒙 is the input vector, 𝛽! are the coefficients of the regression and 𝑋 and 𝑌 are the random
variables representing the input and the output respectively. The loss function to be minimized is
given by the binary cross-entropy loss

−

!
!!!

y! log 𝑦! (1 − y! ) log(1 − 𝑦! ) ,

where 𝑦 = 𝑃𝑟(𝑌 = 1|𝑋 = 𝒙) is the predicted target variable and 𝑦 is the true label. As already
introduced, in order to enforce both the sparsity and the interpretability of the results, the model is
trained with the additional LASSO regularization term:

𝜆

!
!!!

𝛽! .

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

In this way, the absolute value of the surviving weights of the LR algorithm was interpreted as the
feature importances of the subset of most relevant genes for the task. Since a feature ranking
criterion can become sub-optimal when the subset of removed features is large 67, we applied
Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) methodology. For each step of the procedure, we fitted the
model and removed the features with smallest ranking criteria in a recursive manner until a certain
number of features was reached.
The fundamental hyper-parameter of LR is the strength of the LASSO term tuned with a
grid search procedure on the accuracy of the 10-fold cross-validation. The k-fold cross-validation
provided the partition of the dataset into k batches, then exploited k-1 batches for the training and
the remaining test batch as a test, by repeating this procedure k times. In the grid search method,
a cross validation procedure was carried out for each value of the regularization hyperparameter in
the range [10-4, ..., 106]. Specifically, the optimal regularization parameter is chosen by selecting
the most parsimonious parameter whose cross-validation average accuracy falls in the range of
the best one along with its standard deviation. During the fitting procedure, the class unbalancing
was tackled by penalizing the mis-classification of minority class with a multiplicative factor
inversely proportional to the class frequencies. For the RFE, the number of excluded features at
each steps of the algorithm as well as the final number of features was fixed at 100. All data preprocessing and the RFE procedure was coded in Python; the LR model was used, as included, in
the scikit-learn module with the liblinear coordinate descent optimization algorithm.

Pseudoviral Cell-entry Asssay.
A spike-expressing lentivirus in HEK 293T cells was generated using a two-plasmid system. The
first plasmid encoded an NL4.3ΔEnvΔVifΔVpr backbone and firefly luciferase, and the second
encoded SARS-CoV-2 Spike (Wuhan strain). Spike expression on pseudovirus was confirmed
using an ELISA-based assay, capturing with an ACE-2 IgA Fc fusion protein (Absolute Antibody).
Pseudovirus was detected via CR3022, anti-Human IgG-HRP (Jackson ImmunoResearch Europe)
and 1-Step Ultra TMB ELISA substrate (Thermo Fisher).
1x104 ACE-2-expressing MDCK cells in PBS were seeded in a flat-bottom 96-well plate and
treated with 0.3mU Arthrobacter ureafaciens neuraminidase (Merck) or PBS (mock) for 30 minutes
(37°C, 5% CO2). After repeated washing, cells were resuspended in serially diluted pseudovirus in
10% FCS DMEM (Thermo Fisher) for 4 h. After removing excess pseudovirus, cells were
incubated in 1% FCS DMEM for 48 h. Cells were washed and subsequently lysed using Reporter
Lysis Buffer (Promega) and freeze-thaw cycling. Lysate was incubated with Bright-Glo (Promega)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions and luminescence was acquired using a SpectraMax
M5 (Molecular Devices). Data were analysed using Prism 9 (version 9.1.0 for Macintosh).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References
1
2

3

4
5
6

7
8

9

10

11

12

13
14
15
16

17
18

19

20

Li, W. et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the SARS
coronavirus. Nature 426, 450-454, doi:10.1038/nature02145 (2003).
Kuba, K. et al. A crucial role of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in SARS
coronavirus–induced lung injury. Nature Medicine 11, 875-879, doi:10.1038/nm1267
(2005).
Li, F., Li, W., Farzan, M. & Harrison, S. C. Structure of SARS Coronavirus Spike ReceptorBinding Domain Complexed with Receptor. Science 309, 1864,
doi:10.1126/science.1116480 (2005).
Wrapp, D. et al. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation.
Science 367, 1260-1263, doi:papers3://publication/doi/10.1126/science.abb2507 (2020).
Yan, R. et al. Structural basis for the recognition of SARS-CoV-2 by full-length human
ACE2. Science 367, 1444, doi:10.1126/science.abb2762 (2020).
Li, W. et al. Identification of sialic acid-binding function for the Middle East respiratory
syndrome coronavirus spike glycoprotein. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 114, E8508, doi:10.1073/pnas.1712592114 (2017).
Schwegmann-Weßels, C. & Herrler, G. Sialic acids as receptor determinants for
coronaviruses. Glycoconjugate Journal 23, 51-58, doi:10.1007/s10719-006-5437-9 (2006).
Hulswit, R. J. G. et al. Human coronaviruses OC43 and HKU1 bind to 9-O-acetylated sialic
acids via a conserved receptor-binding site in spike protein domain A. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 116, 2681, doi:10.1073/pnas.1809667116 (2019).
Park, Y.-J. et al. Structures of MERS-CoV spike glycoprotein in complex with sialoside
attachment receptors. Nat Struct Mol Biol 26, 1151-1157,
doi:papers3://publication/doi/10.1038/s41594-019-0334-7 (2019).
Qing, E., Hantak, M., Perlman, S. & Gallagher, T. Distinct Roles for Sialoside and Protein
Receptors in Coronavirus Infection. mBio 11, e02764-02719, doi:10.1128/mBio.02764-19
(2020).
Morniroli, D., Giannì, M. L., Consales, A., Pietrasanta, C. & Mosca, F. Human Sialome and
Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19) Pandemic: An Understated Correlation? Frontiers
in Immunology 11, doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.01480 (2020).
Alexander N., B. et al. The SARS-COV-2 Spike Protein Binds Sialic Acids, and Enables
Rapid Detection in a Lateral Flow Point of Care Diagnostic Device. ChemRxiv,
doi:10.26434/chemrxiv.12465680.v1 (2020).
Nguyen, L. et al. Sialic acid-Dependent Binding and Viral Entry of SARS-CoV-2. bioRxiv,
2021.2003.2008.434228, doi:10.1101/2021.03.08.434228 (2021).
Hao, W. et al. Binding of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein to Glycans. bioRxiv,
2020.2005.2017.100537, doi:10.1101/2020.05.17.100537 (2020).
Clausen, T. M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Infection Depends on Cellular Heparan Sulfate and
ACE2. Cell 183, 1043-1057.e1015, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.033 (2020).
Behloul, N., Baha, S., Shi, R. & Meng, J. Role of the GTNGTKR motif in the N-terminal
receptor-binding domain of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Virus Research 286, 198058,
doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2020.198058 (2020).
Chi, X. et al. A neutralizing human antibody binds to the N-terminal domain of the Spike
protein of SARS-CoV-2. Science, eabc6952, doi:10.1126/science.abc6952 (2020).
Mayer, M. & Meyer, B. Characterization of Ligand Binding by Saturation Transfer
Difference NMR Spectroscopy. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 38, 1784-1788,
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1521-3773(19990614)38:12<1784::AID-ANIE1784>3.0.CO;2-Q (1999).
Wagstaff, J. L., Taylor, S. L. & Howard, M. J. Recent developments and applications of
saturation transfer difference nuclear magnetic resonance (STD NMR) spectroscopy.
Molecular BioSystems 9, 571-577, doi:10.1039/C2MB25395J (2013).
Angulo, J., Enríquez-Navas, P. M. & Nieto, P. M. Ligand–Receptor Binding Affinities from
Saturation Transfer Difference (STD) NMR Spectroscopy: The Binding Isotherm of STD

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

21

22

23
24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32
33
34
35

36

37
38

Initial Growth Rates. Chemistry – A European Journal 16, 7803-7812,
doi:10.1002/chem.200903528 (2010).
Rambaut, A. et al. A dynamic nomenclature proposal for SARS-CoV-2 lineages to assist
genomic epidemiology. Nature Microbiology 5, 1403-1407, doi:10.1038/s41564-020-07705 (2020).
Huang, R., Bonnichon, A., Claridge, T. D. W. & Leung, I. K. H. Protein-ligand binding
affinity determination by the waterLOGSY method: An optimised approach considering
ligand rebinding. Scientific Reports 7, 43727, doi:10.1038/srep43727 (2017).
Baldwin, A. J. et al. Cytochrome Display on Amyloid Fibrils. Journal of the American
Chemical Society 128, 2162-2163, doi:10.1021/ja0565673 (2006).
Carver, J. A., Aquilina, J. A., Truscott, R. J. W. & Ralston, G. B. Identification by 1H NMR
spectroscopy of flexible C-terminal extensions in bovine lens α-crystallin. FEBS Letters
311, 143-149, doi:10.1016/0014-5793(92)81386-Z (1992).
Hsu, S.-T. D. et al. Structure and dynamics of a ribosome-bound nascent chain by NMR
spectroscopy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, 16516,
doi:10.1073/pnas.0704664104 (2007).
Mayer, M. & Meyer, B. Group Epitope Mapping by Saturation Transfer Difference NMR To
Identify Segments of a Ligand in Direct Contact with a Protein Receptor. Journal of the
American Chemical Society 123, 6108-6117, doi:10.1021/ja0100120 (2001).
Vallurupalli, P., Bouvignies, G. & Kay, L. E. Studying “Invisible” Excited Protein States in
Slow Exchange with a Major State Conformation. Journal of the American Chemical
Society 134, 8148-8161, doi:10.1021/ja3001419 (2012).
Xie, T., Saleh, T., Rossi, P. & Kalodimos, C. G. Conformational states dynamically
populated by a kinase determine its function. Science 370, eabc2754,
doi:10.1126/science.abc2754 (2020).
Fawzi, N. L., Ying, J., Torchia, D. A. & Clore, G. M. Probing exchange kinetics and atomic
resolution dynamics in high-molecular-weight complexes using dark-state exchange
saturation transfer NMR spectroscopy. Nature Protocols 7, 1523-1533,
doi:10.1038/nprot.2012.077 (2012).
Allard, P., Helgstrand, M. & Härd, T. The Complete Homogeneous Master Equation for a
Heteronuclear Two-Spin System in the Basis of Cartesian Product Operators. Journal of
Magnetic Resonance 134, 7-16, doi:10.1006/jmre.1998.1509 (1998).
Marty, M. T. et al. Bayesian Deconvolution of Mass and Ion Mobility Spectra: From Binary
Interactions to Polydisperse Ensembles. Analytical Chemistry 87, 4370-4376,
doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.5b00140 (2015).
Richardson, W. H. Bayesian-Based Iterative Method of Image Restoration*. J. Opt. Soc.
Am. 62, 55-59, doi:10.1364/JOSA.62.000055 (1972).
Lucy, L. B. An iterative technique for the rectification of observed distributions.
Astronomical Journal 79, 745 (1974).
McMenamy, R. H. & Oncley, J. L. The Specific Binding of L-Tryptophan to Serum Albumin.
Journal of Biological Chemistry 233, 1436-1447 (1958).
Fielding, L., Rutherford, S. & Fletcher, D. Determination of protein–ligand binding affinity by
NMR: observations from serum albumin model systems. Magnetic Resonance in
Chemistry 43, 463-470, doi:10.1002/mrc.1574 (2005).
Bujacz, A., Zielinski, K. & Sekula, B. Structural studies of bovine, equine, and leporine
serum albumin complexes with naproxen. Proteins: Structure, Function, and
Bioinformatics 82, 2199-2208, doi:10.1002/prot.24583 (2014).
Pérez-Victoria, I. et al. Saturation transfer difference NMR reveals functionally essential
kinetic differences for a sugar-binding repressor protein. Chemical Communications,
5862-5864, doi:10.1039/B913489A (2009).
Hars, U., Horlacher, R., Boos, W., Welte, W. & Diederichs, K. Crystal structure of the
effector-binding domain of the trehalose-repressor of Escherichia coli, a member of the
LacI family, in its complexes with inducer trehalose-6-phosphate and noninducer
trehalose. Protein Science 7, 2511-2521, doi:10.1002/pro.5560071204 (1998).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

39
40
41

42
43

44

45

46

47

48

49
50

51
52

53

54

55
56
57
58

McConnell, H. M. Reaction Rates by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance. J. Chem. Phys. 28,
430, doi: 10.1063/1.1744152 (1958).
Watanabe, Y., Allen, J. D., Wrapp, D., McLellan, J. S. & Crispin, M. Site-specific glycan
analysis of the SARS-CoV-2 spike. Science,
doi:papers3://publication/doi/10.1126/science.abb9983 (2020).
Mammen, M., Choi, S.-K. & Whitesides, G. M. Polyvalent Interactions in Biological
Systems: Implications for Design and Use of Multivalent Ligands and Inhibitors.
Angewandte Chemie International Edition 37, 2754-2794, doi:10.1002/(SICI)15213773(19981102)37:20<2754::AID-ANIE2754>3.0.CO;2-3 (1998).
Lee, R. T. & Lee, Y. C. Affinity enhancement by multivalent lectin–carbohydrate interaction.
Glycoconjugate Journal 17, 543-551, doi:10.1023/A:1011070425430 (2000).
Dominguez, C., Boelens, R. & Bonvin, A. M. J. J. HADDOCK: A Protein−Protein Docking
Approach Based on Biochemical or Biophysical Information. Journal of the American
Chemical Society 125, 1731-1737, doi:10.1021/ja026939x (2003).
van Zundert, G. C. P. et al. The HADDOCK2.2 Web Server: User-Friendly Integrative
Modeling of Biomolecular Complexes. Journal of Molecular Biology 428, 720-725,
doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2015.09.014 (2016).
Imberty, A. et al. An Unusual Carbohydrate Binding Site Revealed by the Structures of Two
Maackia amurensis Lectins Complexed with Sialic Acid-containing Oligosaccharides.
Journal of Biological Chemistry 275, 17541-17548 (2000).
Huo, J. et al. Neutralizing nanobodies bind SARS-CoV-2 spike RBD and block interaction
with ACE2. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 27, 846-854, doi:10.1038/s41594-0200469-6 (2020).
Tibshirani, R. Regression Shrinkage and Selection Via the Lasso. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 58, 267-288, doi:10.1111/j.25176161.1996.tb02080.x (1996).
Koths, K., Taylor, E., Halenbeck, R., Casipit, C. & Wang, A. Cloning and characterization of
a human Mac-2-binding protein, a new member of the superfamily defined by the
macrophage scavenger receptor cysteine-rich domain. Journal of Biological Chemistry
268, 14245-14249 (1993).
Johannes, L., Jacob, R. & Leffler, H. Galectins at a glance. Journal of Cell Science 131,
jcs208884, doi:10.1242/jcs.208884 (2018).
Stowell, S. R. et al. Galectin-1, -2, and -3 Exhibit Differential Recognition of Sialylated
Glycans and Blood Group Antigens. Journal of Biological Chemistry 283, 10109-10123,
doi:10.1074/jbc.M709545200 (2008).
Kamili, N. A. et al. Key regulators of galectin–glycan interactions. PROTEOMICS 16, 31113125, doi:10.1002/pmic.201600116 (2016).
Togayachi, A. et al. beta 3GNT2 (B3GNT2), A MAJOR POLYLACTOSAMINE SYNTHASE:
ANALYSIS OF B3GNT2-DEFICIENT MICE. Methods in Enzymology, Vol 502: Protein
Engineering for Therapeutics, Pt A 479, 185-204,
doi:papers3://publication/doi/10.1016/S0076-6879(10)79011-X (2010).
Jia, N. et al. The Human Lung Glycome Reveals Novel Glycan Ligands for Influenza A
Virus. Scientific Reports 10, doi:papers3://publication/doi/10.1038/s41598-020-62074-z
(2020).
Toscano, M. A. et al. Differential glycosylation of T H 1, T H 2 and T H -17 effector cells
selectively regulates susceptibility to cell death. Nat Immunol 8, 825-834,
doi:papers3://publication/doi/10.1038/ni1482 (2007).
Yamada, S. et al. Haemagglutinin mutations responsible for the binding of H5N1 influenza
A viruses to human-type receptors. Nature 444, 378-382, doi:10.1038/nature05264 (2006).
Watanabe, Y. et al. Vulnerabilities in coronavirus glycan shields despite extensive
glycosylation. Nature Communications 11, 2688, doi:10.1038/s41467-020-16567-0 (2020).
Casalino, L. et al. Beyond Shielding: The Roles of Glycans in the SARS-CoV-2 Spike
Protein. ACS Central Science, doi:10.1021/acscentsci.0c01056 (2020).
Huo, J. et al. Neutralization of SARS-CoV-2 by Destruction of the Prefusion Spike. Cell
Host & Microbe 28, 445-454.e446, doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.06.010 (2020).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.14.439284; this version posted April 14, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is
made available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

59

60

61

62

63

64
65
66

67

68

69

70
71

Collins, B. E. et al. High-Affinity Ligand Probes of CD22 Overcome the Threshold Set by
&lt;em&gt;cis&lt;/em&gt; Ligands to Allow for Binding, Endocytosis, and Killing of B Cells.
The Journal of Immunology 177, 2994, doi:10.4049/jimmunol.177.5.2994 (2006).
Chuang, W.-L., McAllister, H. & Rabenstein, D. L. Chromatographic methods for productprofile analysis and isolation of oligosaccharides produced by heparinase-catalyzed
depolymerization of heparin. Journal of Chromatography A 932, 65-74,
doi:10.1016/S0021-9673(01)01241-9 (2001).
Powell, A. K., Ahmed, Y. A., Yates, E. A. & Turnbull, J. E. Generating heparan sulfate
saccharide libraries for glycomics applications. Nature Protocols 5, 821-833,
doi:10.1038/nprot.2010.17 (2010).
Jayalakshmi, V. & Krishna, N. R. Complete Relaxation and Conformational Exchange
Matrix (CORCEMA) Analysis of Intermolecular Saturation Transfer Effects in Reversibly
Forming Ligand–Receptor Complexes. Journal of Magnetic Resonance 155, 106-118,
doi:10.1006/jmre.2001.2499 (2002).
Nakamura, K. et al. Immobilized glycosylated Fmoc-amino acid for SPR: comparative
studies of lectin-binding to linear or biantennary diLacNAc structures. Carbohydrate
Research 382, 77-85, doi:10.1016/j.carres.2013.10.003 (2013).
Sali, A. Comparative protein modeling by satisfaction of spatial restraints. Molecular
Medicine Today 1, 270-277, doi:10.1016/S1357-4310(95)91170-7 (1995).
Shen, M.-y. & Sali, A. Statistical potential for assessment and prediction of protein
structures. Protein Science 15, 2507-2524, doi:10.1110/ps.062416606 (2006).
Koukos, P. I., Xue, L. C. & Bonvin, A. M. J. J. Protein–ligand pose and affinity prediction:
Lessons from D3R Grand Challenge 3. Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design 33,
83-91, doi:10.1007/s10822-018-0148-4 (2019).
Guyon, I., Weston, J., Barnhill, S. & Vapnik, V. Gene Selection for Cancer Classification
using Support Vector Machines. Machine Learning 46, 389-422,
doi:10.1023/A:1012487302797 (2002).
Lepre, C. A., Moore, J. M. & Peng, J. W. Theory and Applications of NMR-Based
Screening in Pharmaceutical Research. Chemical Reviews 104, 3641-3676,
doi:10.1021/cr030409h (2004).
Viegas, A., Manso, J., Nobrega, F. L. & Cabrita, E. J. Saturation-Transfer Difference (STD)
NMR: A Simple and Fast Method for Ligand Screening and Characterization of Protein
Binding. Journal of Chemical Education 88, 990-994, doi:10.1021/ed101169t (2011).
Abragam, A. The Principles of Nuclear Magnetism. (Clarendon Press, 1961).
Taylor, J. R. & Taylor, S. L. L. J. R. Introduction To Error Analysis: The Study of
Uncertainties in Physical Measurements. (University Science Books, 1997).

