bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Active learning tools improve the learning outcomes, scientific attitude and critical
thinking in higher education: Experiences in an online course during the COVID-19
pandemic

Izadora Volpato Rossia, Jordana Dinorá de Limaa, Bruna Sabatkea, Maria Alice Ferreira
Nunesa, Graciela Evans Ramirezb, Marcel Ivan Ramirezc,d

a.

Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biologia Celular e Molecular, Federal University of

Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil
b.

Technological Professional Education Sector, Federal University of Paraná, PR,

Brazil
c.

Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil

d.

Department of Biochemistry, Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil

Correspondence author: Marcel I. Ramirez marcel.iva.ramirez@gmail.com;

Financial support. This study received support from FIOCRUZ, CNPq, CAPES and
Programa Básico de Parasitologia AUXPE 2041/2011 (CAPES) Brazil. M.I.R is currently
fellow from CNPq-Brazil.

All authors have seen and approved the manuscript. The manuscript hasn't been accepted
or published elsewhere.
No competing interest has been declared.

Abstract:

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Active teaching methodologies have been placed as a hope for changing education at
different levels, transiting from passive lecture-centered to student-centered learning. With
the health measures of social distance, the COVID-19 pandemic forced a strong shift to
remote education. With the challenge of delivering quality education through a computer
screen, we validated and applied an online course model using active teaching tools for
higher education. We incorporated published active-learning strategies into an online
construct, with problem-based inquiry and design of inquiry research projects to serve as our
core active-learning tool. The gains related to students' science learning experiences and
their attitudes towards science were assessed by applying questionnaires before, during and
after the course. The course counted on the participation of 83 students, most of them
(60,8%) from post-graduate students. Our results show that engagement provided by active
learning methods can improve performance both in hard and soft skills. Students
participation seems to be more relevant when activities require interaction of information,
prediction and reasoning, such as open-ended questions and design of research projects.
Therefore, our data shows that, in pandemic, active learning tools benefit students and
improve their critical thinking and their motivation and positive positioning in science.

Keywords: Active learning, biology course, higher education, e-learning, COVID-19
pandemic, critical thinking

INTRODUCTION

Academically first world countries have debated how the training of students should
be, from basic primary education at schools to higher education at universities (Aldenmyr et
al., 2012; Biesta, 2009; Janmaat and Piattoeva, 2007; Veugelers, 2007). A major concern is
how education can collaborate in the formation of citizens and professionals capable of
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

leading technological, economic, social, cultural and political changes (Nussbaum, 2006;
Ross, 2007; White, 2013). Specifically, in the area of science, researchers should be trained
with skills that go beyond the technical reproduction of experiments, but that employs critical
thinking and that are capable of applying scientific concepts to propose solutions and
generate knowledge (Gormally et al., 2012; Lederman et al., 2013; Turiman et al., 2012).
The change of curricular programs in the STEM area (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) and new proposals for educational strategies have been stimulated in different
countries (Bybee, 2010; Kennedy and Odell, 2014). Lecture-based and teacher-centered
pedagogy is undergoing a shift towards more active learning, in which students build their
own understanding of a subject through learning activities (Michael, 2006; Wright, 2011).
The benefits of active learning seem substantial, both in cognitive learning and in the
development of soft skills by students, such as leadership, problem-solving, and autonomy
(Chau and Cheung, 2018; Oros, 2007; Stefanou et al., 2013). In Brazil, few efforts have
been made to discuss structural changes in education from basic to university. The absence
of adequate working conditions encourages teachers to adopt an old-fashioned type of
education, in which passive teaching methods predominate. Although there is no state
initiative that encourages the incorporation of active learning methods, some higher teaching
institutions have introduced methods of problem solving, critical thinking and/ or problembased learning with an inspiring success (Araujo and Slomski, 2013; Bestetti et al., 2014;
Mesquita et al., 2015; Randi and Carvalho, 2013).
Active learning comprises approaches that focus more on developing students' skills
than transmitting information and require students to perform activities that require higher
order thinking (Michael, 2006). For this, students use critical thinking, which involves
analysis, reflection, evaluation, interpretation and inference to synthesize information that is
obtained through reading, observation, communication or experience to answer a question
(Halpern, 1999; Nelson and Crow, 2014). There are several methodologies that fit the
concept of active teaching, such as inquiry-based learning, project-based learning and
problem-based learning (Ishiyama, 2013; Stefanou et al., 2013; Walker, 2003). Among them
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

is, for example, project-based learning is a model that organizes learning around projects, in
which challenging questions or problems are involved that involve proposing solutions,
formulating hypotheses and investigative activities (Stefanou et al., 2013).
The COVID-19 pandemic has produced a situation of health emergency, economic
and social instability that challenged the entire educational system. The intense contact and
exchange of information that took place during face-to-face classes in normal life have been
restricted to virtual spaces. Given all these sudden changes, online courses have been a
viable option to prepare students at different levels (Fig. 1). Although some groups have
already reported their teaching experiences and perceptions in times of lockdown and social
distance (Donitsa-Schmidt and Ramot, 2020; Dutta, 2020; Murphy, 2020; Qiang et al., 2020;
Regier et al., 2020; Sunasee, 2020; van der Spoel et al., 2020), very few of them reported
the impact of active learning on online courses, and rarer are the studies in post-graduate
students. During the pandemic, we have seen the opportunity to validate a course model
with the aim of actively encouraging students of higher education to acquire important
biological concepts. We planned to create a rich, multifaceted course that integrated active
learning methodologies. We incorporated active-learning strategies that allowed transit in the
course from passive lecture-centered to active student-centered learning. With this
approach, we were interested in understanding the added value of our course at the student
formation and in answering two important questions:
i. Does the course increase the cognitive and intellectual skills of the students?
ii. How was the impact of critical thinking methodologies into the student’s attitudes
towards science and soft skills?
Our interest was concentrated in analyzing whether students through the course
showed more enthusiasm for the concept of research and science. Crucial elements in
science such as forming and testing hypotheses, defining strategies, communicating results
were evaluated to determine whether critical thinking methods could improve thinking and
rational logic. In order to assess students' gains in these two aspects, we applied
questionnaires to students before, during and after the course. Here, we will comment on the
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

results of this experience that incorporated active methodologies and student-teacher
interaction tools for remote higher education.

Fig. 1. Passive (teacher-centered) and active (student-centered) learning in classroom or
remote teaching models.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

1.

Undergraduate pilot course to validate online active-learning tools
In order to validate an online course model and test some active learning tools, we

have offered a course aimed primarily at undergraduates. The subject of this course was cell
culture which has a wide interest and application in the biological area. Knowledge on cell

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

culture is required for some research activities and also represents a promising alternative
for replacement of animal experimentation.
In order to follow contagious preventive actions during the COVID-19 pandemic, the
course was administered remotely in a teleconference format through the Microsoft Teams
platform. This platform allows the instructors to interact through video, audio and live chat,
which gives the feeling of a personal meeting from a safe distance. Before each class, there
was a moment of relaxation with ―icebreaker‖ conversations to get to know the audience.
This moment helped to create a more intimate environment and also to share tensions and
concerns about the pandemic.
The course had a total of 15 hours, 10 hours of synchronous activities and 5 hours of
asynchronous activities. Synchronous activities included lectures, simultaneous online quiz
activities and discussion of scientific papers. Asynchronous activities consisted of two
questionnaires containing guided questions for critical reading of a scientific paper (one of
papers involving chronic diseases and the other infectious diseases). After returning this
questionnaire, the papers were discussed during classes. To measure perceptions of the
overall effectiveness of the course and the proposed methodologies, we asked students to
complete a questionnaire at the end of the course.

2. Experimental undergraduate and postgraduate course
a. Course design
The experimentation course was offered as a satellite event during a symposium hosted
by a Post-Graduate Program at a Brazilian state university. The focus of the course was
redefined from our previous basic course to contemplate strategies for the study of infectious
diseases using cell culture. In order to know the profile of the enrolled students, we applied
two questionnaires containing open and closed questions: one with demographic questions
and previous research experience and the other about their previous experiences with active
learning methodologies.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The course had a short duration (12h total), divided between synchronous (7h) and
asynchronous activities (5h). The synchronous activities of the course were structured as
follows: (i) 2h of key concepts to introduce the subject and situate the content and emphasis
of the course; (ii) 2h of strategies for studying the pathogen-host cell interaction using cell
culture, (iii) 1h of presentation of a inquiry research project (IRP) with the subject chosen by
the participant, (iv) 1h of questions about concepts and strategies to solve problems (Table
1). The ―offline‖ time was used to prepare the scientific IRP and participate in the
questionnaires with questions related to the classes. The description of the activities
developed can be found in the topic ―Active learning instruments/tools‖ below.

Table 1. Course Schedule
Learning

Description

S.A.T.

A.A.T.

2h

0

2h

0

activities
Lecture

1.

- Dynamic interaction between pathogens and

Introductory

host

concepts

- Virulence factors of pathogens
- Biology of the host cell
- Cell culture basis

Lecture 2. Study

- Genetic manipulation of molecules related to the

strategies

interaction

of

pathogen-host cell

- Changes in the host cell

interaction

- Secretion of factors by pathogens

cell culture

using

- Evaluation of immune system modulation
- Evaluation of cellular communication (Protein
secretion,

Quorum

sensing,

Extracellular

vesicles)

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Simultaneous

Quick fixation questions answered online in real

Online Quiz

time and then corrected

Inquiry

Preparation and presentation of IRP with theme

research

project

chosen by the participant

Problem-based

Questions

inquiry

strategies for solving biology problems

of

class

related

concepts

and

1h

0

1h

3h

1h

2h

S.A.T.: Synchronous Activities Time. A.A.T.: Asynchronous Activities Time

b. Active learning instruments/tools
In order to place the student as the center of the course, we incorporated some activelearning strategies into an online course construct. Some moments of the dynamics of the
classes and the approaches used during the course are gathered in Suppl. Video 1. We
proposed some activities that required student’s engagement:
i. Quiz:
The quiz was a knowledge fixation tool performed at the end of lectures. In this
activity, participants answered questions related to the presented content directly through
the Voxvote website (https://www.voxvote.com/). Table 2 contains some examples of applied
questions; the questions were corrected at the end of the time proposed by the VoxVote tool
(Suppl. Video 1, min 02:36 - 02:51).

Table 2 - Examples of questions administered during live quiz using VoxVote
1. The tropism of pathogens for some tissue is highly linked to which components?
a. Enrichment of cholesterol and membrane lipids
b. Nuclear proteins, such as histones
c. Surface proteins and their receptors in the host cell
d. Cytoskeleton organization

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2. Considering the following sentence, mark the incorrect statement:
To determine the ligand of a pathogen that binds to a host cell receptor (during
pathogen-host cell interaction) through genetic manipulation, we could:
a. Inhibit a pathogen-specific target antigen / ligand by RNAi
b. Mutate the known receptor for the specific target ligand
c. Overexpress the pathogen-specific target antigen / ligand
d. Inhibit a signal transduction pathway activated in the interaction

ii. Inquiry research project (IRP):
We proposed to the participants to develop an inquiry research project (IRP) to
stimulate the construction of knowledge and critical thinking. The IRP should contain the
scientific relevance of the project, main objectives and methodologies to achieve the
proposed objectives. Along with the description of the project, participants could send a
graphic design summarizing their project proposal, following a Graphical Abstract model
indicated as a reference (Suppl. Fig. 1). The IRP was sent using Google Forms. The IRP
proposals were evaluated by all instructors who selected the best 10 for presentation based
on criteria of coherence and conceptualization of the biological question, ampleness of the
applied methodologies and connection between the proposed strategies.
iii. Inquiry questionnaires:
Two online questionnaires were sent to all participants via email and were available
for at least 48 hours. Both questionnaires contained 8 multiple-choice and 4 open-ended
questions about biological concepts related to the course subject. The first questionnaire
(Q1) was available before the beginning of the course, while the second (Q2) was available
two days after the experimental course started. Q1 and Q2 had the same level of difficulty,
with multiple-choices (basic) and problem-based questions (open-ended) (see Table 3). Q2
was answered while the students were simultaneously participating in several activities of
the hosted event.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 3 - Examples of questions applied in the inquiry questionnaires.
Q1
Multiple-choice questions
The fluidity of the plasma membrane
increases with:
a) Increased unsaturated acids in the
membrane
b) Increased saturated acids in the
membrane
c) Increased glycolipid in the membrane
d) Increased phospholipid in the membrane

Open-ended questions
You read in a scientific article that
Dexamethasone (a corticosteroid type drug)
helps in the treatment of coronavirus
infection, but the article provided only clinical
data on mortality, intubation rate or length of
hospitalization time. How would you
investigate the mechanism of action of
Dexamethasone for the benefits seen in the
study?
Q2

Multiple-choice questions
Check the correct alternative regarding the
immune system:
a) Analyzing only one cell type can already
define the complete profile of the host
response during an infection.
b) The immune response against a pathogen
is always pro-inflammatory
c) Dendritic cells are very homogeneous in
terms of their markers and their performance.
d) Cytokines coordinate the action of different
cell types in different tissues. Deregulation of
cytokine release generates a phenomenon
called cytokine storm.

Open-ended questions
One of the mechanisms of fungi and bacteria
virulence is the formation of biofilm. These
structures contribute to antibiotic resistance.
How would you experimentally demonstrate
that biofilm is important in the pathogenesis of
a disease and for antibiotic resistance?

c. Inquiry Questionnaire Assessment
Questionnaire responses were corrected by five evaluators. Multiple-choice questions
scores were calculated by sum of the right answers. Open-ended questions required a more
detailed evaluation process where four evaluation criteria were scored in each answer:
comprehension, specificity, ampleness and connection. All evaluators considered whether
the student had understood the question (comprehension), the approaches that the student
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

proposed to solve the problem (ampleness), the specificity of this or these approaches
(specificity) and the rationale and feasibility of the strategy (connection). For comprehension
evaluation only 0 (lack of comprehension) and 1 (adequately answered). The other criteria
considered three levels of score: insufficient (0), good (1) and excellent (2). The maximum
score was 7 points to each answer. Answers zeroed in comprehension were not evaluated in
the remaining criteria. Furthermore, the order of questions and answers were randomized to
avoid possible bias during the assessment process. The scores were generated from the
average of 5 evaluators. Total score was calculated by the sum of multiple-choice questions
(0-50%) and open-ended questions (0-50%).
Intra-questionnaires comparisons, i.e. between questions, were assessed by
ANOVA, while questionnaire differences were analyzed by unpaired t-test. All analyses were
performed in GraphPad Prism version 6.01.

d. Analysis of students' perception of the course
At the end of the course, students were asked to fill up their impressions and
suggestions about the course in a feedback form containing multiple-choice and open-ended
questions. Some questions were to choose the sentence which they felt more identified and
in others the students evaluated sentences in a 5 points scale, with 0 being "nothing" and 5
being "very" (Likert scale. Likert, 1932). Open-ended questions were added to stimulate the
students to express their opinion about the course. The open-ended data was coded in
categories considering the most cited answer for each question. Qualitative thematic content
analysis was applied to quantify answers, providing support for a quantitative evaluation.

RESULTS

1. Online course can be a platform of active learning methodologies: a pilot experience
In order to validate an online course model and test some active learning tools, we have
offered a course aimed primarily at undergraduates during pandemic. The wide theme Cell
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Culture was well received by students, attracting participants from different fields of health
sciences (including biology, biomedicine, pharmacy, biotechnology and medicine - data not
shown) and with different backgrounds (3,37% bachelor degree, 56.75% undergraduate
students, 18.91% mastering students, 4,72% masters, 10,13% doctoral students, graduate
course 2,02% and 4,05% doctoral also participated. n = 148. Suppl. Fig. 2 A).
The great advantage of remote education is being able to bring together or to mix
participants from different educational institutions and different backgrounds. Participants
were from 22 different Brazilian institutions and 1 foreign institution, with public and private
education (Suppl. Fig. 2 B).
Although only 29% of students had worked with cell culture, the positive perception of
the course was very high (Fig. 2 A). Moreover, 87% of the participants evaluated the course
as excellent (Fig. 2 B). Active learning tools used during the course (real-time online quiz
(live), paper reading guide, etc.) was positively rated by participants (data not shown) and
the participants pointed out as main strengths the didactics, teaching methodology and the
interaction between teacher and student (Fig. 2 C).
Excited by the positive experience of the first course, we decided to go deeper into a
course aimed at postgraduate students to understand whether active learning tools could
improve their cognitive and thinking skills. With the validation and approval of the active
learning approach, we decided to maintain some activities (such as the real-time online quiz
and questionnaires) and adjust some activities targeting the topic to the participants.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 2. The methodology tools used during the validation course were positively
evaluated by the participants. A. Course evaluation by participants. B Contribution in the
course in learning cell culture. C. The open-ended question on ―Course strengths‖ was
content analyzed, and the responses were classified into categories that included similar
statements.

2. Experimental course: active learning tools improve the performance of students in
higher education
2. 1. Participants Students profile: a representative sample of Brazilian higher education
The second experience with the online course model had a heterogeneous audience
profile, including participants with different levels and from different locations. There were 83
enrolled, most of them master students (38.0%) (Fig. 3 A).

Undergraduate students

constituted 24.1% and PhD students 19.0%. There was also the participation of PhDs,
constituting a very heterogeneous public. The participants belonged to 22 Brazilian
institutions from different states (Fig. 3 B). Although 94% had previous research experience,
only 59.4% had experience on cell culture (Suppl. Fig. 3 A), either carrying out in vitro
experiments (full experience) or just accompanying other people (partial experience) (Fig. 3
C). The focus of the course was infectious diseases, which was the object of work of 59.5%
of participants, including the biological model of bacteria (20.3%), fungi (15.2%), parasites
(16.5%) and viruses (7.6%) (Suppl. Fig. 3 B).

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 3. The audience of attendants to the course was heterogeneous. A. Participants'
educational background, divided between complete or incomplete. Others include
"Specialist" as complete and "Incomplete second degree" and "Residency" as incomplete. B.
Distribution of participants' institutions in Brazilian states (highlighted in gray). C. Students'
previous experience with cell culture techniques.

To obtain an overview of students' previous experience with teaching methodologies, we
asked students (n=60) about which method was most used during their academic
experience. The majority of the respondents (76,7%) affirm that their predominant teaching
approach was passive, mainly represented by traditional lectures (Suppl. Fig. 4 A and B).
Among graduate students, 50% answered that their classes have similar proportions
between active and passive classes (Suppl. Fig. 4 C). When asked in an open question
about what could be improved in their education (undergraduate or graduate), 72.1% of
students admitted that other teaching approaches could be employed (data not shown).
Most comments pointed to the necessity of interactive classes, including solving clinical
cases and practical application of knowledge. The answers pointed out that most of the
students (76.7%) consider that active teaching methodologies are excellent for their learning
and that participating interactively in the subjects improve their apprenticeship (Suppl. Fig. 4
D).

2.2. Active methodologies promote improved short-term learning outcomes

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Interested in observing the development of students during the course, we used
research-based learning approaches through the application of questionnaires in a pre-test
(Q1) and post-test (Q2). Fifty-four students participated in the online questionnaire activities
(Suppl. Fig. 5 - graduation: n=14; masters: n=25; doctoral: n=14; post-doctoral: n=3; other:
n=1). Most of them participated in the first questionnaire (Q1: n=49), while a minority
participated in the second one (Q2: n=26); finally, twenty students participated in both
questionnaires.
The average scores of students in the questionnaires was higher in Q2 compared to Q1
(Fig. 4 A, Suppl. Table 1). This progress was distributed similarly through multiple-choice
(13,51%) and open-ended questions (15.67%). In average, no student had zeroed their
score in Q2, which may represent that students were more committed to the second test
(Fig. 4 A). The proportion of students with high performance (total score > 80%) was at least
3 times higher in Q2 compared to Q1 (6,1% at Q1 and 19,2% at Q2. Fig. 4 B). The students
showed improvement in all four criteria evaluated in the open-ended questions from Q1 to
Q2 (Suppl. Fig. 6). When multiple-choice and open-ended questions were analyzed
separately, Q2's superior performance was predominantly due to the scores at the multiplechoice questions (Fig. 4 C) than from the open-ended (Fig. 4 D).

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 4. Students showed a rapid evolution in their performance during the course. A.
General average score in each questionnaire (0-100%); multiple-choice and open-ended
questions represent 50% of the score each; B. Proportion of students within score ranges in
Q1 (n = 49) and Q2 (n=26). C. Students’ scores average only in the multiple-choice
questions between questionnaires; D. Students’ scores average only in the open-ended
questions between questionnaires.

We hypothesized that the overall improvement of open-ended questions may be due
to a lower engagement at the more difficult and exploratory questions (such as the openended questions). Regarding this point we calculated the student dropout rate to each
question by the rate of NA answers - i.e. described as blank answers and ―I don’t know‖ type
of answers. In fact, the dropout for open-ended questions (Q1: 22% and Q2: 15%, Table 4)
was higher than for multiple-choice questions, which was irrelevant (Q1: 2% and Q2: 0%).
Furthermore, there was a 31.8% reduction in the dropout rate in open-ended questions from
Q2 compared to Q1 (Table 4). This may indicate that the students felt more confident and

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

motivated to commit intellectual effort during the performance of Q2, resulting in a better
outcome.

Table 4. Dropout rate among open-ended questions in Q1 and Q2. Dropout was
considered for blank answers and ―I don’t know‖ type of answers. ―OE‖ stands for openended questions from 1 to 4 in each questionnaire.

OE 1

OE 2

OE 3

OE 4

Dropout average

Q1

14%

32%

22%

20%

22%

Q2

19%

11%

7%

22%

15%

2.3.

Formulating hypotheses and proposing strategies: a scientist-like experience
through project-based learning

The inclusion of project-based learning strategies is effective in STEM courses, to
involve students in authentic ―real world‖ tasks (Reeve and Tseng, 2011; Stefanou et al.,
2013). During the course, students were motivated to prepare a mini scientific project to
answer a biological question of their interest, applying cell culture strategies (see Materials
and Methods). The elaboration of the scientific IRP represented the most demanding activity
for the student and we had only 26,5% of participation (22 IRPs), most of which are master's
students (Suppl. Fig. 7). This type of activity was a challenge for the students, who feel
freedom to "think outside the box" and find ways to answer their biological questions. Many
students elaborate different and curious hypotheses, from which the instructors selected the
10 best IRPs based on criteria of coherence, conceptualization, applied methodologies and
connection between the proposed strategies. We were able to see some students who stood
out for the quality of their IRP proposal. Interestingly, among the 10 best IRPs selected, the
fourth part was written by undergraduate students (data not shown). In addition, we reserved
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

a period of the course for presentation of the selected IRPs to the whole class at a
―symposium-like moment‖, using their graphical abstracts as a support. This type of activity
adds other soft skills to students, such as communication and accepting challenges,
essential for future scientists. Part of the presentations of the selected students and their
graphical abstract / poster as other course activities were compiled in Suppl. Video 1 (min
03:01 - 03:51).

2.4. Engagement in active-learning activities correlates to better student performance
Active methodologies place the student as the center of learning and for this reason
their effectiveness relies heavily on the student's engagement in activities. Motivated by the
various studies that show a positive correlation between student engagement and
performance (Kennedy and Odell, 2014; Plump and LaRosa, 2017; Renninger and Hidi,
2006; Rodenbusch et al., 2016; Strayhorn, 2008; Wiggins et al., 2017), we assessed
whether the most engaged students during our course had higher scores.
First, we evaluated the scores of the group of students who participated in both
inquiry questionnaires (―BOTH‖) separated from those who have answered only one of the
questionnaires (―ONLY Q1‖ or ―ONLY Q2‖). This analysis showed that students that were
engaged in both activities had higher performance in open-ended questions, but not in
multiple-choice (Fig. 5 A, B).
We hypothesized whether engagement in activities proposed during the course
(questionnaires and IRP) would be related to the best performance of students. For this, we
considered the following groups: students who had been selected as TOP IRP and also
participated in both Q1 and Q2 (TOP IRP + Q1 + Q2, n=5), students who participated in Q1
and Q2 and sent IRP (but were not TOP IRP, named IRP + Q1 + Q2, n=6), students who
only participated in the questionnaires (BOTH Q1 and Q2, n=9) and those who participated
in only one of the questionnaires (Only Q1, n=23 or Only Q2, n=3) (Fig. 5 C). Interestingly,
half of the students who were selected as TOP IRP also engaged in both Q1 and Q2 (n = 5).
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The students who participated in all activities had higher score levels when compared to the
other groups of engagement, mainly in the open-ended questions analyzed separately (Fig.
5 D). Among the students who participated in the IRP, the best scores were from the
students who were in the top-ten IRP (TOP IRP) (Fig. 5 C and D). Our data show that the
participants who answered only one of the questionnaires (Only Q1 or Only Q2) had the
worst scores in the open questions and shows that involvement in more than one activity
improves the student's performance (Fig. 5 D). Altogether, the data show a positive trend in
the relationship between engagement and performance (Suppl. Fig. 8).

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 5. Highly engaged students have better performances in open-ended questions.
A. Students’ scores average in the multiple-choice questions within each engagement
subgroup; B. Students’ scores in the open-ended questions within each engagement
subgroup. C. Venn Diagram, representing the number of participants in each activity (Q1,
Q2, IRP and TOP IRP). D. Total score (%) in Q1 and Q2 analyzed in groups classified by the
level of engagement in the course activities. The questionnaire to which the average scores
refer is indicated by the horizontal bars (Q1 or Q2). E. Students average in multiple-choice
questions within each group engagement. F. Students average in open-ended questions
within each group engagement.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2.4. Active learning tools improve students' critical thinking and motivation in science
The evaluation of the course was positive by 74% of the participants (n=50), who
considered that the course was excellent (Fig. 6 A). The open-ended questions on ―Course
strengths‖ and ―Course weaknesses were content analyzed, and the responses were
classified into categories that included similar statements (Table 6). Among the strengths,
70% of the students considered the didactics as a strong point, which includes the quality of
the presentations, the confidence of the instructors regarding the domain of the content, the
lesson plan, and the dynamics of the class. 56% of the participants assessed that the
student-teacher interaction was a positive aspect of the classes, where the students
revealed that they felt included (even remotely). Another point highlighted as strengths of the
classes was the teaching methodology and the subjects covered, which brought a balance
between variety and depth. As negative points of the course, issues with infrastructure and
technical problems (such as timetable, platform, class time, sound) and course complexity
for a short time were mentioned.

Table 6. The main positive points cited by the students were didactics, teaching
methodology and instructor-student interaction. The open-ended questions on ―Course
strengths‖ and ―Course weaknesses were content analyzed, and the responses were
classified into categories that included similar statements.
Response category

Students answers
(%)

Effective course components (Course strengths)
Instructors didactics

70

Content organization

24

Active teaching methodology

32

Interactivity between instructors and students

56

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Suggested course improvements (Course weakness)
Infrastructure and technical problems (timetable, platform, class
time, sound)

46

Activities complexity

6

Didactics

14

Deviation from Content

6

Online/remote course model

6

Course complexity for a short time

42

Note: content categories in table represent any categories included by more than 6% (n ≥ 3)
of students who responded to feedback.

The students' feelings about the course's active learning tools were assessed by the
feedback form. Students were instructed to rate from 1 to 5 on how positive the online
inquiry questionnaires were for their learning, being 1 "negative" and 5 "very positive". The
average score of the responses was 4.34, indicating that the questionnaires were validated
by the students. Regarding the type of question contained in the questionnaires, 48% of
students prefer multiple-choice questions (Fig. 6 B). This shows that at least half of students
prefer questions that students prefer questions that only recall information and do not require
elaborating their own reasoning. Despite the high preference for multiple-choice questions
among the participants (48%), 62% considered that discursive problem-solving questions
are a great way to make them think critically and formulate strategies for real situations that
a researcher faces (Fig. 6 C).
One of the proposed activities was the writing of an IRP about some biological
question of their interest. The participation rate in IRPs was relatively low (26.2%), being
68,2% postgraduate students. Interestingly, 54% of the participants felt motivated during
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

elaboration of the scientific project (Fig. 6 D). In an open question, the participants affirm that
the elaboration of an IRP improves its positioning in science, becoming more critical and
more motivated. It is also mentioned that the IRP stimulates the acquisition of more
knowledge, they are able to expand their scientific vision, simulate a real situation of
researchers and collaboration in scientific communication (data not shown).

Fig. 6. Students demonstrate a positive feeling about active learning tool. A.
Percentage of responses from students on the multiple-choice question "How do you think
the course contributed to your learning?", With possible answers "Excellent", "Moderate",
"Insufficient". B. Percentage of responses to the multiple-choice question "In the
questionnaires, what type of question do you prefer?", With possible answers "Multiplechoice", "Open-ended", and "I have no preference". C. Percentage of students' responses to
the question "How do you evaluate the problem-based questions present in the
questionnaires?", With possible answers "They were excellent", "They were very difficult"
and "They were very simple". D. Percentage of responses to the question "How did you feel
during the conduct of the inquiry research project?", With possible responses being

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

"Motivated", "Comfortable", and "Apprehensive". The percentage of responses was
calculated on the number of students who answered the questionnaire (n = 50).

In general, there was a demonstration of positive perception regarding active learning
methodologies by most students (96%) (data not shown). The main points commented by
the students regarding their perception of active methodologies were that they are more
effective for lasting learning, stimulate critical thinking and improve the dynamics of the class
and the student-teacher interaction.
When consulted in an open-ended question about the skills they improved with the
course, the answers were directed to three points: incorporation of knowledge, motivation
about science and gains in their skills on scientific processes. 44% of the participants cited
an improvement in their logical critical and rational thinking. A gain in knowledge of the
subject was pointed out by 22% of them, and the expansion of the vision by 20% (Fig. 7 A).
It is also interesting to note that 94% of the participants indicate that the course was able to
give a real insight into problems that scientists face in their research. When questioned how
motivated they are to solve scientific problems using critical thinking after the course on a
scale of 1 to 5 (1: nothing; 5: very), the average response was 4.14, with a rating of 4 and 5
by 86% of them (Fig. 7 B).

Fig. 7. Active methodologies are able to increase the incorporation of knowledge,
motivation in front of science and students show gains in soft skills. A. Answers to the
open question "what are the main gains you obtained with the course?" were categorized
among common themes (showing categories that comprise 6% (n = 3) or more of the
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

answers). B. Student responses to the question "how motivated are you to solve scientific
problems using critical thinking after the course?" on a scale of 1 to 5 (1: nothing; 5: very).
The percentage of responses was calculated on the number of students who answered the
questionnaire (n = 50).

DISCUSSION

The constant concern with excellence in the scientific training of academics
encountered a new challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic: how to engage students in
effective learning in remote education? This question was the driving force of our study,
which reports a semi experimental online course for higher education. Our course
incorporated active methodology tools that promoted the integration of students in the
construction of knowledge and stimulated their critical thinking skills. For this, we proposed
problem-based learning strategies in questionnaires, elaboration of a scientific project and
online quiz in order to complete the lectures. In the last few months, there has been a huge
increase in the number of studies dedicated to developing and validating active learning
strategies in remote or hybrid education, driven by the pandemic (Ghazi-Saidi et al., 2020;
Hasnine and Ahmed, 2020; McGreevy and Church, 2020; Murugesan and Chidambaram,
2020; Qiang et al., 2020).
Our study was interested in evaluating mainly two types of achievement in students:
i. Cognitive and intellectual skills (learning outcomes) and ii. Critical thinking, attitudes
towards science and soft skills. For this, different activities and questionnaires were applied
before, during and after the course. Our data show that student engagement in the different
active learning tools proposed is directly linked to their performance in the course. The
average score of the groups that participated in all the proposed activities and stood out in
the writing of the IRP was considerably higher compared to the groups with less involvement
in the course when evaluating the discursive questions. In fact, other studies have already
shown that active learning approaches in the classroom improve academic performance. In
a long-term study (3 years), the implementation of problem-based learning (PBL) and
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

learning by teaching (LbT) resulted in an increase from 5 to 6-7 in the average scores in final
exams of engineering students (Freitas et al., 2016). Interactive-engagement also shows
score improvements in physics courses compared to traditional pedagogical strategies
(Hake, 1998).
Our data show that student involvement is a key point for their learning. This is widely
accepted and experienced at different levels (Prince, 2004; Reeve, 2013). Emotional,
behavioral and cognitive dimensions can be considered when analyzing engagement
(Parsons et al., 2014). First, emotional engagement happens when students are emotionally
affected and motivated by the learning environment (Blumenfeld et al., 2012). In our
courses, introductory icebreakers and friendly communication was a factor that contributed
to students to feel comfortable in interacting with instructors and with each other. Second,
behavioral engagement corresponds to attitudes students demonstrate in class, such as
listening and paying attention to the class or the persistence and concentration in activities
(Fredricks et al., 2004). In this scenario, at least three forms of interaction were provided
(chat, audio only and video), in which the chat demonstrated that students were constantly
connected to instructors during the presentation. Finally, cognitive engagement happens
when students apply their ability to select, connect and plan in constructing and self regulating the learning process (Corno and Mandinach, 1983; Parsons et al., 2014). Here,
these movements were detected, under our point of view, in the construction of the inquiry
research project and in the responses to open-ended questions in both questionnaires, in
which students provide strategies to real problems inside and outside their fields of study. All
three dimensions of engagement are linked together and may contribute to improvement on
students’ academic performance, then one should not consider them solely.
Beyond the intellectual benefit, traditionally used as teaching quality indicators, we
hypothesized that student-centered teaching methodologies would lead to a positive attitude
or perception with science and thinking skills. In a self-assessment, students reported that
they had an improvement in their critical thinking, which involves judging the information with
criteria and healthy skepticism. This relationship between active learning and improving
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

critical thinking has been reported in other groups around the world (Kim et al., 2013; Nelson
and Crow, 2014; Styers et al., 2018). Active-learning strategies (such as collaborative work
in small groups and case studies) improved students critical thinking skills as measured by
the Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal, which assesses decision making ability as
well as predicts judgment, problem solving, and creativity (El Hassan, 2016). Umbach and
Wawrzynski (2005) analyzed two sets of American national data and showed a positive
relationship between university environments where teachers used active and collaborative
learning techniques and students' gains in personal-social development. Improving students'
ability to recognize problems and apply effective strategies and solutions to fundamental
challenges in the field is the basis of good scientific training. Our results show that tools of
active methodology can impact the attitude of students that will be reflected in future
scientists able to position themselves in the face of problems.
The improvement of the indicators added to the approval of the course by the
students confirmed that the approaches were well chosen and encouraged us to write our
experience in order to facilitate the implementation of active methodologies in other courses.
We opted for active learning tools that could be easily applied to the virtual environment,
improving the dynamics of the classes. Online questionnaires seem to be a great option for
validating students' learning, and makes them reflect on the class and apply their knowledge
in the answers. Because our courses aim at a scientific formation associated with the
resolution of real problems, the questionnaires addressed both concept questions and
interpretive/exploratory open-ended questions. This allowed us to highlight a clear problem
in Brazilian education: students are trained as "information recorders / archivers" and not as
"critical thinkers", as many students showed good levels in concept questions and poor
performance in problem-based questions. The use of open and closed questions is ideal to
provide greater freedom of responses for students and to stimulate reasoning, but they also
need clear criteria for their correction. In order to guarantee the impartiality of the
corrections, all five instructors of the courses corrected all the questions and the scores were
given by an average between evaluators.
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

During the course design, we were interested in getting immediate feedback on
student learning in relation to the main concepts discussed. For this, at the final of everyday
classes, approximately 10 final minutes were reserved for an online quiz. This activity was
very interesting to reaffirm "take home messages", that is, what the student cannot "get out
of class" without learning and their perception about the acquired knowledge. There are
several online tools for this type of quiz, and we emphasize that the most interesting ones
are those that allow a real-time assessment of the result with a percentage of "votes'' in each
of the questions. This allows questions to be promptly corrected and students can use that
time to clear up any doubts.
During the undergraduate course, we opted for a questionnaire that represented a
"critical reading guide" for scientific papers. Participation in the questionnaires was very
positive, but we replaced this activity with the elaboration of a mini-scientific project in the
graduate course, since reading scientific papers is a basic/trivial activity for graduate
students. The preparation of the IRP represented the most demanding activity for the
student, because there he should use the knowledge of the course to answer a scientific
question of his preference. This type of activity gives students freedom to "think outside the
box" and search for ways to answer biological questions that interest them. With this activity,
we detected - observed some students who were highlighted for their commitment to
develop a project as a principal investigator. In addition, we reserved a time within the
course for some students who had the IRPs selected to present for everybody. This type of
activity adds other soft skills to students, such as communication and accepting challenges,
which are essential for future scientists.
Although we have achieved good results as an online course model for higher
education, we have encountered some limitations in our study. The course was presented in
a short time (3 inconsecutive days) which hampered a robust evaluation regarding the
impact of active tools in student progress. Also, the experimental course was transmitted
simultaneously with other activities of the hosted congress, which may have impacted on
students’ outcomes due to other demanding activities. In addition, because it is an optional
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

course (as a satellite event), there were no ways to require student participation, nor
condition performance to the approval of the course. This could have been caused, among
other possible reasons, by the low responsiveness in certain activities, showing that part of
the students only engages in activities when they are requirements for approval. Previous
experiences with the theme were not considered as a differential advantage, students from
different fields in health and biological sciences were analyzed together; the same happened
to undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows, for example. Finally, a point that can be
seen in a positive and negative way was the heterogeneity of the class. This was interesting
because it brought the most different backgrounds to the same class, however, it also made
it difficult to know about the level of knowledge among students, since the same knowledge
could be very basic or essential for some and very advanced or specific for others.
Interestingly, although our study was carried out during a pandemic, with a limited
number of students, our data reflect the profile of Brazilian education. The students admit
that most of their academic training was with passive approaches, but they are interested
and willing to more interactive activities. This exposes a gap in the unequal Brazilian
educational model: changes in the educational environment are strongly necessary to
prepare citizens socially and personally able to participate in society in a democratic way
(UNESCO, 2004, McCowan, 2007, INEP 2003). The current model of higher education in
force in Europe after the establishment of the parameters determined by the European
Higher Education Area prioritizes among the student's abilities the development of an
autonomous learning capacity (Boni and Lozano, 2007; González, 2008). However, the
models found in traditional schools, including Brazil, prepare students equally, minimizing
the idea that knowledge acquisition is motivated in cognitive, personal and also social skills
(Morán, 2015).
The introduction of active learning methodologies has been widely encouraged
worldwide, but it requires a great effort from both teachers and students: educators need to
review their lesson plans and add new tools and students need to be willing to engage in the
construction of knowledge (Wright, 2011). Unquestionably, the process requires dynamic
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

instructors, with a flexible mind and willing to use the class to produce a transformation in the
students to acquire knowledge through active methodologies. The course was carried out
after three months in full lockdown. We have no elements to evaluate if the impact of our
proposal could be different spending more time within the course. Certainly, with all the
uncertainties of this moment in the world, our experience reaffirms the remote method of
learning when using elements of critical thinking and active methodologies, with a real
benefit of self-confidence and empowerment of students to motivate themselves in their long
and arduous road to be a scientist.
Above all, our experience showed that making the student the center of the class
brings not only cognitive benefits (such as intellectual growth) but also in the psychosocial
and personal spheres, giving students independence, improvement in their effective
communication and in their ability to accept challenges for self-development. Our data
shows that active learning tools that require constant engagement benefit students and
improve their critical thinking. This study also shows that if courses on various scientific
topics were reformulated by adding active methodologies, it is likely that more students will
obtain better intellectual baggage and positive positioning towards participation in science,
forming/preparing more powerful thinkers.

Acknowledgments: We are grateful for the invitation from the Graduate Program in
Biosciences and Pathophysiology (State University of Maringá) through Prof. Gessilda de
Alcantara Nogueira de Melo to participate in the VII International Meeting of Biosciences and
This study received support from FIOCRUZ, UFPR, CNPq, CAPES M.I.R is currently fellow
from CNPq-Brazil

REFERENCES

Aldenmyr, S.I., Wigg, U.J., Olson, M., 2012. Worries and possibilities in active citizenship:
Three Swedish educational contexts. Educ. Citizsh. Soc. Justice 7, 255–270.
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

https://doi.org/10.1177/1746197912456341
Araujo, A.M.P. de, Slomski, V.G., 2013. Active Learning Methods—An Analysis of
Applications and Experiences in Brazilian Accounting Teaching. Creat. Educ. 04, 20–
27. https://doi.org/10.4236/ce.2013.412a2004
Bestetti, R.B., Couto, L.B., Romão, G.S., Araújo, G.T., Restini, C.B.A., 2014. Contextual
considerations in implementing problem-based learning approaches in a Brazilian
medical curriculum: The UNAERP experience. Med. Educ. Online 19.
https://doi.org/10.3402/meo.v19.24366
Biesta, G., 2009. What kind of citizenship for european higher Education? Beyond the
competent active citizen. Eur. Educ. Res. J. 8, 146–158.
https://doi.org/10.2304/eerj.2009.8.2.146
Blumenfeld, P.C., Kempler, T.M., Krajcik, J.S., 2012. Motivation and Cognitive Engagement
in Learning Environments. Cambridge Handb. Learn. Sci. 475–488.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511816833.029
Boni, A., Lozano, J.F., 2007. The generic competences: An opportunity for ethical learning in
the European convergence in higher education. High. Educ. 54, 819–831.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-006-9026-4
Bybee, R., 2010. Advancing STEM Education: A 2020 Vision. Technol. Eng. Teach. 70, 30.
Censo da Educação Superior: sinopse estatística – 2002. Instituto Nacional de Estudos e
Pesquisas Educacionais Anísio Teixeira – Brasília. 2003.
Chau, S., Cheung, C., 2018. Academic satisfaction with hospitality and tourism education in
Macao: the influence of active learning, academic motivation, and student engagement.
Asia Pacific J. Educ. 38, 473–487. https://doi.org/10.1080/02188791.2018.1500350
Corno, L., Mandinach, E.B., 1983. The Role Of Cognitive Engagement in Classroom
Learning and Motivation. Educ. Psychol. 18, 88–108.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00461528309529266
Donitsa-Schmidt, S., Ramot, R., 2020. Opportunities and challenges: teacher education in
Israel in the Covid-19 pandemic. J. Educ. Teach. 46, 586–595.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02607476.2020.1799708
Dutta, D.A., 2020. Impact of Digital Social Media on Indian Higher Education: Alternative
Approaches of Online Learning during COVID-19 Pandemic Crisis. Int. J. Sci. Res.
Publ. 10, 604–611. https://doi.org/10.29322/ijsrp.10.05.2020.p10169
El Hassan, K., 2016. El Hassan , K . and Madhun , G . ( 2007 ). Validating the Watson
Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal . 361–383.
Fredricks, J.A., Blumenfeld, P.C., Paris, A.H., 2004. School Engagement Potential of The
Concept. Rev. Educ. Res. 74, 59–109.
Freitas, S.A.A. De, Silva, W.C.M.P., Marsicano, G., 2016. Using an active learning
environment to increase students’ engagement. Proc. - 2016 IEEE 29th Conf. Softw.
Eng. Educ. Training, CSEEandT 2016 232–236.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CSEET.2016.24
Ghazi-Saidi, L., Criffield, A., Kracl, C.L., McKelvey, M., Obasi, S.N., Vu, P., 2020. Moving
from Face-to-Face to Remote Instruction in a Higher Education Institution during a
Pandemic: Multiple Case Studies. Int. J. Technol. Educ. Sci. 4, 370–383.
https://doi.org/10.46328/ijtes.v4i4.169
González, M.R., 2008. El enfoque por competencias en el EEES y sus implicaciones en la
enseñanza y el aprendizaje. Tendencias Pedagógicas 37, 227–230.
Gormally, C., Brickman, P., Lut, M., 2012. Developing a test of scientific literacy skills
(TOSLS): Measuring undergraduates’ evaluation of scientific information and
arguments. CBE Life Sci. Educ. 11, 364–377. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.12-03-0026
Hake, R.R., 1998. Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods: A six-thousandstudent survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. Am. J. Phys.
66, 64–74. https://doi.org/10.1119/1.18809
Hasnine, M.N., Ahmed, M.M.H., 2020. Towards Post-Pandemic Active Learning Design by
connecting Strategies with Towards Post-Pandemic Active Learning Design by
connecting Strategies with Technologies.
31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ishiyama, J., 2013. Frequently used active learning techniques and their impact: A critical
review of existing journal literature in the United States. Eur. Polit. Sci. 12, 116–126.
https://doi.org/10.1057/eps.2012.3
Janmaat, J.G., Piattoeva, N., 2007. Citizenship education in Ukraine and Russia:
Reconciling nation-building and active citizenship. Comp. Educ. 43, 527–552.
https://doi.org/10.1080/03050060701611920
Kennedy, T.J., Odell, M.R.L., 2014. Engaging Students In STEM Education. Sci. Educ. Int.
25, 246–258.
Kim, K., Sharma, P., Land, S.M., Furlong, K.P., 2013. Effects of Active Learning on
Enhancing Student Critical Thinking in an Undergraduate General Science Course.
Innov. High. Educ. 38, 223–235. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10755-012-9236-x
Lederman, N.G., Lederman, J.S., Antink, A., 2013. International Journal of Education in
Mathematics , Science and Technology ( IJEMST ) Nature of Science and Scientific
Inquiry as Contexts for the Learning of Science and Achievement of Scientific Literacy
Nature of Science and Scientific Inquiry as Conte. Int. J. Educ. Math. Sci. Technol. 1,
138–147.
Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychology, 22
140, 55.
McCowan, T., 2007. Expansion without equity: An analysis of current policy on access to
higher education in Brazil. High. Educ. 53, 579–598. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734005-0097-4
McGreevy, K.M., Church, F.C., 2020. Active learning: Subtypes, intra-exam comparison, and
student survey in an undergraduate biology course. Educ. Sci. 10, 1–15.
https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci10070185
Mesquita, A.R., Souza, W.M., Boaventura, T.C., Barros, I.M.C., Antoniolli, A.R., Silva, W.B.,
Lyra, D.P., 2015. The effect of active learning methodologies on the teaching of
pharmaceutical care in a Brazilian pharmacy faculty. PLoS One 10, 1–16.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0123141
Michael, J., 2006. Where’s the evidence that active learning works? Am. J. Physiol. - Adv.
Physiol. Educ. 30, 159–167. https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00053.2006
Morán, J., 2015. Mudando a educação com metodologias ativas. Convergências Midiáticas,
Educ. e Cid. aproximações jovens II, 15–33.
Murphy, M.P.A., 2020. COVID-19 and emergency eLearning: Consequences of the
securitization of higher education for post-pandemic pedagogy. Contemp. Secur. Policy
41, 492–505. https://doi.org/10.1080/13523260.2020.1761749
Murugesan, S., Chidambaram, N., 2020. Success of Online Teaching and Learning in
Higher Education-Covid 19 Pandemic: A Case Study Valley View University, Ghana.
Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 15, 735–738.
Nelson, L.P., Crow, M.L., 2014. Do Active-Learning Strategies Improve Students’ Critical
Thinking? High. Educ. Stud. 4, 77–90. https://doi.org/10.5539/hes.v4n2p77
Nussbaum, M.C., 2006. Education and Democratic Citizenship: Capabilities and Quality
Education. J. Hum. Dev. 7, 385–395. https://doi.org/10.1080/14649880600815974
Oros, A.L., 2007. Let’s debate: Active learning encourages student participation and critical
thinking. J. Polit. Sci. Educ. 3, 293–311. https://doi.org/10.1080/15512160701558273
Parsons, S.A., Nuland, L.R., Parsons, A.W., 2014. The ABCs of student engagement. Phi
Delta Kappan 95, 23–27. https://doi.org/10.1177/003172171409500806
Plump, C.M., LaRosa, J., 2017. Using Kahoot! in the Classroom to Create Engagement and
Active Learning: A Game-Based Technology Solution for eLearning Novices. Manag.
Teach. Rev. 2, 151–158. https://doi.org/10.1177/2379298116689783
Prince, M., 2004. Does Active Learning Work ? A Review of the Research. J. Eng. Educ. 93,
223–231.
Qiang, Z., Obando, A.G., Chen, Y., Ye, C., 2020. Revisiting Distance Learning Resources
for Undergraduate Research and Lab Activities during COVID-19 Pandemic. J. Chem.
Educ. 97, 3446–3449. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.0c00609
Randi, M.A.F., Carvalho, H.F. de, 2013. Aprendizagem através de role-playing games: uma
32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.22.423922; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

abordagem para a educação ativa. Rev. Bras. Educ. Med. 37, 80–88.
https://doi.org/10.1590/S0100-55022013000100012
Reeve, J., 2013. How students create motivationally supportive learning environments for
themselves: The concept of agentic engagement. J. Educ. Psychol. 105, 579–595.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0032690
Reeve, J., Tseng, C.M., 2011. Agency as a fourth aspect of students’ engagement during
learning activities. Contemp. Educ. Psychol. 36, 257–267.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2011.05.002
Regier, D.S., Smith, W.E., Byers, H.M., 2020. Medical genetics education in the midst of the
COVID-19 pandemic: Shared resources. Am. J. Med. Genet. Part A 182, 1302–1308.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61595
Renninger, S., Hidi, K.A., 2006. The four-phase model of interest development. Educ.
Psychol. 41, 111-127,. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep4102
Rodenbusch, S.E., Hernandez, P.R., Simmons, S.L., Dolan, E.L., 2016. Early engagement
in course-based research increases graduation rates and completion of science,
engineering, and mathematics degrees. CBE Life Sci. Educ. 15, 1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.16-03-0117
Ross, A., 2007. Multiple identities and education for active citizenship. Br. J. Educ. Stud. 55,
286–303. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8527.2007.00380.x
Stefanou, C., Stolk, J.D., Prince, M., Chen, J.C., Lord, S.M., 2013. Self-regulation and
autonomy in problem- and project-based learning environments. Act. Learn. High.
Educ. 14, 109–122. https://doi.org/10.1177/1469787413481132
Strayhorn, T.L., 2008. How College Students’ Engagement Affects Personal and Social
Learning Outcomes. J. Coll. Character 10. https://doi.org/10.2202/1940-1639.1071
Styers, M.L., Van Zandt, P.A., Hayden, K.L., 2018. Active learning in flipped life science
courses promotes development of critical thinking skills. CBE Life Sci. Educ. 17, 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.16-11-0332
Sunasee, R., 2020. Challenges of Teaching Organic Chemistry during COVID-19 Pandemic
at a Primarily Undergraduate Institution. J. Chem. Educ. 97, 3176–3181.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.0c00542
Turiman, P., Omar, J., Daud, A.M., Osman, K., 2012. Fostering the 21st Century Skills
through Scientific Literacy and Science Process Skills. Procedia - Soc. Behav. Sci. 59,
110–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.09.253
Umbach, P.D., Wawrzynski, M.R., 2005. Faculty do matter: The role of college faculty in
student learning and engagement. Res. High. Educ. 46, 153–184.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11162-004-1598-1
UNESCO (2004). Statistical tables: Gross graduation ratio from tertiary education. Available
online at http://data.uis.unesco.org/#, accessed 15 December 2020.
van der Spoel, I., Noroozi, O., Schuurink, E., van Ginkel, S., 2020. Teachers’ online teaching
expectations and experiences during the Covid19-pandemic in the Netherlands. Eur. J.
Teach. Educ. 43, 623–638. https://doi.org/10.1080/02619768.2020.1821185
Veugelers, W., 2007. Creating critical-democratic citizenship education: Empowering
humanity and democracy in Dutch education. Compare 37, 105–119.
https://doi.org/10.1080/03057920601061893
Walker, S.E., 2003. Active Learning Strategies to Promote Critical Thinking. J. Athl. Train.
38, 263–267.
White, M., 2013. Higher Education and Problems of Citizenship Formation. J. Philos. Educ.
47, 112–127. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9752.12002
Wiggins, B.L., Eddy, S.L., Wener-Fligner, L., Freisem, K., Grunspan, D.Z., Theobald, E.J.,
Timbrook, J., Crowe, A.J., 2017. ASPECT: A survey to assess student perspective of
engagement in an active-learning classroom. CBE Life Sci. Educ. 16, 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.16-08-0244
Wright, G.B., 2011. Student-Centered Learning in Higher Education. Int. J. Teach. Learn.
High. Educ. 23, 1–237. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315559605

33

