bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.228890; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

EUAdb: a resource for COVID-19 test development
Alyssa Woronik1, Henry W. Shaffer1, Karin Kiontke1, Jon M. Laurent2, Ronald Zambrano3, Jef
D. Boeke2 and David H. A. Fitch1
1
Department of Biology, New York University, 100 Washington Square East, New York, NY
10003
2
Institute for Systems Genetics and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology,
NYU Langone Health, New York, NY 10016
3
Department of Ophthalmology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10017
Abstract
Due to the sheer number of COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) cases, the
prevalence of asymptomatic cases and the fact that undocumented cases appear to be
significant for transmission of the causal virus, SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2), there is an urgent need for increased SARS-CoV-2 testing capability
that is both efficient and effective1. In response to the growing threat of the COVID-19 pandemic
in February, 2020, the FDA (US Food and Drug Administration) began issuing Emergency Use
Authorizations (EUAs) to laboratories and commercial manufacturers for the development and
implementation of diagnostic tests1. So far, the gold standard assay for SARS-CoV-2 detection
is the RT-qPCR (real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction) test2. However, the
authorized RT-qPCR test protocols vary widely, not only in the reagents, controls, and
instruments they use, but also in the SARS-CoV-2 genes they target, what results constitute a
positive SARS-CoV-2 infection, and their limit of detection (LoD). The FDA has provided a web
site that lists most of the tests that have been issued EUAs, along with links to the authorization
letters and summary documents describing these tests1. However, it is very challenging to use
this site to compare or replicate these tests for a variety of reasons. First, at least 12 of 18 tests
for EUA submissions made prior to March 31, 2020, are not listed there. To our knowledge, no
EUAs have been issued for these applications. Second, the data are not standardized and are
only provided as longhand prose in the summary documents. Third, some details (e.g. primer
sequences) are absent from several of the test descriptions. Fourth, for tests provided by
commercial manufacturers, summary documents are completely missing. To address at least
the first three issues, we have developed a database, EUAdb (EUAdb.org), that holds
standardized information about EUA-issued tests and is focused on RT-qPCR diagnostic tests,
or "high complexity molecular-based laboratory developed tests"1. By providing a standardized
ontology and curated data in a relational architecture, we seek to facilitate comparability and
reproducibility, with the ultimate goal of consistent, universal and high-quality testing nationwide.
Here, we document the basics of the EUAdb data architecture and simple data queries. The
source files can be provided to anyone who wants to modify the database for his/her own
research purposes. We ask that the original source of the files be made clear and that the
database not be used in its original or modified forms for commercial purposes.
Database architecture
To construct EUAdb, FileMakerTM was chosen for its ease in building databases that can
be freely shared online (e.g. via WebDirectTM) without clients needing to use any tool other than
a web browser. Although EUAdb is meant to be fairly straightforward and user-friendly for those
with some knowledge of RT-qPCR tests, knowing a little about FileMaker will help users
understand the data and generate custom queries. Fig. 1 shows how the data from the FDA site
is organized into tables and how these tables are related to each other. Laboratories that have

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.228890; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

applied for EUAs are represented with data sufficient to identify them, including URLs to the lab
web sites. Although it does not yet happen, each laboratory could potentially employ multiple
tests. The Tests table includes data fields with URLs to documents stored on the FDA site, testspecific notes about sampling, reagents or instruments used, types of controls used, details
about how results from the tests should be interpreted, etc. Several calculated fields are used
for reporting (e.g. most recent EUA issue date represented in the database). "Join" tables are
used to allow many-to-many relationships between tests and sampling techniques, reagents or
instruments. That is, because a test can use multiple sampling techniques, reagents or
instruments, and the same sampling technique, reagent or instrument can be used in multiple
tests, special tables with double index fields are needed to establish these relationships (tables
with "Jct..." in their names). These join tables are then linked to tables for specific Sample
Types, Nucleic Acid Extraction Kits, Master Mix Kits for PCRs, Instruments used for either
nucleic acid extraction or RT-qPCR, and Primers that may be parts of Primer Kits used in the
PCR. These tables are also linked to a Manufacturers table (represented by multiple
occurrences, one for each reagent or instrument table). Fields, tables and architecture may
change somewhat in the future as new tests are developed.

Figure 1. Main database architecture of EUAdb. Tables of data are related via one-to-many connections
using a unique index field in each table, except for "join" tables that establish many-to-many connections
via pairs of fields.

Data curated and standardized ontology
In defining the specific data fields of the tables described above, we sought to
standardize relevant data across all tests, thus allowing controlled and efficient data entry as
well as comparisons among tests. However, the data provided for each test by the US FDA is in
the form of a Summary document written by the laboratory developing the test. Although the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.228890; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FDA requests certain types of information about each test, the Summary documents are written
in free-form prose and there is no easy way to automatically capture these data into individual
fields. Thus, information about each test is manually transferred from the Summary document to
the database by curators who are trained biologists knowledgeable about RT-qPCR testing.
This curation process required deciding on specific ontology, where the same reagent,
instrument, etc. may be described with slightly different terminology in different Summary
documents. For example, we developed a standard set of "sample types" to describe what kinds
of samples the tests were designed to use. We have also added some details that may not be
explicitly found in the Summary documents, such as catalog numbers, URLs to manufacturer
web sites and primer sequences, except in cases where the identity of specific reagents,
instruments or manufacturers is unspecified or unclear. Data is entered by one person and
independently validated by a second person. To enter data, fields show a list of values that are
currently in the database and can be selected, allowing controlled data entry and efficiency as
well as preventing redundancy. As new data are entered, the value lists are automatically
updated.
Accessing and using EUAdb

Figure 2. The Home layout is the landing page for EUAdb.org. See text for description.

EUAdb is password-secured for administrative-level access, but anyone can access all
the data and perform all queries via an open Guest account at EUAdb.org. This URL leads to
the Home page (Fig. 2), which provides one-stop access to all data via global query fields and
buttons attached to various scripts. In the upper left, Options-Menu and Return-to-PreviousPage buttons provide functions that are universally available on all layout pages. For example,
clicking on the Options-Menu button pulls down a menu that allows you to choose the option to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.228890; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

see a list of all tests or to exit the database. It is important to use the "Return to Previous Page"
button instead of the browser "back" button because the database is run within a single browser
window. A URL is provided to the US FDA site from which all information is obtained. Users are
automatically signed out after 15 minutes of inactivity.
Several types of Queries are available by typing keyword(s) into field(s) and selecting a
button. Keyword fields next to blue query buttons allow any search term to be entered; clicking
on the blue button will open a new page listing items that have the search term somewhere in
the record. Several such free-form query fields are provided to query tests, labs, manufacturers,
instruments and the different types of reagents. Keyword fields next to green buttons only allow
particular terms to be selected in conjunction with a search for tests containing those terms.
This allows a more controlled method of querying. For example, one can find all tests that use
"Bronchial washes (BW)" as a sample type by selecting that term in the "Specific Query for
Tests...using sample type" field and clicking the adjacent green query button. This action will
bring up a page listing all tests in which bronchial washes are used as a sample type. More
complex queries for tests can also be generated by selecting query terms for multiple kinds of
items and using one of the large green buttons to find all tests consistent with "all" query terms
(i.e., the Boolean intersection of sets of tests having each term) or with "any" of the query terms
(i.e., the Boolean union of such sets). The red "Clear all" button provides an easy way to reset
all terms to null values.

Figure 3. Example of a chart showing summary statistics for EUAdb, in this case the number of tests
using a particular sample type. In the upper right corner is a query field for showing all tests that use a
selected sample type.

Several types of summary statistics are provided, including the number of tests recorded
in the database, the most recent EUA issue date, and several charts about the tests and what
kinds of samples, reagents or instruments are used in the tests. For example, clicking on the
"Sampling Method" button brings up a page with a bar chart showing the numbers of tests that
use each type of sample (Fig. 3). This chart shows that (at the time this manuscript was written)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.228890; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

nasopharyngeal swabs are the only type of sample that is authorized by all RT-qPCR tests
currently in the database and only three are recommended for saliva samples. To determine
which tests these are, use the query box at the top right of the chart page to select "Saliva
specimens" (you may need to select the down arrow in the value list to see additional values)
and click on the green query button.
On the right side of the Home page are a series of buttons that allow Guest users to
browse and authorized users to add and edit all of the data in all of the tables (except the join
tables). For those with FileMaker (FM) experience, typical FM functions are preserved at the top
of the screen, allowing users a broader range of record navigation, query and sort functionality
than provided on the Home page.
A typical test page

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.228890; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. Example showing details for a particular test. See text for explanation.

Selecting "Browse all tests" from the Options menu will open a page listing all EUA tests
entered into the database (Fig. 4). This only provides a few fields of information about each test.
To open a new database layout/page with all the curated details for any particular test, click the
blue "See" button for that test. The main part of the Test page is a three-tabbed panel. The first
tab is open by default and shows data about the laboratory and URLs for the FDA documents.
The original EUA Summary and other documents are available for viewing either within the
document viewer, e.g. by clicking on "Show EUA Summary", or by opening a separate browser
window outside of the database, e.g. by clicking on the adjacent blue world-wide web buttons.
The second tab (opened by clicking on the "Molecular Test Details" tab title, Fig. 4)
shows the sample types, nucleic acid extraction and PCR master mix reagents, instrumentation
and primers used for a particular test. These data are shown as rows in "portals" linked to the
join tables for those items. Additional information specific to an item may be obtained by clicking
on an adjacent "i" button.
The third tab contains information about experimental controls and criteria for
interpreting the test data.
Keyword-based queries for tests typically use the list of tests layout to show all the test
records in the found set. However, if there is only one such record, the layout automatically
switches to the test details layout.
Findings
Queries of EUAdb reveal several interesting aspects about the diversity of the tests. A
plurality—but not a majority— of the tests use the primers originally recommended by the CDC
(US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). The CDC primers target the N1, N2, and N3
genes. Other SARS-CoV-2 regions that are targeted include orf-1ab and the genes encoding
the E, RdRP, and S proteins. Some of the tests only use a single primer pair to detect viral
genes, whereas most use at least two and sometimes three. The RT-qPCR result needed to
declare a positive result for COVID-19 infection varies. For example, some tests with three
primer pairs only require one amplification reaction to declare positivity, while others require at
least two out of the three. The controls and sampling methods used also vary widely with the
nasopharyngeal swab as the only universal sampling method. Collecting nasopharyngeal
samples is invasive and uncomfortable for the patient and might put health care workers at a
higher risk of disease transmission4. These facts, in addition to recent swab and personal
protective equipment shortages, have led to calls for the development of non-invasive, selfsampling methods using saliva4. As of this writing, only three tests can utilize saliva specimens
(Figure 1), with the Rutgers' test being the only one for which patients can self-collect without
health-care worker supervision. Reagents used for RNA extraction and RT-qPCR vary
substantially, as does instrumentation (although a plurality of tests use Applied Biosystems
QuantStudio for qPCR). As detailed in a separate, co-submitted study from the C. Mason lab
(Cornell Univ. Weill Medical School), the LOD (limit of detection) varies by several orders of
magnitude across tests. Finally, we found that information provided by the FDA is incomplete
with regard to several EUA applications announced prior to March 31, 2020. Of these, six are
listed in separate tables on what appears to be a semi-redundant FDA web site5. We conclude
that at least 12 pre-March 31 EUA applications are not listed on the FDA’s web site; we are
contacting the owners of these EUAs to encourage them to provide their EUA submission
materials for databasing in EUAdb.
Conclusion

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.228890; this version posted August 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

By providing standardized data and controlled ontology, EUAdb should provide a useful
and user-friendly resource for browsing, querying and comparing the different kinds of COVID19 tests for which the FDA has issued EUAs2. The source files can be provided to those who
wish to modify the database for their own research purposes.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NIH Fellowship 1F32GM136170 to AW, NSF grant IOS
1656736 to DHAF and an award from the Pershing Square Foundation to JDB. JDB is a founder
and director of the following: Neochromosome, Inc., the Center of Excellence for Engineering
Biology, and CDI Labs, Inc. and serves on the Scientific Advisory Board of the following:
Sangamo, Inc., Modern Meadow, Inc., and Sample6, Inc.
References Cited
1. Fang, Bingliang; and Meng, Qing H., 2020 (online). The laboratory's role in combating
COVID-19. Critical Reviews in Clinical Laboratory Sciences. doi:
10.1080/10408363.2020.1776675.
2. Federal Drug Administration (FDA), 2020. https://www.fda.gov/emergency-preparednessand-response/mcm-legal-regulatory-and-policy-framework/emergency-use-authorization.
3. Sethuraman, Nandini; Jeremiah, Sundararaj Stanleyraj; and Ryo, Akihide, 2020. Interpreting
diagnostic tests for SARS-CoV-2. JAMA 323(22):2249-2251. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.8259.
4. Sri Santosh, Tatikonda; Parmar, Reshu; Anand, Hanish; Srikanth, Konkati; and Saritha,
Madham, 2020. A review of salivary diagnostics and its potential implication in detection of
COVID-19. Cureus. 2020 Apr 17;12(4):e7708. doi: 10.7759/cureus.7708.
5. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19-emergency-useauthorizations-medical-devices/vitro-diagnostics-euas#individual-molecular. (The two tables are
entitled "Umbrella EUA for Molecular Diagnostic Tests for SARS-CoV-2 Developed And
Performed By Laboratories Certified Under CLIA To Perform High Complexity Tests; Appendix
A: Authorized Molecular-Based Laboratory Developed Tests for Detection of Nucleic Acid from
SARS-CoV-2" and "Individual EUAs for Molecular Diagnostic Tests for SARS-CoV-2".)

