bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Knowledge synthesis from 100 million biomedical
documents augments the deep expression profiling of
coronavirus receptors
AJ Venkatakrishnan1, Arjun Puranik1, Akash Anand2, David Zemmour1, Xiang Yao3,
Xiaoying Wu3, Ramakrishna Chilaka2, Dariusz K. Murakowski1, Kristopher Standish3,
Bharathwaj Raghunathan4, Tyler Wagner1, Enrique Garcia-Rivera1, Hugo Solomon1,
Abhinav Garg2, Rakesh Barve2, Anuli Anyanwu-Ofili3, Najat Khan3, Venky Soundararajan1*

1. nference, inc., One Main Street, Suite 400, East Arcade, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
2. nference Labs, pvt. ltd., Wind Tunnel Road, Murugesh Palaya, Bengaluru 560017, India.
3. Janssen Research & Development LLC, USA.
4. nference, 111 Peter St, Toronto, ON M5V 2G9, Canada.

* Address correspondence to venky@nference.net

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic demands assimilation of all available biomedical knowledge to decode
its mechanisms of pathogenicity and transmission. Despite the recent renaissance in
unsupervised neural networks for decoding unstructured natural languages, a platform for the
real-time synthesis of the exponentially growing biomedical literature and its comprehensive
triangulation with deep omic insights is not available. Here, we present the nferX platform for
dynamic inference from over 45 quadrillion possible conceptual associations extracted from
unstructured biomedical text, and their triangulation with Single Cell RNA-sequencing based
insights from over 25 tissues. Using this platform, we identify intersections between the pathologic
manifestations of COVID-19 and the comprehensive expression profile of the SARS-CoV-2
receptor ACE2. We find that tongue keratinocytes, airway club cells, and ciliated cells are likely
underappreciated targets of SARS-CoV-2 infection, in addition to type II pneumocytes and
olfactory epithelial cells. We further identify mature small intestinal enterocytes as a possible
hotspot of COVID-19 fecal-oral transmission, where an intriguing maturation-correlated
transcriptional signature is shared between ACE2 and the other coronavirus receptors DPP4
(MERS-CoV) and ANPEP (ɑ-coronavirus). This study demonstrates how a holistic data science
platform can leverage unprecedented quantities of structured and unstructured publicly available
data to accelerate the generation of impactful biological insights and hypotheses.

The nferX Platform Single-cell resource - https://academia.nferx.com/
Keywords: Deep-learning, Neural networks, Virus-host interaction, Single cell RNA-seq, COVID-19.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Since December 2019, the SARS-CoV-2 virus has been rapidly spreading across the globe. The
associated disease (COVID-19) has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization
(WHO), with over 350,000 confirmed cases and 15,000 deaths across nearly every country as of
March 23, 20201. The constellation of symptoms, ranging from acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) to gastrointestinal issues, is similar to that observed in the 2002 Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) epidemic and the 2012 Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)
outbreak. SARS, MERS, and COVID-19 are all caused by Coronaviruses (CoV), deriving their
name from the crown-like spike proteins protruding from the viral capsid surface. Coronavirus
infection is driven by the attachment of the viral spike protein to specific human cell-surface
receptors: ACE2 for SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV2–4, DPP4 for MERS-CoV5 and ANPEP for
specific ɑ-coronaviruses6. In addition to these receptors, the protease activity of TMPRSS2 has
also been implicated in viral entry7,8.
In a recent clinical study of COVID-19 patients from China, 48% of the 191 infected patients
studied had comorbidities such as hypertension and diabetes9. Epidemiological and clinical
investigations on COVID-19 patients are also suggesting fecal viral shedding and gastrointestinal
infection10–12. In the case of the earlier SARS epidemic, multiple organ damage involving lung,
kidney and heart was reported13. The mechanisms by which various comorbidities impact the
clinical course of infections and the reasons for the observed multi-organ phenotypes are still not
well understood. Thus, there is an urgent need to conduct a comprehensive pan-tissue profiling
of ACE2, the putative human receptor for SARS-CoV-2.
A deep profiling of ACE2 expression in the human body demands a platform that synthesizes
biomedical insights encompassing multiple scales, modalities, and pathologies described across
the scientific literature and various omics siloes. With the exponential growth of scientific (e.g.
PubMed, preprints, grants), translational (e.g. clinicaltrials.gov), and other (e.g. patents)
biomedical knowledge bases, a fundamental requirement is to recognize nuanced scientific
phraseology and measure the strength of association between all possible pairs of such phrases.
Such a holistic map of associations will provide insights into the knowledge harbored in the world’s
biomedical literature.
While unsupervised machine learning has been advanced to study the semantic relationships
between word embeddings14,15 and applied to the material science corpus16, this has not been
scaled-up to extract the “global context” of conceptual associations from the entirety of publicly
available unstructured biomedical text. Additionally, a principled way of accounting for the
distances between phrases captured from the ever-growing scientific literature has not been
comprehensively researched to quantify the strength of “local context” between pairs of biological
concepts. Given the propensity for irreproducible or erroneous scientific research17, which reflects
as truths, semi-truths, and falsities in the literature, any local or global signals extracted from this
unstructured knowledge need to be seamlessly triangulated with deep biological insights
emergent from various omics data silos.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The nferX software is a cloud-based platform that enables users to dynamically query the universe
of possible conceptual associations from over 100 million biomedical documents, including the
COVID-19 Open Research Dataset recently announced by the White House18 (Figure 1). An
unsupervised neural network is used to recognize and preserve complex biomedical phraseology
as 300 million searchable tokens, beyond the simpler words that have generally been explored
using higher dimensional word embeddings previously14. Our local context score is derived from
pointwise mutual information content between pairs of these tokens and can be retrieved
dynamically for over 45 quadrillion possible associations. Our global context score is derived
using word2vec14, as the cosine distance between 180 million word vectors projected in a 300
dimensional space (Figure 1A, Figure S1).
In order to assess the veracity of these conceptual associations derived from biomedical literature,
it is absolutely essential to enable triangulation with structured data sources including gene and
protein expression datasets. To address this need and empower the scientific community, we
built a Single Cell resource which harnesses these local and global score metrics to enable
seamless integration of literature-derived associations with the analysis of transcriptomes from
over 1 million individual cells from over 25 human and mouse tissues (Figure 1B). Here we use
this first-in-class resource to conduct a comprehensive expression profiling of ACE2 across host
tissues and cell types and discuss how the observed expression patterns correlate with the
pathogenicity and viral transmission shaping the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic (Figure 1C).

Results
ACE2 has higher expression levels in multiple cell types of the Gastrointestinal
(GI) tract compared to respiratory cells
To systematically profile the transcriptional expression of ACE2 across tissues and cell types, we
triangulated single cell RNAseq-based measurements with literature-derived signals to
automatically delineate novel, emerging, and known expression patterns (Figure 2B; Table S1).
This approach immediately highlights renal proximal tubular cells and small intestinal enterocytes
among the cell types that most robustly express ACE2 (detection in >40% of cells). These cell
types are also moderately to strongly associated with ACE2 in the literature. The strong intestinal
ACE2 expression is particularly interesting given the emerging clinical reports of fecal shedding and
persistence post-recovery which may reflect a fecal-oral transmission pattern10–12.
Conversely, pancreatic PP cells (gamma cells), pancreatic alpha cells, and keratinocytes show
similarly robust ACE2 expression but have not been strongly associated with ACE2 in the
literature. This combination suggests either a biological novelty or an experimental artifact. We
note that the strong ACE2 expression in pancreatic cell types is derived from only one murine
study (Figure S2A19), while ACE2 expression is not observed in gamma or alpha cells from
scRNA-seq of human pancreatic islets (Figure S2B20–22). While we cannot determine the validity
of either observation, this example demonstrates how knowledge synthesis can automatically
surface discordant biological signals for further evaluation.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Surprisingly, cells from respiratory tissues were notably absent among the populations with
highest ACE2 expression by scRNA-seq (Figure 2B). This observation was corroborated by
complementary gene expression analysis of over 250,000 bulk RNA-seq samples from GTEx23,24
and the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) along with protein expression analysis from healthy
tissue proteomics and immunohistochemistry (IHC) datasets25–27, where lung and other
respiratory tissues consistently show lower ACE2 expression compared to the digestive tract and
kidney (Figure S3A-D). However, the respiratory transmission of COVID-19 along with the
disease symptomatology and well-documented viral shedding in respiratory secretions28 strongly
indicates that SARS-CoV-2 indeed infects and replicates within these tissues. This would suggest
that ACE2 is likely expressed in the respiratory epithelium, and so we prioritized the respiratory
and digestive tracts for further knowledge synthesis-augmented scRNA-seq analysis.
We also applied the Single Cell resource to analyze several other human and mouse tissues
including heart, adipose, liver, pancreas, blood, spleen, bone marrow, thymus, testis, prostate,
bladder, ovary, uterus, placenta, brain, and retina. An example use case describing the
functionalities of the Single Cell app and a summary of ACE2 expression across these tissues
are given in the Supplemental Text and Figures S4-19.

Club cells, ciliated cells, and pneumocytes are likely targets of SARS-CoV-2 in
respiratory tract
Next, we classified 105 respiratory cell populations from eight independent studies based on their
expression of and literature-derived associations to ACE2 (Figure 3A). Consistent with the low
levels of ACE2 in respiratory tissues by bulk RNA-seq, proteomics, and IHC (Figure S3A-D), we
found that ACE2 expression is detected in fewer than 10% of all cell types recovered from these
studies. However, as mentioned above, we believe that even low ACE2 expression levels in these
respiratory cells may be sufficient for COVID-19 pathogenesis.
We found that club cells (formerly known as Clara cells), were consistently among the highestexpressing respiratory cell types (Figures 3A-B). Literature-derived local and global scores
suggest that this ACE2-club cell connection is underappreciated, with a few documents
discussing these concepts together (nferx link). We also found that ACE2 is detected in type II
pneumocytes in multiple studies, although the percentage of expressing cells ranges from only
0.5-7% (Figures 3A-B). This relatively low expression, which may be deemed inconsequential if
viewed in isolation, is strongly supported by knowledge synthesis that highlights an existing
association between ACE2 and type II pneumocytes (Figures 3A-B). Indeed, multiple studies
have demonstrated ACE2 expression in these cells29–35. Further, ACE2 expression in bulk
RNAseq of GTEx lung samples (n = 578) is strongly correlated to markers of type II pneumocytes,
with all seven surfactant protein-encoding genes among the top 4% of transcriptional correlations
to ACE2 (out of the ~19,000 genes expressed at > 1 TPM in GTEx lung samples; hypergeometric
p-value = 1.1x10-10) (Figure S20).
Our scRNAseq analysis also shows that ACE2 is expressed in small fractions of ciliated airway
cells and epithelial cells of the nasal cavity (Figures 3A-B). While no staining is observed for
ACE2 in nasopharynx samples from the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) IHC dataset (Figure S21), a
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

previous IHC study did report the staining of ACE2 in nasal and oral mucosa and the
nasopharynx33. This expression is consistent with the high SARS-CoV-2 viral loads detected in
nasal swab samples28. Intriguingly, mild degeneration of olfactory epithelium was observed in an
immunosuppressed animal model infected with SARS-CoV36. These observations are correlated
with emerging reports of anosmia/hyposmia (loss of smell) in otherwise asymptomatic COVID-19
patients from South Korea and other countries37. Such emerging clinical evidence emphasizes
the need for further investigation into olfactory ACE2 expression via scRNA-seq and other
modalities.
Taken together, these scRNA-seq analyses and triangulation to literature synthesis confirm that
type II pneumocytes are a likely target of SARS-CoV-2 infection while also highlighting club cells,
ciliated cells, and olfactory epithelial cells as additional potential sites of infection.

Tongue keratinocytes and mature small intestinal enterocytes are potential
targets of SARS-CoV-2
We then classified 136 gastrointestinal cell types from nine scRNA-seq studies based on their
expression of and literature associations to ACE2 (Figure 4A). These studies encompassed
samples from the upper, mid, and lower GI tracts including tongue, esophagus, stomach, small
intestine, and colon19,38–42.
This analysis highlights a robust expression of ACE2 in tongue keratinocytes that has not been
strongly documented in the literature, as evidenced by the weak local context score between
ACE2 and keratinocytes (Figure 4B). In fact, we found no previous reports of ACE2 expression
in keratinocytes and only one recent report suggesting ACE2 expression in the human tongue
based on a combination of bulk RNA-seq and a scRNA-seq dataset which has not been made
publicly accessible43. We propose that a subset of ACE2+ tongue keratinocytes may serve as a
novel site of SARS-CoV-2 entry and highlight the need to generate additional gene and protein
expression data from human tongue samples to further evaluate this hypothesis. Emerging
reports of loss of taste (dysgeusia) in otherwise non-symptomatic COVID-19 patients may warrant
further study of the tongue in this pathology44.
We also found that ACE2 is highly expressed in both human and murine small intestinal
enterocytes, confirming an association which has been moderately appreciated in literature, as
indicated by our literature derived local score between ACE2 and enterocytes. However, to our
knowledge, the transcriptional heterogeneity of ACE2 among enterocyte populations has never
been explored. In this context, we found that ACE2 shows an increase in expression correlated
with the maturation of murine small intestinal enterocytes, with minimal expression in stem cells
and transit amplifying cells in contrast to most robust expression in mature enterocytes (Figure
4). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration that ACE2 expression
synchronously increases over the course of enterocyte maturation. The recognition of such intratissue heterogeneity is necessary to specify the cell types which are most likely responsible for
the proposed fecal-oral transmission of COVID-1912.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

COVID-19, SARS, MERS and HCoV-229E receptors share a transcriptional
signature correlated to maturation of small intestinal enterocytes
To determine whether the maturation-correlated expression pattern is unique to ACE2, we
computed cosine similarities between the ACE2 gene expression vector (CP10K values in ~6,000
small intestinal enterocytes) and that of the ~15,700 other genes detected in this study (Figure
5A). For this analysis, the vector space is constituted of the individual cells as the dimensions
using the gene expression values to construct the vectors (see Methods). Interestingly, we found
that ANPEP, the established entry receptor for HCoV-229E, showed the third highest cosine
similarity to ACE2 (Figure 5B). Further, DPP4 – the entry receptor for MERS coronavirus – is
also among the top 1% of similarly expressed genes by this metric (Figure 5B). We confirmed
that both of these genes do indeed show a maturation-correlated transcriptional pattern similar to
that of ACE2 (Figure 5C-D), highlighting an unexpected shared pattern of transcriptional
heterogeneity among known coronavirus receptors in a cell population which may be relevant for
viral transmission.
We then asked whether this shared pattern of transcriptional heterogeneity among coronavirus
receptors is observed in the human small intestine. Indeed, among all enterocytes from a human
scRNA-seq study, both ANPEP and DPP4 were among the top 1% of genes with similar
expression vectors to that of ACE2 (Figure S22A-B). We independently validated this observation
by computing gene expression correlations from bulk RNA-sequencing of human small intestine
samples from GTEx (n = 187), which similarly revealed that DPP4 and ANPEP are among the top
1% of correlated genes to ACE2 (Figure S22C). In fact, among all ~18,500 genes mean
expression > 1 TPM in GTEx small intestine samples, DPP4 shows the second highest correlation
to ACE2 (r = 0.95).
To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration that all known coronavirus entry receptors display
highly coordinated and maturation-correlated transcriptional expression patterns in intestinal
epithelial cells. We propose that the requisite interaction with human proteins displaying a tightly
defined expression gradient on apical surfaces of epithelial cells, which is shared among known
coronavirus strains, may have fundamental implications for understanding the evolution, lifecycle,
and/or transmission patterns of this family of viruses.

Discussion
Recent advances in scRNA-seq are empowering us to study tissue and cellular transcriptomes at
previously unprecedented resolutions. Several single-cell RNA sequencing based efforts such as
the Human Cell Atlas are underway to catalog gene expression across tissues and cell types, and
the raw data from many of these studies are available on public platforms such as the Broad
Institute Single Cell Portal45 and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Analyses of these datasets
are of interest to a wide range of researchers but currently prove challenging for all but a few due
to the need for specialized workflows and computing infrastructures. Consequently, the
widespread use of this data for biomedical research is hampered, an issue which is particularly
evident in the face of public health crises like the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. To address this
unmet need, the nferX platform Single Cell resource enables the rapid and interactive analysis of

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the continually growing scRNAseq datasets by specialists and non-specialists alike. Furthermore,
the seamless triangulation of scRNA-seq insights with global and local scores derived from the
synthesis of accessible biomedical literature creates a truly first-in-class resource.
By making the resource available to all academic researchers, we enable scientists to not only
dive deeper into insights that are aligned with existing knowledge but also to prioritize the novel
insights which warrant further experimental validation. Looking forward, we plan to automate the
integration of the rapidly growing number of scRNA-seq studies so that access to the entire
world’s knowledge of single cell transcriptomes is just one click away for any researcher. As we
do so, we encourage interactive feedback from the scientific community so that this platform can
evolve to optimally support the research needs across the biomedical ecosystem, beyond the
COVID-19 focus on the current study.
Combined with our analyses of bulk RNA-seq, IHC, and proteomics datasets, our characterization
of the known human coronavirus receptors (ACE2, DPP4, ANPEP) using the nferX platform
Single Cell resource represents the most comprehensive molecular fingerprint of host factors
determining coronavirus infections including COVID-19. While this serves as a primer of the deep
profiling that is made possible with this resource, we also identified several interesting aspects of
coronavirus receptor biology which warrant further experimental follow-up.
We identified tongue keratinocytes and olfactory epithelia as novel ACE2-expressing cell
populations and thus as important potential sites of SARS-CoV-2 infection. This molecular
fingerprint is a striking correlate to emerging clinical reports of dysgeusia44 and anosmia37 in
COVID-19 patients, which strongly implicate the gustatory and olfactory systems in SARS-CoV2 pathogenesis and human-to-human transmission. Tongue epithelial cells have also previously
been shown to uptake Epstein-Barr virus46, and importantly a recent study found that ACE2 is
appreciably expressed in tongue based on a small number of non-tumor bulk RNA-seq samples
from TCGA43. This study further showed by scRNA-seq that ACE2 expression is observed in a
subset of the human tongue (but not other oral mucosal) epithelial cells, albeit in only ~0.5% of
the recovered epithelial population. This data has unfortunately not been released for public
consumption but certainly does provide preliminary support for our finding, particularly as the
listed set of cluster-defining genes for this population (SFN, KRT6A, KRT10) is consistent with
the tongue keratinocyte identify from the Tabula Muris data set (Figure S23). We thus emphasize
the imminent need for further generation of multi-omic expression data from large numbers of
healthy and diseased human tongue samples drawn from a cohort of wide demographic
representation.
We also observed that expression of ACE2 and other coronavirus receptors is intimately linked
to the maturation status of small intestinal enterocytes, pinpointing the more mature subsets as
the most likely cells to harbor SARS-CoV-2 virus. This finding amplifies the potential for fecal-oral
transmission of COVID-1910–12 and should motivate further experimental validation to determine
whether monitoring of fecal viral loads should be considered clinically for diagnostic or prognostic
purposes.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We further found that this transcriptional mirroring of coronavirus entry receptors was not unique
to small intestine but rather also strongly present among renal proximal tubule epithelial cells,
where ACE2, DPP4, and ANPEP expression tends to be observed in the same cellular subsets.
These observations suggest the existence of a transcriptional network spanning tissues and cell
types which may drive and/or regulate coronavirus receptor expression. The question of whether
coronaviruses have evolved to exploit such a network may be relevant to pursue, particularly
given that downregulation of ACE2 by SARS-CoV has been reported previously and is associated
with poor clinical outcomes31,47. Perhaps other coronaviruses can similarly modulate the
expression of their entry receptors to impact the clinical course of the induced disease.
The emerging picture of the coronavirus life cycle appears to be intricately interwoven with many
proteins beyond the primary host receptors. For instance, a recent structural complex of the
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein with ACE2 identified SLC6A19 as an interaction partner of ACE248.
Further, spike proteins from some coronaviruses can interact with CEACAM149 and sialylated
glycans similar to influenza hemagglutinin50 as host receptors. Future studies are likely to highlight
several other proteins and glycans that constitute the “interactome” of the coronavirus proteome.
Understanding the expression profiles of the interactome across tissues will provide systems level
insights on the cellular dynamics of the functional partners and the regulatory machinery of the
host receptor proteins. Like in the current study, the nferX platform will be an excellent resource
for unraveling the purported interaction partners for coronavirus receptors and profiling their
expression across different tissues and cells constituting the human body.
Overall, this study evidences the utility of an integrative data science platform to enable rapid and
high-throughput analysis of publicly available data to generate relevant biological insights and
scientific hypotheses. We hope that by making our biomedical knowledge synthesis-augmented
single cell platform publicly accessible, we help empower the research community to advance our
understanding of the world’s most pressing biomedical challenges such as COVID-19.

Methods
Unstructured biomedical knowledge synthesis and triangulation capabilities
In order to capture biomedical literature based associations, the nferX platform defines two
scores: a “local score” and a “global score”, as described previously51. Briefly, the local score
represents a traditional natural language processing technique which captures the strength of
association between two concepts in a selected corpus of biomedical literature based on the
frequency of their co-occurrence normalized by the frequency of each individual concept
throughout the corpus. A higher local score between Concept X and Concept Y indicates that
these concepts are frequently mentioned in close proximity to each other more frequently than
would be expected by chance. The global score, on the other hand, is based on the neural network
renaissance that has recently taken place in the Natural Language Processing (NLP) field. To
compute global scores, all tokens (e.g. words and phrases) are projected in a high-dimensional
vector space of word embeddings. These vectors serve to represent the “neighborhood” of
concepts which occur around a given concept. The cosine distance between any two vectors

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

measures the similarity of these neighborhoods and is the basis for our global score metric, where
concepts which are more similar in this vector space have a higher global score.
While the global scores in this work are computed in the embedding space of word2vec model, it
can also be computed in the embedding space of any deep learning model including recent
transformer-based models like BERT52. These may have complementary benefits to word2vec
embeddings since the embeddings are context sensitive having different vectors for different
sentence contexts. However, despite the context sensitive nature of BERT embeddings a global
score computation for a phrase may still be of value given the score is computed across sentence
embeddings capturing the context sensitive nature of those phrases.
From a visualization perspective, the local score and global score (“Signals”) are represented in
the platform using bubbles where bubble size corresponds to the local score and color intensity
corresponds to the global score. This allows users to rapidly determine the strength of association
between any two concepts throughout biomedical literature. We consider concepts which show
both high local and global scores to be “concordant” and have found that these typically
recapitulate well-known associations.
The nferX platform also supports a logical thought engine that enables AND (conjunction), OR
(disjunction), and NOT (negation) queries - the universal logic gates. This engine is referred to as
“dynamic adjacency” and leverages a highly distributed main memory approach that allows the
computation of local scores for any type of logical query in real time. Fundamentally, this system
allows a user to extract all 100-word fragments of text which meet the specified logical query. We
then calculate local scores for all other tokens occurring within these fragments, which quantifies
the likelihood (i.e. odds) of each token occurring this frequently within these textual fragments by
chance.
The platform further leverages statistical inference to calculate “enrichments” based on structured
data, thus enabling real-time triangulation of signals from the unstructured biomedical knowledge
graph various other structured databases (e.g. curated ontologies, RNA-sequencing datasets,
human genetic associations, protein-protein interactions). This facilitates unbiased hypothesisfree learning and faster pattern recognition, and it allows users to more holistically determine the
veracity of concept associations. Finally, the platform allows the user to identify and further
examine the documents and textual fragments from which the knowledge synthesis signals are
derived using the Documents and Signals applications.
Association Scores
If we have an automated method that, given a corpus (consisting of text and other structured and
semi-structured data as is often the case with biomedical data), comes up with a strength of
association score between a query entity and all the tokens or entities present in the corpus, then
that score can be used to obtain a ranking of tokens or entities related to the query. There have
been other motivations for ranking the association strength of tokens/entities (e.g. for use in
picking among possible tokens in speech recognition or Optical Character Recognition - OCR).

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Generally, association scores are based in some way on the co-occurrences of the tokens (or
referents to the entities) in the text within small windows of text. Co-occurrences have been
studied in linguistics/NLP since at least Firth’s maxim that “a word is known by the company it
keeps.” One popular traditional measure for association strength between tokens in text is
pointwise mutual information, or PMI53, which we consider in several association scores.
Measures of association
Formally, for a given corpus, an association score is some real-valued function S(q, t) where q is
a query token/entity and t is another token/entity. We discussed association scores as if they were
symmetric above, but for some convenience later on our formal notion is asymmetric: there’s a
query q and a token t. In particular, we later extend q to logical combinations of tokens/entities.
The association score need not be symmetric (for logical queries it cannot be as t is still restricted
to single tokens/entities) though it often is when q and t are both single tokens/entities.
Context of q - All the measures involve the notion of the “context” of the query q. The context of
q are those locations in the corpus deemed to be “near” to q. For single token queries, follow the
typical approach of defining context as those locations in the corpus that are within some fixed
number of words w (the window size w is a tunable parameter) from an occurrence of q in the
corpus. The dynamic adjacency engine generalizes this notion of context in a natural way to
logical queries; the context for a logical q is a certain set of fixed-length fragments.
Co-occurrences - This is just the number of times t appears in the context of q.
Traditional PMI - This is log(p(t | q) / p(t)). Here p(t | q) is the number of times t occurs in the
context of q (ie co-occurrences of t and q) divided by the total length of all q contexts in the corpus,
whereas p(t) is the number of occurrences of t in the entire corpus, divided by the corpus length.
Word2vec cosine distance - The popular word2vec algorithm [5] generates a vector (we use 300dimensional vector representation) for each token in a corpus. The purpose of these vectors is
usually to be used as features in downstream NLP tasks. But they can also be used for similarity.
The original paper validates the vectors by testing them on word similarity tasks: the association
score is the cosine between the vector for q and the vector for t. This score only applies to singletoken q.
Exponential mask PMI (ExpPMI) - This is our first new proposed score. PMI treats every position
in a binary way: it’s either in the context of q or not. With a window size of say 50, a token which
appears 3 words from a query q and a token which appears 45 words from a query q are treated
the same. We thought it might be useful to consider a measure which distinguishes positions in
the context based on the number of words away that position is from an occurrence of q. We did
this by weighting the positions in the context by some weight between 0 and 1. Our weighting is
based on an exponential decay (which has some nice properties especially when we extend to
the case of logical queries).

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Local score - This is another new proposed score. We find that PMI and ExpPMI can vary a lot
for small samples (i.e. small numbers of co-occurrences, occurrences). The Local Score is
log(coocc) * sigmoid(PMI - 0.5), constructed to correct for this; we found that this formula too
works well empirically.
Exponential mask local score (ExpLocalScore) - We apply both modifications together: the
exponential mask score is log(weighted_coocc) * sigmoid(expPMI - 0.5). Here weighted_coocc is
the sum of the weights of the positions of the corpus
Evaluation of association scores are further described in the Supplementary Information.

Single-cell RNA-seq analysis platform
The objective of the single cell platform is to enable dynamic visualization and analysis of single
cell RNA-sequencing data. Currently, there are over 30 scRNA-seq studies available for analysis
in the Single Cell app including studies from human donors/patients covering tissues such as
adipose tissue, blood, bone marrow, colon, esophagus, liver, lung, kidney, ovary, nasal
epithelium, pancreas, placenta, prostate, retina, small intestine, and spleen. Because no pantissue reference dataset yet exists for humans, we have manually selected individual studies to
maximally cover the set of human tissues. In some cases, these studies contain cells from both
healthy donors and patients affected by a specified pathology such as ulcerative colitis (colon) or
asthma (lung). There are also a number of murine scRNA-seq studies covering tissues including
adipose tissue, airway epithelium, blood, bone marrow, brain, breast, colon, heart, kidney, liver,
lung, ovary, pancreas, placenta, prostate, skeletal muscle, skin, spleen, stomach, small intestine,
testis, thymus, tongue, trachea, urinary bladder, uterus, and vasculature. Note that two of these
murine studies (Tabula Muris and Mouse Cell Atlas) include ~20 tissues each.
Single-cell data processing pipeline
For each study, a counts matrix was downloaded from a public data repository such as the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) or the Broad Institute Single Cell Portal (Table S1). Note that this
data has not been re-processed from the raw sequencing output, and so it is likely that alignment
and quantification of gene expression was performed using different tools for different studies. In
some cases, multiple complementary datasets have been generated from a single publication. In
these cases, we have generated separate entries in the Single Cell platform.
While counts matrices have been generated using different technologies (e.g. Drop-Seq, 10x
Genomics, etc.) and different alignment/pre-processing pipelines, all counts matrices were scaled
such that each cell contains a total of 10,000 scaled counts (i.e. the sum of expression values for
all genes equals 10,000 in each individual cell). All data were uniformly processed using the
Seurat v3 package54. In short, this pipeline involves the following steps. First, we identify 2000
variable genes across the given dataset and then perform linear dimensionality reduction by
principal component analysis (PCA). Using the set of principal components which contribute
>80% of variance across the dataset, we then do the following: (i) perform graph-based clustering
to identify groups of cells with similar expression profiles (Louvain clustering), (ii) compute UMAP
and tSNE coordinates for each individual cell (used for data visualization) and (iii) annotate cell
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

clusters. Note that the three human pancreatic datasets (GSE81076, GSE85241, GSE86469)
were integrated together in a shared multi-dimensional space using CCA (Canonical Correlation
Analysis) and the integration method in the Seurat v3 package54. Cell clustering and computation
of dimensionality reduction coordinates were performed on this integrated dataset.
Cell cluster annotation
In cases where publicly deposited counts matrices are accompanied by author-assigned
annotations for individual cells or clusters, we have retained these cell annotations for display in
the platform and accompanying analyses. For any study which was not accompanied by a
metadata file containing cluster annotations, we have manually labeled clusters based on sets of
canonical “cluster-defining genes.” In these cases, we have attempted to leverage annotations
and descriptions of gene expression patterns described by study authors in the manuscript text
and figures corresponding to the data being analyzed.
Metrics to Summarize Cluster-Level Gene Expression
The platform allows users to query any gene in any selected study. The corresponding data is
displayed in commonly employed formats including a series of violin plots and as a set of
dimensionality reduction plots. Expression is summarized by listing the percent of cells expressing
Gene G in each annotated cluster and the mean expression of Gene G in each cluster. To
measure the specificity of Gene G expression to each Cluster C, we compute a cohen’s D value
which assesses the effect size between the mean expression of Gene G in cluster C and the
mean expression of Gene G in all other clusters. Specifically, the cohen’s D formula is given as
follows: (MeanC - MeanA)/(sqrt(StDevC2 + StDevA2)), where C represents the cluster of interest
and A represents the complement of C (i.e. all other cell clusters). Note that this is functionally
similar to the computation of paired fold change values and p-values between clusters which is
frequently used to identify cluster-defining genes.
Gene-Gene Cosine Similarity
Within the platform, we support the run-time computation of cosine similarity (i.e. 1 - cosine
distance) between the queried gene and all other genes. This provides a measure of expression
similarity across cells and can be used to identify co-regulated and co-expressed genes.
Specifically, to perform this computation, we construct a “gene expression vector” for each gene
G. This corresponds to the set of CP10K values for gene G in each individual cell from the
selected populations in the selected study.
Profiling Expression of Coronavirus Receptors in Single-cell Datasets
For each single-cell dataset, we examined the expression of ACE2, TMPRSS2, ANPEP, and
DPP4. We generally considered a cell population to potentially express a gene if at least 5% of
cells from that cluster showed non-zero expression of this gene. For each dataset, we show a
figure which includes a UMAP dimensionality reduction plot colored by annotated cell type along
with identical plots colored by the expression level of each coronavirus receptor in all individual
cells. In some cases, we also show violin plots from the platform which automatically integrate
literature-derived insights to highlight whether there exist textual associations between the
queried gene and the tissue/cell types identified in the selected study.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Murali Aravamudan, Peter Lebowitz, Ajit Rajasekharan, and Mathai Mammen
for their insightful reviews and feedback on our research. We also express our gratitude to Patrick
Lenehan, Saurav Kumar Verma, Travis Hughes, and Vishy Thiagarajan who helped develop
some of the scientific tools that were leveraged for this study.

Figure Legends
Figure 1. Knowledge synthesis and the nferX Single Cell resource. (A) Knowledge synthesis:
capturing association between concepts from over 100 million documents. Schematic shows the
work-flow for generating literature-derived associations between phrases. Local score and global
score are defined and the types of literature-derived associations are shown for combinations of
high and low local and global scores. (B) Datasets enabling knowledge synthesis-powered
scRNA-seq analysis platform. Single Cell RNAseq data was obtained from over 30 publicly available
human and mouse single cell RNA-seq datasets. Bulk RNA-seq data was obtained from Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) and the Genotype Tissue Expression (GTEx) project portal. Protein-level
expression of coronavirus receptors was assessed using a collection of immunohistochemistry (IHC)
images and tissue proteomics datasets from the Human Protein Atlas and the Human Proteome Map.
Literature-derived association scores are obtained from over 100 million biomedical documents (C)
Tissues and cell-types identified by one or more modalities to express ACE2, the putative receptor of
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.
Figure 2. Triangulation of knowledge synthesis with ACE2 expression profile by scRNAseq across cells and tissues. Scatterplot shows comparison of percentage of cells with nonzero expression (x-axis) against literature-derived associations: local score (y-axis and size of
circles) and global score (transparency of circles). Data includes more than 800 cell populations
from over 25 murine and human tissues comprising over 1 million cells.
Figure 3. Triangulation of ACE2 expression in the respiratory tract with literature-derived
insights. (A) Schematic representation of the respiratory system highlighting key cell types from
the nasal cavity, airway and alveoli. Scatterplot shows comparison of percentage of cells with
non-zero expression (x-axis) from eight single cell studies against literature-derived associations:
local score (y-axis and size of circles) and global score (transparency of circles). (B) Assessing
literature-based and scRNAseq-based associations between ACE2 and respiratory tract cells. On
the left, the dimensionality reduction plots show different cell populations associated with lung
and olfactory epithelium. On the right, violin plots show the distribution of ACE2 expression levels
in selected populations with non-zero expression. The cell-types and the literature-derived local
and global associations scores are shown.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. Triangulation of ACE2 expression in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract with literaturederived insights. (A) Schematic representation of the GI tract highlighting key cell types.
Scatterplot shows comparison of percentage of cells with non-zero expression (x-axis) from nine
single cell studies against literature-derived associations: local score (y-axis and size of circles)
and global score (transparency of circles). (B) Assessing literature-based and scRNAseq-based
association between ACE2 and tongue keratinocytes. Violin plot shows distributions of ACE2
expression in keratinocytes. The literature-derived local and global associations between ACE2
and keratinocytes are shown. (C) ACE2 transcriptional expression is correlated to enterocyte
maturation. Violin plots show distribution of ACE2 expression levels in enterocytes at different
stages of differentiation.
Figure 5. Coronavirus receptors share a transcriptional signature correlated to maturation
of small intestinal enterocytes. (A) Distribution of cosine distances between the ‘gene
expression vectors’ of ACE2 and all genes in a scRNA-seq study of the murine small intestine.
The gene expression vector corresponds to the set of CP10K values for a given gene in each
individual cell from the selected populations in the selected study. (B) Genes similar to ACE2
(cosine similarity > 0.4) sorted by literature-derivation association. (C) Transcriptional expression
of ANPEP correlated to enterocyte maturation in murine small intestine. Violin plots show
distribution of ANPEP expression levels in enterocytes at different stages of differentiation. (D)
Transcriptional expression of DPP4 correlated to enterocyte maturation in murine small intestine.
Violin plots show distribution of DPP4 expression levels in enterocytes at different stages of
differentiation.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.

8.

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.
20.

Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center. Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource
Center https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/.
Zhou, P. et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat
origin. Nature 579, 270–273 (2020).
Li, W. et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for the SARS
coronavirus. Nature vol. 426 450–454 (2003).
Hofmann, H. et al. Human coronavirus NL63 employs the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus receptor for cellular entry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 7988–
7993 (2005).
Raj, V. S. et al. Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is a functional receptor for the emerging human
coronavirus-EMC. Nature 495, 251–254 (2013).
Yeager, C. L. et al. Human aminopeptidase N is a receptor for human coronavirus 229E.
Nature 357, 420–422 (1992).
Hoffmann, M. et al. The novel coronavirus 2019 (2019-nCoV) uses the SARS-coronavirus
receptor ACE2 and the cellular protease TMPRSS2 for entry into target cells. (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.01.31.929042.
Gierer, S. et al. The spike protein of the emerging betacoronavirus EMC uses a novel
coronavirus receptor for entry, can be activated by TMPRSS2, and is targeted by
neutralizing antibodies. J. Virol. 87, 5502–5511 (2013).
Zhou, F. et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. The Lancet (2020) doi:10.1016/s01406736(20)30566-3.
Xu, Y. et al. Characteristics of pediatric SARS-CoV-2 infection and potential evidence for
persistent fecal viral shedding. Nature Medicine (2020) doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0817-4.
Gu, J., Han, B. & Wang, J. COVID-19: Gastrointestinal manifestations and potential fecaloral transmission. Gastroenterology (2020) doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2020.02.054.
Xiao, F. et al. Evidence for gastrointestinal infection of SARS-CoV-2. Gastroenterology
(2020) doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2020.02.055.
Yang, J.-K., Lin, S.-S., Ji, X.-J. & Guo, L.-M. Binding of SARS coronavirus to its receptor
damages islets and causes acute diabetes. Acta Diabetol. 47, 193–199 (2010).
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G. & Dean, J. Efficient Estimation of Word Representations
in Vector Space. (2013).
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature vol. 521 436–444 (2015).
Tshitoyan, V. et al. Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent knowledge from
materials science literature. Nature 571, 95–98 (2019).
Reality check on reproducibility. Nature 533, 437 (2016).
Call to Action to the Tech Community on New Machine Readable COVID-19 Dataset | The
White House. The White House https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/callaction-tech-community-new-machine-readable-covid-19-dataset/.
Tabula Muris Consortium et al. Single-cell transcriptomics of 20 mouse organs creates a
Tabula Muris. Nature 562, 367–372 (2018).
Segerstolpe, Å. et al. Single-Cell Transcriptome Profiling of Human Pancreatic Islets in

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

30.
31.

32.

33.

34.
35.

36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

Health and Type 2 Diabetes. Cell Metab. 24, 593–607 (2016).
Grün, D. et al. De Novo Prediction of Stem Cell Identity using Single-Cell Transcriptome
Data. Cell Stem Cell 19, 266–277 (2016).
Muraro, M. J. et al. A Single-Cell Transcriptome Atlas of the Human Pancreas. Cell Syst 3,
385–394.e3 (2016).
GTEx Portal. www.gtexportal.org.
Carithers, L. J. & Moore, H. M. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) Project.
Biopreservation and Biobanking vol. 13 307–308 (2015).
Uhlén, M. et al. Proteomics. Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science 347,
1260419 (2015).
Wang, D. et al. A deep proteome and transcriptome abundance atlas of 29 healthy human
tissues. Mol. Syst. Biol. 15, e8503 (2019).
Kim, M.-S. et al. A draft map of the human proteome. Nature 509, 575–581 (2014).
Wang, W. et al. Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in Different Types of Clinical Specimens. JAMA
(2020) doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3786.
Glowacka, I. et al. Evidence that TMPRSS2 activates the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus spike protein for membrane fusion and reduces viral control by the
humoral immune response. J. Virol. 85, 4122–4134 (2011).
van den Brand, J. M. A. et al. Pathology of experimental SARS coronavirus infection in cats
and ferrets. Vet. Pathol. 45, 551–562 (2008).
Glowacka, I. et al. Differential downregulation of ACE2 by the spike proteins of severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus and human coronavirus NL63. J. Virol. 84, 1198–
1205 (2010).
Bertram, S. et al. Cleavage and activation of the severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus spike protein by human airway trypsin-like protease. J. Virol. 85, 13363–13372
(2011).
Hamming, I. et al. Tissue distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for SARS
coronavirus. A first step in understanding SARS pathogenesis. J. Pathol. 203, 631–637
(2004).
Mossel, E. C. et al. SARS-CoV replicates in primary human alveolar type II cell cultures but
not in type I-like cells. Virology 372, 127–135 (2008).
To, K. F. & Lo, A. W. I. Exploring the pathogenesis of severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS): the tissue distribution of the coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and its putative receptor,
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). J. Pathol. 203, 740–743 (2004).
Schaecher, S. R. et al. An immunosuppressed Syrian golden hamster model for SARS-CoV
infection. Virology 380, 312–321 (2008).
COVID-19. https://www.entuk.org/categories/covid-19.
Han, X. et al. Mapping the Mouse Cell Atlas by Microwell-Seq. Cell 172, 1091–1107.e17
(2018).
Wang, Y. et al. Single-cell transcriptome analysis reveals differential nutrient absorption
functions in human intestine. J. Exp. Med. 217, (2020).
Smillie, C. S. et al. Intra- and Inter-cellular Rewiring of the Human Colon during Ulcerative
Colitis. Cell 178, 714–730.e22 (2019).
Haber, A. L. et al. A single-cell survey of the small intestinal epithelium. Nature 551, 333–

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

42.
43.
44.

45.
46.
47.

48.
49.

50.
51.
52.
53.
54.

339 (2017).
HCA Data Browser. https://data.humancellatlas.org/explore/projects/c4077b3c-5c98-4d26a614-246d12c2e5d7.
Xu, H. et al. High expression of ACE2 receptor of 2019-nCoV on the epithelial cells of oral
mucosa. Int. J. Oral Sci. 12, 8 (2020).
AAO-HNS: Anosmia, Hyposmia, and Dysgeusia Symptoms of Coronavirus Disease.
American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery
https://www.entnet.org/content/aao-hns-anosmia-hyposmia-and-dysgeusia-symptomscoronavirus-disease (2020).
Single Cell Portal. https://singlecell.broadinstitute.org/.
Tugizov, S. M., Berline, J. W. & Palefsky, J. M. Epstein-Barr virus infection of polarized
tongue and nasopharyngeal epithelial cells. Nat. Med. 9, 307–314 (2003).
Kuba, K., Imai, Y., Ohto-Nakanishi, T. & Penninger, J. M. Trilogy of ACE2: a peptidase in
the renin-angiotensin system, a SARS receptor, and a partner for amino acid transporters.
Pharmacol. Ther. 128, 119–128 (2010).
Yan, R. et al. Structural basis for the recognition of the SARS-CoV-2 by full-length human
ACE2. Science (2020) doi:10.1126/science.abb2762.
Miura, H. S., Nakagaki, K. & Taguchi, F. N-terminal domain of the murine coronavirus
receptor CEACAM1 is responsible for fusogenic activation and conformational changes of
the spike protein. J. Virol. 78, 216–223 (2004).
Tortorici, M. A. et al. Structural basis for human coronavirus attachment to sialic acid
receptors. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 481–489 (2019).
Park, J. et al. Recapitulation and Retrospective Prediction of Biomedical Associations Using
Temporally-enabled Word Embeddings. doi:10.1101/627513.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North. (2019) doi:10.18653/v1/n19-1423.
Evert, S. The Statistics of Word Cooccurrences: Word Pairs and Collocations. (2005).
Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Integrating single-cell
transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat. Biotechnol.
36, 411–420 (2018).

18

A

Knowledge synthesis: capturing association between concepts from over 100 million documents
Literature-synthesized association between two phrases
(e.g. ‘gene-name’ and ‘tissue-name’)

Unsuperivsed
neural network
recognizes
300 million
100 million+ documents
phrases
e.g., PubMed, Grants,
Preprints, Patents,
Clinical Trials

User interface
enables searching
dynamically
from 45 quadrillion
potential
associations

Types of literature-based associations
local score < 3
global score > 1.3

Concordant
association

Incipient
association
size proportational
to Local score

semantic

global
score

darkness proportional
to Global score

Local score measures how frequently two tokens are found within each other’s
local context in a particular corpus, normalized by the occurrences of those
tokens in that corpus. Derivative of point-wise mutual information.

Knowledge synthesis powered scRNAseq platform
~1 million
cells

>100 million
biomedical documents

25 tissues

(Includes COVID-19
open research dataset)

30 studies

well known

local score < 3
global score < 1.3

local score > 3
global score < 1.3

Siloed
association

Weak/No
association
local score

Global score measures the similarity between the word vectors corresponding to
two tokens, normalized by a control token collection. Word2Vec at scale.

B

local score > 3
global score > 1.3

C

Expression profiling of ACE2 Putative receptor of SARS-CoV-2
Nasal cavity
Olfactory epithelial cells

Lung
Type II pneumocytes
Club cells (Clara cells)
Ciliated cells

Identify cell populations

Tongue
Keratinocytes

Heart
Fibroblasts,
Cardiomyocytes,
Endothelial cells

Pancreas

Identify cluster-defining
genes
Leverage machine learning
based literature associations

e.g., PubMed, Grants,
Preprints, Patents,
Clinical Trials

Gall bladder
Columnar epithelial cells

Acinar cells
Ductal cells

Kidney
Adipose tissue
Adipocytes

Proximal tubule epithelial cells

Small intestine

Mature enterocytes

Bulk RNAseq

Proteomics

IHC

262,152
RNA samples
GEO GTEx

Mass spec
>25 healthy
tissues

Antibody-based
quantification in
>40 healthy tissues

6,552
54
studies studies

Human Human
Protein Proteome
Atlas
Map

Human
Protein
Atlas

Testis
Leydig cells
Spermatocytes

Colon
Enterocytes

Figure 1

ACE2 expression profile: triangulation of knowledge synthesis with pan-tissue single-cell RNA sequencing
(1 million+ cells from 25 tissues spanning 32 studies)

Figure 2

A Triangulation of ACE2 expression in respiratory tract from literature-based knowledge synthesis and eight single cell studies
nasal cavity

epithelial cells
airway

clara cells,
ciliated cells
alveoli

respiratory tract

pneumocytes

B Assessing literature-based and scRNAseq-based association between ACE2 and respiratory tract cells
type II
pneumocytes

e.g. Mapping the Mouse Cell Atlas by Microwell-Seq

Expression (In (1 + CP10K))

local score: 2.5
global score: 1.6
club cells/clara
clara cells and
ciliated cells
type II
pneumocytes

local score: 0.9
global score: <1.3
ciliated cells
local score: 1.9
global score: <1.3

e.g. Single-cell analysis of olfactory neurogenesis and differentiation
in adult humans

respiratory tract
epithelial cells

local score: 2.9
global score: <1.3
olfactory/nasal cavity
epithelial cells
nasal cavity
epithelial
cells

respiratory
tract
epithelial
cells

local score: 2.9
global score: <1.3
Figure 3

A ACE2 expressing cell populations in the gastrointestinal tract

C

transcriptional signature correlated to enterocyte maturation

mature enterocytes

GI tract

villi

enterocyte
maturation

stem
cell

Triangulation of ACE2 expression in GI tract from literature-based
knowledge synthesis and nine single cell studies

B ACE2 expression in tongue keratinocytes
tongue
keratinocytes

Expression (In (1 + CP10K))

local score: 0.4
global score < 1.3

e.g. Single-cell transcriptomics of 20 mouse organs creates a
Tabula Muris.

Figure 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.005702; this version posted March 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint

(which
not certified
by peer review) is
the author/funder.
All rights reserved. No
reuse allowed
without
permission.
Expression of
allwas
known
coronavirus
receptors
synchronously
increase
with
enterocyte
maturation

A

B

B

C

Anpep Expression During Murine
Small Intestinal Enterocyte Maturation

D

Dpp4 Expression During Murine
Small Intestinal Enterocyte Maturation

Figure 5

